 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.REVIEW: IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC INITIATIVES AND SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE ...Piccoli, Gabriele;Ives, Blake
MIS Quarterly; Dec 2005; 29, 4; ABI/INFORM Collection
pg. 747Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
MIS arterly MISQREVIEW REVIEW: IT-DEPENDENT STRATEGIC INITIATIVES 
AND SUSTAINED COMPETITIVE ADVANTAGE: A 
REVIEW AND SYNTHESIS OF THE LITERATURE
1 By: Gabriele Piccoli 
School of Hotel Administration 
Cornell University 
Ithaca, NY 14850 
U.S.A. gp45@cornell.edu Blake Ives 
Information Systems Research Center 
Bauer College of Business 
University of Houston 
Houston, TX 77204 
U.S.A. bives@mac.com Abstract The role of information systems in the creation and 
appropriation of economic value has 
a long 
tion of research, within which falls the literature on 
the sustainability of IT-dependent competitive 
advantage. In this article, we formally define the 
notion of IT-dependent strategic initiative and use 
1Jane Webster was the accepting senior editor for this 
paper. Anitesh Barua was the associate editor. Jeanne 
Ross, Anandhi Bharadwaj, and Paul Pavlou served as 

reviewers. it to frame 
a review of the literature on the 
ability of competitive advantage rooted in 
mation systems use. We offer 
a framework that 
articulates both the dynamic approach to 

dependent strategic advantage currently receiving 

attention in the literature and the underlying drivers 
of sustainability. This framework models how and 
why the characteristics of the IT-dependent 

tegic initiative enable sustained competitive 

tage, and how the determinants of sustainability 

are developed and strengthened over time. Such 

explanation facilitates the pre-implementation 

analysis of planned initiatives by innovators, as 
well as the post-implementation evaluation of 
existing initiatives 
so as 
to identify the basis of 
their sustainability. 
In carrying out this study, we examined the 
interdisciplinary literature on strategic information 
systems. Using a structured methodology, we 
reviewed the titles and abstracts of 648 articles 
drawn from information systems, strategic 
agement, and marketing literature. We then 
examined and individually coded 
a relevant subset 
of 117 articles. The literature has identified four 
barriers to erosion of competitive advantage for 

dependent strategic initiatives and has surfaced 
the structural determinants of their magnitude. 
Previous work has also begun to theorize about 
the process by which these barriers to erosion 

evolve over time. Our review reveals that signifi-
MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4, pp. 747-776/December 
2005 747  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
cant exploratory research and theoretical 
ment have occurred in this area, but there is 
a paucity of research providing rigorous tests of 
theoretical propositions. 
Our work makes three principal contributions. 
First, it formalizes the definition of IT-dependent 
strategic initiative. Second, 
it organizes the extant 
interdisciplinary research around an integrative 

framework that should prove useful to both 

research and practice. This framework offers an 
explanation of how and why IT-dependent 
tegic initiatives contribute to sustained competitive 
advantage, and explains the process by which 
they evolve over time. Finally, our review and 
analysis of the literature offers the basis for future 
research directions. 
Keywords: Strategic information systems, 
sustainable competitive advantage, competitive 
advantage, strategic agility, IT-dependent strategic 
initiatives Introduction Since the early 1980s, considerable research 
attention has focused on the strategic role of 
information technologies and their potential for 
creating competitive advantage (Benjamin et al. 
1984; Cash and Konsynski 1985; Ives and 
month 1984; McFarlan 1984; Parsons 1983; Porter 
and Millar 1985). From this work has emerged the 
widely accepted conclusion that IT can be used to 
create competitive advantage through efficiency 
improvements, differentiation, and channel 
nation (Sethi and King 1994). 
In this article, we review and synthesize the work 
that has examined the role of IT in sustaining 
competitive advantage so as to provide guidance 
forfuture research in this area. The strategic 
mation systems tradition has shown that a narrow 
focus on technology as a source of competitive 
advantage-such as that recently assumed in the 
business press (Carr 2003)-is misguided and 
misleading. Thus, we center our review on the 
notion of IT-dependent strategic initiatives. 
748 MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 2005 
IT-dependent strategic initiatives consist of 
fiable competitive moves (Smith et al. 1991) that 
depend on the use of IT to be enacted, and are 
designed to lead to sustained improvements in a 
firm's competitive position (Ross et al. 1996). 
Examples of such initiatives include business 
process reengineering, ERP-enabled business 
integration, customer relationship management, 
electronic commerce, electronic business, and 

electronic supply chain management initiatives. 

Our focus on IT-dependent strategic initiatives is 
rooted in a perspective that views strategy not as 
the making of a few discrete "one time" decisions, 
but as the configuration of interrelated and 
interlocking activities (Rivkin 2000; Siggelkow 
2001 ). Thus, IT-dependent strategic initiatives do 
not simply consist of the building of a computer 

system or application that, allegedly, generates 

competitive advantage until it is successfully 
cated (Carr 2003); rather, they consist of the 

configuration of an activity system, dependent on 
IT at its core, that fosters the creation and 
priation of economic value (Brandenburger and 
Stuart 1996). We term the initiatives as 
dependent to highlight the fact that they could not 
be feasibly executed without the enabling 
nology foundation. 
We organize previous work in this area through an 
integrative framework that surfaces both the 
minants of sustainability of IT-dependent strategic 
initiatives-here called 
barriers to erosion-as 
well as the process through which, once implemented, 
IT-dependent strategies evolve to limit the decay 
of competitive advantage and reinvigorate these 
barriers to erosion. Our model identifies potential 
sources of sustainability and explains how they 
contribute to reduce threats to the leader's 
advantage over time. 
Many examples point to the value of this analysis. 

Dell Inc. has been able to maintain its leadership 
position in the personal computer market for more 
than a decade. At the heart of Dell's strategy is its 
high velocity built-to-order production model for 
direct sales. The firm is continually improving the 
performance of its production system, as well as 

introducing further initiatives that leverage its core 
advantage (i.e., Dell Online). Wal-Mart Stores Inc. 
 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.has created a highly efficient supply chain that has 
proven very difficult for competitors to match. And 
Harrah's Entertainment, a recognized pioneer in 
the use of data warehousing and data mining 
technology (Goodhue et al. 2002), may have 
positioned itself for sustained superior 
mance with its customer relationship management 
initiative. The firm is continuously seeking new 
innovations around its core strategy-a discipline 

of continued marketing experimentation and 
customer knowledge dependent on its business 
intelligence infrastructure. According to our 
nology, all three companies have built substantial 
barriers to erosion around their IT-dependent 
strategic initiatives and actively work to strengthen 
them over time so as to maintain their leadership 
position. In the next section, we formalize the concepts of 
sustainable competitive advantage and barriers to 

erosion. We then outline the theoretical 
work, grounded in more than two decades of 
research on strategic information systems, which 
we use to organize our findings. Following this, we 
outline the results of our literature review. The 
paper concludes with a discussion of our findings, 
and implications for future research and practice. 
Sustainable Competitive 
Advantage The concept of competitive advantage is rooted in 
the logic of value creation and distribution. A firm 
is said to enjoy competitive advantage when the 
value that is created in an economic exchange in 
which the firm partakes is greater than the value 
that could be created were the firm not to 
participate in the exchange (Brandenburger and 
Stuart 1996). Sustainability, a concept that has 
garnered less consensus (Wade and Hulland 

2004 ), has traditionally been conceptualized as a 

condition where a "firm's competitive advantage 
resists erosion by competitor behavior .... [This] 
requires that a firm possesses some barriers that 
make imitation of the strategy difficult" (Porter 
1985, p. 20). The ability to protect a position of 
Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
competitive advantage is, therefore, predicated on 
the successful creation of impediments to 
tion of the strategy by competitors-referred to as 
barriers to erosion (Reed and DeFillippi 1990; 
Wernerfelt 1984 ). The strength of these barriers to 
erosion determines the degree to which the 
process of competitive imitation is slow, difficult, 
and/or costly. 
Proponents of the resource-based view of the firm 
originally introduced the notion of inability to 
replicate, saying that "a competitive advantage is 
sustained only if it continues to exist after efforts to 
duplicate that advantage have ceased" (Barney 
1991 p. 102). This formulation, a difficult one to 
operationalize (Wiggins and Ruefli 2002), seems 

to treat any competitive advantage that is shorter 
than forever as temporary. But it provides no 
guidance to determine how long temporary may 
be, "other than implying [that] it is shorter than 
forever" (Hidding 2001, p. 206). Moreover, the 
duration of a "temporary" competitive advantage is 

important as it helps to determine whether 
tion is warranted or not (Feeny and Ives 1990). 
More recent definitions of the construct in the 
resource-based view recognize that sustained 
competitive advantage accrues when competitors 
"face significant challenges in acquiring, 

oping, and using" the resources underlying the 

value creating strategy (Mata et al. 1995, p. 495; 
see also Barney 1995; Ross et al. 1996). Our 
treatment of sustainability and the central role of 
barriers to erosion is consistent with this latter 
conceptualization. The Response-Lag Drivers 
Perspective Competitive imitation is thought to occur in 
sequential stages (MacMillan 1988, 1989). Once 
rivals recognize that a firm has achieved a position 
of advantage, they begin to scrutinize it in an effort 
to identify its sources. Considerable ambiguity 
may exist with respect to these sources, however, 
making it difficult for imitators to mount a response 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 
29 No. 4/December 
2005 749  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
(Reed and DeFillippi 1990). 
Response lag 
is defined as "the time it takes competitors to 
respond aggressively enough to erode the 
petitive advantage" (MacMillan 1989 p. 24).
2 Different competitors will move with different speed 
and with different degrees of success (Chen and 
Miller 1994 ), and their entrance will dissipate some 
of the leaders' advantage. Yet barriers to erosion 
impede or prevent complete dissipation of the 
advantage, even for easily imitable products in 

industries with minimal barriers to entry (Makadok 
1998). It follows that the strength of barriers to 
erosion is directly related to their ability to generate 
response lag and thus delay or deny imitation. We 
define the notion of 
response-lag drivers 
as the 
structural determinants of the magnitude of 
barriers to erosion. Response-lag drivers are 

characteristics of the firm, its competitors, the 
technology, and the value system in which the firm 
is embedded that contribute to raise and 
strengthen barriers to erosion. 
Strategic IS research has been recently 
gorated by the agility perspective (Sambamurthy et 

al. 2003; Weill et al. 2002) and the role that IT 
plays in enabling the firm to "launch many and 
varied competitive actions" (Sambamurthy et al. 
2003, p. 237). This view, originally borne out of 
the idiosyncrasies of the hypercompetitive 
ment (D'Aveni 1994; Eisenhardt and Martin 2000; 

Sambamurty 2000), focuses on the firm as the unit 
of analysis. As such, it is concerned with 
plaining how the firm can use IT to identify and 

launch a variety of initiatives to solidify its business 
performance. 2The notion of response lag is familiar to strategists and 
information systems executives. One executive at a 
branded direct-sale apparel manufacturer indicated in an 

interview with the authors that his firm times innovations 
on the Web site to appear in the September/October time 
frame. The reason is that the firm and its competitors 
"lock down" their Web site functionality in November as 

they enter their busiest season-Christmas. Website 
innovations are generally easy to copy, but, as this 
example suggests, timing the innovation as they do 
ensures a minimum response lag spanning the year's 
largest selling season because it is impossible for 
competitors to examine, replicate, and test the new 
features before the lock-down period. 
750 MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 
2005 Our work complements this perspective by 
adopting a response-lag perspective that focuses 
on the individual strategic initiative as the unit of 
analysis. It is concerned with the role of specific 
initiatives and is best suited to answer questions 
such as the following: How difficult is a specific 
initiative to imitate and how long can it be expected 
to remain unique? What makes the initiative 
cult to replicate? How long should the firm 
tain commitment to the initiative before enhancing 
it or launching a new one? What degrees of 
dom does the firm have in designing or improving 
the initiative so as to maximize its defensibility? 
What characteristics of the initiative (i.e., 
lag drivers) can be strengthened over time to 
extend its useful life? How can the specific 
dependent strategic initiative contribute to the 
creation of valuable resources? 
Failure to conduct this response-lag analysis risks 
leaving much of the potential benefits of the 

initiative on the table. Similar analysis is valuable 
a posteriori 
to seek ways to counter successful 
dependent strategic initiatives or to explain the 
determinants of successful initiatives. 
Theoretical Framework 
The literature review is organized around an 
integrative framework that explicitly models the 
characteristics of an IT-dependent strategic 
tive and the dynamic processes through which that 
initiative evolves over time. It also recognizes that 
sustainability of competitive advantage is affected 
by competitive response (Chen and Miller 1994) 
and the cycle speed of the ecology in which the 
firm competes (Hidding 2001; Lefebvre et al. 
1997). The latter effects are represented in our 
model by the moderating role of the competitive 
environment (Figure 1 ).
3 3Given the length and complexity of the literature review, 
and the limited attention that competitive response and 
ecology cycle speed have received in the specific context 

of IT-dependent strategic initiatives, they are introduced 
here for completeness, but their treatment is beyond the 
scope of this paper. Interested readers are referred to 
work on this topic (Eisenhardt 1989; Mendelson 2000; 
Moorman and Slotegraaf 1999; Wade and Hui land 2004 ). 
 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
Competitive Environment Lag Drivers 
Barriers to 
Erosion Sustained Competitive Advantaae Figure 1. Theoretical Framework 
Our literature review suggests that four barriers to 
erosion fully capture the determinants of 
ability in the context of IT-dependent strategic 
initiatives: IT resources barrier, complementary 
resources barrier, IT project barrier, 
and tion barrier. 
These four barriers to erosion, 
pinned by their respective response-lag drivers, 
contribute independently, or in combination with 
one another, to enable a firm to sustain 
titive advantage. 
The dynamic capabilities literature hypothesizes 
that firms leverage their current asset positions to 

develop and renew superior capabilities that 
enable them to maintain competitiveness (Teece 
et al. 1997). While the dynamic capabilities 
perspective is primarily concerned with how the 
firm can successfully "renew competencies to 
respond to shifts in the business environment" 
(Teece, et al. 1997, p. 515), it is also instrumental 
in explaining how barriers to erosion can be 
tained and strengthened over time. Two 
mental dynamic processes contribute to reinforce 

barriers to erosion: 
organizational learning 
and asset stock accumulation. 
From a theoretical standpoint, the analysis of 
these dynamic processes is concerned not with 
the immediate effect of response-lag drivers, but 
with their determinants and their evolution over 
time. It explains the process by which erosion of 
competitive advantage can be prevented, delayed, 
limited, or even reversed by the reinvestment in, 
and rejuvenation of, barriers to erosion (MacMillan 
1989; Reed and DeFillippi 1990). It also illustrates 
which response-lag drivers can be strengthened 
over time, and how. Organizational learning and 
asset stock accumulation processes, described 
below, are often subject to time compression 
economies and, therefore, cannot be accelerated 
by the firm (Bharadwaj 2000; Dierickx and Cool 
1989). Organizational Learning 
Organizational learning is defined as "the capacity 
or processes within an organization to maintain or 
improve performance based on experience" (Nevis 
et al. 1995, p. 73). The dynamic capabilities 
research tradition suggests that a firm can develop 
superior capabilities through 
learning mechanisms, 
including repetition, experimentation, and even the 
analysis of small mistakes (Eisenhardt and Martin 
2000). Organizational learning is subject to path 
dependency and cannot take place without 
appropriate preconditions (Eisenhardt and Martin 
2000; Teece et al. 1997). In other words, because 
learning tends to be a localized process, the firm's 
history and its current set of available resources 
both enable and constrain the learning process. 
As Teece and his colleagues put it, "Where a firm 
can go is a function of its current position and the 
paths ahead" (1997, p. 522). 
It follows that a process of organizational learning 
associated with IT-dependent strategic initiatives 
must evolve in co-presence with the initiative and 
the underlying IT -a phenomenon described as 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 
29 No. 4/0ecember 
2005 751  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
learning-by-using (McKenney et al. 1995). Unless 
an IT-dependent strategic initiative is introduced, 
related organizational learning processes cannot 
be set in motion. For example, repeated practice 
with its high-velocity, built-to-order model enabled 
Dell to consistently increase inventory 
thereby strengthening its direct sales initiative over 
time (Magretta 1998)-and subsequently to 
age its advantage to reach previously unserved 
consumers and small accounts using the 
net-a broadening of the initiative (Rangan and 
Bell 1999). 
Asset Stock Accumulation 
Asset stock accumulation is defined as the 
process by which a firm accrues or builds up a 
resource over time as a result of a "consistent 

pattern of resource flows" (Dierickx and Cool 1989, 
p. 1506). While many resources, such as personal 
computers or specialized labor, are readily 
able to firms that can purchase them on the open 
market, other resources are by definition 
tradable (e.g., a specialized IT infrastructure, a 
specialized information repository). These latter 
resources must be built by the organization over 
time, and the ability to do so is predicated on the 
availability of precursory assets. Under this 
tion, known as interconnectedness of asset stocks 
(Dierickx and Cool 1989), only the firm that has 
acquired or developed the precursory resources 
can begin the accumulation process. For 
example, Harrah's Entertainment has developed a 

comprehensive database of customer behaviors in 
and across the casinos of the Harrah's family 
(Loveman 2003). The population of this 
tory, started in 1998, would not have been possible 
unless Harrah's had launched its IT-dependent 
strategic initiative and built a core IT infrastructure 
enabling customer-level data collection using 
rewards cards and specially equipped, networked 
slot machines.
4 4Note that to the extent that the information is specialized 
to the casino, it is non-tractable and, therefore, must be 
accumulated by Harrah's directly. Any other casino 
wishing to pursue a similar initiative must engage in its 

own data collection effort. 
752 MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 2005 
Literature Review 
Following the IS tradition, we define resources to 
encompass both assets and capabilities. Assets 
represent "anything tangible and intangible the firm 
can use in its processes for creating, producing, 
and/or offering its products (goods or services) to 
a market" (Wade and Hulland 2004, p. 109). 
Capabilities represent "repeatable patterns of 
actions in the use of assets to create, produce, 
and/or offer products to a market" (Wade and 
Hulland 2004, p. 109). Table 1 summarizes the 
barriers to erosion and response-lag drivers that 
emerge from our literature review. Each is 
described in depth below. 
IT Resources Barrier 
At any point in time, competing firms have a 
different endowment of IT resources at their 
disposal to identify, assemble, deploy, and use 
information technologies (Bharadwaj 2000; 
Santhanam and Hartono 2003). An organization 

can exploit this idiosyncratic set of IT resources to 
create response lag (Wade and Hui land 2004 ). 
When a firm's IT-dependent strategic initiative 
leverages some preexisting IT resources, 
titors who do not have ready access to the same 
or substitute resources find it costly and difficult to 
replicate. For example, at the heart of Wal-Mart's 

dominance is its superior supply chain. To foster 
its efficiency, Wal-Mart developed a continuous 
replenishment strategy requiring real-time, 
of-sale data. For this initiative, Wal-Mart 
aged its proprietary satellite network connecting all 
of its geographically dispersed stores. 
titors with no access to a network of comparable 
functionality faced substantial obstacles to 
replication. 5 5Unlike the IT project barrier described below, the IT 
resources barrier is not concerned with the nature of the 
IT at the core of the initiative, but with the prerequisite 
organizational IT resources underpinning the strategic 
initiative.  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initi
atives Table 1. Barriers to Erosion and Relative Response-Lag Drivers 
Barrier to Erosion 
Response Lag Drivers 
1. IT Resources Barrier 
IT As
sets Ł IT infrastru
cture* Ł Information repositories* IT Capabilities Ł T
echnical skills t Ł IT management skills t Ł Relationship asset * 2. Complementary Resources Barrier Complementary Resources*t 3. IT project barrier 
Technology Ch
aracteristics Ł Visibility 
Ł Uniqueness 
Ł Complexity Implementation Process Ł Comple
xity Ł Process change 
4. Preemption Barrier Switching Costs Ł Tangible 
co-specialized investments* Ł Intangible 
co-specialized investments* Ł Collective 
switching costs* Value System Structural Chara
cteristics Ł Relationship 
exclusivity Ł Concentrat
ed links *Response-lag dri
vers s
ubject to asset stock accu
mulation processes 
tResponse-/ag drivers subject to organizational learning processes Recent research on the strategic impact of 
information systems explicitly addresses the role of 
IT assets and IT capabilities in building response 
lag (see Table 2). 
IT Assets IT assets available to the firm include hardware 
components and platforms (e
.g., a private satellite network), software applications and environments (e.g., a proprietary revenue management system 
using custom developed models), and data reposi
tories (e
.g., a database of historical 
customer behavior). Two principal IT assets have been 
identified in the literature: IT infrastructure and 
information repositories. 
IT Infrastructure. An IT infrastructure is defined 
as "the base foundation of the IT portfolio 
(including both technical and human assets), 
shared through the firm in the form of reliable 
services" (Broadbent et al. 1999b, p. 163). As 
such, the IT infrastructure provides the foundation 
for the delivery of business applications 
and services (Broadbent and 
Weill 1997). The IT infrastructure varies in reach (the extent 
of the connectivity both within and outside of the firm), 
and range 
(the scope of services that it 
can support) (Keen 1991 
). As reach and range 
increase, the resources made available by the IT 
infrastructure, and its ability to support a wide 
range of strategic initiatives, increase as well 
(Broadbent et al. 1999a). With IT infrastructure 
development times 
estimated to be in the five
-to MIS Quarterly Vol. 
29 No. 4/December 2005 753  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiative
s Table 2. Concept Matrix: IT Resources Barrier 
IT Assets IT Capabilities 
Cl) ti) C: ... a. ::J C: Cl) i: 0 0 ·.::: Cl) :;:; 0 iii E ti) ::J C: ... co~ CJ Cl) vi E ti) "i: ti) C) 0 ctl ti) ·--ctl ... 0 .c --Cl) 0 a. C: = ti) ... CJ:: ctl ·---Cl) Cl).:,(, Cl) ti) Citation Methodology E E c:: I-(/) c:: <( (Attwell 1992) Theoretical X (Barton and 
Peters 1992) Case study 
(st X X (Bharadwaj 2000) 
Archival X X X 
(Broadbent and Weill 1997) 
Theoretical X X X 
(Broadbent et al. 1999a) 
Case study (m) 
X X X (Broadbent et al. 1999b) 
Case study 
(m) X X X 
(Clemons 1986) 
Theoretical X X X (Clemons and Row 
1991a) Case study 
(s) X X (Copeland and McKenney 1988) Case 
study (m) X X X (Dehning and 
Stratopoulos 2003) Archival X X X (Duliba et al. 2001) 
Archival X (Duncan 1995) 
Survey X X X (Feeny 2001) 
Theoretical X (Feeny and Ives 1990) 
Theoretical X X (Feeny and Willcocks 1998) 
Theoretical X X X (Garud and Nayyar 1994) 
Theoretical X (Glazer 1991) 
Theoretical X (Henderson and Venkatraman 1993) 
Theoretical X X X (Jarvenpaa and Leidner 
1998) Case study (s) 
X X X (Johnston and Carrico 
1988) Case study (m) 
X (Kettinger and 
Grover 1995) Archival X X X 
(Kettinger et al. 1994) 
Archival X X (King et al. 1989) 
Survey X X (Kotha 1995) Case study 
(m) X X X 
(Lindsey et al. 1990) 
Case study (s) 
X X (Mata et al. 
1995) Theoretical X X X (McFarlan 1981) Theoretical X X 
754 MIS Quarterly Vol. 
29 No. 4
/December 2005 
 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
Table 2. Concept Matrix: IT Resources Barrier (Continued) 
IT Assets IT Capabilities 
Cl) c ... 1/) a. :::J C Cl) :c ti 0 ·;:: Cl) :;::; 0 iii E 1/) 2 co~ () Cl) C iii E 1/) "i:: 1/) Cl 0 111 1/) ·--111 ... 0 ..c --Cl) ... 0 Q. () = c= .!2 1/) --Cl) 111 ·-Cl) 1/) Cl)~ Citation Methodology E E o::: I-"' :!!:~ 0::: <( (Monteiro and Macdonald 1996) Theoretical 
X X 
X (Pemberton et 
al. 2001) Survey X (Porter and Millar 1985) 
Theoretical X (Robertson and Gatignon 1986) Theoretical 
X (Ross and Beath 2002) 
Survey X X X 
X (Ross et al. 1996) 
Theoretical X X X X (Santhanam and Hartono 2003) Archival 
X X (Sambamurthy et al. 2003) 
Theoretical X X X X X (Wade 2001) 
Survey X X X X X (Weill et 
al. 2002) 
Theoretical X X X X 
(Wiseman and MacMillan 1984) Theoretical 
X X (Wixom and Watson 2001) 
Survey X X a We use the label 
"Case study (s)" 
to identify 
a sing
le site case 
study and the label 
"Case study 
(m)" to identify a site case. 
seven-year range (Bharadwaj 2000), the response 
lag and ensuing barrier to erosion is likely to be 
very substantial (Duncan 1995). 
IT infrastructures are subject to asset stock 
accumulation dynamics. When a firm introduces 
a strategic initiative that employs reusable 
logy, it contributes to the development of an 
infrastructure that can be leveraged in the future 
by the initiative, through improvements, or by other 
initiatives (Barton and Peters 1992; Ross et al. 
1996). This process is theorized to create "options 
value" that provides the leader with the ability to 
expand the original initiative or to create new ones 

at a lower cost, more quickly, and with less 
inherent risk than competitors (Applegate 2003; 

Sambamurthy et al. 2003). 
Information Repository. 
An information 
tory is a collection of logically related data, or-
ganized in a structured form, that is accessible and 
usable for decision-making purposes. 
6 Information is now widely recognized as a fundamental firm 
resource, and organizations are investing 
cantly to improve their ability to collect, store, 
manage, and distribute it (Wixom and Watson 
2001 ). Moreover, the emergence of powerful 
lytical technologies and the declining costs of 
storage have created significant opportunities for 

strategies predicated on data analysis (Brahman et 
al. 2003; Glazer 1991 ). Information repositories 
can contribute to the creation of substantial 
response lag to imitation since information that can 
be kept secret, proprietary, or that is co-
6The term 
information repository 
is not synonymous with 
database management system. 
The asset is the 
able data that can be leveraged to create value, rather 
than the software programs that hold it. 
MIS Quarterly 
Vol. 29 No. 4/December 
2005 755  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
specialized7 with the resources or offerings of 
other firms contributes to delaying imitation 
(Rumelt 1987). In other words, if an IT-dependent 
strategic initiative relies on substantial information 
repositories, it is not enough for competitors to 
replicate the initiative: they must accumulate the 
needed information as well. 
Information repositories are subject to asset stock 
accumulation (Glazer 1991 ). For example, a 
critical resource underpinning Harrah's 
dent strategic initiative is its exhaustive data about 
customer preferences and behavior (e.g., 
bling, shopping, dining). This information 
tory represents a valuable resource that is 
impossible to rapidly replicate. Imagine a 
tion customer visits the Las Vegas properties once 
a quarter to play blackjack, information about six 
visits takes 1.5 years to accumulate. 
IT Capabilities 
While different technologies are inherently 
similar and thus create unique challenges, over 
time firms have developed unique sets of IT 
capabilities (McKenney et al. 1995). As a 
quence of this idiosyncratic development, some 
firms find themselves in a better position than their 
rivals when using and managing certain classes of 
technologies {Bharadwaj 2000; Dehning and 
Stratopoulos 2003; Ross et al. 1996; Wade and 
Hulland 2004 ). IT capabilities that have received 
research attention include technical skills, IT 
management skills, and relationship assets. 
Technical Skills. 
Technical skills refer to the 
ability to design and develop effective information 
systems. As such, they include proficiency in 
system analysis and design, infrastructure design, 
programming, and so on (McKenney et al. 1995; 
Ross et al. 1996). While some have argued that 
technical IT skills are easily obtainable in the labor 
market (Mata et al. 1995), the IT adoption 
ture suggests that they are in-fact subject to 
7 A resource is defined as co-specialized when its value 
is dissipated or greatly diminished unless the resource is 
used in conjunction with other co-specialized resources 
(Teece 1989). 
756 MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 
2005 organizational learning dynamics (Fichman 2000) 
and knowledge barriers (Attewell 1992). Thus, 
preexisting specific knowledge or a diverse 
nical knowledge set allow firms to more easily 
adopt and use IT (Cohen and Levinthal, 1990). 
IT Management Skills. 
IT management skills 
refer to the ability to provide leadership for the IS 
function, manage IT projects, evaluate technology 
options (Mata et al. 1995), manage change 
(McKenney et al. 1995), and envision creative and 
feasible technical solutions to business problems 
(Feeny and Willcocks 1998; Ross et al. 1996). 
Managerial IT skills are thought to significantly 
reduce the costs and lead times associated with IT 
development (Bharadwaj 2000). They also form 
the basis for envisioning and producing 
ments to existing IT-dependent strategic initiatives. 
IT management skills are developed through the 
process of organizational learning. For instance, 
American Airlines developed superior capability in 
managing and using reservation technology and 
the information it produced (Hopper 1990; 
Pemberton et al. 2001) through its pioneering 
efforts with the SABRE reservation system. 
aging this superior capability and the development 
of SMARTS, a proprietary application for channel 
analysis and management, American maintained 
its competitive advantage in distribution long after 
standard reservation systems functionalities had 
become available to all major airlines (Christiaanse 
and Venkatraman 2002). 
Relationship Asset. 
Relationship asset refers to 
a mutual respect and trusting rapport established 

over time between the IS function and the 
ness (Ross et al. 1996) that enables IS specialists 
and users to work together more effectively. By 
coordinating and communicating extensively, they 
share a vision for the role of IT within the business, 
executives share the risk and accept the 
responsibility for IT projects, and IS specialists are 
able to anticipate business IT needs and devise 
appropriate solutions (Feeny and Willcocks 1998; 
Ross et al. 1996). 
Relationship assets are subject to asset stock 
accumulation. Mata et al. (1995) provided the first 
complete articulation of the process by which 
relationship assets are developed. They theorized 
 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.that the pillars of a friendly and trusting relationship 
between IT and the business can take years to 
develop. This development is built on past 
ences and positive interactions. Individuals or 
groups that display competence in a task over time 
accumulate idiosyncrasy credits (Hollander 1960), 
which they can leverage at a later date to exert 
influence (Hollander 1960; Hollander 1971 ). It 
follows that IT-dependent strategic initiatives are 
instrumental in the development of strong 
relationship assets.
8 As the business and the 
technology partners develop mutual understanding 
and tighter relationships, the firm's ability to 
enhance existing IT-dependent strategic initiatives, 

as well as deploy new ones, increases. 
Recent alignment literature lends support to this 
notion. An investigation of high-performing IS 
functions in eight companies revealed that the 
enduring trait was a strong relationship between 
the business and information systems 
sionals, often stemming from mutual respect and 
ongoing relationships developed over time (Chan 

2002). Complementary Resources Barrier 
While technology is a core component of 
dependent strategic initiatives, enabling the 
system of value-adding activities, its successful 
implementation requires a number of other 
plementary organizational resources to be 
mobilized. Previous research has investigated the 
role of information systems in leveraging these 
organizational resources via co-presence or 
specialization (Clemons and Row 1991 b; Powell 
and Dent-Micallef 1997). 
When a firm deploys an IT-dependent strategic 
initiative, it employs a number of non-IT resources 
arranged into a highly interrelated activity system. 
For example, Pacific Pride's "cardlock" initiative 
leveraged the firm's distribution network of gas 
stations (Nault and Dexter 1995). Harrah's Enter-
8As a CIO we interviewed put it, "They [other executives] 
had no faith in the guy who preceded me. When l came 
in, l focused on getting a number of quick wins. Now they 
know we can deliver. 
" Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
tainment's initiative leverages its national network 
of casinos to capture drive-in traffic and foster 
cross-selling-a strategy that competitors with 
portfolios of properties concentrated in a single 

market cannot match. Interestingly, these 
mentary resources need not be considered 
able to begin with. Rather, they could be valueless 

or even considered liabilities until they are 
nected to a new "engine of value creation" (Miller 
2003). As in the example of Wyndham 
national's substantial real estate investment 
(Piccoli and Applegate 2003), an IT-dependent 
strategic initiative can be instrumental in 
aging a liability into a resource necessary to attain 
a unique competitive position. 
When a firm has access to co-specialized 
complementary assets that underpin the 
dependent strategic initiative, significant response 
lag can be created because imitation of the 
initiative is predicated on the ability to obtain the 
same (or equivalent) complementary resources 
(Clemons and Row 1991 b ). To the extent that the 
technology is co-specialized to, and amplifies the 

value of, unique complementary resources, its 
mere imitation by competitors is not sufficient. 
Narrowly replicating one element of a strategic 

initiative (e.g., the IT core) equates to playing an 
incomplete game that leads to a decline of the 
imitator's current position rather than to successful 
erosion of the leader's competitive advantage 
(Siggelkow 2001 ). As a consequence, successful 

imitation of an IT-dependent strategic initiative 
requires the introduction of a comparable IT core, 
the development or acquisition of the necessary 
complementary resources, and a reconfiguration of 
the linked activities-a risky strategy that becomes 
unmanageable when the number of activities to be 

replicated increases (Atkins 1998; Rivkin 2000). 
The extant literature has identified a number of 
response-lag drivers contributing to strengthening 
the complementary resources barrier (see 

Table 3).
9 9Jn an effort to limit the scope of this review, and due to 
the non-IT nature of this barrier, we have not identified 
single response-lag drivers, but rather provide a holistic 
discussion of the barrier. 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 
2005 757  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Str
ategic Initiatives Table 3. Concept Matrix: Complementary Resources Barrier 
Citation (Atkins 1998) 
(Bharadwaj 2000) 
(Chen and Hitt 2002) 
(Christiaanse and Venkatraman 2002) 
(Clemons and Row 1991a) 
(Clemons and Row 1991b) 
(Clemons and Weber 1990) 
(Dyer and Singh 1998) 

(Feeny 2001) 

(Feeny a
nd Ives 1990) 
(Han et a
l. 2001) (Hart and 
Saunders 1997) 
(Henderson and Venkatraman 1993) 
(Jarvenpaa a
nd Leidner 1998) 
(Kettinger and Grover 1995) 
(Kettinger et al. 1994) 
(Kotha 1995) 
(Makadok 1998) 
(Mata et al. 1995) 
(Mykytyn et a
l. 2002) (Pavlou 2
002) (Powell and 
Dent-Micallef 1997) 
(Sambamurthy et al. 2003) 
(Sethi and King 1994) 
(Slater and 
Narver 1995) (Stalk et al. 1992) 
(Venkatraman and Z
aheer 1990) Examples of complementary resources include 
scale of operations and market share (Clemons 
and Row 1991a
; Kettinger et al. 1994)
, organizational structure or governance (Feeny and Ives 
1990), slack resources (Kettinger et al. 1994 ), 
access to distribution channels (Feeny 2001 )
, physical assets (Feeny and Ives 1990)
, ownership structure (Piccoli and Applegate 2003)
, corporate culture (Barney 1986; Feeny and Ives 1990; 
Powell and Dent-Micallef 1997)
, top management 
commitment (Henderson and Venk
atraman 1993
; Keen 1991 )
, competitive scope 
(Clemons and Row 
758 MIS Qu
arterly Vol. 29 No. 4/
0ecember 2005 Methodology Case study (s) 
Archival Archival Archival Case study 
(s) Theoretical Case study 
(s) Theoretical Theoretical Theoretical Survey Theoretical Theoretical Case study 
(s) Archival Archival Case study 
(m) Archival Theoretical Theoretical Archival Survey Theoretical Theoretical Theoretical Theoretical Archival 1991a; Feeny and Iv
es 1990)
, and software and 
process patents (Atkins 
1998; Mykytyn et al. 
2002). Firms 
with a unique act
ivity system 
(kow 2001) or unique business processes (Daven
port 199
3) may also be able to leverage these 
resources to create value for customers
. External resources, such as interorganizational 
ships (Dyer and Singh 1998), brand recognition
, image, and trust
, are intangible and developed 
over time (Porter 1991 )
. They can be valuable 
components of IT-d
ependent strategic initi
atives as well (Hart and Saunders 1997
; Kotha 1995)
.  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Many response-lag drivers associated with the 
complementary resources barrier are subject to 
organizational learning and asset stock 
lation processes. Zhang and Lado (2001 ), for 
example, theorize that the potential for information 

systems to produce sustainable competitive 
vantage should be sought for their indirect effect in 
developing and leveraging organizational 
bilities. For instance, Wal-Mart's "cross-docking" 
logistic capability hinges on daily communication 
between its in-store point-of-sales systems, its 
distribution centers, and its suppliers (Stalk et al. 
1992). Wal-Mart began experimenting with 
docking upon the introduction of its IT-dependent, 
continuous replenishment strategic initiative. 

Thus, without its pioneering 
effort in continuous 
replenishment it would not have had the facilities 
to begin the organizational learning process and 
develop its cross-docking capability. 
IT Project Barrier 
Since IT-dependent strategic initiatives rely on an 
essential enabling IT core, they cannot be 
mented until the necessary technology and 
ciated information systems have been successfully 
deployed-the more time consuming and costly 
the process, the more resilient the IT project 
barrier. In other words, the longer and more 
expensive it is to design, develop, and introduce 
the information processing functionality needed to 
deliver the initiative's value proposition, the 
stronger is the IT project barrier. 
Information technologies are not homogeneous 
and undifferentiated entities, rather they are 
malleable and differ in their intrinsic 
tics, their ability to complement other 
tional resources, and the degree of organizational 
change that needs to occur when they are 
mented (Orlikowski and Iacono 2001 ). For 
example, Web pages are normally rapidly built and 
visible to competitors, but data warehouses are 
generally lengthy undertakings concealed from 

competitors' view (Feeny 2001; Wixom and 
Watson 2001 ). In extreme cases, the amount of 
time and money needed to replicate the leader's 
initiative may render imitation unjustifiable. When 
Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
United and American Airlines introduced travel 
agent automation, providing travel agents with 
access to their reservation systems, the other 
airlines decided not to follow due to the estimated 
high cost and risk of this initiative (McKenney et al. 
1995).10 More subtly, the response lag generated by the IT 

project barrier may be instrumental in enabling 
sufficient organizational learning and asset stock 

accumulation to prevent erosion of the leader's 
advantage. Glazer 
( 1991) first conceptualized this 
relationship when studying successful innovators, 
stating that "the organization first put in place an 
information technology infrastructure and then 
went beyond the technology 
to view the 
ment of 
'information' itself as an asset" (p.2, 
emphasis in original). In other words, the IT 
ject barrier may provide the leading firm with a 
head start that enables it to engage in the learning 
and accumulation process that strengthens its 
response-lag drivers and further reinforces its 
barriers to erosion. The stronger the IT project 
barrier, the longer this head start. For example, 
Harrah's Entertainment could not begin to 
late customer behavior data until its IT-dependent 
strategic initiative-including data capture, 
age, and analytical IT at the core-was in place 
and operational (Loveman 2003). It follows that 
the IT project barrier may play a fundamental role 
in creating sustainable competitive advantage by 
providing sufficient response lag to enable 
zational learning and asset stock accumulation to 

take place. This dynamic is similar to the 
market effect partially responsible for market share 
differential among early and late product market 
entrants (Brown and Lattin 1994; Makadok 1998). 
The extant literature has coalesced around two 
categories of response-lag drivers underpinning 
the IT project barrier: IT characteristics and 
mentation process (see Table 4). While related, 
10The IT resources and IT project barriers are related to 
one another. The IT project barrier creates, 
ceteris paribus, objective difficulties. But the IT resources barrier 
recognizes that all else is often not equal and enables 
analysis of how well different competitors are positioned 
to react to the initiative. 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 
2005 759  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
Table 4. Concept Matrix: IT Project Barrier 
Implementation IT Characteristics Process 
(I) (I) Q) '>< 'i< C: f/) Q) Q) Q) Q) a. a. f/) Cl ii :I Q) C: C' E E 
<.l ca 'iii 'i: 0 0 e ..c: Citation Methodology > ::::, u u a.. u (Attwell 1992) Theoretical (Barton and 
Peters 1992) 
Case study (s) 
(Bharadwaj et al. 1993) 
Theoretical (Broadbent et al. 1999b) 
Case study (m) 
(Clemons and 
Row 1991a) Case 
study (s) 
(Davenport 1998) Theoretical (Feeny 2001) Theoretical (Feeny and Ives 
1990) Theoretical (Mata et al. 1995) 
Theoretical (McFarlan 1981) Theoretical (Nault and 
Dexter 1995) 
Case study (s) 
(Reed and DeFillipp
i 1990) Theoretical 
(Reich and Huff 1991) 
Case study (m) 
(Robertson and Gatignon 1986) 
Theoretical (Rumelt 1987) 
Theoretical (Sethi and 
King 1994) 
Theoretical these two classes of response-lag drivers 
bute to the creation of response lag at different 
times. IT characteristics primarily have an effect 
during the development of the IT core or when 
competitors evaluate the information processing 
functionalities of the leader's initiative. The 
bution of the implementation process to response 
lag primarily occurs after design and development, 
when the IT core is rolled out to deliver the 
mation processing functionalities of the initiative. 
IT Characteristics 
Information technologies differ with respect to their 
intrinsic characteristics and, 
ceteris paribus, 
their 760 MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 2005 
X X X X X X X X X 
X X X 
X X X X X X X X 
X X X X X X potential to produce response lag. The literature 
has identified three response-lag drivers in this 
category: visibility, uniqueness, and complexity. 
We define them in turn below. 
Visibility. Visibility represents the extent to which 
the IT at the core of the initiative is readily 

vable by competitors. The visibility dimension can 
be conceptualized as a continuum spanning from 
internal systems (e.g., Harrah's Entertainment's 
engine for data analysis) to public systems (e.g., 
Lands' End Live: Web-based chat with customer 
service agents). The degree to which the 
teristics and results of an innovation are 
ible to others is generally linked to the rate of 
diffusion of the innovation (Moore and Benbasat 
 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.1991 ). Thus, as visibility decreases it becomes 
harder and harder for competitors to garner 
reliable information about the system, its 
tionality, and its role in supporting the firm's 
strategic initiatives. As a consequence, a 

visibility IT core affords its IT-dependent strategic 

initiative longer lag time. 
Uniqueness. Uniqueness is defined here as a 
continuum. On one side of the spectrum are 
contained, off-the-shelf IT that are standardized 
and need minimal integration or customization to 
a given environment (e.g., a new e-mail system). 
At the opposite end of the spectrum are custom 
developed applications that are not available for 

acquisition in the open market and/or require 
extensive integration and customization (e.g., 

Amazon.corn's collaborative filtering engine for 
suggestive selling). When uniqueness is low, 
pagating institutions such as consultants and 

service firms can be engaged by any firm seeking 
to deploy the standard functionality (Fichman and 
Kemerer 1997; Robertson and Gatignon 1986). 
Conversely, when uniqueness is high, no 
standardized solution is available on the open 
market and a customized solution needs to be 
developed-a typically more costly and time 
consuming proposition. 
Complexity. Complexity is a soft-primary 
teristic of IT (Fichman 2000), indicating that 
information technologies differ with respect to their 

inherent degree of complexity. Complexity 
butes to making it difficult for organizations to 
assimilate and effectively use technology. As a 
consequence, while organizations have different 

endowments of resources and skills that allow 
them to be more or less effective with any one 

technology, some technologies objectively offer 
more obstacles than others and, therefore, have 
the potential to produce substantially different 
response lag to imitation. Simple technologies, 
such as a static Web site, can quickly be designed 
and developed by all competitors, while more 
complex ones, such as supply chain management, 
often require substantial investments and time in 

their design and development, thus creating much 
higher response lag. 
Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
Implementation Process 
Information technologies not only differ with 
respect to their intrinsic characteristics, but also in 
how they are implemented and become available 
for utilization by the organization (Orlikowski and 
Iacono 2001 ). While IT characteristics and 
mentation process are related, they serve as 

pendent sources of response lag. The literature 
has identified two response-lag drivers in this 
category: implementation process complexity and 
the degree of process change required. 
Implementation Process Complexity. 
mentation process complexity represents the 
degree of difficulty associated with the process by 
which technology solutions at the core of the 
dependent strategic initiative come to permeate an 
organization. Once the IT core has been designed 
and developed, the conversion process starts, 
including installation, configuration, end-user 
training, and reorganization. Thus the 
effect of this 
response-lag driver is felt after the technology has 
been designed and developed, and the firm is 
rolling it out in an effort to create a working 
information system (Sawyer 2001 ). A customer 
relationship management initiative, for example, 
requires the implementation of a collection of 
operational and analytical IT products (Goodhue et 
al. 2002). Purchasing or developing the IT 
ponents is only a step in the process of "achieving 
CRM functionalities." 
Consider the case of Harrah's. When the firm 

embarked on its CRM initiative, it had to shift the 

allegiance of its casinos' general managers from 
the property to the brand-a dramatic 
zation necessary to complement its transactional 
and analytical IT core (Loveman 2003). This was 
a lengthy process that highly decentralized 
competitors would have to engage in to match 
Harrah's brand-wide value proposition to its 
customers. Degree of Process Change. 
Degree of process 
change refers to the extent to which the firm's 

processes need to evolve to adapt to the new 
technology in an effort to optimize the performance 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 
2005 761  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
of the information system as a whole (O'Hara et al. 
1999). Because of the tight link between IT and 
the processes the technology enables and 
ports, this is a crucial response-lag driver. As work 
in business process reengineering and ERP 
traditions has shown, when technologies require 
substantial process change before they can be 
utilized, considerable time and money needs to be 
devoted to the project even after the IT core has 
been made available (Kumar and Van 
berg 2000; Scott and Wagner 2003). This lag 
driver is particularly powerful when firms have 
company-specific business practices and 
cesses, developed 
over long periods of time, that 
need to be adapted to the requirements of the new 
IT-dependent strategic initiative (Soh et al. 2000). 
Preemption Barrier 
The three barriers to erosion discussed thus far 
are each concerned with competitors' ability to 
replicate the leader's IT-dependent strategic 
initiative. The preemption barrier instead focuses 
on the question of whether, even after successful 
imitation has occurred, the leader's position of 
competitive advantage can be threatened. It 
stems from the research tradition of competitive 
response and preemption (Chen and MacMillan 
1992; MacMillan 1983; Rivkin 2000). This tradition 
sees the firm as able to take action to "shape its 
luck" by minimizing competitors' ability to 
cessfully respond (MacMillan 1983). 
Early research in this area focused primarily on the 
role of switching costs associated with proprietary 
IT investments. Later described as the "create, 
capture, keep" paradigm, this work was criticized 
based on the premise that partners or customers 
11 can anticipate the risks of being locked-in to a 
proprietary technology (Mata et al. 1995). Recent 
work has broadened the debate, recognizing that 
11The preemption barrier to imitation emerges in the 
context of relationships between the firm and other 
organizations. While these business relationships may 
occur with any entity in the firm's value system, for 
simplicity we refer to them henceforth as "the customer." 
762 MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 2005 
preemption potential is rooted in value propositions 
that require co-specialized investments by the 
customer, and that customers willingly agree to 
make the needed investments as a means of 
taking in the initiative (Chen and Hitt 2002; Shapiro 
and Varian 1999).
12 These investments are not 
only associated with obtaining and operating the IT 
core of the IT-dependent strategic initiative, but 
they also include all the tangible and intangible 
specialized investments the customer has made in 
the initiative (Shapiro and Varian 1999). Note that 
for successful preemption to occur, customers 
need not be severely locked-in through significant 
switching costs. Instead, they must have made 

enough co-specialized investments to have an 
incentive to remain in a relationship with the firm 
(Chen and Hitt 2002).
13 When the preemption barrier is high, competitors 
cannot simply imitate the leader's initiative; they 
need to either compensate the customer for the 
cost of switching or provide enough additional 
12A bank executive we interviewed indicated that some 
banks are attempting to become "trusted consolidators" 
of top clients' complex financial positions. This strategy 
entails the collection of extensive information about 
tomers' current services, banking profile, insurance 
holdings, investment portfolio, mortgage, credit and loan 
positions, scheduled bills payment, and so on. The bank 
does not provide all products, but it strives to offer a 
consolidated view of all financial positions by 
tically retrieving and organizing the pertinent information 
over the Web. Customers that find the service useful and 
use it over time develop a strong relationship with the 
bank and face substantial costs to 
move to a competitor. 
Switching costs extend well beyond customers' 
proficiency with the bank's Web site. In order to change 
its provider, the customer must research and evaluate 
competitors, compare offerings, configure the 

petitor's application, migrate historical data (if possible), 
open new accounts, close old accounts, and so on. 
13While a cursory examination may suggest that these 
costs are negligible, early research shows that even in 
markets with apparently negligible co-specialized 
ments and low barriers to entry, like the money market 
mutual funds market, significant entry order effects, due 

to early 
mover lock in, do exist (Makadok 1998). This 
empirical result confirms that, "Even when switching 
costs appear low, they can be critical for strategy" 
(Shapiro and Varian 1999, p. 108). What appears to be 
critical is not the absolute magnitude of the cost of 
switching, but its size relative to the value that customers 
receive from the product or service. 
 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.value to justify the customer's decision to incur the 
switching costs (Shapiro and Varian 
1999). That is, imitators must be "that much better," where 
"that much" is an amount at least equal to the 
current value of all co-specialized investments that 
the customer has made. As a bank executive we 
interviewed eloquently observed when speaking 
about customers' reluctance to switch to an 
native provider of online banking: "Do not 
estimate the power of entanglement." 
The extant literature has identified a number of 
response-lag drivers that can be grouped into two 
categories: switching costs and value system 
structural characteristics (see Table 5). 
Switching Costs 
IT-dependent strategic initiatives, heavily relying 
on the collection, storage, manipulation, and 
bution of information, are particularly suited to the 
creation and exploitation of switching costs (Chen 
and Hitt 2002; Shapiro and Varian 
1999). Switching costs stem from investments that are 
specific 14 or co-specialized to the IT-dependent 
strategic initiative. The literature has identified 
three sources of switching costs: co-specialized 

tangible investments, co-specialized intangible 
investments, and collective switching costs. 
Co-specialized Tangible Investments. 
When an 
IT-dependent strategic initiative is deployed, it 
sometimes requires that customers procure the 
physical assets necessary to participate in the 

initiative. Co-specialized tangible investments 

represent the current value of these assets. 
These investments range from computer hardware 
and telecommunication equipment to software 
applications and interfaces between the 
mer's existing systems and the firm's IT. For 
example, hotel franchisees regularly buy costly 
software interfaces to the franchising brand's 
reservation system; these interfaces often become 
14The term 
specific indicates that the value of these 
complementary investments is significantly lower in any 
alternative use. 
Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
valueless, however, if the property is rebranded. 
Information that the customer accumulates while 
participating in a firm's IT-dependent strategic 

initiative represents another example of a 
specialized asset when the customer's information 
repository is only usable with the firm's initiative. 

Moreover, the information collected may only be 
valuable as long as the customer maintains a 
relationship with the franchisor-a condition known 
as information specificity (Choudhury and Sampler 
1997). For example, in hotels, revenue 
ment models and historical records are often brand 
specific and become valueless if, for instance, a 
hotel is re-branded.
15 The investments customers 
have made in Apple's iTunes proprietary music 
format represent another example. 
Co-specialized tangible investments are subject to 
the process of asset stock accumulation. The 
impact of co-specialized tangible investments 
fluctuates over time, owing to the fact that 
switching costs associated with many tangible 
investments tend to decrease over time as the 

useful life of the investment grows shorter (Shapiro 
and Varian 
1999). Thus, the value of this 
response-lag driver may follow a reverse sawtooth 

pattern whereby switching costs are greatest upon 
acquisition or upgrade of the assets, and degrade 
over time until the next investment is made. 
It follows that the firm's leadership position is most at 
risk as the customer faces the cyclical capital 
outlay. Information repositories, whose value 
tends to increase over time with their increasing 
size and scope, are one exception to this rule. 
Co-specialized Intangible Investments. 
When an IT-dependent strategic initiative is deployed, it 
often necessitates that the firm's customers make 
a set of co-specialized intangible investments. 
15Note that the revenue management software used is 
generally not proprietary or brand specific. Yet the 
toric data and the forecasting models the hotel has 
developed assume that the hotel operates under a 

specific brand (e.g., Hilton). If the hotel is rebranded, 
while the software, the data, and the models can be 
retained by the franchisee, their value is much lower 
because the data and models are specific and assume 
that the hotel sports the Hilton flag (i.e., has access to 
Hilton's reservation systems, operational standards, 
brand equity, customer base, customer loyalty, etc.). 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 
2005 763  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
Table 5. Concept Matrix: Preemption Barrier 
Switching Costs 
Value (Co-specialized System's 
Investments) Structure 
C: 0 :;:; (I) (I) ('CJ ... (I) j5 > -"> j5 C: "in "c, Cl) "c, C: t) ::J C: ('CJ 0 C: u -0 ('CJ Citation Methodology I--= u u >< w (Amit and Zott 2001) 
Case study (m) 
(Armstrong and 
Hagel 1996) Theoretical 
(Chen and 
Hitt 2002) Archival (Clemons 1986) 
Theoretical (Clemons and 
Row 1988) Case study (s) 
(Clemons and 
Weber 1990) Case study (s) 
(Dos Santos and Peffers 1995) 
Archival (Duliba et al. 2001) 
Archival (Feeny 1988) 
Survey (Feeny 2001) 
Theoretical (Feeny and 
Ives 1990) Theoretical (Johnston and Carrico 1988) Theoretical 
(Kettinger et al. 1994) 
Archival (Kotha 1995) 
Case study (m) 
(McFarlan 1984) Theoretical (Nault and 
Dexter 1995) Case study (s) 
(Porter and Millar 1985) 
Theoretical (Rumelt 1987) Theoretical (Vitale et al. 1986) 
Theoretical These investments often occur in the form of time 
expenditures. For instance, to benefit from 
personalization initiatives, customers often need to 
take the time to complete a profile. Common 
examples of co-specialized intangible investments 
include training (Feeny 1988), practice over time 
leading to proficiency with the technology (Shapiro 
and Varian 1999), costs associated with searching 
for and contracting with other partners and setting 
up new relationships (Makadok 1998), and 
uncertainty surrounding switching decisions and 
the available alternatives (Schmalensee 1982). 
764 MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 2005 
X X X X X X X X X X X X X X 
X X X X X X X X X X 
X X X 
X X X X X X X X 
X X X X Intangible co-specialized investments are subject 
to asset stock accumulation and tend to rise over 
time (Shapiro and Varian 1999). A good example 
is individual proficiency with software programs 
that tends to increase as a function of time and 
use (Chen and Hitt 2002). Thus, a Microsoft 
Office user faces significantly higher switching 
costs as time goes on because adopting a 
peting software application would depress her 

productivity. Moreover, she may lose the value of 
other investments made in the software (e.g., 
Visual Basics-based custom modules). As a con-
 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.sequence, IT-dependent strategic initiatives that 
leverage co-specialized intangible investments 
have the potential to build self-reinforcing barriers 
to erosion. 
Collective Switching Costs. 
A unique form of 
switching costs is represented by collective 
switching costs, occurring when the market 
sents network externalities, and representing the 

combined switching cost of all entities in the 
work (Shapiro and Varian 1999). In the presence 
of network externalities, participation in the 
nant network affords the most value while, at the 
same time, it increases the value of the network. 
As a group, participants face collective switching 

costs that exceed the simple sum of individual 
switching costs because, unless a coordinated 
defection occurs, any individual defector finds 
himself cut out of the network and its benefits 
(Shapiro and Varian 1999). When collective 
switching costs are prevalent, only "wholesale 
defection makes sense" (Feeny and Ives 1990, p. 
40); however, the coordination costs of wholesale 
defection are often daunting (Shapiro and Varian 
1999). Collective switching costs are subject to asset 

stock accumulation dynamics that, over time, 
enable the leading firm to strengthen an already 

advantageous position by increasing the size of 
the network it sponsors.
16 A clear example of the 
power of this response-lag driver is provided by 
eBay, Inc. and its dominance of the online auction 
market in the face of retaliation by powerful 
competitors such as Amazon.com and Yahoo!, Inc. 
Value System's Structure 
A firm does not engage in economic activity in 
isolation, but as a link in a larger value system 
16Examples of IT-based strategic initiatives that create 
increasing collective switching costs over time include 
communities of interests (e.g., purchasing circles and 
telecommunication groups such as Verizon Wireless 
"in"), user communities (e.g., Microsoft Office user base), 
trading networks (e.g., Bloomberg users, eBay 
mers), etc. 
Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
including upstream and downstream members 
(Porter 1985). The structure of this value system 
can provide significant opportunity for preemptive 
strategies and for the exploitation of the 
lag drivers discussed above (MacMillan 1983). 
Unlike typical response-lag drivers, however, the 
structure of the value system does not directly 
impact the strength of the preemption barrier to 
erosion. Instead it plays a facilitating or inhibiting 
role by moderating the impact of other 
lag drivers on the strength of the preemption 
barrier. We discuss two characteristics of the 
value system-relationship exclusivity and 
concentrated links-below. 
Relationship Exclusivity. 
An exclusive 
ship is said to exist when economic actors in the 
value system, upstream or downstream from the 
focal firm, elect to do business with one and only 
one organization. That is, these actors (e.g., 
customer, supplier) place a premium on dealing 
exclusively with the innovator or one of its 
titors, but not both. For example, most consumers 
will prefer to consolidate their mutual funds 
ments with one provider. In time they may switch 
providers, but they will not likely simultaneously 
require the same service from more than one. 

Conversely, major consulting firms have a 
ship and negotiated rates with many of the large 
hotel chains; hence, they have a concurrent 
tionship with multiple direct competitors. 
tionship exclusivity is generally associated with 
dependent initiatives that provide integrated 
services and that benefit from the accumulation of 
historical information. 
In the presence of relationship exclusivity, 
emption is easier because laggards cannot simply 

enter the market when they have replicated the 
initiative, but must instead displace the leader for 
any customer that has already established a 
relationship with the innovator. As a consequence, 
the base of available customers who face no 
switching costs is inherently smaller then it would 
be if no relationship exclusivity existed, and it 
grows smaller the longer the leader's lead time. 
Concentrated Link. 
The various entities within a 
value system can be characterized as links in the 

chain of value creation (e.g., raw material pro-
MIS Quarterly Vol. 
29 No. 4/December 
2005 765  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
ducers, suppliers, distributors, firm's customers, 
end consumers). The degree of concentration in 
a link is inversely proportional to the number of 
suitable entities populating that link.
17 Thus, a 
highly concentrated value system link is one where 
there are relatively few counterparts (upstream or 
downstream in the value system) available with 
whom the firm can work (MacMillan 1983 ). For 
cruise lines, the total number of travel agents 

serving the target market may be the concentrated 
link. In the case of a fighter jet manufacturer, it 
may be the pool of customers approved by the 
firm's national government. Given the firm's 
resource constraints, when a link has a high 
degree of concentration, the proportion of entities 
in the link that can be effectively reached, 
cated, and influenced in a given amount of time is 
higher. Consequently, the firm stands a better 
chance of capturing a significant proportion of 
relationships and thus of being able to leverage 
switching costs to "lock out" competitors. 
versely, when a link in the value system has a low 
degree of concentration, the firm may be unable to 

establish a relationship with enough entities to 
preempt a successful competitor's response (Huff 
and Robinson 1994 ). 
Conclusions We reviewed the abstracts of 648 articles from the 
information systems, strategic management, and 
marketing literatures, and categorized 117 relevant 
studies. Based on this review, we developed an 
integrative model summarizing the determinants of 
sustainability of competitive advantage rooted in 
information systems use. 
Pundits contend that as "information technology's 

power and ubiquity have grown, its strategic 
importance has diminished" (Carr 2003, p. 5). The 
accuracy of this statement is debatable (McFarlan 
and Nolan 2003) and, more importantly, our review 

of the literature shows that a narrow focus on "IT" 
17 An economic actor is deemed suitable if the firm that is 
implementing the IT-dependent strategic initiative would 
find a business relationship with it desirable. 
766 MIS Quarterly Vol. 
29 No. 4/December 2005 
is misguided and misleading. The focus should be 
on IT-dependent strategic initiatives-of which IT 
represents a fundamental component-because 
technology does not contribute to firm performance 
in isolation, but instead contributes as part of an 
activity system that fosters the creation and 
appropriation of economic value. 
The literature has coalesced around four barriers 

to erosion that seem to fully capture the potential 

for IT-dependent strategic initiatives to afford 
sustained competitive advantage: 
IT resources barrier, complementary 
resources barrier, IT 
ject barrier, 
and preemption barrier. 
The 
tive framework we propose identifies the 
lag drivers underpinning these four barriers, as 
well as the process of organizational learning and 
asset stock accumulation by which they may be 

strengthened over time. Our review suggests that 

considerable opportunity exists for using IT to 
enable sustained competitive advantage through 
IT-dependent strategic initiatives. As IS scholars, 

it is incumbent upon us to uncover and explain 

how IT-dependent strategic initiatives lead to the 
creation and appropriation of economic value. We 
believe that our work can offer a useful structure to 
this quest and we offer some suggestions for 
future research. 
Implications for Research 
and Practice 
After two decades of research on strategic 
mation systems, the question of sustainability 
remains largely unanswered due to a paucity of 
empirical studies. One reason for this dearth of 
research is the difficulty inherent in the longitudinal 
nature of the phenomenon of interest and the use 
of highly aggregated outcome variables (e.g., firm 
performance). But because firms excel in specific 

initiatives and/or business processes, while they 

are sometimes at a disadvantage in others, 

gate outcome variables are not well suited to this 

analysis (Ray et al. 2004). The example of 
Wyndham International is illustrative. The firm has 
been very innovative with its customer relationship 
management initiative-Wyndham ByRequest-
 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.and has seen positive results (e.g., brand 
tion, customer loyalty). Yet, because of its legacy 
debt position, the firm remains in deep financial 
trouble and has recently been forced to 
restructure. A research focus on IT-dependent 
strategic initiatives as the unit of analysis, such as 
the one proposed here, may help mitigate these 
difficulties (Ray et al. 2004 ). The effect of specific 
IT-dependent strategic initiatives can be measured 
on immediate outcomes viz. the competition's 
performance on the same dimensions. We 
encourage future research at this level of analysis. 
With the popularization and intuitive appeal of the 
resource based view of the firm, much recent 
literature has focused on the role of IT resources. 
While this work remains largely theoretical, or only 
tangentially related to this barrier to erosion, some 
authors have begun to test the role of specific 
response-lag drivers. Bharadwaj (2000) and 
Santhanam and Hartono (2003) found that firms 
with high IT capability outperformed a control 

sample over a sustained period of time. Barton 
and Peters (1992) linked sustained competitive 

advantage to IT management skills and the 

ability of a modular IT infrastructure, and 
Pemberton et al. (2001) demonstrated the value of 
information repositories. Others found that IT 

management skills contribute to sustainable 
petitive advantage while technical IT skills and IT 
infrastructure do not (Dehning and Stratopoulos 
2003). A major challenge facing researchers in this 
important area is the operationalization of some of 
the key concepts. Early work has relied on 
proxies, such as lists of most admired companies 
from the practitioner literature, but calls have been 
issued to develop reliable measures that can be 
used to build a cumulative research tradition 

(Santhanam and Hartono 2003). Survey 
ments could be developed so that executives 
closely involved in the development or 
ment of IT-dependent strategic initiatives may 
assess the drivers as well as the business 

comes associated with the initiative. Another 
approach consists of identifying observable 
characteristics of each construct that can be used 
to consistently and reliably measure response-lag 
Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
drivers across initiatives and time. For example, 

an information repository can be evaluated with 
respect to scope (e.g., the number of entities 
currently captured in the repository) and size (e.g., 
the number of records available for analysis). 
Relationship assets may be measured through 
network analysis by evaluating the degree to which 
the IS function is isolated or comingled with 
business with respect to communication, trust, and 
other relevant constructs. 
No study to date has directly attempted to evaluate 
the ability of the IT project barrier to produce 
response lag. Research on the response-lag 
drivers associated with this barrier has remained 

exclusively theoretical. Yet, without rigorous 
studies confirming or challenging the 
notion that because IT is easily replicable it cannot contribute 
to sustainability, no such conclusion is warranted. 
At a minimum, the documented high failure rate of 
IT projects casts some doubts on the accuracy of 
the "easily replicable" hypothesis. Similarly, the 
argument that computers are more powerful and 
the functionalities of once large systems are now 
available and affordable to all firms (Carr 2003) is 
flawed. Consider an oft-cited example: SABRE. 
When first introduced, SABRE represented a 
significant technical achievement and a substantial 
financial investment relative to the average degree 
of computerization and spending among 
peting firms. SABRE was, for its time, both highly 
complex and highly unique (Copeland and 
McKenney 1988). Thus, it was not its 
absolute computational power, or the 
absolute investment required, that determined SABRE's ability to 
generate response lag. Rather, it was its 
plexity and cost 
relative to the state of the art 
at the time 
that ensured its uniqueness and, at least 
partly, difficulty of imitation (McKenney et al. 
1995). As computing power has improved 
nentially, and as its cost has fallen, what were 

once unique systems have now become 

petitive necessities (Clemons and Row 1991b). In 
other words, the bar has risen significantly. But 
there is no evidence that the underlying 
anisms have changed as well. On the contrary, 

our review of the literature suggests that under 
certain circumstances (e.g., low visibility, high 
uniqueness) the IT project barrier can create 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 2005 
767  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
significant response lag in its own right. One 
approach to testing this idea may be to identify a 
set of IT-dependent strategic initiatives that relied 
on different technologies and explain the variance 
in response lag to imitation that each generated 
based on their characteristics. 
IT-dependent strategic initiatives require a set of 

resources and capabilities to be successfully 
implemented. But, with the recent exception of 
strategic agility research (Sambamurthy et al. 
2003; Weill et al. 2002), the literature is silent 
about how resources are generated and what role 
IT plays in fostering them. Our framework 
gests that once an IT-dependent strategic initiative 
is introduced, through organizational learning and 
asset stock accumulation processes, the firm can 
leverage its leadership position to further 
strengthen other barriers to erosion. It is also 
unclear what resources are specific to a given 

dependent strategic initiative and which ones are 
instead more general and available to the firm to 
launch new, unrelated initiatives. These 

explored questions provide fertile ground for future 
research and the potential to make outstanding 
contributions to research and practice. 
The preemption barrier to erosion received some 
research attention early on (Clemons 1986; Dos 
Santos and Peffers 1995 ), but, with few notable 
exceptions demonstrating that firms have 
siderable control over their ability to create 
based switching costs and harness them to the 
retention of customers (Amit and Zott 2001; Chen 
and Hitt 2002), it seems to have fallen out of favor. 
This is surprising given the potential that 
dependent strategic initiatives have to create 
preemption through switching costs. Our review 
also suggests that relationship exclusivity and a 
concentrated value systems link may maximize the 
effect of switching costs on sustainability. Yet, no 
research to date has explicitly modeled this 
moderating effect. 
Beyond testing the framework we have proposed, 
and the current gaps in the literature, there are 
many opportunities to extend our theorizing. 
Recently, the strategic agility perspective has 
challenged us to think about information systems 
768 MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 2005 
as digital options generators (Sambamurthy et al. 
2003). Within this view, a firm can use its current 
IT capabilities to afford itself future opportunities to 
leverage digital processes and knowledge to 

launch future competitive moves and initiatives. 
Marrying the impetus of the strategic agility 
perspective with the unit-level focus espoused in 
this paper creates a wealth of valuable cross-level 
research opportunities. For example, some of the 
response-lag drivers developed through 
zational learning or asset stock accumulation will 
be specific to the IT-dependent strategic initiative 
that generated them, while others will likely be 
broader and contribute generally to digital options 
generation. In order to map the characteristics of 
initiative to their potential for options generation, a 
taxonomy of IT-dependent strategic initiatives may 
be developed and tested. Cross-organizational 
initiatives (e.g., supply chain management) 
sent a class of initiatives that creates fertile ground 
for extending our work beyond the current focus on 
an individual firm. With the widespread adoption 
of enabling technologies (e.g., radio frequency 
identification), this area of research has the 

potential to be extremely timely and relevant. 
Finally, while this article provides an intellectual 
basis in support of planning for sustained 

competitive advantage, our work presently 
vides little guidance about the process that might 
be employed to carry out such planning. Who, for 

instance, should be involved in this process and 
how would they be facilitated? What are the 
principal challenges to gathering and processing 
the information necessary to carry out many of the 
value judgments necessary to estimate the 
strength of the barriers to erosion? From the 
follower, rather than the innovator, perspective, 
how should the firm use the framework to 

diagnose the sources of the leader's advantage? 
Acknowledgments We would like to thank Sergei Boukhonine and 
Deborah Bauder for their indispensable support 
with the background research that made this 
article possible. We would also like to thank the 
 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.editors and the review panel for their guidance and 
support throughout this project. 
References Amit, R., and Zott, C. "Value Creation in 
business," Strategic Management Journal 
(22:6), 2001, pp. 493-520. 
Applegate, L. M. "Making the Case for Networked 
Business," in 
Corporate Information Strategy 
and Management, 
L. M. Applegate, R. D. 
Austin, and F. W. McFarlan (Eds.), McGraw 
Hill, New York, 2003, pp. 115-134. 
Armstrong, A., and Hagel, 
J. "The Real Value of 
On-Line Communities," 
Harvard Business 
Review(74:3), 1996, pp.134-141. 
Atkins, M. H. "The Role of Appropriability in 
taining Competitive Advantage-An Electronic 
Auction System Case Study," 
Journal of 
tegic Information Systems 
(7:2), 1998, pp. 131-
152. Attewell, P. "Technology Diffusion and 
tional Learning: The Case of Business 
puting," Organization Science 
(3:1 ), 1992, pp. 1-
19. Barney, J. "Firm Resources and Sustained 
petitive Advantage," 
Journal of Management 
(17:1), 1991, pp. 99-120. 
Barney, J. B. "Looking Inside for Competitive 
Advantage," Academy of Management 
tive (9:4), 1995, pp. 49-61. 
Barney, J. "Organizational Culture: Can it Be a 
Source of Sustained Competitive Advantage," 
Academy of Management Review 
(11 :3), 1986, 
pp. 656-664. 
Barton, P. S., and Peters, D. H. "The ASB Bank: 
An IT Case Study in Sustained Competitive 
Advantage," Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems (1:3), 1992, pp. 165-170. 
Benjamin, R. 
I., Rockart, J. F., Scott Morton, M. S., 
and Wyamn, 
J. "Information Technology: A 
Strategic Opportunity," 
Sloan Management 
Review (25:3), 1984, pp. 3-14. 
Bharadwaj, A. S. "A Resource-Based Perspective 
on Information Technology Capability and Firm 
Performance: An Empirical Investigation," 
MIS Quarterly (24: 1 ), 2000, pp. 169-196. 
Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
Bharadwaj, A. S., Varadarajan, P.R., and Fahy, 
J. "Sustainable Competitive Advantage in Service 
Industries: A Conceptual Model and Research 
Propositions," Journal of Marketing 
(57:4), 1993, pp. 83-99. 
Brandenburger, A. M., and Stuart, H. W. 
Based Business Strategy," 
Journal of 
mics and Management Strategy(5:1 
), 1996, pp. 
5-24. Broadbent, M., and Weill, P. "Management by 
Maxim: How Business and IT Managers Can 
Create IT Infrastructures," 
Sloan Management 
Review (38:3), 1997, pp. 77-92. 
Broadbent, M., Weill, P., and Neo, B. S. "Strategic 
Context and Patterns of IT Infrastructure 
Capability," Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems (8:2), 1999a, pp. 157-187. 
Broadbent, M., Weill, P., and St. Clair, D. 'The 
Implications of Information Technology 
structure for Business Process Redesign," 
MIS Quarterly (23:2), 1999b, pp. 159-182. 
Brohman, M. K., Watson, R. T., Piccoli, G., and 
Parasuraman, A. "Data Completeness: The 
Key to Narrowing the Gap Between Your 

Customer and You," 
Communications of the 
ACM (46:6), 2003, pp. 47-51. 
Brown, C. L., and Lattin, 
J. M. "Investigating the 
Relationship Between Time in Market and 
Pioneering Advantage," 
Management Science 
(40:10), 1994, pp. 1361-1370. 
Carr, N. "IT Doesn't Matter," 
Harvard Business 
Review(81:5), 2003, pp. 41-50. 
Cash, J. I., and Konsynski, B. R. "IS Redraws 
Competitive Boundaries," 
Harvard Business 
Review (63:2), 1985, pp. 134-142. 
Chan, Y. E. "Why Haven't We Mastered 
ment? The Importance of the IT Informal 
Organizational Structure," 
MIS Quarterly 
Executive (1 :2), 2002, pp. 97-110. 
Chen, M., and MacMillan, 
I. C. "Nonresponse and 
Delayed Response to Competitive Moves: The 
Roles of Competitor Dependence and Action 
Irreversibility," Academy of Management 
Journal (35:3), 1992, pp. 539-570. 
Chen, M., and Miller, D. "Competitive Attack, 
Retaliation and Performance: An 
Valence Framework," 
Strategic Management 
Journal (15:2), 1994, pp. 85-103. 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 
29 No. 4/0ecember 
2005 769  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
Chen, P. Y., and Hitt, L. M. "Measuring Switching 
Costs and the Determinants of Customer 
Retention in Internet-Enabled Business: A 
Study of the Online Brokerage Industry," 
Information Systems Research 
(13:3), 2002, pp. 
255-274. Choudhury, V., and Sampler, J. "Information 
Specificity and Environmental Scanning: An 
Economic Perspective," 
MIS Quarterly 
(21 :1 ), 
1997, pp. 25-50. 
Christiaanse, E., and Venkatraman, N. "Beyond 
Sabre: An Empirical Test of Expertise 
tion in Electronic Channels," 
MIS Quarterly 
(26:1), March 2002, pp. 15-38. 
Clemons, E. K. "Information Systems for 
able Competitive Advantage," 
Information and 
Management(11:3), 1986, pp.131-137. 
Clemons, E. K., and Row, M. C. "Information 
Technology at Rosenbluth Travel: Competitive 
Advantage in a Rapidly Growing Global Service 
Company," Journal of Management Information 
Systems (8:2), 1991a, pp. 53-79. 
Clemons, E. K., and Row, M. C. "McKesson Drug 
Company: A Case Study of Economost-A 
Strategic Information System," 
Journal of 
Management Information Systems 
(5: 1 ), 1988, 
pp. 36-50. 
Clemons, E. K., and Row, M. C. "Sustaining IT 
Advantage: The Role of Structural Differences," 
MIS Quarterly 
(15:3), 1991 b, pp. 275-292. 
Clemons, E. K., and Weber, B. W. "London's Big 
Bang: A Case Study of Information 
nology, Competitive Impact, and Organizational 
Change," Journal of Management Information 
Systems (6:4 ), 1990, pp. 41-60. 
Cohen, W. M., and Levinthal, D. A. "Absorptive 
Capacity: A New Perspective on Learning and 
Innovation," Administrative Science Quarterly 
(35:1), 1990, pp. 128-152. 
Copeland, D. G., and McKenney, J. 
L. "Airline Reservation Systems: Lessons from History," 
MIS Quarterly 
(12:3), 1988, pp. 353-370. 
D'Aveni, R. A. Hypercompetition: Managing in the 
Dynamics of Strategic Maneuvering, 
The Free 
Press, New York, 1994. 
Davenport, T. H. 
Process Innovation: 
neering Work Through Information Technology, 
Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 1993. 
770 MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 
2005 Davenport, T. H. "Putting the Enterprise into the 
Enterprise System," 
Harvard Business Review 
(76:4), 1998, pp. 121-131. 
Dehning, B., and Stratopoulos, T. "Determinants 
of a Sustainable Competitive Advantage Due to 
an IT-Enabled Strategy," 
Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems 
(12:1), 2003, pp. 7-28. 
Dierickx, I., and Cool, K. "Asset Stock 
lation and Sustainability of Competitive 
tage," Management Science 
(35), 1989, pp. 
1504-1511. Dos Santos, B. L., and Peffers, K. "Rewards to 
Investors in Innovative Information Technology 
Applications: First Movers and Early Followers 
in ATMs," 
Organization Science 
(6:3), 1995, pp. 
241-259. Duliba, K. A., Kauffman, 
R. J., and Lucas Jr., H. C. 
"Appropriating Value from Computerized 
vation System Ownership in the Airline 
Industry," Organization Science 
(12:6), 2001, 
pp. 702-728. 
Duncan, N. B. "Capturing Flexibility of Information 
Technology Infrastructure: A Study of 
source Characteristics and Their Measures," 
Journal of Management Information Systems 

(12:2), 1995, pp. 37-57. 
Dyer, J. H., and Singh, H. 'The Relational View: 
Cooperative Strategy and Sources of 
organizational Competitive Advantage," 
demy of Management Review 
(23:4 ), 1998, pp. 
660-679. Eisenhardt, K. M. "Making Fast Strategic 
sions in High-Velocity Environments," 
Academy of Management Journal 
(32:3), 1989, pp. 543-
576. Eisenhardt, K. M., and Martin, J. "Dynamic 
bilities: What Are They?," 
Strategic 
ment Journal 
(21 ), 2000, pp. 1105-1121. 
Feeny, D. F. "Creating and Sustaining 
titive Advantage," in 
Information Management: 
The Strategic Dimension, 
M. Earl (Ed.), Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, England, 1988, pp. 
98-124. Feeny, D. F. "Making Business Sense of the 
Opportunity," MIT Sloan Management Review 
(42:2), 2001, pp. 41-51. 
Feeny, D. F., and Ives, B. "In Search of 
ability: Reaping Long-Term Advantage from 
Investments in Information Technology," 
Jour- Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.nal of Management Information 
Systems (7:1 ), 
1990, pp. 27-46. 
Feeny, D. F., and Willcocks, L. P. "Core IS 
bilities for Exploiting Information Technology," 
Sloan Management Review 
(39:3), 1998, pp. 9-
21. Fichman, R. G. "The Diffusion and Assimilation of 
Information Technology Innovations," in 
Framing the Domains of IT Management: 
jecting the Future Through the Past, 
R. W. 
Zmud (Ed.), Pinnaflex, Cincinnati, OH, 2000, 
pp. 105-127. Fichman, R. G., and Kemerer, C. F. "Object 
nology and Reuse: Lessons from Early 
Adopters," IEEE Computer 
(30:10), 1997, pp. 
47-59. Garud, R., and Nayyar, P. R. "Transformation 
Capacity: Continual Structuring by 
poral Technology Transfer," 
Strategic 
ment Journal 
(15:5), 1994, pp. 365-385. 
Glazer, R. "Marketing in an Information-Intensive 
Environment: Strategic Implications of 
edge as an Asset," 
Journal of Marketing 
(55:4 ), 
1991, pp. 1-19. 
Goodhue, D. L., Wixom, B. H., and Watson, H.J. 
"Realizing Business Benefits Through CRM: 
Hitting the Right Target in the Right Way," 
MIS Quarterly Executive 
(1 :2), 2002, pp. 79-94. 
Han, J. K., Kim, N., and Kim, H. B. "Entry 
Barriers: A Dull-, One-, or Two-Edged Sword 
for Incumbents? Unraveling the Paradox from 
a Contingency Perspective," 
Journal of 
keting (65: 1 ), 2001, pp. 1-14. 
Hart, P., and Saunders, C. "Power and Trust: 
Critical Factors in the Adoption and Use of 
Electronic Data Interchange," 
Organization Science (8: 1 ), 1997, pp. 23-43. 
Henderson, J., and Venkatraman, N. "Strategic 
Alignment: Leveraging Information Technology 
for Transforming Organizations," 
IBM Systems Journal (32:1), 1993, pp. 4-17. 
Hidding, G. J. "Sustaining Strategic IT Advantage 
in the Information Age: How Strategy 
digms Differ by Speed," 
Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems (10:2), 2001, pp. 201-222. 
Hollander, E. P. "Competence and Conformity in 
the Acceptance of Influence," 
Journal of 
Abnormal and Social Psychology 
(61 ), 1960, 
pp. 365-369. 
Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
Hollander, E. P. 
Principles and Methods of Social 
Psychology, Oxford University Press, New York, 
1971. Hopper, M. D. "Rattling SABRE-New Ways to 
Compete on Information," 
Harvard Business Review (68:3), 1990, pp. 118-126. 
Huff, L. C., and Robinson, W. T. "Note: The 
Impact of Leadtime and Years of Competitive 
Rivalry on Pioneer Market Share Advantages," 
Management Science 
(40:10), 1994, pp. 1370-
1378. Ives, B., and Learmonth, G. "The Information 
System as a Competitive Weapon," 
cations of the ACM 
(27:12), 1984, pp. 1193-
1201. Jarvenpaa, S. L., and Leidner, D. E. "An 
tion Company in Mexico: Extending the 
Resource-Based View of the Firm to a 

Developing Country Context," 
Information tems Research 
(9:4 ), 1998, pp. 342-361. 
Johnston, H. R., and Carrico, S. R. "Developing 
Capabilities to Use Information Strategically," 
MIS Quarterly 
(12:1 ), 1988, pp. 37-48. 
Keen, P. G. W. 
Shaping the Future: 
Business Design Through Information Technology, 
Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 1991. 
Kettinger, W. J., and Grover, V. "Do Strategic 
Systems Really Pay Off?," 
Information Systems 
Management(12:1), 1995, pp. 35-44. 
Kettinger, W. J., Grover, V., Guha, S., and Segars, 
A.H. "Strategic Information Systems Revisited: 

A Study in Sustainability and Performance," 
MIS Quarterly(18:1), 1994, pp. 31-58. 
King, W. R., Grover, V., and Hufnagel, E. H. 
"Using Information and Information Technology 
for Sustainable Competitive Advantage: Some 
Empirical Evidence," 
Information and 
ment (17:2), 1989, pp. 87-93. 
Katha, S. "Mass Customization: Implementing 
the Emerging Paradigm for Competitive 
tage," Strategic Management Journal 
(16), 1995, pp. 21-42. 
Kumar, K., and Van Hillegersberg, J. "ERP 
Experiences and Evolution," 
Communications of 
the ACM 
(43:4), 2000, pp. 22-26. 
Lefebvre, L.A., Mason, M., and Lefebvre, E. "The 
Influence Prism in SM Es: The Power of CE O's 
Perceptions on Technology Policy and its 
Organizational Impacts," 
Management Science 
(43:6), 1997, pp. 856-878. 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 
2005 771  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
Lindsey, D., Cheney, P. H., Kasper, G. M., and 
Ives, B. "TELCOT: An Application of 
tion Technology for Competitive Advantage in 
the Cotton Industry," 
MIS Quatterly (14:4 ), 
1990, pp. 347-357. 
Loveman, G. W. "Diamonds in the Data Mine," 
Harvard Business Review 
(81 :5), 2003, pp. 
109-113. MacMillan, I. C. "Controlling Competitive 
mics by Taking Strategic Initiative," 
The Academy of Management Executive 
(2:2), 1988, pp.111-118. 
MacMillan, I. C. "How Long Can You Sustain a 
Competitive Advantage?," in 
The Strategic 
Planning Management Reader, 
L. Fahey (Ed.), 
Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1989, pp. 
23-26. MacMillan, I. C. "Preemptive Strategies," 
Journal of Business Strategy 
(3:2), 1983, pp. 16-26. 
Magretta, J. "The Power of Virtual Integration: An 
Interview with Dell Computer's Michael Dell," 
Harvard Business Review 
(76:2), 1998, pp. 72-
84. Makadok, R. "Can First-Mover and Early-Mover 
Advantages Be Sustained in an Industry with 
Low Barriers to Entry/imitation?," 
Strategic 
agement Journal 
(19:4 ), 1998, pp. 683-696. 
Mata, F. J., Fuerst, W. L., and Barney, J. B. 
"Information Technology and Sustained 
titive Advantage: A Resource-Based Analysis," 
MIS Quat1erly(19:4), 1995, pp. 487-505. 
McFarlan, F. W. 
"Information Technology 
Changes the Way You Compete," 
Harvard Business Review 
(62:3), 1984, pp. 98-104. 
McFarlan, F. W. "Portfolio Approach to 
tion Systems," 
Harvard Business 
Review(59:5), 1981, pp. 142-150. 
McFarlan, F. W., and Nolan, R. L. "Does IT 
Matter? An HBR Debate," 
Harvard Business 
Review(81:6), 2003, pp.109-115. 
McKenney, J. L., Copeland, D. C., and Mason, R. 
0. Waves of Change: Business Evolution 
Through Information Technology, 
Harvard 
ness School Press, Boston, 1995. 
Mendelson, H. "Organizational Architecture and 
Success in the Information Technology 
Industry," Management Science 
(46:4), 2000, 
pp. 513-529. 
Miller, D. "An Asymmetry-Based View of 
tage: Towards an Attainable Sustainability," 
772 MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 2005 
Strategic Management Journal 
(24:10), 2003, 
pp. 961-976. 
Monteiro, L., and Macdonald, S. "From Efficiency 
to Flexibility: The Strategic Use of Information 
in the Airline Industry," 
Journal of Strategic 
Information Systems 
(5:3), 1996, pp. 169-188. 
Moore, G. C., and Benbasat, 
I. "Development of 
an Instrument to Measure the Perception of 
Adopting an Information Technology 
vation," Information Systems Research 
(2:3), 1991, pp. 192-222. 
Moorman, C., and Slotegraaf, R. J. 'The 
gency Value of Complementary Capabilities in 
Product Development," 
Journal of Marketing 
Research (36:5), 1999, pp. 239-257. 
Mykytyn, K., Mykytyn, J. P. P., Bordoloi, B., 
McKinney, V., and Bandyopadhyay, K. "The 

Role of Software Patents in Sustaining 
Enabled Competitive Advantage: A Call for 
Research," Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems (11: 1 ), 2002, pp. 59-82. 
Nault, B. 
R., and Dexter, A. S. "Added Value and 
Pricing with Information Technology," 
MIS Quarterly (19:4), 1995, pp. 449-465. 
Nevis, E. C., DiBella, A. J., and Gould, J. 
M. "Understanding Organizations as Learning 
Systems," Sloan Management Review 
(36:2), 1995, pp. 73-85. 
O'Hara, M. T., Watson, R. T., and Kavan, C. B. 
"Managing the Three Levels of Change," 
Information Systems Management Journal 
(16:3), 1999, pp. 63-70. 
Orlikowski, W. J., and Iacono, C. S. "Research 
Commentary: Desperately Seeking the 'IT' in IT 
Research-A Call to Theorizing the IT Artifact," 
Information Systems Research 
(12:2), 2001, pp. 
121-134. Parsons, G. L. "Information Technology: A New 
Competitive Weapon," 
Sloan Management 
Review (25:1 ), 1983, pp. 3-14. 
Pavlou, P. A. "Trustworthiness as a Source of 
Competitive Advantage in Online Auction 
Markets," in 
Best Paper Proceedings of the 
Academy of Management Conference, 
D. H. 
Nagao (Ed.), Denver, CO, 2002, pp. A1-A6. 
Pemberton, J. D., Stonehouse, G. H., and Barber, 
C. E. "Competing with CRS-Generated 

mation in the Airline Industry," 
Journal of 
tegic Information Systems 
(10: 1 ), 2001, pp. 59-
75.  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli, G., and Applegate, L. M. "Wyndham 
International: Fostering High-Touch with 
Tech," Harvard Business School Publishing 
(Case# 9-803-092), February 2003. 
Porter, M. E. 
Competitive Advantage: Creating 
and Sustaining Superior Performance, 
The Free 
Press, New York, 1985. 
Porter, M. E. "Towards a Dynamic Theory of 
tegy," Strategic Management Theory 
(12:1), 1991, pp. 95-117. 
Porter, M. E., and Millar, 
V. E. "How Information 
Gives You a Competitive Advantage," 
Harvard Business Review 
(63:4), 1985, pp. 149-160. 
Powell, T. C., and Dent-Micallef, A. "Information 
Technology as Competitive Advantage: The 
Role of Human, Business, and Technology 
Resources," strategic Management Journal 
(18:5), 1997, pp. 375-405. 
Rangan, V. K., and Bell, M. "Dell Online," Harvard 
Business School Publishing (Case # 9-598-
116), March 1999. 
Ray, G., Barney, 
J. B., and Muhanna, W. 
A. "Capabilities, Business Processes, and 
titive Advantage: Choosing the Dependent 

Variable in Empirical Tests of the 
Based View," 
Strategic Management Journal 
(25: 1 ), 2004, pp. 23-37. 
Reed, R., and DeFillippi, R. 
J. "Casual Ambiguity, 
Barriers to Imitation, and Sustainable 
tive Advantage," 
The Academy of Management 
Review(15:1), 1990, pp. 88-103. 
Reich, B. H., and Huff, S. L. "Customer-Oriented 
Strategic Systems," 
Journal of Strategic 
mation Systems 
( 1: 1 ), 1991, pp. 29-37. 
Rivkin, J. W. "Imitation of Complex Strategies," 
Management Science 
(46:6), 2000, pp. 824-
844. Robertson, T. S., and Gatignon, H. "Competitive 
Effects on Technology Diffusion," 
Journal of 
Marketing (50:3), 1986, pp. 1-12. 
Ross, J. W., and Beath, C. M. "New Approaches 
to IT Investment," 
MIT Sloan Management 
Review (43:2), 2002, pp. 51-59. 
Ross, J. W., Beath, C. M., and Goodhue, D. L. 
"Develop Long-Term Competitiveness Through 
IT Assets," 
Sloan Management Review 
(38:1 ), 
1996, pp. 31-42. 
Rumelt, R. P. "Theory, Strategy and 
neurship," in 
The Competitive Challenge: Stra-
Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
tegies for Industrial Innovation and Renewal, 
D. J. Teece (Ed.), Bellinger Publishing Company, 
Cambridge, MA, 1987, 137-158. 
Sambamurty, V. "Business Strategy in 
competitive Environments: Rethinking the 
Logic of IT Differentiation," in 
Framing the 
Domains of IT Management: Projecting the 
Future Through the Past, 
R. W. Zmud (Ed.), 
Pinnaflex Educational Resources, Inc., 
Cincinnati, OH, 2000, pp. 245-261. 
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A., and Grover, V. 
"Shaping Agility Through Digital Options: 
Reconceptualizing the Role of Information 
Technology in Contemporary Firms," 
MIS Quarterly (27:2), 2003, pp. 237-263. 
Santhanam, R., and Hartono, E. "Issues in Linking 
Information Technology Capability to Firm 
Performance," MIS Quarterly 
(27: 1 ), 2003, pp. 
125-153. Sawyer, S. "A Market-Based Perspective on 
Information Systems Development," 
cations of the ACM 
(44:11 ), 2001, pp. 97-102. 
Schmalensee, R. "Product Differentiation 
tages of Pioneering Brands," 
American 
nomic Review 
(72:3), 1982, pp. 349-365. 
Scott, S. 
V., and Wagner, E. 
L. "Networks, 
tiations, and New Times: The Implementation 
of Enterprise Resource Planning into an 

Academic Administration," 
Information and 
Organization (13:4), 2003, pp. 285-313. 
Sethi, V., and King, W. 
R. "Development of 
Measures to Assess the Extent to Which an 
Information Technology Application Provides 
Competitive Advantage," 
Management Science 
(40:12), 1994, pp. 1601-1628. 
Shapiro, C., and Varian, H. R. 
Information Rules: 
A Strategic Guide to the Network Economy, 
Harvard Business School Press, Boston, 1999. 
Siggelkow, N. "Change in the Presence of Fit: 
The Rise, the Fall, and the Renaissance of Liz 
Claiborne," Academy of Management Journal 
(44:4), 2001, pp. 838-857. 
Slater, S. F., and Narver, 
J. C. "Market 
tion and the Learning Organization," 
Journal of 
Marketing (59:3), 1995, pp. 63-74. 
Smith, K. G., Grimm, C. 
M., Gannon, M. J., and 
Chen, M. "Organizational Information 
cessing, Competitive Responses and 
mance in the Domestic Airline Industry," 
Aca-MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 
2005 773  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
demy of Management Journal 
(34:1 ), 1991, pp. 
60-85. Soh, C., Kien, S.S., and Tay-Yap, 
J. "Cultural Fits 
and Misfits: Is ERP a Universal Solution?," 
Communications of the ACM 
(43:4), 2000, pp. 
47-51. Stalk, G., Evans, P., and Shulman, 
L. E. 
peting on Capabilities: The New Rules of 
porate Strategy," 
Harvard Business Review 
(70:2), 1992, pp. 57-70. 
Teece, D. 
J. "Capturing Value from Technological 
Innovation: Integration, Strategic Partnering 
and Licensing Decisions," 
Interfaces (18:3), 1989, pp. 46-61. 
Teece, D. 
J., Pisano, G., and Shuen, 
A. "Dynamic Capabilities and Strategic Management," 
tegic Management Journal 
(18:7), 1997, pp. 
509-533. Van de Ven, 
A. H., and Poole, M. S. "Explaining 
Development and Change in Organizations," 
Academy of Management Review 
(20:3), 1995, 
pp. 510-540. 
Venkatraman, N., and Zaheer, A. "Electronic 
Integration and Strategic Aadvantage: A 
Experimental Study in the Insurance Industry," 
Information Systems Research 
(1 :4 ), 
1990, pp. 
377-393. Vitale, M. R., Ives, B., and Beath, C. M. "Linking 
Information Technology and Corporate 
tegy: An Organizational View," in 
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on 
Information Systems, 
L. Maggi, R. W. Zmud, 
and J. C. Wetherbe (Eds.), San Diego, CA, 
1986, pp. 265-276. 
Wade, M. "Exploring the Role of Information 
Systems Resources in Dynamic Environments," 

in Proceedings of the 
2Z'd International Conference on Information Systems, 
V. Storey, 
S. Sarkar, and 
J. I. DeGross (Eds.), New 
Orleans, LA, 2001, pp. 491-496. 
Wade, M., and Hulland, 
J. "Review: The Resource-Based View and Information Systems 
Research: Review, Extension, and Suggestions 
for Future Research," 
MIS Quarterly 
(23:1 ), 
2004, pp. 107-142. 
Webster, J., and Watson, R. T. "Analyzing the 
Past to Prepare for the Future: Writing a 
Literature Review," 
MIS Quarterly 
(26:2), 2002, 
pp. xiii-xxiii. 774 MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 2005 
Weill, P., Subramani, 
M., and Broadbent, 
M. "Building IT Infrastructure for Strategic Agility," 
MIT Sloan Management Review 
(44:1), 2002, 
pp. 57-65. 
Wernerfelt, B. "A Resource-Based View of the 
Firm," Strategic Management Journal 
(5), 1984, 
pp. 171-180. 
Wiggins, R. R., and Ruefli, T. W. "Sustained 
Competitive Advantage: Temporal Dynamics 
and the Incidence and Persistence of Superior 
Economic Performance," 
Organisation Science 
(13:1), 2002, pp. 82-105. 
Wiseman, C., and MacMillan, 
I. C. "Creating 
Competitive Weapons from Information 
tems," JournalofBusinessStrategy(5:2), 1984, pp. 42-50. 
Wixom, B. H., and Watson, H. 
J. "An Empirical 
Investigation of the Factors Affecting Data 
Warehousing Success," 
MIS Quarterly 
(25:1 ), 
2001, pp.17-41. 
Zhang, M. J., and Lado, A. A. "Information 
Systems and Competitive Advantage: A 
Competency-Based View," 
Technovation (21 :3), 
2001, pp. 147-156. 
About the Authors 
Gabriele Piccoli 
is an assistant professor 
mation Systems at the School of Hotel 
tion at Cornell University. His primary research 
and teaching expertise is in strategic information 

systems and the use of IT to enable customer 

service. His research appears in academic and 
applied journals including 
MIS Quarterly, Decision 
Sciences, Communications of the ACM, MIS 
terly Executive, Harvard Business Review, 
and Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration 
terly. He serves on the editorial board of 
Cornell Hotel and Restaurant Administration Quarterly. 
Blake Ives 
holds the C. T. Bauer Chair in 
ness Leadership at the Bauer College of Business 
at the University of Houston. He is also Director 
of the Information Systems Research Center 
(ISRC) and Director of Research for the Society for 
Information Management's Advanced Practice 
Council. Blake is a past President of the Asso-
 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.ciation for Information Systems, a Fellow of the 
Association for Information Systems, and a past 
Editor-in-Chief of 
MIS Quarterly. 
Blake's research 
has been published in 
Sloan Management Review, 
IBM Systems Journal, MIS Quarterly, MIS Quar-
Appendix A 
Methodology Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
terly Executive, Management Science, Information 
Systems Research, Communications of the 
ACM, Decision Sciences, Academy of Management 
Executive, DataBase, IEEE Computer, 
and Journal of MIS. The literature on sustainable competitive advantage is interdisciplinary. Thus, following the methodology 
proposed by Webster and Watson (2002), we performed a search spanning the information systems, 
strategic management, and marketing literatures. As a first step, we examined selected journals in these 
fields and completed full-text electronic searches 
18 on keywords including "competitive advantage and 
information systems" or "competitive advantage and information technology."
19 These searches identified 
a total of 602 articles (see Table A 1 ). The titles and abstracts of each article were examined to evaluate 
whether inclusion was warranted (i.e., the article appeared to be concerned with, or relevant to, the question 
of sustainability of competitive advantage based on information systems).
20 This process, patterned after 
similar previous work (Van de Ven and Poole 1995), provided 80 articles for in-depth review and coding. 
In an effort to broaden the search beyond the original set of journals, we noted cited works of potential 
interest in the articles reviewed (Webster and Watson 2002). A further set of 46 articles, from journals other 
than those formally searched, was collected and a subset of 37 articles was read in full and coded. 
Our categorization of the literature was concept-driven (Webster and Watson 2002) and organized around 

the theoretical framework presented above. For each article, we noted what response-lag driver the authors 
had identified and/or tested and the process, if any was provided, by which the driver was thought to 
contribute to sustaining competitive advantage. The results, including specific barriers to erosion and 
response-lag drivers that emerged from the analysis, are presented in the article organized by the guiding 
frameworks and concept matrices (Webster and Watson 2002). Out of 117 coded articles, 69 included 
variables of interest and are compiled in the analysis. 
18The following databases where used: Proquest, Science direct, JSTOR archive. 
19AII issues of the following journals were searched in an effort to include top journals in the selected disciplines and 
broaden the search beyond North American journals: 
MIS Quarterly, Information Systems Research, Management 
Science, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, European Journal of Information Systems, Academy of Management 
Review, Strategic Management Journal, Academy of Management Journal, Organization Science, Journal of Marketing, 
Journal of Marketing Research. 
20Note that, in an effort to develop a comprehensive model of the role of information systems in sustainable competitive 
advantage, we included not only articles that explicitly tested a construct's own contribution to sustainability, but also 
those that, while concerned with other research questions, discussed, directly or indirectly, such contributions. 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 
2005 775  Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Piccoli & Ives/IT-Dependent Strategic Initiatives 
Table A1. Journal Articles Analyzed 
Journal Abstract Coded Of Interest 
MIS Quarterly 
137 17 
13 Information Systems Research 14 6 3 Management Science 
41 11 
2 Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems 128 13 
8 European Journal of 
Information Systems 
39 3 
0 Organization Science 
31 6 2 Academy of Management Review 
34 4 
2 Academy of Management Journal 
47 7 
0 Strategic Management 
Journal 74 7 
5 Journal of Marketing 49 5 5 Journal of Marketing Research 8 1 
0 Other 46 37 29 
Total 648 117 69 
776 MIS Quarterly Vol. 29 No. 4/December 
2005 