 Organization Studies 1 Œ27© The Author(s) 2017Reprints and permissions:  sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.navDOI: 10.1177/0170840616679454www.egosnet.org/osThe Interaction of Control Systems and Stakeholder Networks  
in Shaping the Identities of  
Self-Managed TeamsMaria Carmela AnnosiSchool of Social Sciences, Wageningen University, The NetherlandsNicolai FossBocconi University, ItalyFederica BrunettaLUISS Guido Carli University, ItalyMats MagnussonKTH Royal Institute of Technology, SwedenAbstractTeam identity has received little research attention even though an increasing number of firms are moving to team-based organizations and there is evidence that teams form identities. We explore the extent to 
which team identity can be institutionalized as a central organizing principle of team-based firms. We argue 
that managerial and stakeholder interventions shape the self-construction of team identity as well as the 
team™s commitment to specific work objectives. We also suggest that team identity becomes isomorphic to 
organizational identity because of pressures related to: (1) the presence of a dense network of managers and 

stakeholders, which orients teams towards a focus on certain aspects of the higher-order identity; (2) the use of team routines and regular feedback loops, which force alignment with the organizational identity; and (3) the use of coordinating roles aimed at promoting, ratifying and reinforcing the convergence of identity within 
the team. We analyse multiple cases from a major multinational corporation in the telecommunications 
industry, which we examine through the lens of a multi-level model of controls involving the micro, meso 
and macro organizational levels. We expand and refine the model in the process.Keywordsmanagerial control, organizational control, organizational identity, team identity
Corresponding author:Nicolai Foss, Department of Management and Technology, Bocconi University, Via Roentgen 1, Milan, 20135, Italy. 
Email: Nicolai.foss@unibocconi.it679454OSS0010.1177/0170840616679454
Organization Studies
Annosi et al.research-article
2017Article 2 Organization Studies IntroductionAn understanding of ‚identity™ is important for comprehending the functioning of those contempo
-rary organizations that rely on flat hierarchies and the use of more or less autonomous teams 

(Albert, Ashforth, & Dutton, 2000). Thus far, research has paid little attention to the identity aspects 

of these new organizational forms. Identity is important because of its powerful sense-making, 

direction-setting and motivating roles, and there is no reason identity should be any less important 
in these regards in contemporary, team-based organizations. In this study, we apply an identity 

perspective to a particular instance of contemporary work organization, namely ‚agile™ software 

development (Martin, 2003).Agile methods have been adopted in many industries (Austin & Devin, 2009). They represent a 
new model of labour-process control that maintains discipline in teamwork. Post-bureaucratic con
-
trol relies on the creation of shared meaning, which reduces the need for the ‚principles of hierarchy 

and explicitly rule-governed behavior™ (Sewell, 1998, p. 408). An internalized cognitive structure of 

the organization and its goals (Albert et
 al., 2000) serves as the basis of new control strategies 
designed to coexist with established bureaucratic frameworks. This results in a ‚complex interweav
-
ing between bureaucratic logic and the autonomisation of conduct™ (Fournier, 1999, p. 293).
Identity is pivotal to our understanding of coordination in organizations. Organizational identity 
is the cognitive image held by individuals within the organization that is used to make sense of the 

world (Dutton, Dukerich, & Harquail, 1994). Identity provides rules of action that help organiza
-
tional actors deal with ambiguity and cognitive limitations by emphasizing certain issues and prob-
lems. It also helps them define those issues that are crucial and demand attention (Thornton, 2002). 
The extant research indicates that the identities of organizational members are closely connected 

with organizational identity (Ashforth & Mael, 1989; Brown, 1997; Dutton et
 al., 1994; Elsbach & 
Kramer, 1996). However, to the best of our knowledge, the extant research does not theorize about 

the mechanisms that link team identity and organization identity. Nevertheless, the literature 

emphasizes the importance of observing cross-level dynamics and theoretically unfolding the ‚cas
-
cades™ of nested identities, such as the link between the organizational and team levels (Ashforth, 

Rogers, & Corley, 2011). Identities are not created in a vacuum and organizational identity con
-
struction is not performed by an abstract organizational entity. Rather, it is crafted by managers and 

stakeholders who are simultaneously creating their own identities through self-categorization 
(Kramer, 1991), cognitive identification (Dutton et
 al., 1994) and self-affirmation (Brown, 1997; 

Elsbach & Kramer, 1996).
We build on the idea that ‚organizational identity is best understood as contested and negotiated 
through iterative interactions between managers and stakeholders™ (Scott & Lane, 2000, p. 44). 

Scott and Lane (2000) suggest a number of relations between stakeholder characteristics, such as 
the density of their related networks and stakeholders™ abilities to influence managers™ reconstruc
-
tion of organizational identity. We expand on these ideas, especially on the view that organizational 

identity is an outcome of the complex interactions among managers, organizational members and 

other stakeholders. In this regard, we argue that team members are not passive targets of manageri
-
ally designed identities. We consider several groups of organizational actors and constituencies at 

multiple organizational levels as we integrate theory on organizational identity with theory on team 

identification. We apply a multi-level model of controls (Martin, 2003) at three organizational 

levels: the micro or team level, the meso level and the macro level.Based on a field investigation of three R&D units in the same multinational telecommunications company, we argue that agile routines make teams permeable to stakeholder influence at the meso 

level. At the same time, organizational routines at the macro level enable intense relations among 

stakeholders, leading to the formation of coalitions that pressure teams. This pushes teams towards 
 Annosi et al. 3conformity with stakeholders™ values and beliefs, thereby prompting alignment between the identi
-ties of teams and those of stakeholders. In addition, we propose that task interdependencies within 
the team at the micro level intensify the strength of relational ties among members. As team con
-
nectivity becomes more intense, team members tend to behave in similar ways despite their free-
dom to be different, which gives rise to a set of legitimized working conventions (Scott, 1995) 

nested in value-based control. This team identity becomes the basis on which members operate 

when developing products or services. Finally, we propose that established managerial controls at 

the macro level tend to amplify the defined team identity, adding legitimacy to team behaviours as 

the team works towards agile values and principles instilled by stakeholders.Theoretical BackgroundOrganizational stakeholders in the context of organizational identity constructionIn general, stakeholders are groups or individuals with relationships with a firm that have the power to affect the firm™s performance and/or have a stake in the firm™s performance (Freeman, 

1983). In this paper, ‚stakeholders™ refers to individuals outside the focal team who have an interest 

in leading the team towards the desired performance. Such stakeholders might include middle 
managers, line managers, customer representatives and team coordinators, who act as dominant, 

powerful and legitimate stakeholders (Mitchell, Agle, & Wood, 1997) and who attract manage
-
ment™s attention.
In modern organizations, management may use social identity and ‚the corporatization of the 
self™ (Kärreman & Alvesson, 2004, p. 151) as a way to exercise meaningful executive authority 

over other social groups. For this purpose, management uses socio-ideological control in attempts 
to control worker beliefs and technocratic control in attempts to control worker behaviour 
(Kärreman & Alvesson, 2004). Given their need to be sensitive to their obligations to stakeholders 

(Clarkson, 1995), to serve the strategic goals of the organization and to satisfy their own needs of 

self-definition, managers may initiate interactions with stakeholders and other organizational enti
-
ties through which organization identity can be inferred and controlled.
In the process of constructing organizational identity, top managers play a special role with 
respect to stakeholders, as they can be considered ‚agents of [all] other stakeholders™ (Hill & Jones, 

1992, p. 135). Previous studies have focused on the roles of top management (Gioia & Thomas, 

1996) and other organizational members (Elsbach & Kramer, 1996) in organizational identity con
-
struction. We define organizational identity as the shared beliefs held by organizational members 

concerning the main, enduring and distinguishing peculiarities of the company (Albert & Whetten, 

1985). Organizational identity construction is dynamic and iterative, and it results from managers™ 

and stakeholders™ consideration of the meaning of events and policies, and their interpretations of 

identity-relevant feedback (Scott & Lane, 2000).Organizational identity construction and managerial organizational controlsManagers and stakeholders exercise control and power in the organization in order to secure suf
-
ficient resources and steer individual actions towards specific ends (Langfield-Smith, 1997). 
Control strategies may contribute to identity formation, but the multiple identity demands may 

create tensions and even challenge the ‚very core of each employee™s sense of selfhood and iden
-
tity, defining his/her very being™ (Gabriel, 1999, p. 180). Managerial control typically involves 

mechanisms for monitoring and evaluating the inputs and/or outputs of relevant organizational 

entities, or mechanisms that target employee beliefs.
 4 Organization Studies Two layers of control are considered in this study: technocratic and socio-ideological (Alvesson 
& Kärreman, 2001). Specifically, technocratic control encompasses the use of bureaucracy and 
performance measures. As such, it is associated with structural arrangements (e.g. organizational 

hierarchies, plans, feedback procedures, systems) that are focused on the behaviours and work 

methodologies that make work processes as simple and transparent as possible. Socio-ideological 
control, on the other hand, targets beliefs via norms, emotions and values, and it indirectly affects 

the behaviour of workers. In ideological forms of control, managers seek to make employees com-
ply with their own values and ideals.Research suggests that there has been a general and significant shift in managerial control sys
-tems in complex, decentralized organizations from technocratic control towards socio-ideological 

control (Alvesson & Kärreman, 2001). Technocratic control is oriented towards the behavioural 

level, while bureaucracy may have a socio-ideological influence. The two forms of control ‚feed 

upon and inform each other™ (Alvesson & Kärreman, 2001, p. 171). In the following, we investi
-
gate key mechanisms that are involved in this interplay.
Team identity construction within nested organizational identitiesOrganizational identities are linked across levels of analysis: action and structure can both con
-
strain (by restricting choice) and favour (by enabling choice within those boundaries) each other 
(Bechky, 2011; Giddens, 1984). Thus, the macro and micro levels of analysis are mutually linked 

in the sense that identities at higher levels of analysis both constrain and enable the formation and 
enactment of identities at lower levels, which then feed back into the formation and enactment of 

higher-order identities.
In terms of cross-level effects, a given collective identity will have the greatest impact on identi
-ties at proximal (especially adjacent) levels, with ripple effects possibly affecting other levels. 

After lower-order and higher-order identities are established, the downward effects may be stronger 

than the upward effects due to the fact the power is generally closely correlated with hierarchical 

level (Pfeffer, 1981). While organizational identity is best understood as contested and negotiated 

through iterative interactions between managers and stakeholders, we argue that the construction 

of team identity also involves teams in iterative interactions with managers and stakeholders. 
Therefore, we suggest that team identity is crafted by interactions between ‚insiders™ and ‚outsid
-
ers™ (Coupland & Brown, 2004) in a network of social relationships. As a team™s survival is contin
-
gent on its compliance with expectations from stakeholders and managers, an analysis of this 
network of social relationships may help determine the degree of resistance within a team to the 
higher-level organizational identity. Resistance arises from over-identification mechanisms 

(Dukerich, Kramer, & Parks, 1998) and from the desire to preserve the team™s sense of self, which 

make team members devoted to the known value system and reluctant to change (Ferraris, Carveth, 

& Parrish-Sprowl, 1993).Individual identity construction within the context of team identity constructionResearch defines identification using social identity and social categorization (Turner, 1982) theo
-
ries, and points to the cognitive links between individuals and groups that emerge from the images 

or mental representations that members have of their group. The desired identity image (Schlenker, 

1985) (i.e. self-images that preserve or enhance individual self-esteem; Leary, 1983) is built by 

making an initial assessment of the audience (e.g. expectations, goals, beliefs) and the related situ-
ational characteristics (e.g. social roles, rules) within the social context in which individuals oper
-ate. Thus, individuals modify the desired image based on their perceptions of the audience™s needs, 
 Annosi et al. 5beliefs, knowledge and skills (Schlenker & Leary, 1982). This audience includes the self, reference 
groups and interaction partners (Schlenker, 1985).
Cognitive identification with a group has a strong impact on members™ behaviour and, conse
-quently, on group outcomes (Ashforth & Mael, 1989; Dutton et
 al., 1994). When members socially 

identify with a group, they embrace its main problems as their own and collaborate in their resolu-
tion, regardless of their feelings toward other group members (Brewer & Gardner, 1996). In addi
-
tion, self-categorization as a member emphasizes one™s self-perception of similarity to the group 

prototype (Hogg & Terry, 2000) and thereby enacts the creation of a group identity. In this sense, 

the depersonalization of the self ‚is the process underlying group phenomena™ (Hogg & Terry, 

2000, p. 123). In other words, group dynamics cannot be analysed separate from the categorization 
of group members and their identity processes. However, some researchers (Albert & Whetten, 

1985; Ashforth & Mael, 1989) show that group identity is shaped by the characteristics of the 

group, such as its goals, mission, practices and actions, and is not related to its individual members 
(Albert & Whetten, 1985; Ashforth & Mael, 1989).
Research gapsThe construction of organizational identities is a complex phenomenon. Although the literature 

notes that organizational members™ identities and organizational identity are closely connected 

(Ashforth & Mael, 1989; Brown, 1997; Dutton et al., 1994; Elsbach & Kramer, 1996), little atten
-
tion has been devoted to identity construction mechanisms or to the relationships among them. 
Most of the extant research focuses on a particular level of analysis, typically the macro level 

(Ashforth et al., 2011). As such, it neglects (complex) inter-level dynamics in the construction of 

identity (for exceptions, see Cheney & Christensen, 2000; Gioia, Schultz, & Corley, 2000).
Alvesson and Willmott (2002) present identity regulation as a form of managerial organization 
control and offer a preliminary overview of how identity can be influenced, regulated and changed 

within organizations. Their research provides a simplified view of identity change, as it does not 

focus on the cross-level dynamics of nested identities. Rather, they consider the related concept of 

image and the adjacent forces involved in an entity™s sense of self, where the image is represented 

by the actual perception that others have of an entity and the way in which an entity wishes to be 
perceived by others (Ashforth et al., 2011).
However, team identity differs from organizational identity, as the value consensus and the 
socially created rules system enacted within teams are not under the direct control of organizational 

managers (Larson & Tompkins, 2005). In this regard, our research seeks to provide answers to two 

questions: (1) What are the cross-level mechanisms between team identity and organizational iden
-
tity in a modern organization? (2) How can managers and teams™ stakeholders influence the forma
-
tion of team identity?Research SettingAgile software development and scrumAgile software development represents a major deviation from traditional, plan-based approaches to software engineering (Dybå & Dingsøyr, 2008). Its methodologies emphasize the need for lean 

processes and dynamic adaptation rather than detailed front-end plans and heavy documentation 

(Nerur & Balijepally 2007). Agile software development is often viewed as the answer to the 

uncertainties related to detecting, identifying and responding to emerging user requirements (Beck 

& Andres, 2005; Schwaber & Beedle, 2002). Software development agility rests on a team™s ability 
 6 Organization Studies to efficiently and effectively respond to changes in user requirements (Lee & Xia, 2010) with mini
-mal formal processes (Cockburn, 2006).Agile principles, first discussed in the ‚Agile Manifesto™ (Fowler & Highsmith, 2001), are based 
on: (1) business-value generation through the delivery of software at regular, short intervals; (2) 

self-organizing teams whose members work at a sustainable pace, allowing for creativity and pro
-
ductivity; and (3) customer involvement in the development process, which favours feedback and 
reflection aimed at ensuring more satisfying outcomes (Dingsøyr, Nerur, Balijepally, & Moe, 

2012).‚Scrum™, which is one of the most common agile methods (Dingsøyr et
 al., 2012), emerged from 
the ‚new product development game™, a holistic approach to product development in which self-
managing teams implement innovative products in a relatively short period of time (Takeuchi & 

Nonaka, 1986). The scrum method prescribes the delegation of decision making to the organiza
-
tion™s operational layer and the adoption of self-managing teams. Scrum is suitable in contexts 

where it is difficult to plan ahead (Dybå & Dingsøyr, 2008) because it involves feedback loops that 

serve as mechanisms for exercising control over product-release planning processes and for han
-
dling changes as a project evolves (Schwaber, 1997). The software is realized in increments 

(‚sprints™) that normally last from two to four weeks, each starting with a planning session and 
ending with a review. The product owner (PO) determines which items are to be developed and 

listed in the product backlog, which embodies the current knowledge of what needs to be done 
(Sutherland & Schwaber, 2007). During sprint planning, team members select the top priority 

items from the product backlog and include them in the next sprint. Daily meetings are held to 
coordinate the team™s work. One team member acts as the ‚scrum master™ and is responsible for 

resolving the issues that prevent the team from working effectively.
A telecommunications industry caseOur empirical setting is a large multinational telecommunications firm comprising three interde
-
pendent R&D divisions, each relying on agile teams for software production. The software devel
-
opment setting is well suited for a study of team identity in the context of organizational identity 

construction, as it allows for the simultaneous evaluation of relatively stable between-team factors 
and more variable within-team beliefs and behaviours. This setting is favourable for an empirical 

description of team identity construction in the context of a multitude of organization/work-based 

identifications. As relations and connections can be easily discerned, this setting is also suitable for 

analysing specific forms of organizational preconditions as well as contradictions in identity con
-
struction work.Team identity construction is constrained by the frequent interactions among team members and 
by the presence of stable agile routines, which make team boundaries permeable to the environ-
mental context. At the same time, organizational identity construction is affected by the dense 

interactions between team managers and stakeholders, such as the product owners and the scrum 
masters. Organizational structures and controls are the same, and similarities in language and cul
-
ture reduce the likelihood of confounding effects. Organizations developing software products 

usually work in highly competitive and volatile environments in which time-to-market is crucial. 
In this context, team identity is continuously affected by ongoing changes in organizational iden
-
tity and adaptations to environmental instability, which challenge its endurance.
The focal multinational telecommunications firm had a reputation for product and management 
innovation. The company employed approximately 550 people in the three investigated R&D 

units; 400 employees used agile software development (mainly scrum). We collected the data 

between November 2012 and April 2013.
 Annosi et al. 7In mid-2011, the company transitioned to agile software development. Before the transition, the 
three R&D organizations had applied a traditional, plan-driven software development methodol
-ogy with longer project development cycles and little possibility to dynamically adjust to new 

customer requests. Extensive upfront planning was used to predict, measure and control problems 
and deviations for the entire product development process. The approach was process-centric, 

driven by beliefs about the relevance of highly optimized and repeatable processes related to spe-
cific tasks with desired outcomes for each project phase. Roles were assigned to each individual. 
After transitioning to agile software development, social relations changed, as units were organ
-
ized around the choices and self-expression of teams. While our aim was not to empirically analyse 

continuity and change in patterns of social identification throughout the agile transformation, we 
could identify discrete time periods before and after the transformation.The transition to agile software development was finalized with the reorganization of human 
resources into self-managed teams and a ramp-up focused on the agile way of working. In the 18 

months prior to our study, no substantial technological changes took place. The three R&D units 

began the transition to agile software development at the same time and with comparable resources. 

The agile transformation was launched with the aim of promoting efficiency, learning and cross-

functional collaboration within the self-managing teams. Teams devoted to the development of 

new product functionalities were mostly cross-functional, and made up of designers, testers, soft-
ware architects and system managers. Cross-functional teams were seen as facilitating product 
development, as they were expected to reduce information-processing problems, bring a diversity 
of perspectives to bear on problems, increase problem-solving efficiency and increase the absorp
-
tive capacity of the team (Cohen & Levinthal, 1990; Galbraith, 1974).Research MethodsData collectionAs triangulation from multiple sources at multiple times reinforces confidence in the accuracy of findings (Jick, 1979), we used several data sources: (1) extensive archival data gathered from rel-
evant project and organization publications; (2) 17 group interviews; (3) attendance at multiple 

team and firm events; (4) repeated semi-structured interviews with executives of the focal R&D 
units; (5) informal follow-ups through emails, phone calls and observations; and (6) 65 texts gener-ated from open-ended questions in an exploratory survey used as secondary data sources. The 

survey was launched in the same period as the interviews.We initially collected qualitative data through four individual pilot interviews conducted with 
managers in two of the three focal units and through two group pilot interviews with: (1) the head 
of the firm, the head of innovation at the firm level, and the rest of the management team; and (2) 
the organizational innovation coaches, who were line managers specifically appointed to promote 

innovation at the team and organizational levels. The aim of this first stage was to understand the 

main problems the firm faced after the transformation to agile software development. After agile 

transition the firm had experienced a year-to-year reduction in the number of patents, system 

improvements and product ideas. At the same time, even though management did not keep actual 

data, it had a strong perception that the agile way of working stimulated process improvements, 
given the high frequency of new process ideas emerging in the organization. We registered exam
-
ples of innovation behaviours, innovation and learning events in order to evaluate the extent to 
which the organization was investing in process and product innovation.
After the initial data collection, we interviewed line managers, team members, scrum masters, product owners and system managers in each R&D organization. The interviews lasted from 60 to 
 8 Organization Studies 90 minutes, and were recorded and reviewed within 24 hours. The interviews covered the follow
-ing issues: (1) the firm™s portfolio formation activities; (2) aspects of the organizational design 

aimed at achieving operational goals and driving innovation; (3) the strengths and weaknesses of 
the new organizational design for the implementation of the innovation and operations strategy; (4) 

organizational routines aimed at enabling knowledge transfer, self-reflection and learning; and (5) 

perceived barriers to innovation. After the initial interviews, we posed closed-ended questions to a 

subset of interviewees in order to collect specific factual information (e.g. dates, events, managers 

involved, issues discussed, deal terms).We complemented our interview data with observational data. In a three-day visit to two of the 
three involved units (the first one active in design and the second in testing), we observed six teams 

working on new telephony software. The third organizational unit supported the design unit and 

therefore played only an auxiliary role, and it was subject to strict rules and working procedures. 

Thus, it was only involved in the interview round. We conducted a two-hour workshop with middle 

and senior managers about perceived barriers to innovation in order to better understand the nature 

and root cause of the predefined organizational identity. We also analysed the 65 texts derived from a 

secondary data source (see above). We dealt with potential informant bias in several ways. First, in 

order to increase the likelihood of capturing a comprehensive, accurate picture we gathered interview 

data in subsequent waves over five months, and involved informants at multiple hierarchical levels 

and in the focal R&D units. Second, we relied on informants who were particularly knowledgeable 

about the organizational design, and the problems faced by employees, and who could reveal part of 

the organizational culture, identity and logics in order to increase data accuracy (Kumar, Stern, & 

Anderson, 1993). Third, we guaranteed informant anonymity to encourage candour. Fourth, we trian
-
gulated our interview data with archival data. Finally, in order to validate our understanding, we built 

visual maps tracing all of the claimed problems to the organizational design and organizational char
-acteristics, and discussed them with the relevant organizational stakeholders.
Data analysisWe started our data analysis by focusing on individual case histories derived from interview, obser
-vational and archival data (Eisenhardt, 1989). We then triangulated that data. In addition, we 

checked emails and chat logs in order to gather missing details. Each case was reported in tables 
that included relevant quotes and organization information. The cross-case analysis was performed 

by looking at similar emerging concepts and themes (Eisenhardt & Graebner, 2007) and highlight
-
ing organizational performance trends that emerged in the years of the agile transformation. This 

process began after most of the data had been gathered in order to ensure the integrity of the repli-
cation logic across the cases (Eisenhardt, 1989). Similarities and differences between cases were 

identified. The emerging common constructs and themes led to the construction of initial relation
-
ships via the replication logic, which relied on continuous efforts to return to each case in order to 

confirm the occurrence of specific constructs, relationships and logics. This iteration between 

theory and data eased the refinement of theoretical relationships between emerging constructs 

(Eisenhardt, 1989). As we identified the theoretical framework, we continuously compared it with 

the extant literature. We then undertook recurring iterations among data, literature and theory.
Theory and Proposition DevelopmentMain constructsTeam identity. We delineated team identity by adopting attributes that relevant research 
describes as characterizing identity and that were consistent with our data. Identity can become the 
 Annosi et al. 9‚internalized cognitive structure of what the entity stands for and where it intends to go™ (Albert et al., 2000 p. 13), especially in the absence of an externalized bureaucratic structure serving as a 
‚rudder for navigating difficult waters™ (Albert et al., 2000, p. 13). In most of our focal cases, the 
identity of autonomous teams was built on the need to satisfy project tasks and accommodate 
proximal managers and stakeholders. Table 1 summarizes the qualitative characteristics of the 
identities of the sampled teams.Organizational identity.
 Organizational identity was detected through archival data, and through its 
main contributors™ (i.e. top managers) descriptions of the current and intended direction for the 
organization. Related evidence showed close alignment between the established team identity and 

the organizational identity shared among top managers. Identity was focused on the need to ensure 

customer satisfaction and, to some extent, on product innovation. Table 2 summarizes the qualita
-
tive characteristics of the organizational identity.
Team stakeholders.
 By team stakeholders, we mean the individuals who have an interest in leading a team towards the desired performance. Table 3 lists the identified teams™ stakeholders together 
with their relevant roles in the teams™ performance, based on the available data and the observa
-
tions reported.Figure 1 represents the organization design built up around the teams, including the identified 
stakeholders, and their connections with each team and their peers. Figure 2 presents the organiza
-
tional form selected to drive product innovation inside each unit. It assumes that only one person Table 1. Characteristics of team identity.Data sourceInformantQuotesFree text in a secondary data 
sourceTeam member‚Actually, quality is the top priority inside our team. There is 
always a need to maintain it, and this has been successfully 
achieved up to this point.™Free text in a 
secondary data 
sourceTeam member‚Customer satisfaction and product quality are continuous 
challenges and exercises for our team.™Free text in a 
secondary data 
sourceTeam member‚Innovation is viewed as a secondary task that survives in the free 
space left after our daily work.™Team group interviewTeam members‚I have four projects on my task list that I cannot hand over to 
somebody else (because there is nobody else who would have time and the right skills), so I cannot work on new ideas.™
‚The focus on high efficiency leaves little or no time for innovation.™Team group 
interviewTeam members‚Working in autonomous teams, but they do not give us any 
freedom. There is no room left for creativity. We have to be 
fast. When some ideas pop up, we do not reserve time to realize them. We do not have time to implement ideas.™Manager group interviewManagers‚People do not have time to carry out innovation. However, 
beyond the time constraint, it is a matter of establishing the right mindset. We do not know how to motivate people to innovate.™Archival dataTeam‚The retrospective meetings called by team members in order to reflect and improve the way of working were set up with the 
objective of improving the team™s behaviour along the following dimensions: product quality, team spirit, team commitment, tools, agile processes, and relationships among team members.™ 10 Organization Studies Table 2. Characteristics of organizational identity.Source of dataInformantIllustrationsArchival data: Operational plan 
for the entire organizationHigh-level managementThe yearly organizational operational plan did not emphasize product/
technology innovation and learning, but only the dimensions of 
motivation, recognition among peers, agile, increased collaboration, software (SW) craftsmanship, customer engagement, the quality concept, and competence. Efforts to increase competence were 
planned with the aim of filling gaps in the following areas: continuous SW integration, SW craftsmanship, SW development expertise, people leadership, team culture, consulting skills, and customer orientation.Archival data: Performance management 
philosophy in the organizationHigh-level 
managementPerformance management measures were conceived at three levels: 
individual, team and organization. At the team level, they included budget and delivery precision for new feature-development activities 
as relevant metrics. Quality checks were planned at the end of the feature development and of the sprint via the ‚definition of done™ documents. Key performance indicators for each product area were 
used to monitor the feature development at higher levels in the organization. Organizational motivation was assessed via an annual survey and constantly checked with people in the team through regular 
one-to-one talks. There were no formal indicators to monitor teams™ ideation capabilities, or the time spent on learning or creative activities. Product-innovation performance was measured at the unit level and 
across units at the site level. It was measured as the number of patents.Table 3. Teams™ stakeholders.Source of dataStakeholderIllustrationsArchival data: 
Description of 
the role found in the organizational documentationScrum 
master‚Drive the evolution of the team towards high performanceEnsure that all team members are integrated and contributingProvide feedback on team performance and individual development needsDrive the implementation of agile methodsEnsure that the scrum framework, and lean and agile principles are 
appliedActively remove impediments™Archival data: 
Description of the role found in 
the organizational documentationProduct 
owner‚Provide the product vision and translate and transfer requirements 
towards the teamOwn, maintain, and prioritize the User Stories Backlog for the teamDefine the ‚definition of done™ for the feature responsible™Archival data: Description of the role found in the organizational 
documentationLine 
responsible‚Act as a lean/agile agent for the teamSecure right team composition with a focus on competenceSecure the work environment for the teamProvide important feature information to the teamMaintain contact with team members (and product owner and scrum master) to feel the ‚temperature™ within the team and act on itSupport the scrum master in issues regarding team performance, team efficiency, team development and team setupServe as the first escalation point for the scrum master in terms of 
handling impedimentsEnsure that team members build cross-functional competencies™ Annosi et al. 11in each R&D unit organization takes on the role of innovation coach. These coaches support inno
-vation ideas coming from the teams, provide them with infrastructure and inspiration for innova-
tion, create learning opportunities and establish workshops with customers, and offer logistics 
Figure 1. The stakeholder network of teams.Figure 2. Organization design for driving innovation. 12 Organization Studies support, which is consistent with the organization™s innovation strategy. This is a secondary role for 
a line manager that demands only a small percentage of working time. These coaches report 

directly to the unit™s management team. Both figures are based on our field observations, inspec
-
tions of organizational documents, and interviews, and they have been validated by key organiza
-
tional informants.Forming and strengthening team identity by orchestrating controls and working routinesRelational networks are crucial for the creation of institutional values and logics in an organization 
(see Owen-Smith & Powell, 2008). Intense interconnections among individuals in an organiza
-
tional network enable efficiency in communication and favour the exchange of information across 

the network in a way that allows norms and expectations to spread and become institutionalized 

(Meyer & Rowan, 1977). An increase in density in the stakeholder network (e.g. the number of 

interactions in a network linking actors together relative to the total number of possible interac-
tions) leads to shared behaviours and expectations among members, resulting in the organization™s 

actions being affected by normative mechanisms (Rowley, 1997). Dense networks create strong, 

unified stakeholder pressures, which drive the organization towards conformity.
Our data indicated that the routines characterizing agile software development made the teams™ 
boundaries permeable to the external environment by allowing team stakeholders to frequently and 

regularly interact with the teams. Teams™ stakeholders were present, albeit silent, during daily scrum 

meetings at which team members reported on their progress. Scrum masters, who were responsible 

for removing any impediments to the team™s work, were key actors in these meetings.
At the end of each sprint, teams showed their accomplishments to the product owner and the line manager during a formalized sprint review. The product owner sought to verify whether the 

produced deliverables satisfied the criteria established during sprint planning. Group performance 
was constantly monitored by the scrum master with the aim of triggering reflection on ways to 
improve teamwork. The product owner and the scrum master provided continuous updates to the 

line manager. The line manager regularly interacted with the scrum master, who was the first esca
-
lation point if impediments were severely affecting team performance. These interactions provided 

constant information on team performance and operative needs.Teams™ stakeholders were tasked with spreading agile practices and values, and with driving the 
transformation to agile software development. The dense networks of stakeholders had the capac
-
ity to efficiently monitor the team™s actions, thereby applying a form of pressure on the team and 

pushing it towards conformity. This was underpinned by the significant overlap between team and 

stakeholder identities. In contrast, in the less dense network in which innovation coaches drove 
product innovation, teams had more discretion over their actions, as they were under less unified 
pressure. While the sparse, fragmented network of the innovation coaches exhibited a limited abil
-
ity to monitor team behaviours or to create shared behavioural norms, project stakeholders were 
able to exert a strong influence on teams and the resulting pressure sometimes conflicted with that 

of the innovation coaches. Consequently, teams were often unable to conform to innovation 

coaches™ expectations because doing so would require defying the expectations of project stake
-
holders. As such, teams could resist innovation coaches by claiming a lack of time for innovation 

and by arguing that the quality of the product was the priority. The above reasoning and observa
-
tions motivate two propositions:Proposition 1: In the presence of agile routines, the combination of shared expectations that 
agile practices will be followed and the ease of information exchange among an agile team™s 

stakeholders create conditions for applying strong, unified stakeholder pressure to teams.
 Annosi et al. 13Proposition 2: The denser a team™s stakeholder network, the greater the influence of that team™s 
stakeholders™ needs, values and beliefs on the team™s reconstruction of organizational identity, 
so that the team™s identity might become isomorphic with organizational identity.
A focal actor™s centrality can influence that actor™s degree of influence over stakeholders 
(Rowley, 1997) due to the actor™s prominence (Wasserman & Galaskiewicz, 1994) or power (Brass 
& Burkhardt, 1993). Three types of centrality, referring to different aspects of actors™ positions, are 

usually considered in the social network literature: degree, closeness and betweenness centrality 
(Brass & Burkhardt, 1993).1According to the archival data, the scrum master had to provide ‚feedback on team performance and individual development needs™ to, respectively, a line manager responsible for the focal team, 

and a line manager responsible for team members™ growth and career development. In addition, the 

scrum master was in contact with the person responsible for the new software™s functionality (i.e. 

the ‚feature™) and the product owner through regular meetings designed to inform the person 
responsible for the feature about the ‚temperature within the team™. In addition, the scrum master 
had to escalate all of the issues and impediments raised by the team to the line manager, who was 

expected to ‚support the scrum master in issues regarding team performance, team efficiency, team 

development, and team setup.™ Figure 3 shows that the scrum master holds a central position and 

has access to all other actors in the network. The line manager is two steps away from the team, 

while other actors are one step away.
As the scrum master had the shortest aggregate distance to the other actors, he or she could quickly diffuse information. Centrality is related to effective communication, as closeness ‚mean[s] 

fewer message transmissions, shorter times and lower costs™ (Freeman, 1979 p. 225). With regard 

to betweenness centrality (the degree to which an actor exercises control over other actors™ access 

to different areas of the network; Freeman, 1979) Figure 3 suggests that the scrum master was 

again highly central, as all actors had to pass through him or her to exchange information with 
other parts of the network.An actor in a central position is able to influence behavioural expectations and mediate informa-tion flows within the network, potentially biasing the communication to the actor™s advantage. The 

scrum master was favourably positioned to isolate stakeholders from one another and to undermine 
their coordination abilities. Consequently, his or her imposed norms and beliefs were diffused 

across the stakeholders™ networks. The archival data suggest that scrum masters should: (1) ‚edu
-
cate and train the organization in agile and lean principles™; (2) ‚learn quickly from the features 

delivered™; (3) ‚support feature teams in their efforts to be more productive in any way they can™; 

(4) ‚secure active and efficient communication among feature teams™; (5) ‚encourage transparency 

and sharing of good practices™; (6) ‚foster a feedback culture™; and (7) ‚address and report on 
organizational and cross-feature impediments™. The group interviews confirmed that scrum mas
-
ters™ attention and focus reflected their desire to make teamwork smoother, favouring improve
-
ments and, eventually, learning in order to implement new functionalities within their development 

projects. An organizational document explained the vision for the scrum masters:
Scrum masters are a community that fully understands the mechanisms and the processes that drive our product forward in an agile environment [–]. We assist the teams in challenging the status quo and 

pursuing simplicity, so the organization is able to understand and learn the processes that can drive us in 

developing products leveraging on motivated individuals.In crafting the organization™s operational plan (i.e. the implementation of its business-level 
strategy), managers highlighted the following dimensions of interest: agile processes, agile values 
related to the idea of process improvement, product quality (as prescribed by lean principles), team  14 Organization Studies collaboration, team members™ technical excellence, and customer involvement (as prescribed by 
agile). The project performance system was centred on several dimensions: cost, speed, product 

quality and customer value; the adoption of budget checkpoints on specific feature ‚toll gates™; 
speed checkpoints using burn-down charts; and value assessment checklists and quality checks at 
the feature and sprint levels. The latter were implemented using ‚definition of done™ documents, a 

list of actions to complete before a focal piece of software would be ready to be released. Team 

outcomes were checked externally for product quality, project delivery times and competences, 

and each team™s internal performance was continuously monitored and supported by the scrum 

masters. This was confirmed by minutes from retrospective meetings in which some team mem
-
bers stated: ‚The scrum masters press the team to produce and to deliver.™ In other words, scrum 

masters imposed and diffused norms and beliefs about the need to improve processes and to act 

according to agile practices across the stakeholders™ networks. These findings suggest the follow
-
ing proposition:Proposition 3: The greater the centrality of a focal actor, such as a scrum master, in the team™s 
stakeholder network, the lower the influence of other stakeholders™ needs, values and beliefs on 

organizational identity.
As suggested in Figure 4, the scrum master played a special role inside the team due to his or her regular and frequent interactions with team members. As show in in Table 3, the product owner 
had a smaller impact on team members™ actions than the scrum master, although that impact 

remains relevant.Figure 3. Scrum master™s position within the stakeholders™ network. Annosi et al. 15An increase in interactions with the organization through its stakeholder groups raises the 
strength of organizational identification (Dutton et
 al., 1994). Organizational identity mirrors a 
negotiated order (Strauss, 1978) that take shape as members work together, communicate their 
preferences, show their problem-solving styles (Swidler, 1986) and manage external demands and 

internal needs for coordination and integration (Schein, 1990). This shared experience can generate 

a common and rooted (Denison, 1996) understanding of how the social environment works, and 
determine which practices and standards are defined as appropriate and effective. Identity repre
-
sents an aspect of the organizational environment that acts as a reference, and helps members make 

sense of their own and others™ behaviours.
Greater interaction among stakeholders and teams increases the accessibility and salience of stakeholders™ organizational social identity, which is likely to influence how team members evalu
-
ate and respond to stakeholder issues. This occurs, first, by creating a common interpretative frame 

for the collection, screening and evaluation of information about stakeholder attributes and, sec-
ond, by motivating behaviours and practices that protect, improve or support the organization™s 

identity. The central role played by stakeholders such as the scrum master helped resolve identity 

ambiguity and allowed team members to make sense of the new identity (Corley & Gioia, 2004), 
perhaps by brokering information (Rowley, 1997). Team members might rely on those stakehold
-
ers with higher perceived power, legitimacy and urgency (Mitchell et
 al., 1997).In the organizational context, scrum masters were given power and legitimacy to operate from the 
focal R&D organizations. Their responsibilities were described in organizational documentation:
(1) drive the evolution of the team towards high performance, (2) drive the implementation of agile software development, (3) provide feedback on team performance and individual development needs, (4) 
ensure application of the scrum framework, and (5) remove specific impediments.Figure 4. Scrum master™s position within team. 16 Organization Studies When discussing the role of the scrum master and the centrality of his or her position relative to 
the team, one team member reported:The scrum master triggers reflections on how to improve the speed of flow and new ideas of way of working. In particular, the scrum master stimulates us during the daily stand-up meeting, giving us 

suggestions for improving the way we organize the work for our deliveries.
Scrum masters gained legitimacy when team members view their actions or claims as proper and appropriate given the prevailing standards of the institutional context. Notes from teams™ ret
-rospective meetings show that constant attention was paid to the teams™ adherence to agile software 

development in line with the scrum master™s focus. We therefore propose:
Proposition 4: The embeddedness of a scrum master within a team favours the diffusion of the scrum master™s norms and beliefs inside the team. Therefore, team identity and alignment with 

the organization identity are moderated by the presence of a scrum master.
Mechanisms for team identity regulationTeam self-regulation is a self-monitoring process aimed at changing the team™s cognition and 

affection. It may include shaping the organizational identity, especially if this is needed to strengthen 

the team™s efficiency. Behavioural self-regulation refers to self-observation and strategic adjust
-
ments to expected goals, actions and reactions. This perspective embodies the team cognition and 

its interpretation of organizational identity, which enhance or constrain engagement and participa
-
tion in realizing the stakeholders™ objectives.
Team and social regulatory processes can be diverse and located at different organizational 
levels, but they can function together to influence a team™s perception of organizational identity 

and development through ‚co-regulation™ (Fogel, 1993). This macro-level perspective offers a 

broader picture in which co-regulation (team control and social influences) affects a team™s cogni
-
tion and affection through opportunities to operate and receive feedback within a social context 

(McCaslin, 2009).In our study, the adoption of the scrum methods led to the implementation of a broad system of 
interrelated feedback controls and the adoption of numerous routines for teamwork. For example, 

the product owner prescribed the team™s tasks for a specific timeframe, then checked and weighed 

that work against specific criteria at the end of each two-week sprint. Teams were required to con
-
tinuously report to the product owner on the status of their activities. At each retrospective meeting, 

the scrum master measured and assessed team performance in terms of speed in delivering user 

stories on the basis of burn-down charts. Working in isolation from the rest of the organization, 

agile teams were responsible for releasing new software functionalities every two weeks, which 

were then integrated into the overall product. Automatic regression tests were launched almost 

daily to check for the integrity of the product system, while team members worked towards having 
a demonstration ready for their stakeholders at the end of each sprint. Quality checks were under-taken at the end of each feature and/or sprint. ‚Definition of done™ documents were handled by the 

product owner and by those responsible for the team and the feature. The team™s budget and deliv
-
ery precision were constantly measured and reported to higher levels, and team competences were 

regularly assessed in order to detect gaps.This example illustrates how control of team members™ behaviour may be realized: sanction 
mechanisms aimed at limiting deviating behaviours were routinely part of the jobs of organiza
-
tional members, teams™ stakeholders and managers. Team self-regulation does not occur in a 
 Annosi et al. 17vacuum: many parties have an interest in a team™s actions and decisions. Self-regulation, which is 
grounded in a control theory framework (Carver & Scheier, 1981), suggests that teams adopt stand
-
ards that reflect their perceptions of the organizational image, test their cognitive understanding 

against those standards using information taken from their social environment, and take actions to 
decrease any discrepancies. The team™s regulatory aim is to reduce discrepancies between stand
-
ards and ‚enacted™ behaviours (Lord & Hanges, 1987).
Information and feedback from stakeholders enable the team to reduce discrepancies and adjust 
behaviours, thereby renewing the interpretation of the organization image. When stakeholders™ 

behaviours are supportive of team goals and actions, they reinforce team perceptions of organiza
-
tional identity in a direction that is consistent with desired organizational images and the team 

becomes more resilient to change (Bem, 1972). A team member stated, on this point: ‚The problem 

is that there are too many stakeholders and different perceptions of what we are doing, while no 

one is justifying the time we may spend on learning or the things we are learning.™ Team members 

added that their main priorities were the features on which they were working. Teams™ beliefs 

seemed aligned with the scrum masters™ mission ‚to learn fast from the features delivered,™ which 

was reinforced by the organizational expectations for the scrum master™s role: ‚drive the evolution 

of the team towards high performance™ and ‚ensure that all team members are integrated in and 

contributing to the scrum framework, and that lean and agile principles are applied™.Stakeholders™ continuous validation ensures their pivotal role in the building of team memory. 
In light of convergent information from stakeholders, team identities, which are formed in par
-ticular situations with certain stakeholders, eventually become generalized to other situations 

and stabilized, so that they are cued in team members™ memories. This suggests the following 

proposition:Proposition 5: Team members engage in active processing of an organization™s identity-rele
-vant information to reflect stakeholders™ appraisals, managers™ self-identities and perceived 

organizational goal attainment.
Though quite strict, the feedback-based control systems can leave members with areas of behav-
ioural discretion, creating an opportunity to be out of sync with the current organizational perspec
-
tive. An example of this was given by a team member:
During the grooming session, our product owner asks us to only consider the possible investigations 
needed to implement features. Even then, the time needed for this type of investigation/competence 
building differs from sprint to sprint but, on average, it is probably around 10% of the sprint time. Actually, 
there is no real time allowed for our competence building-up from our stakeholders. Training on certain 
tools and methods is sometimes arranged.The acceptance of the organizational identity can be fostered in order to reduce the extent of 
team members™ discretion and decision making. This limits the range of options to those congruous 
with that identity (Tompkins & Cheney, 1985) and organizational goals. Discretion can be restricted 

by the expectation that behaviour should mirror organizational values (Sewell, 1998).
Interview and archival data suggested that daily stand-up meetings run by team members in the presence of line managers and stakeholders served as a rule enforcement mechanism. These meet
-
ings made routine operations possible and hindered team members from pursuing their own inter-ests, which could be antithetical to the goals of the organization and the team. Team members 

attended daily scrum meetings together with the relevant stakeholders and managers, who were 
only allowed to listen. Each team member had to answer the following questions: 
What did you do  18 Organization Studies yesterday? What will you do today? Are there any impediments?
 By focusing on each person™s 
accomplishments, the team gained an understanding of what was completed and what remained to 
be done. Given the high level of interdependency among members and the presence of a scrum 
master fostering knowledge of agile routines, team members could reach a common perspective by 
relying on shared task knowledge and common flow expectations. The silent presence of managers 

and stakeholders was recognized by the team in the decision-making process, while the organiza
-
tion made a subtle statement to individuals of its values regarding team autonomy. These actors 

used meaning-laden actions to inform team members of their values and to raise the attractiveness 
of organizational images among team members, thereby encouraging a favourable self-image 

(Dommermuth, 1989). Our field observations suggested that team members engaged in bricolage 
(Bechky & Okhuysen, 2011). Team members publicly drafted agreements on their work with the 

participation of managers and stakeholders, and created opportunities for team members to ask 
questions, propose alternatives or critique approaches. These 15 minutes of active and engaged 

conversation took place every day in view of everyone. The temporal flow of the work, which 

imposed a constant rhythm with frequent deliveries, the continuity of team memberships, the con
-
sequences for the team and the organization if deadlines were not met, and the constant presence 

of stakeholders with similar interests in team performance and behaviours framed the ways in 
which team members responded to urgencies and built the necessary resources.
Managers and stakeholders influenced the team™s identification with the organizational identity 
through two independent routes: (1) showing a desired organizational image that was attractive to 

team members during the daily stand-up meeting (e.g. highlighting opportunities that the organiza
-
tion offered to individuals to express themselves; see Shamir, 1991); and (2) influencing the extent 

to which team members™ participation in the team attracted their attention While some organiza
-
tions advocated worthy social issues to enhance their legitimacy, managers and stakeholders strived 

to boost legitimacy by incorporating qualities they believed as particularly valued by team mem-
bers and by deflecting attention from negative aspects of their identity. The presence of managers 

and stakeholders also gave legitimacy to teams™ agile routines, leaving team members with the 

perception of being compliant with organizational goals. Legitimacy was held by the team ‚inde
-
pendent of particular observers™ (Suchman, 1995, p. 574). Nevertheless, team members™ attribu
-
tions of legitimacy mirrored their individual beliefs that relevant others recognized a congruence 
between the team™s behaviour and ‚[their] shared (or assumedly shared) beliefs™ (Suchman, 1995, 

p. 574). The public presentation of the team™s activities, and planning in the presence of managers 

and stakeholders, constituted important mechanisms for improving individual identification with 
the organization.
The visibility of the affiliation with the organization moderates the relationship between the 
attractiveness of a perceived organizational identity and organization identification, as visibility 

supports people™s affiliation within the organization (Dutton et
 al.,1994). On the other hand, the 
visibility of team™s participation in the realization of its stakeholders™ objectives generates an 

enhanced cognitive elaboration of the organizational social identity owned by the stakeholders. 

Based on this reasoning, we offer the following proposition:
Proposition 6: The visibility of a team™s work processes favours the cognitive elaboration of a 
perceived organizational identity within the team, thereby increasing the accessibility and sali
-
ence of team-related stakeholders™ organizational social identity and the likelihood that team 

members will eventually become self-disciplined.Team members are involved in self-construction processes within their team through which they 
try to define who and what they are. The high interdependence within the team intensifies the 
 Annosi et al. 19connectivity among people. As connectivity becomes more intense, team members tend to behave 
similarly despite their freedom to be different. This creates a set of legitimized working conventions 

(Scott, 1995) nested in the value-based controls that becomes the basis on which members operate 

in the development of products or services. Shared task knowledge is developed, making it easier 

for team members to coordinate without explicitly communicating (Cannon-Bowers & Salas, 2001).The longer one stays within an organization, the more prominent self-categorization and organi
-zational membership become (Kramer, 1991). As identification with a group increases, so does the 

motivation to reach group goals (Ashforth & Mael, 1989; Brewer & Gardner, 1996; Dutton et
 al., 
1994). When members socially identify with their team, they emphasize similarities among in-

group members and try to demonstrate differences with non-group members (Hogg & Abrams, 

1988). Moreover, once socially identified, members evaluate the team™s claims as legitimate 

(Brown, 1997). In that case, team identity can enhance individual self-esteem, leading to a percep-
tion of group identity as legitimate and as ‚desirable, proper, and appropriate within some socially 

constructed system of norms, values, beliefs, and definitions™ (Suchman, 1995, p. 574). The fol
-
lowing proposition sums up this reasoning:Proposition 7: Team members™ task interdependencies and team members™ stability inside the 
team favour individual identification with the team identity.
Within the team, individuals are exposed to the scrutiny of the other members, so that low per
-formers are motivated to improve their efforts and high performers push others towards continuous 
improvement. In the daily meetings, team members had the opportunity to indicate their approval 

or disapproval of the behaviour or performance of others, making the daily meeting a forum for 
rewards and sanctions. This points to a controlling, horizontal, disciplinary force running across 

the team, creating the conditions for an extended mode of concertive control (Barker, 1993). 

Concertive control is based on the ability of the team to use its own sanctions and rewards, and is 

associated with the individual basis of evaluation discussed above (Sewell, 1998). The concerted 

actions of groups do not affect team conformity to norms (i.e. accepting team identity as one™s 

own) (Hopkins, 1964). Rather, they can affect compliance with those norms (i.e. behaving in 

accordance with the current team identity). Concertive control is directly correlated with compli-
ance (Barker, 1993).
In our context, concertive control was enhanced through the scrum master™s surveillance. As the 
scrum master was embedded in the team, he or she had an organizational mandate to reach a high 

degree of compliance, implementing what Sewell (1998) calls ‚biopower™.
2 Team members indi
-cated that they suffered from high levels of pressure after the introduction of agile software devel
-
opment. In these conditions, environmental features more central to completing the task seemed to 

increase in salience and vice versa, leading team members to interpret the goals of their interac-
tions differently and to use different criteria to judge the quality of the group product. Groups 

working under time pressure worked with certain modes of influence, such as ‚normative™ or 

‚informational™ influence, suggesting a focus on task completion and consensus (Kelly, Jackson, & 

Hutson-Comeaux, 1997). Normative influence favoured consensus formation when resolving dif-
ferences of opinion, while informational influence favoured consensus formation when resolving 
differences of fact. Our data revealed the presence of concertive control on teams, which is a nor
-mative influence. As normative influence is associated with the heuristic processing of information 

(Kaplan, 1987), time pressure reduced the systematic processing of task information, leading to 

faster decisions.Time pressure might have led team members to focus on a narrow range of task-relevant cues 
and to embrace task completion as the relevant interaction objective. As a team member observed: 
 20 Organization Studies ‚It is impossible to have a clear mind for innovations when a new product is developed. You are 
always under pressure to succeed with the next delivery. Therefore, there is very little time to think 

about new ideas.™ As a result, team members mostly talked about task-relevant information in their 

interactions and processed such information less systematically, as indicated by the following 

statement by a team member:The greatest obstacle to innovation is that we are overloaded with tasks in our day-to-day jobs and we do not get a chance to work on innovative areas. We are just given meaningless goals to produce meaningless 

ideas, which are measured in numbers and not evaluated in terms of their value for the company.
Group members were worried about achieving consensus or making a decision quickly, and not 
concerned with other goals, such as improving innovation performance or systematically evaluat-ing alternatives. One team member highlighted the lack of routines addressing decisions on inno-
vation: ‚No space and time for it. Not an integrated part of daily work. Not enough recognized and encouraged examples. We have a graveyard of many good ideas without knowing what happens 

with the selected ones.™ These interactions and information-processing strategies led to less crea
-
tive, less satisfactory decisions.The above reasoning and observations suggest the following propositions:Proposition 8: The team™s concertive control and the scrum master™s presence in the team 
jointly cause continuous re-establishment of team identity towards higher performance stand
-ards and full compliance of the team members with the team™s renewed norms.
Proposition 9: Team-internal tensions with regard to enhanced performance standards and full 
compliance with the team™s norms create a feeling of pressure inside the team and focuses the 
attention of team members on the organizational goals
.Concluding DiscussionIn this study, we have analysed mechanisms of team identity given the socially constructed nature 

of organizational identities. This joint construction provides an understanding of the dynamic rela
-
tionships among organizational entities, and legitimizes their influence on the mechanisms of 

organization and team identity formation. Based on data from small-N research in a single firm and 

on extant theory, we developed theory on how the dynamics of nested organizational identities 

evolve across organizational levels, focusing on mechanisms facilitating identity cascades. In an 

organization adopting agile software development, nested identities gradually become more 

focused on and shaped by the established organizational identity as one descends the cascade.
At a given level below the organizational level, different organizational entities emphasize 
diverse attributes of the higher-order identity. In the focal organization, the structural differentia
-
tion principle was applied: entities on the same level focused on certain aspects of the inclusive 
higher-order identity. For example, scrum masters focused on the team™s adherence to agile prac
-
tices with little tolerance for deviations from the plan, while line managers focused on motivational 
aspects of team members and on the competences needed for project development activities.Although clear group identities directly informed and legitimized relational identities among 
individuals within the group, there could be some variance across relationships, as relational iden-
tities imply individual differences (Sluss & Ashforth, 2007). Research shows that individual-level 

characteristics that help differentiate group members are pivotal within the context of the group™s 

identity (Postmes & Jetten 2006). Entities at the lowest level of analysis may intentionally diverge 

from their prescribed identity (Foreman & Parent 2008) for purposes of self-aggrandizement  Annosi et al. 21(negative deviance). Agile routines (e.g. daily stand-up meetings, regular feedback loops) force 
compliance with the team™s norms and ensure convergence towards the organizational identity. The 

goal is to reduce the likelihood that entities might develop strategic ambiguity and accommodate 
diverse preferences. Discursive resources, derived from the constant presence of the scrum master, 

are used to promote, ratify and reinforce the convergence of identity claims inside the team. They 

also reinforce isomorphism across organizational levels (Sveningsson & Alvesson, 2003).
While most research on organization-based identities concentrates on a single level of analysis 
(the individual, the group or the organization), we addressed the question of cross-level mecha
-
nisms between team and organizational identity construction, and offered a speculative discussion 

concerning nested identities. In this regard, this paper advances our understanding of the processes 
through which identities are linked across levels, and explores how identities at one level of analy-
sis can favour and constrain identities at other levels.Building on these linked identities, we identified ways in which they become isomorphic across levels and ways of overcoming various barriers to isomorphism. We highlighted the importance of 

understanding the interrelationship between the projection of team identity and the feedback 
received by different organizational members. In addition, we viewed organizations as fractured 

and hierarchical locales in which individuals and groups are reciprocally involved, but often 
through asymmetrical power relationships (Clegg, 1981). Consequently, the exercise of power 

affects how organization and team identities develop. In order for these identity construction pro
-
cesses to be examined, we needed to analyse the influence and interplay of the identities that char-acterize individuals, teams and organizations (Brown, 1997). This approach allowed us to provide 

an interpretation of patterns of interaction belonging to a specific organizational design. 

Investigations of the degree of resistance to change at both the team and organizational levels 

would be an interesting avenue for research.Our arguments are relevant for understanding organizational change in post-bureaucratic struc
-tures relying on self-management but coordinated by a higher organizational layer. It seems rea
-
sonable to suggest that the degree of a team™s resistance to change is an integral aspect of its 

identity and that strategic change implies identity change (Gioia & Thomas, 1996).
The difficulties of regulating team identity documented in this paper show that understanding 
the inertial power of post-bureaucratic structures might inform research in this field. Familiarity 

with processes of team identity change may improve our understanding of how organizations 

reshape and reorder their strategic discourse. We have analysed the power of identities as a form of 

behavioural control, thereby enhancing the classic typology of control. We did so by clarifying the 

link between desired organizational identities and a form of control that leads to team members™ 

moral obedience. Individuals with collective identities identify with and internalize their group™s 

goals and norms, and are therefore committed to accomplishing their responsibilities as group 
members (Johnson & Yang, 2010). Research has shown that organizations can influence the forma
-
tion of organizational members™ identities (Alvesson & Willmott, 2002; Van Maanen & Schein, 

1979), but it typically fails to explain exactly how this occurs. The possibility that identities may 

be triggers for action has been mentioned but not elicited or detailed, with the exception of a few 
notable contributions (White, 1992; Akerlof & Kranton, 2005).
Our study suffers from some limitations and highlights avenues for further research. First, we 
point to the issue of ‚moral obedience™ (Courpasson & Dany, 2003), which is important in a context 

of empowerment, as deserving of more research attention. We focused on the self-managed, auton
-
omous team as a relevant unit of analysis, but it would be interesting to observe individuals in 
teams who may be morally obliged to conform with decisions over which they have no real control. 

Extant research (Courpasson & Dany, 2003; Heckscher & Donnellon, 1994) has analysed the con
-
trol of empowered people working and acting within consensually based systems of power. The 
 22 Organization Studies evidence seems to suggest that the dilemma related to obedience depends on how people view disa-greement and disobedience given the strict relations among bureaucracy, community sense and 

social dynamics. A position maintained on moral grounds is related to identity status. Thus, team 

identification could be a means to realize individual moral obedience (Podd, 1972).Second, we analysed how a team relates to diverse social categories when constructing a sense of self (see Alvesson & Willmott, 2002; Sveningsson & Alvesson, 2003). The intersectionality 

perspective suggests that identity construction takes place in the relations between different organi
-
zational categories (Essers & Benschop, 2007). We have focused on inequalities in organizational 

and team identity construction, and analysed how organizational stakeholders and teams relate 

themselves to the privileges and/or disadvantages of prominent categories (Zanoni & Janssens, 
2007). However, we analysed silence as a discursive phenomenon related to excluding potentially 

important understandings on a specific topic and building knowledge on it. Here, silence can be 

seen as related to different ways of neglecting issues related to social categories. On the interper
-sonal level, social categories are seen as related to others, meaning that people are mostly silent on 
themselves as members of categories. On the individual level, silence is related to what is said and 

not said about oneself as a member of social categories. In both cases, there is a tendency to avoid 
inequalities: at the organizational level, by not referring to inequalities at work; at the individual 

level, as disadvantages and/or privileges and their impact on oneself at work.Third, the analysis of context is in need of further development. The same is true for the means 
through which elements of identification may be changed or manifested when both proximal and 
distal circumstances are different from scrum implementation.
Finally, we have explicitly acknowledged the roles of organizational practices, norms and stake
-holders™ and managers™ interactions in giving substance to collective self-perceptions in teams, and 

we have highlighted how these manifestations affect team identity formation. Nonetheless, how 

current organizational culture (i.e. the traditional way of working) influences responses to identity 

threats remains unexplored. Future research may deepen our understanding of the evolution of 
organizational identities through environmental changes. Along these lines, we suggest that collec
-
tive history, organizational symbols and consolidated practices may complement our analysis.
However, as this study provided a wide context for an examination of identity formation across 
multiple levels, and for the analysis of organizational routines and roles, we believe that the 

approach used herein might enable scholars to better understand these phenomena. We hope that 

the use of our conceptualizations will help to effectively trace identity dynamics, such as how col
-
lective identities emerge and change over time.
AcknowledgementsWe thank, but do not implicate, participants in the 2015 EGOS Colloquium for comments on an earlier draft.FundingThis research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.Notes1. Degree centrality can be described by the number of ties an actor has with other actors in the network. Closeness 

describes an actor™s ability to independently gain access to all other actors in the network. Betweennness 

measures when an actor is in the geodesic paths between pairs of other actors (Freeman, 1979).2. ‚Biopower normalizes individuals within categories through its ability to identify prodigious subjects, 

people who don™t fit in. These misfits would then receive the attention of the normalizing forces of mod
-
ern society, such as therapy, discipline, or medical treatment™ (Sewell, 1998, p. 421).
 Annosi et al. 23ReferencesAlbert, S., Ashforth, B. E., & Dutton, J. E. (2000). Organizational identity and identification: Charting new 
waters and building new bridges. Academy of Management Review, 25, 13Œ17.Albert, S., & Whetten, D. A. (1985). Organizational identity. In L. L. Cummings & B. M. Staw (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (pp. 263Œ295). Greenwich: JAI Press.Akerlof, G. A., & Kranton, R. E. (2005). Identity and the economics of organizations. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19, 9Œ32.Alvesson, M., & Kärreman, D. (2001). Odd couple: Making sense of the curious concept of knowledge man-agement. Journal of Management Studies, 38, 995Œ1018.Alvesson, M., & Willmott, H. (2002). Identity regulation as organizational control: Producing the appropriate individual. Journal of Management Studies, 39, 619Œ644.Ashforth, B. E., & Mael, F. (1989). Social identity theory and the organization. 
Academy of Management 
Review, 14, 20Œ39.Ashforth, B. E., Rogers, K. M., & Corley, K G. (2011). Identity in organizations: Exploring cross-level dynamics. Organization Science, 22, 1144Œ1156.Austin, R. D., & Devin, L. (2009). Research Commentary. Weighing the benefits and costs of flexibility in making software: Toward a contingency theory of the determinants of development process design. Information Systems Research, 20, 462Œ477.Barker, J. (1993). Tightening the iron cage: Concertive control in self-managing teams. Administrative Science Quarterly, 38, 408Œ437.Bechky, B. A. (2011). Making organizational theory work: Institutions, occupations, and negotiated orders. 
Organization Science, 22, 1157Œ1167.Bechky, B. A., & Okhuysen, G. A. (2011). Expecting the unexpected? How SWAT officers and film crews handle surprises. Academy of Management Journal, 54, 239Œ261.Beck, K., & Andres, C. (2005). Extreme programming explained: Embrace change. Boston, MD: Addison-Wesley.Bem, D. J. (1972). Self-perception theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (pp. 1Œ62). New York: Academic Press.Brass, D. J., & Burkhardt, M. E. (1993). Potential power and power use: An investigation of structure and behavior. Academy of Management Journal, 36, 441Œ470.Brewer, M. B., & Gardner, W. (1996). Who is this ‚We™? Levels of collective identity and self- representations. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 83Œ93.Brown, A. D. (1997). Narcissism, identity, and legitimacy. Academy of Management Review, 22, 643Œ686.
Cannon-Bowers, J. A., & Salas, E. (2001). Reflections on shared cognition. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 22, 195Œ202.Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (1981). SelfŒconsciousness and reactance. Journal of Research in Personality, 15, 16Œ29.Cheney, G., & Christensen, L. T. (2000). Organizational identity: Linkages between internal and external communication. In F. Jablin & L. Putnam (Eds.), The new handbook of organizational communication 
(pp. 231Œ270). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.Clarkson, M. E. (1995). A stakeholder framework for analyzing and evaluating corporate social performance. 
Academy of Management Review, 20, 92Œ117.Clegg, S. (1981). Organization and control. Administrative Science Quarterly, 26, 545Œ562.
Cockburn, A. (2006). Agile software development: The cooperative game. New York: Pearson Education.
Cohen, W. M., & Levinthal, D. A. (1990). Absorptive capacity: A new perspective on learning and innova-tion. Administrative Science Quarterly, 35, 128Œ152.Corley, K. G., & Gioia, D. A. (2004). Identity ambiguity and change in the wake of a corporate spin-off. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 49, 173Œ208.Coupland, C., & Brown, A. D. (2004). Constructing organizational identities on the web: A case study of 
Royal Dutch/Shell. Journal of Management Studies, 41, 1325Œ1347.Courpasson, D., & Dany, F. (2003). Indifference or obedience? Business firms as democratic hybrids. Organization Studies, 24, 1231Œ1260. 24 Organization Studies Denison, D. R. (1996). What is the difference between organizational culture and organizational climate? A native™s point of view on a decade of paradigm wars. Academy of Management Review, 21, 619Œ654.Dingsøyr, T., Nerur, S., Balijepally, V., & Moe, N. B. (2012). A decade of agile methodologies: Towards explaining agile software development. Journal of Systems and Software, 85, 1213Œ1221.Dommermuth, W. P. (1989). Promotion: Analysis, creativity, and strategy. Boston: PWS-Kent Publishing Company.Dukerich, J. M., Kramer, R., & Parks, J. M. (1998). The dark side of organizational identification. In D. A. 
Whetten & P. C. Godfrey (Eds.), Identity in organizations: Building theory through conversations (pp. 245Œ256). Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.Dutton, J. E., Dukerich, J. M., & Harquail, C. V. (1994). Organizational images and member identification. Administrative Science Quarterly, 39, 239Œ263.Dybå, T., & Dingsøyr, T. (2008). Empirical studies of agile software development: A systematic review. Information and Software Technology, 50, 833Œ859.Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Academy of Management Review, 14, 532Œ550.Eisenhardt, K. M., & Graebner, M. E. (2007). Theory building from cases: Opportunities and challenges. Academy of Management Journal, 50, 25Œ32.Elsbach, K. D., & Kramer, R. M. (1996). Members™ responses to organizational identity threats: Encountering and countering the Business Week rankings. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41, 442Œ476.Essers, C., & Benschop, Y. (2007). Enterprising identities: Female entrepreneurs of Moroccan or Turkish origin in the Netherlands. Organization Studies, 28, 49Œ69.Ferraris, C. R., Carveth, R., & Parrish-Sprowl, J. (1993). Interface Precision Benchworks: A case study in organizational identification. Journal of Applied Communication Research, 21, 343Œ357.Fogel, A. (1993). Developing through relationships. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Foreman, P. O., & Parent, M. M. (2008). The process of organizational identity construction in iterative 
organizations. Corporate Reputation Review, 11, 222Œ244.Fournier, V. (1999). The appeal to ‚professionalism™ as a disciplinary mechanism. Sociological Review, 47, 280Œ307.Fowler, M., & Highsmith, J. (2001). The agile manifesto. Software Development, 9(8), 28Œ35.
Freeman, L. C. (1979). Centrality in social networks conceptual clarification. Social Networks, 1(3), 215Œ239.Freeman, R. E. (1983). Strategic management: A stakeholder approach. Advances in Strategic Management, 1(1), 31Œ60.Gabriel, Y. (1999). Beyond happy families: A critical reevaluation of the control-resistance-identity triangle. Human Relations, 52, 179Œ203.Galbraith, J. R. (1974). Organization design: An information processing view. Interfaces, 4(3), 28Œ36.
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society: Outline of the theory of structuration. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.Gioia, D. A., Schultz, M., & Corley, K. G. (2000). Organizational identity, image, and adaptive instability. 
Academy of Management Review, 25, 63Œ81.Gioia, D. A., & Thomas, J. B. (1996). Identity, image, and issue interpretation: Sensemaking during strategic change in academia. Administrative Science Quarterly, 41, 370Œ 403.Hopkins, T. K. (1964). The exercise of influence in small groups. Totowa, NJ: Bedminster.
Jick, T. D. (1979). Mixing qualitative and quantitative methods: Triangulation in action. Administrative Science Quarterly, 24, 602Œ611.Johnson, R. E., & Yang, L. Q. (2010). Commitment and motivation at work: The relevance of employee identity and regulatory focus. Academy of Management Review, 35, 226Œ245.Kaplan, S. (1987). Aesthetics, affect, and cognition environmental preference from an evolutionary perspec
-tive. Environment and Behavior, 19, 3Œ32.Kärreman, D., & Alvesson, M. (2004). Cages in tandem: Management control, social identity, and identifica-tion in a knowledge-intensive firm. Organization, 11, 149Œ175.Kelly, J. R., Jackson, J. W., & Hutson-Comeaux, S. L. (1997). The effects of time pressure and task differ-ences on influence modes and accuracy in decision-making groups. Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 10Œ22. Annosi et al. 25Kramer, R. M. (1991). Intergroup relations and organizational dilemmas: The role of categorization pro-cesses. In B. M. Staw & L. L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior (pp. 191Œ228). Greenwich: JAI Press.Kumar, N., Stern, L. W., & Anderson, J. C. (1993). Conducting interorganizational research using key inform-ants. Academy of Management Journal, 36, 1633Œ1651.Heckscher, C., & Donnellon, A. (1994). The post-bureaucratic organization: New perspectives on organiza-tional change. London: SAGE Publications.Hill, C. W., & Jones, T. M. (1992). StakeholderŒagency theory. Journal of Management Studies, 29, 131Œ154.Hogg, M. A., & Abrams, D. (1988). Social identification. New York: Routledge, Chapman & Hall.
Hogg, M. A., & Terry, D. I. (2000). Social identity and self-categorization processes in organizational con-texts. Academy of Management Review, 25, 121Œ140.Langfield-Smith, K. (1997). Management control systems and strategy: A critical review. Accounting, Organizations, and Society, 22, 207Œ232.Larson, G. S., & Tompkins, P. K. (2005). Ambivalence and resistance: A study of management in a concertive control system. Communication Monographs, 72, 1Œ21.Leary, M. R. (1983). Understanding social anxiety: Social, personality and clinical perspectives. London: SAGE Publications.Lee, G., & Xia, W. (2010). Toward agile: An integrated analysis of quantitative and qualitative field data. Management Information Systems Quarterly, 34, 87Œ114.Lord, R. G., & Hanges, P. J. (1987). A control system model of organizational motivation: Theoretical devel-opment and applied implications. Behavioral Science, 32(3), 161Œ178.Martin, R. C. (2003). 
Agile software development: Principles, patterns, and practices
. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall.McCaslin, M. (2009). Co-regulation of student motivation and emergent identity. Educational Psychologist, 44, 137Œ146.Meyer, J. W., & Rowan, B. (1977). Institutionalized organizations: Formal structure as myth and ceremony. American Journal of Sociology, 83, 340Œ363.Mitchell, R. K., Agle, B. R., & Wood, D. J. (1997). Toward a theory of stakeholder identification and 
salience: Defining the principle of who and what really counts. Academy of Management Review, 22, 853Œ886.Nerur, S., & Balijepally, V. (2007). Theoretical reflections on agile development methodologies. 
Communications of the ACM, 50, 79Œ83.Owen-Smith, J., & Powell, W. W. (2008). Networks and institutions. In R. Greenwood, C. Oliver, R. Suddaby, & K. Sahlin-Andersson (Eds.), The Sage handbook of organizational institutionalism (pp. 596Œ623). London: SAGE Publications.Pfeffer, J. (1981). Power in organizations. Marshfield, MA: Pitman.Podd, M. H. (1972). Ego identity status and morality: The relationship between two developmental con-structs. Developmental Psychology, 6, 497Œ507.Postmes, T., & Jetten, J. (2006). Individuality and the group: Advances in social identity. London: SAGE Publications.Rowley, T. J. (1997). Moving beyond dyadic ties: A network theory of stakeholder influences. Academy of Management Review, 22, 887Œ910.Schein, E. H. (1990) Organizational culture. American Psychologist, 45, 109Œ119.Schlenker, B. R. (1985) Identities, identifications, and relationships. In V. Derlega (Ed.), Communication, intimacy and close relationships (pp. 65Œ99). New York: Academic Press.Schlenker, B. R., & Leary, M. R. (1982). Social anxiety and self-presentation: A conceptualization model. Psychological Bulletin, 92, 641Œ669.Schwaber, K. (1997). Scrum development process. In J. V. Sutherland, D. Patel, C. Casanave, J. Miller, &  G.Hollowell. (Eds.), Business object design and implementation (pp. 117Œ134). London: Springer.Schwaber, K., & Beedle, M. (2002). Agile software development with scrum. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.Scott, S. G., & Lane, V. R. (2000). A stakeholder approach to organizational identity. Academy of Management Review, 25, 43Œ62. 26 Organization Studies Scott, W. R. (1995). Institutions and organizations. Thousand Oaks, CA: SAGE Publications.Sewell, G. (1998). The discipline of teams: The control of team-based industrial work through electronic and peer surveillance. Administrative Science Quarterly, 43, 397Œ428.Shamir, B. (1991). Meaning, self and motivation in organizations. Organization Studies, 12, 405Œ424.
Sluss, D. M., & Ashforth, B. E. (2007). Relational identity and identification: Defining ourselves through work relationships. Academy of Management Review, 32, 9Œ32.Strauss, A. L. (1978). Negotiations: Varieties, contexts, processes, and social order
. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.Suchman, M. C. (1995). Managing legitimacy: Strategic and institutional approaches. Academy of Management Journal, 20, 571Œ610.Sutherland, J., & Schwaber, K. (2007). The scrum papers: Nuts, bolts, and origins of an agile method. Cambridge, MA: Scrum, Inc.Sveningsson, S., & Alvesson, M. (2003). Managing managerial identities: Organizational fragmentation, dis-course and identity struggle. Human Relations, 56, 1163Œ1193.Swidler, A. (1986). Culture in action: Symbols and strategies. American Sociological Review, 51, 273Œ286.
Takeuchi, H., & Nonaka, I. (1986). The new product development game. Harvard Business Review, 64, 137Œ146.Thornton, P. H. (2002). The rise of the corporation in a craft industry: Conflict and conformity in institutional logics. Academy of Management Journal, 45, 81Œ101.Tompkins, P. K., & Cheney, G. (1985). Communication and unobtrusive control in contemporary organiza
-tions. In R. D. McPhee & P. K. Tompkins (Eds.), Organizational communication: Traditional themes and new directions (pp. 179Œ210). London: SAGE Publications.Turner, J. C. (1982). Towards a cognitive rede˜nition of the social group. 
Current Psychology of Cognition, 1(2), 93Œ118.Van Maanen, J., & Schein, E. H. (1979). Toward a theory of organizational socialization. In B. Staw & L. Cummings (Eds.), Research in organizational behavior. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press.Wasserman, S., & Galaskiewicz, J. (1994). Advances in social network analysis: Research in the social and behavioral sciences. London: SAGE Publications.White, H. C. (1992). Identity and control: A structural theory of social action. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.Zanoni, P., & Janssens, M. (2007). Minority employees engaging with (diversity) management: An analysis of control, agency, and microemancipation. Journal of Management Studies, 44, 1371Œ1397.Author biographiesMaria Carmela Annosi is Assistant Professor of Technology and Innovation Management in the Department 
of Management Studies at Wageningen University in the Netherlands. She has been researcher in organiza
-
tional learning and innovation at Ericsson Research. She received her PhD from KTH, the Royal Institute of 
Technology at the School of Industrial Engineering and Management, in Stockholm. She has been a teaching 
assistant at LUISS Guido Carli University, Rome. Her research activities focus on understanding and 

improving processes through which organizations learn and innovate and on the link between strategy and 

innovation. Specifically, her research effort is devoted to understanding the regulation of self-managing 
team learning and innovation activities. She has been the driver of a series of field research studies as part of 
a five-year research project, globally launched at Ericsson corporate level.Nicolai Foss
 is Professor of Organization Theory and Human Resource Management at the Bocconi University, 
Milano. Foss™s research is in the intersection of organization design and strategic management and has been 

published in journals such as Academy of Management Review, Academy of Management Journal, Organization 

Science and Strategic Management Journal. He is a member of Academia Europaea.Federica Brunetta is Assistant Professor of Corporate Strategy and Technology and Innovation Management 
in the Department of Business and Management at LUISS Guido Carli University in Rome. She gained her PhD from the Catholic University of Sacred Heart (Milan, Italy) and spent a year as Visiting Scholar at the  Annosi et al. 27Ross School of Business, University of Michigan. Her research interests cover topics in the field of strategy 
and management of innovation, such as R&D management, alliances, network analysis, industry dynamics 
and management of collaboration.Mats Magnusson is Professor of Product Innovation Engineering at KTH Royal Institute of Technology in Stockholm. Moreover, he is Permanent Visiting Professor at LUISS School of Business and Management in 
Rome and Visiting Researcher at Ritsumeikan University in Japan. He holds a PhD in Innovation Engineering 
and Management and an MSc in Industrial Engineering and Management from Chalmers University of 
Technology, as well as a BA in Japanese from the University of Gothenburg. He has previously been Visiting 
Professor at LUISS University, the University of Bologna and Aalborg University, and since 2005 has been chairman of the Continuous Innovation Network (CINet). His research and teaching activities concern con-tinuous innovation, management of ideas and knowledge, innovation networks and strategic management, 
and he has published articles on these topics in such journals as Research Policy, Journal of Product 
Innovation Management and Long Range Planning.