 https://doi.org/10.1177/0170840617709311Organization Studies2017, Vol. 38(6) 723 Œ732© The Author(s) 2017Reprints and permissions:  sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.navDOI: 10.1177/0170840617709311www.egosnet.org/osIntroduction to the Special Issue: The Day-to-Day Lives of Cultures 
and CommunitiesJohn WeeksIMD, Lausanne, SwitzerlandGalit AilonBar-Ilan University, IsraelMary Yoko BrannenUniversity of Victoria, CanadaAbstractIn a sense, the study of everyday life epitomizes the challenges and opportunities of ethnography. The papers 
in this Special Issue show how the close examination of the day-to-day lives of people in idiosyncratic settings 

can shed light on universal questions, complicate the elegant narratives we tell ourselves about what we know, 
enrich our theories, and expand our sphere of empathy. Although the study of everyday life can be traced back 
at least as far back as the turn of the 20th century, reaching its apogee after the middle of the century, especially 
in the writings of Erving Goffman and Harold Garfinkel, it remains as uncommon as its object is commonplace. 

That is because it is easy to overlook the importance of what is happening when ‚nothing™ is happening and 
difficult to uncover what is significant about ‚the dust of social activity™. We argueŠand the papers that follow 
showŠthat the details of the day-to-day can not only be unexpectedly interesting in their specifics but also a 

source of general theoretical insights about communities, organizations, and teams: their continuity, change and 

contradictions. What the papers have in common (with each other and with Goffman™s work) is an attention 
to the work that people do every day to sustain their particular self-image in the face of ongoing, mundane 
challenges of various sorts to the ways they like to think of and present their world and their place within it. 

This work to maintain the edges of meaning hides in plain sight and occupies us constantly, whether we are part 

of a public organization, a religious organization, a profit-seeking organization, a profit-resisting organization, an 

organization-less organization, or we are students of organizations marking the unremarkable.Keywordseveryday life, organizational communities, organizational cultureIn his classic, The Interpretation of Cultures
, Clifford Geertz argues that the scientific study of 
humankind must seek ﬁto encounter humanity face to face,ﬂ but warns, ﬁthe road lies, like any 
genuine Quest, through a terrifying complexityﬂ (Geertz, 1973, 53Œ54). As any researcher who 
Corresponding author:John Weeks, IMD, Chemin de Bellerive 23, 1001 Lausanne, Switzerland.
Email: john.weeks@imd.org709311
OSS0010.1177/0170840617709311
Organization Studies
Weeks, Ailon, and Brannen
research-article
2017Introduction to the Special Issue 724 Organization Studies 38(6) seeks this encounter knows, it is a road whose destination constantly recedes and often obscures as it passes through the intricate byways of day-to-day life. To embark on this journey is to avoid the 

convenient shortcuts of oversimplification and premature sensemaking we often take as we hurry 
past the routine and the mundane to get somewhere we deem significant in the worlds of the people 
we study. It has the advantage (or disadvantage, depending on your point of view) of complicating 

the elegant narratives we tell ourselves about what we know. It gives us a chance to see much that 

is hidden in plain sight and challenges our ability to make sense of the bewildering detail we 
encounter along the way.
When David Courpasson, then Editor in Chief, invited us to help organize an 
Organization 
Studies workshop on day-to-day organizational life, we had not imagined how many researchers 

out there might be fellow travelers on this quest. Although the study of everyday life can be traced 

at least as far back as the turn of the 20
th century, reaching its apogee after the middle of the century, 
especially in the writings of Erving Goffman and Harold Garfinkel (Schaffer, 2000), until that 

workshop we had nevertheless felt that within the organizational field it remained as uncommon as 

the object of its study is commonplace. Encouraged by the many interesting papers and thought-

provoking sessions at the workshop, we embarked upon the task of putting together this Special 
Issue. In our Call for Papers, we invited submissions that ﬁfurther our understanding of the rich-
ness and complexity of people™s experiences, struggles, beliefs, and interpretations.ﬂ Dozens of 

researchers answered our call. And, to our grateful relief, an even larger number of reviewers were 

willing to appraise the pieces, helping us to find our way in our own day-to-day task of working 
with all of the submissions and ultimately choosing the papers that we are proud to present here.We have learned a lot from 
all of the papers that were submitted. We feel that the rich variety 
 of work being done studying the everyday life of cultures and communities deserves to be 
 highlighted. The live views of organization, in all their different forms and voices, are critically 

important for enlivening the theoretical imagination, for challenging paradigmatic convictions, 

and for sharpening conceptualizations (Van Maanen, 1988). We also learned a lot from working as 

a Special Issue editorial team. In discussing the papers between us, championing their merits, 
expressing concern over claims we felt were perhaps not fully coming from the data, we relived 
with our authors Geertz™s 
terrifying complexity of writing about the quotidian. And, as a team, we 

found ourselves reflecting back over our own work and sharing with each other what we seem to 
hold as central tenets of what constitutes good research on day-to-day life. As we did so, we began 

to feel that of no less importance than their intellectual contributions, the live views hold the poten-
tial for expanding the sphere of empathy, helping ensure that those who see themselves as experts 

of organizations can deeply understand and help others to understand what it means to belong to 

and work in different settings, different roles, different hierarchical positions, different industrial 

sectors, different places in the world. To paraphrase a well-known cliché about culture, the live 

views of organization carry contributions to both minds and hearts.
The papers that appear in this Special Issue offer a glimpse of quite distinct organizational 
worlds that appear almost incomparable in terms of goals, structure, history, and so forth. Yet in 

each of them readers can find people struggling, day to day, with challenges and hardships that 

would no doubt feel familiar to them struggles that are as universal in essence as they are idio-
syncratic in form and that concern, for example, valued ideals and beliefs, relationships and friend
-
ships, loneliness and fears. Ironically, perhaps, it is only through rich contextualizationŠthrough 

thick descriptions of the particularities that shape specific expressions of specific struggles in spe-
cific organizationsŠthat a sense of the universal emerges in the form of in-depth understanding 

and sense of relatedness.Each of the papers in this Special Issue tells a specific story that contributes to theory by delving into humdrum, everyday organizational lives to develop key insights that further knowledge and 

extend bodies of literature in the field. Each is thus a testament of the fact that, as Ybema, Yanow, 
 Weeks et al. 725Wels, and Kamsteeg put it, ﬁmuch of the intriguing ‚mystery™ of organizational life is hidden in the 
ordinary exchanges of ordinary people on an ordinary sort of dayﬂ (2009, p. 1). As we will detail in 
the next section, the theoretical contributions of the papers are diverse. Each concerns a distinct 

body of organizational thought: Kameo™s paper contributes to literature on organizational change; 

the paper by Pouthier contributes to literature on cross-boundary teams; the paper by Farias offers 

a contribution to the burgeoning literature on alternative organizations; Georgi and Palmisamo™s 

paper contributes to literature on institutional contradictions and identity work; and Garrett, 

Spreitzer, and Bacevice™s paper contributes to literature on organizational communities. Each 

paper descends into the details of day-to-day life as a means of producing general theoretical 
insights that further knowledge on distinct issues that are of interest in the field.Moreover, alongside their individual contributions to specific theoretical literatures, we argue 
that the papers have an emergent joint contribution as well. What these papers have in common 

became clear to us only toward the end of the long process of composing the Issue, through our 
own inductively-oriented attempt to organize the introductory discussion that you are now reading. 

More specifically, when we started working on this introductory piece we tried to apply the induc
-
tive sensibility to the diverse set of papers that we are about to present by asking ourselves if such 
varied accounts of the everyday lives that unfold in such different contexts have anything in com
-
mon. In his recent book, Why Nothing Works: The Anthropology of Every Day Life
, Marvin Harris 
(2011, pp. 8Œ9) writes that ﬁOne important point that anthropologists have always made is that 

aspects of social life which do not seem to be related to each other, actually are related.ﬂ Finding 

that aspects of social life that don™t seem to be related to each other in the slightest are in fact intri
-
cately tied, he surfaces linkages between such seemingly unrelated events as the rise in divorce 

rates and shoddy consumer products, inflation and the increase in self-identified homosexuals. Is 

there, we wondered, a common thread that runs through the different portrayals that compose this 

Special Issue? And if so, what does this common thread reveal about the significance and impor
-tance of the study of everyday life for the field?The Edges of MeaningThere is, indeed, a common thread that runs through the papers that compose this Special Issue: all 
show us what happens when people face ongoing, mundane challenges of various sorts to the ways 
they like to think of and present their world and their place within it. More specifically, the papers 

depict the struggles that unfold in face of ongoing inconsistencies, contradictions, or changes that 

are wittingly or unwittingly induced in day-to-day life that rub against the edges of collectively 
entrenched ways of thinking about the organization and about the organizational self. These day-

to-day struggles thus unfolding at the edges of meaning bring Goffman to mind. In his 1971 book, 

Relations in Public, he referred to the ﬁclaimsﬂ that we make to ourselves and to others about who 
we are, what we believe, and how we are connected and differentiated from others, and stated, ﬁAt 

the center of social organization is the concept of claims, and around this center properly, the stu
-
dent must consider the vicissitudes of maintaining them.ﬂ These vicissitudes, the papers of this 

Special Issue illustrate, are indeed great, and their consequences theoretically surprising.In the first paper in the Special Issue, ﬁ
A culture of uncertainty: Interaction and organiza
-tional memory in software engineering teams under a productivity scheme
,ﬂ Nahoko Kameo 
shows how members™ images of their organization and of their managers are 
actively entrenched in 
a collective memory that resists change. More specifically, the paper examines how software engi
-
neers responded to the introduction of Scrum, a new way of working when designing computer 
software. It is interesting to understand why the engineers resisted fully adopting Scrum given that, 
on its surface, the new way of working promised to offer them more autonomy and empowerment. 

The resistance does not come, primarily, from their dislike of Scrum or from suspicion of the 
 726 Organization Studies 38(6) motives of management for introducing it or from general resistance to change. Rather it comes 
from their distrust that management will stick with Scrum, distrust that stems from a continually 
conjured up organizational memory of past changes that were abandoned. The engineers do not 

want to commit to Scrum if they feel that it might be abandoned.In other words, the paper depicts an organizational context in which official presentations of 
change are actively imbued with uncertainty and doubt. The engineers parse every statement and 

action by management and by other teams in the company trying to read what are the implications 
for the future of Scrum. And their interpretations are colored by their pessimism, based on the 

organization™s track record of previous changes, that abandonment is likely. In a sense, then, offi
-
cial presentations by, and informal interactions with, team leaders were constantly and actively 

ﬁedgedﬂ by members who read the past into the present; who read against the grain of official 

presentations. Since the nature of Scrum is that it requires trust and shared mental models among 
the engineers, because they were hypersensitive to signs that other teams were not doing full 
Scrum, they did not do full Scrum. Rendering the organization intelligible through an overarching 

and repeatedly reaffirmed narrative of superficially-embraced-and-then-painfully-aborted changes, 

the engineers™ response was to pull back enough from commitment to Scrum that its form was 

maintained but its substance was subverted. Extending theory on organizational change, Kameo 

thus identifies organizational memory as a cultural resource that members use to enact commit
-
ment and resistance.If the software engineers that Kameo studied used organizational memory as a cultural resource 
with which they struggled to make sense of and resist a formally espoused change, then the people 
whom Vanessa Pouthier studied used different cultural resourcesŠnamely, humor and com
-
plaintsŠto sustain their identity as a united team despite the structural contradictions and tensions 
that beset it. In her paper, ﬁ
Griping and joking as identification rituals and tools for engage
-
ment in cross-boundary team meetings
,ﬂ Pouthier takes us to a cross-boundary team in a pallia-
tive care/oncology unit in a large hospital. The paper is about how members in this unit sustain 

their sense of being a ﬁteamﬂ despite differences in occupational perspective (acute care versus 

palliative care) and differences in power and status between departments and functions, and the 

fact that people had higher affinity with their occupational communities than with the team. The 

setting is full of tensionŠdeath and dying are all around, people are overworkedŠand cross-
functional teamwork is required both by law and for positive patient outcomes. The team has no 

leader, no formal goals or agenda for its meetings, and shifting composition of members.
Relationships are built through everyday griping about their shared circumstances and joking about their occupational and status differences. By griping together good-naturedly about the dif
-
ficult working conditions they share, challenging patients and families, and other healthcare pro-
viders not in the room at the time, they come together in commiseration and shared moral identity. 

By joking about the differences among them in perspective towards patients and their relative 

power and status, they raise these issues in a way that allows them to recognize them while tempo-
rarily suspending them, surfacing them with enough ambiguity to prevent disharmony. Deriving a 

theoretical model of managing the tensions inherent to cross-boundary teams through the use of 
joking and complaining to strengthen affinity, Pouthier richly demonstrates the way both served to 

strengthen, affirm, and sustain the image of a united professional team despite its ongoing difficul
-
ties and the lack of unity of occupational perspective.In the third and fourth papers the edges of meaning are imbued with deep ideological and 
religious significance. In ﬁ
Money is the root of all evilŠor is it? Recreating culture through 

everyday neutralizing practices
,ﬂ Carine Farias explores everyday life in Longo Maï, an inten
-tional community that seeks to oppose the capitalist order. With a history that dates back to the late 

1960s, Longo Maï is an organization that sees itself as fulfilling an alternative model of collective 

life. Yet it turns out that in order to survive and to promote its ideology, Longo Maï is dependent 
 Weeks et al. 727upon one of the most powerful symbols of the capitalist order that it so passionately resists: money. 
In order to sustain its activities, it needs to engage in both fundraising and commerce. Drawing 
from classical writers in anthropology and sociology, Farias thus argues that money constitutes a 

ﬁdirty objectﬂ in this cultural universe, and notes the risk it entails for transgressing and polluting 
the group™s shared classification of values and meanings. Moreover, Farias further illustrates that 

the challenge posed by this ﬁdirty objectﬂ is not merely a marginal occurrence that can easily be 

denied or brushed aside, but is an ongoing difficulty.
Longo Maï™s ﬁdirty object,ﬂ then, repeatedly reveals the fragile edges of the community™s own 
valued, oppositional self-image. A community that fashions itself as an alternative to the capitalist 

order has to repeatedly face its own entanglement in that order, and, moreover, to deal with the 

consequent threat of transgressing the boundaries that define what ﬁalternativeﬂ could and does 
actually mean. Interestingly, however, Farias further argues that this ﬁdirty objectﬂ is not merely an 

ideological and cultural threat but also a creative force. The processes through which members 

confront and seek to neutralize money™s usesŠnamely, ﬁdistancingﬂ and ﬁre-appropriatingﬂŠ

lubricate the dynamic flow of everyday life and smooth out the tensions in ways that, surprisingly 
perhaps, are culturally productive. Inciting the development of dynamic, responsive, and heteroge
-
neous forms of alternative cultural practices and scripts, the neutralizing processes facilitate the 
development of what Farias calls ﬁa relational and politicized culture of exchange.ﬂ Identifying the 
cultural potential stemming from a group™s inability to completely rid itself of that which it renders 

a ﬁdirty object,ﬂ Farias thus furthers our theoretical understanding of the cultural implications of 
the complex entanglement of alternative organizations in the system they resist and contributes 

theoretical insights concerning the creative (albeit somewhat ironic) role of persistent symbolic 
threats in the shaping of organizational cultures.
In ﬁSober intoxication: Institutional contradictions and identity work in the everyday life 
of four religious communities in Italy
ﬂ, Simona Giorgi and Stefania Palmisano take us to a site 

where people™s most deeply felt truths concerning the order of things are invoked and formulated 

through the realm of the sacred: religious communities. Even here, we learn, notions of the abso-
lute can routinely run the course of having to face their own edges. Georgi and Palmisano™s context 

of study are four mystical religious communities whose members also belong to the Catholic 

Church. Located in Italy, these mystical communities are characterized by a worldview and a set 

of ceremonial and religious practices that, as far as mainstream Catholicism is concerned, are 
highly suspect. Since members of these communities define themselves both as mystics and as 

Roman Catholics, their religious experience is replete with a sense of identity-tension. The con
-flicting religious prescriptions continually surface the edges of each religious worldview, necessi
-
tating an ongoing ﬁidentity workﬂ to reconcile the experience of these institutional contradictions.Georgi and Palmisano are right when they define their context of study ﬁan extreme setting.ﬂ 
Their case study indicates that even in organizational worlds whose notions of truth are literally 

and most comprehensively sanctified, the experience of contradictions and inconsistencies can 
become routine. Moreover, their analysis further traces the inner echoes of these contradictions at 

the level of self. It reveals the ways through which members turn their own sense of self into a site 
of stabilization where temporary truces are reached and contradictions are partly reconciled. Rather 
than seeking institutional change as a means of eliminating the tensions and forging coherence 

between the conflicting religious scripts, members resort to identity work that allows for the reflec-
tive maintenance of the institutions they belong to, despite all the tensions. Georgi and Palmisano 

call the primary mechanisms of this identity work ﬁdistancingﬂ and ﬁembedding,ﬂ and their analy
-
sis illustrates the ways that these mechanisms enable the flow of everyday life, smoothing out 
 those rough edges of religious meaning that the conflicting cultural scripts continually bring to 
light. Using their findings and analytical insights to build a dynamic model of managing institu-
tional contradictions, Georgi and Palmisano extend theory by pointing out how these institutional 
 728 Organization Studies 38(6) contradictions are not just disruptive catalysts of change, but also serve as essential components to organizational maintenance.
In the fifth paper, ﬁ
Co-constructing a sense of community at work: The emergence of com
-munity in co-working spaces,ﬂ Lyndon Garrett, Gretchen Spreitzer, and Peter Bacevice discuss 

the efforts of members of a co-working space to enact a collective sense of community. In their 

analysis, the authors trace the source of these efforts to the painful experience of loneliness that 

working at home entails for certain people. As members™ narratives indicated, after a job change or 

relocation had led them to start working from home, they encountered a frustrating sense of social 

isolation. Whatever images they once held about the realities of working from home, and about 

their own work-related personal needs, the actual work-from-home experience has apparently 
forced them to realize the existence of ﬁa social void,ﬂ and to acknowledge their own overwhelm-
ing desire for collective identity, friendships, and a sense of influence and social importance. 

Facing and coping with realizations that defy any individualistic images of their own working 
selves, members sought a sense of community.
Their attempt to forge this community, however, required constant effort. We tend to think of 
sense of community as something that grows organically, but this paper describes the creation of 

community in the most artificial way imaginable. These people have nothing in common except a 

desire to be part of a community. The community has no reason for being except the desire of its 

members to exist. It is analogous to a child with no friends at school identifying another child he 
doesn™t know but who looks like he has no friends either and going up to him and saying, ﬁDo you 

want to be my friend?ﬂ It is like a romantic relationship between two people who have nothing in 
common except a common desire to have someone in their life to love. The paper describes how 

this community of community-seekers sustains itself through everyday affirmation, in words and 

behaviors, of their shared desire for community. It shows the work they have to do to convince 

themselves that this community is as real as, more real than, communities that form in traditional 
workplaces, and to protect their belief in the strength of the community from signs that not every
-
one is fully committed to it. They are growing a lawn in the desertŠsustaining their image of a 

community requires constant watering and attention. Garrett, Spreitzer, and Bacevice use their 

unique case study to develop a theoretical model of how the sense of community is co-constructed 
in non-traditional work spaces where unity is negotiated differentially from leader-driven, shared 

values toward organizational performance.
The papers thus all concern attempts to sustain a particular self-image: the self-image of a fad-dish, non-committing organization (Kameo) or of a united team (Pouthier); an alternative and 

resistant self-image (Farias); the self-image of normative Catholics (Georgi & Palmisano); and the 

self-image of an ideal community (Garrett, Spreitzer, & Bacevice). All these images require forms 

of repair work in face of contradictions, inconsistencies, and tensions that mark out their threaten-
ing edges. Seen together, the papers provide a collage of different forms of the everyday protection 

against what Goffman long ago described as the vicissitudes of everyday life.
That the ghost of Erving Goffman touches each of the papers in this Special Issue is perhaps no 
surprise. Goffman, ﬁthe quintessential sociologist of everyday life,ﬂ according to the editors of his 

collected works (Lemert & Branaman, 1977), was not only responsible for elevating a subject 
treated by sociologists before him as ﬁthe dust of social activity, empty and trivialﬂ (Goffman, 

1971, p. 90) to something worthy of serious consideration and study, but masterfully dissected the 
meaning and importance of everyday life with a remarkable and cutting discernment. Resonating 
with his insights, the papers in this Special Issue teach us two things about the maintenance work 
that is required to preserve the ways that we like to think of our world against real and potential 
threats: it tends to hide in plain sight and it occupies us constantly. The edges of meaning are not 

peripheral, nor do they require exceptional dramas (e.g., Ailon, 2011) to bring them to pass. Rather, 

they seem to be a central aspect of daily organizational life.
 Weeks et al. 729Furthermore, the papers illustrate the dynamic outcomes of edge dynamics. In some cases, namely those described in Farias™s paper about an alternative organization and in Georgi and 
Palmisano™s paper about a religious community, these dynamics lead members to try and reconcile 

the contradictory themes, inciting reflexivity, negotiation, and boundary work (i.e., ﬁdistancingﬂ). 

In the case of Garrett, Spreitzer, and Bacevice™s study of a co-working space, these dynamics seem 

to inspire quite extensive everyday affirmations. In Pouthier™s paper about the cross-functional 

hospital team they incite humor and griping. And in the case of Kameo™s paper about the software 

developers they seem to breed, and to be bred by, a culture of suspicion. In sum, reflexivity, nego
-
tiation, boundary work, affirmations, humor, griping, and suspicion provide in different ways what 

Fine and Hallett call ﬁthe tensile strength of organizations in the face of forces of alienation or 

uncertainty that might otherwise disrupt allegianceﬂ (2014, p. 1778). They are each different ways 
of confronting those aspects of day-to-day life that transcend (or that threaten to transcend) the 

ideologically, normatively, emotionally, and even religiously entrenched ways through which 

members collectively make sense of their world and of their place within it.David Courpasson, whom we invited to contribute the closing essay to this Special Issue, would 
no doubt add that these dynamics unfolding at the edges of meaning are also deeply political. His 
piece adds a complex, theoretically nuanced perspective that underscores the extent to which the 
open-ended, creative, and unexpected everyday dynamics at work constitute a complex politics of 
submission and resistance. His argument is that submission and resistance are undecisively inter
-mingled in everyday life for the simple reason that what Van Maanen (2011, p.
 xviii) calls ﬁthe intricate ways individuals and groups understand, accommodate, and resist a presumably shared 
orderﬂ is the stuff life is made of, or, more properly, the stuff with which we make our
 lives.As a whole, the Special Issue thus illustrates how the study of the everyday can help uncover the commonplace but often submerged dramas that unfold in the interstices of collectively espoused 

images of or beliefs about life. It may appear odd to think of the mundane, of the seemingly banal, 
as an ongoing and highly political drama of treading the edges of meaning, of copingŠwittingly 

or notŠwith all that defies, challenges or otherwise threatens the socially, emotionally, and mor
-ally invested systems of meaning through which we understand and experience organizational life. 

But on second thought, it actually makes sense. After all, the mundane is where life actually hap
-
pens. And life, John Lennon sang to us many years ago, has this tendency to resist that which we 

think we know: ﬁLife is what happens to you while you™re busy making other plans.ﬂ1In a sense, then, the Special Issue portrays the day-to-day processes that render this lyric so true. It illustrates the lubrication that keeps people™s wheels moving: we see how people get through 

their day despite the contradictions they (and we all) face. Indeed, the papers bear evidence not 
merely of the fact that contradictions and inconsistencies exist, but also of how they can be dynam-
ically ﬁsmoothed outﬂ at the level of the individual (Georgi and Palmisano™s paper about the reli
-
gious communities), the team (Pouthier™s paper about the cross-functional hospital team), and the 

organization (Farias™s paper about the alternative organization and Garrett, Spreitzer, and Bacevice™s 

paper about the co-working space). Additionally, the Special Issue shows that contradictions and 

inconsistencies can be dynamically heightened and emphasized (Kameo™s paper about software 

engineers; and also Courpasson™s closing essay).
In order to appreciate how surprising these aggregate findings are, let us broadly compare them to the type of analytical expectations that often guide the theoretical imagination. First, the finding 
that contradictions and inconsistencies are hardly marginal in day-to-day illustrates how much is 

empirically lost through positivist analytical strategies that project upon the empirical world their 
own criteria of logic instead of turning logicŠemic logicŠinto an empirical question. Second, the 
finding that contradictions and inconsistencies can be interactionally monitored and re-fashioned 
problematizes Marxist-based expectations regarding their inherently radical force. Third, it indi
-
cates what is missing in postmodernist type of accounts that tend to assume the proliferation of  730 Organization Studies 38(6) contradictions and inconsistencies, but overlook the fact that they are often actively smoothed outŠturned into a bridge between institutional logics (Georgi & Palmisano), into a functional 

force (Pouthier), into a culturally creative force (Farias and Garrett et
 al.), or into a means of forg
-
ing coherence with the past (even at the price of heightening tensions in the present) (Kameo). It is 
precisely this ability of studies of everyday life to unsettle that which we think we know that ren-
ders them so critically important for the field.The Importance of the Study of Everyday Organizational LifeIn a recent essay, Karl Weick argued that organizational research is not, nor should it aspire to be, 

a ﬁsettled science.ﬂ ﬁOrganizational research,ﬂ he writes, ﬁprepares people for what they don™t see 

and don™t know. In other words, it builds capacity more than solves problemsﬂ (Weick, 2016, 

p. 342). Acts of inquiry are valuable in and of themselves when they alter meaning as well as con
-straints of comprehension. The study of everyday life seems to us to be especially valuable in this 

regard. Exploring those aspects of life that are broadly viewed as usual, unremarkable, and even 
banal by the people living it, researchers of everyday life focus precisely on those dimensions of 
organizational life that are easily overlooked and, when noticed, are easily dismissed as uninterest
-
ing. They examine what is happening when it seems like nothing is happening. Whether looking at 

contexts that are distant from those of the researchers and their intended audience or those closer 
to home, the study of everyday life holds the potential of lifting the constraints of comprehension 

that prevent us from seeing the eventfulness of the seemingly commonplace. In the case of distant 
or unusual contexts, comparisons to what we ourselves find routine or even mundane can reveal 
both the similarities and the differences: making the others feel less strange to us by domesticating 

the seeming exotic and causing us to recognize what we might otherwise take for granted in our 

own lives. Marking what is seen as unremarkable in contexts we think we already know can reveal 
the function and significance of behaviors we otherwise overlook because they are so prevalent.This holds true both for organizational members and for organizational scholars. Regarding the 
former, as organizational routines and procedures become entrenched and taken for granted, they 

are generally enacted uncritically and without awareness of any need for change nor of the resources 
available for change. Studies of everyday life can surface these hidden dimensions. Consider, for 

example, Brannen, Mughan, and Moore™s (2013) account of the ﬁstrategic ethnographyﬂ conducted 

in Tesco Plc, a global food retailer and Britain™s largest private sector employer at that time. In this 

project, an academic research team deployed insider/outsider bicultural bridges by training nine 
Asian subsidiary managers to become in-house ethnographers of Tesco UK. By observing day-to-

day routines and processes, and by comparing and contrasting them with those of their home coun
-
try, these ethnographers facilitated learning by surfacing various underlying organizational identity 

fissures. Moreover, as a whole, this action-based research study revealed everyday knowledge that 

people within their own local context didn™t know they
 had.Additionally, the study of everyday life can also enrich theories of behavior, broaden the schol
-arly imagination, and enlarge the scope of our descriptive understanding of organizations. These 

virtues seem especially critical today. As a number of renowned organizational scholars have 

recently argued, the commitment to knowledge development in the field is currently impeded in 

two primary ways: institutional pressures limit our theoretical goals and values, preventing us from 
fully capturing dramatic changes in the world of organizations (Barley, 2016; Davis, 2015), and 

analytical frameworks tend to limit our empirical field of vision (Kunda, 2013).We do not wish to add to these ruminations, but to explain why we believe that deep immersion 
in the everyday lives of those who belong to and are impacted by organizations is critical for over
-coming both of these problems. First, let us consider the issue of theoretical goals and values. As 

Davis (2015, p. 179) explains, ﬁchanges in the world of organizations are not being met with 
 Weeks et al. 731changes in how and for whom organizational research is done.ﬂ Given the impact of organizations 
and the dramatic reconfigurations of their structures and operations, he argues, there is a need to 

rethink our research goals and include a broader vision of the public™s benefit, including workers, 

consumers, and citizens.ﬁBroadening the vision,ﬂ however, is much more difficult to achieve than it appears. Among the 
various strategies for achieving this broader visionŠnew theoretical resources, new statistical 
strategies, etc.Šimmersion in the day-to-day lives of the different constituents of organizations 

seems to us to be both the most promising and the bravest. Many analytical strategies tend to dis-
tance scholars from the ﬁreal,ﬂ mundane lives of those who belong to or are routinely impacted by 
organizations. Analytically sophisticated as they may be, they often entail the price of moral, emo
-
tional, and social simplifications. Broadening our vision through studies of day-to-day lives no 

doubt entails an unsettling, terrifying complexity in all these terms. It clarifies the social and moral 
challenges and contingencies of organizational research, and it carries the potential to breathe 

actual life into abstract scientific values.Second, studies of day-to-day life hold the potential to yield the unexpected, inductive insight 
thatŠaccording to Eisenhardt, Graebner, and Sonenshein (2016)Šis critical for adding ﬁrigorﬂ 

and avoiding ﬁrigor mortisﬂ in the field. To a great extent, there seems to us to be a proclivity in 

organization studies to search for the known or pursue a ﬁscience of the obvious,ﬂ often through 

deductive hypothesis testing that relies on sophisticated quantitative methodologies for isolating, 

controlling, and manipulating variables. But, as Harris (2011, pp. 8Œ9) reminds us, given the sur
-prising cultural interrelations between aspects of social life, ﬁwe cannot hope to understand why 
any aspect of a people™s way of life has changed if we view it in isolation.ﬂ Returning to John 

Lennon, the busy plans of the deductive theory tester thus tend to be quite removed from the life 
that is actually happening, often right in front of our eyes.In contrast, researching life as it actually happens holds the potential to stretch our understand
-ing beyond what we (and perhaps also the people we study) take for granted. Indeed, as Kunda 
(2013) notes, actual interactions with the people who are studied tend to surface the limits of the 
interpretive tools which are grounded in theory, inviting a reliance on a broader set of symbolic 

tools that have been developed over the researcher™s lifetime and that are critical for the generation 

of new insight. The attempt to deeply understand the lives of the people who are studied enables 

researchers to face, grapple with, and enrich the bounds of the theoretical imagination. It is a way 
of purposely searching for the edges of our own analytical images; of actively surfacing the blind 
and blinding spots of theory.
In the context of organizational studies, where a substantial portion of the knowledge produced 
has historically taken the shape of administrative plans and managerial prescriptions, the idea that 
life is what happens to you when you are busy making other plans seems an especially poignant 
reminder that we should not lose sight of daily life as it actually unfolds. Our hope is that this 
Special Issue, which brings to you accounts of the lives of people who take part in all sorts of 
organizationsŠa public organization (by Pouthier), a religious organization (by Georgi & 

Palisano), a profit-seeking (by Kameo) and a profit-resisting (by Farias) organization, and even an 

organization-less organization (by Garrett et
 al.)Ševokes the intricate scope of our disciplinary 
mandate and the value of studies of everyday life in enriching our thinking and deepening our 

understanding of organizations. The journey along Geertz™s road, like any genuine Quest, is one 

where we learn more by paying close attention along the way than by arriving at what we or those we study suppose to be Oz.FundingThis research received no specific grant from any funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors. 732 Organization Studies 38(6) Note1. Lennon used that quote in his song, Beautiful Boy, but he didn™t come up with it. According to the 
Yale 
Book of Quotations editors Fred R. Shapiro and Joseph Epstein (2006), it originated with the writer and 
cartoonist Allen Saunders. And a variation of it appeared in 
Reader™s Digest
 in 1957.ReferencesAilon, G. (2011). Mapping the cultural grammar of reflexivity: The case of the Enron scandal. Economy and Society, 40, 141Œ166.Barley, S. R. (2016). 60th anniversary essay: Ruminations on how we became a mystery house and how we might get out. Administrative Science Quarterly, 61, 1Œ8.Brannen, M. Y., Mughan, T., & Moore, F. (2013). Strategic ethnography and reinvigorating Tesco Plc: 
Leveraging inside/out bicultural bridging in multicultural teams. 
EPIC 2013 Proceedings
, pp. 255Œ273.
Davis, G. F. (2015). Editorial essay: What is organizational research for? Administrative Science Quarterly, 60, 179Œ188.Eisenhardt, K. M., Graebner, M. E., & Sonenshein, S. (2016). From the editors: Grand challenges and induc-tive methods: Rigor without rigor mortis. Academy of Management Journal, 59, 1113Œ1123.Fine, G. A., & Hallett, T. (2014). Group cultures and the everyday life of organizations: Interaction orders and meso-analysis. Organization Studies, 35, 1773Œ1792.Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New York: Basic Books.
Goffman, E. (1971). Relations in public: Microstudies of the public order. New York: Basic Books.
Harris, M. (2011). Why nothing works: The anthropology of daily life. New York: Simon & Schuster.Kunda, G. (2013). Reflections on becoming an ethnographer. Journal of Organizational Ethnography, 2, 4Œ22.Lemert, C., & Branaman, A. (Eds.). (1977). The Goffman reader. Cambridge, MA: Wiley-Blackwell.Schaffer, S. (2000). Introduction: To munadity and beyond– Journal of Mundane Behavior, 1, 1Œ6.
Shapiro, F. R., & Epstein, J. (2006). Yale book of quotations. London: Yale University Press.Van Maanen, J. (1988). Tales of the field: On writing ethnography. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Van Maanen, J. (2011). Tales of the field: On writing ethnography. 2nd edition. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.Weick, K. E. (2016). 60th Anniversary essay: Constrained comprehending: The experience of organizational inquiry. Administrative Science Quarterly, 61, 333Œ346.Ybema, S., Yanow, D., Wels, H., & Kamsteeg, F. (2009). Studying everyday organizational life. In S. Ybema, D. Yanow, H. Wels, & F. Kamsteeg (Eds.), Organizational ethnography: Studying the complexities of 
everyday life (pp. 1Œ20). Los Angeles: SAGE Publications.Author biographiesJohn Weeks is Professor of Leadership and Organizational Behavior at IMD. He is the author of 
Unpopular Culture: The Ritual of Complaint at a British Bank. His research investigates how cultures evolve in organiza
-
tions and the intended and unintended consequences of efforts to shape that evolution.Galit Ailon is a Senior Lecturer at the Department of Sociology & Anthropology at Bar-Ilan University. She is a researcher of organizational and economic cultures and the author of Global Ambitions and Local Identities: An Israeli-American High-Tech Merger (Berghahn, 2007). Her published papers focus on topics 
such as identity and culture in global organizations, financial scandals, and economic reflexivity. Her current 
research interest concerns the study of the expansion of financial culture.Mary Yoko Brannen is the Jarislowsky East Asia (Japan) Chair of Cross-Cultural Management and Professor of International Business at the University of Victoria, Canada, and Visiting Professor at the Copenhagen Business School. She served as Deputy Editor of the Journal of International Business Studies for two terms 
(2011Œ2016) where she actively helped to open the journal to more interdisciplinary and methodologically 
plural research.