 


























 Journal of Management Information Systems / 
Summer 2009, Vol. 26, No. 1, pp. 155Œ195.
 © 2009 M.E. Sharpe, Inc. 0742Œ1222 / 2009 $9.50 + 0.00. DOI 10.2753/MIS0742-1222260107The CMC Interactivity Model: How 
Interactivity Enhances Communication 

Quality and Process Satisfaction in 
 Lean-Media Groups
PAUL B
ENJA
MIN LOWRY, N
ICHOLAS C. ROM
ANO JR.,  JEFFREY L. JENKINS, A
ND RANDY W. GUTHRIEPAUL
 BENJAMIN
 LOWRY
 is an 
Assistant Professor of Information Systems at the Marriott 
School, Brigham 
Young University, where he also directs the IS Ph.D. preparation pro
-gram; and a 
Kevin and Debra 
Rollins 
Faculty 
Fellow. 
He received his Ph.D. in MIS from 
the University of 
Arizona. His research interests include humanŒcomputer interaction 
(collaboration, culture, communication, adoption, entertainment), e
-business (privacy, 
security, trust, branding, electronic markets), and scientometrics of information sys
-tems research. 
He has published articles in the 
Journal of Management Information 
Systems, Journal of the Association for Information Systems,
 Communications of the 
ACM,
 Communications of the AIS,
 Decision Support Systems,
 IEEE Transactions on 
Systems, Man, and Cybernetics,
 IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication,
 Small Group Research,
 Information Sciences,
 Journal of Business Communication, 
and others. 
He serves as an associate editor of 
AIS Transactions on HCI
 and of 
Com-munications of the AIS.
NICHOLAS
 C. ROMANO
 JR. is an 
Associate Professor of Management Science and In
-formation Systems at Oklahoma State 
University. 
He earned his Ph.D. in 1998 (MIS; 
Arizona), and has worked for IBM. 
His research interests include technology-supported 
learning, collaborative project/process management, and e
-customer relationship man
-agement. The 2006 Business Research Yearbook 
ranked Dr. 
Romano third in the 
World 
in E
-Commerce Journal Articles (1998Œ2004). 
He has published papers in 
Journal of 
Management Information Systems, Communications of the ACM, International Jour
-nal of Electronic Commerce, Small Group Research, Information Systems Frontier,
 
and others. 
He is associate editor for 
European Journal of Information Systems 
and Electronic Markets.
 Dr. 
Romano coedited the 
Advances in Management Information 
Systems (AMIS) volume on Electronic 
Customer Relationship Management and is 
coediting the 
AMIS volume on 
Collaborative Science. 
He is 
Region 1 (
Americas) Council Representative for the 
Association for Information Systems (
July 1, 2007, 
to June 30, 2009).JEFFREY
 L. JENKINS
 is a Ph.D. candidate in MIS at the 
University of 
Arizona. He com
-pleted the Masters of Information Systems Management Ph.D. preparation program at 
the Marriott School of Management, Brigham 
Young 
University. 
His research interests 
include computer-mediated communication (
CMC) (lean 
CMC technologies, 
CMC implementation in personal handheld devices, adoption), hedonic systems (virtual 
 156     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIEworlds, social networks, immersion, affect, interactivity), and e
-business (satisfaction, 
trust, loyalty).
RANDY
 W. G
UTHRIE
 is an 
Academic Developer Evangelist for Microsoft 
Corporation. In 
this role, Dr. Guthrie provides academic and research support to faculty and students 
at schools in the southwestern portion of the 
United States. Prior to his working at 
Microsoft, he was a professor at 
Cal Poly Pomona, where he taught software engineer
-ing, programming, and information systems courses. 
He earned his B.S. in Business 
from the 
University of 
La Verne in 1991, an MB
A in 1998 from the Peter 
F. Drucker 
School of Management, and a Ph.D. in Information Science in 2007 from the School 

of Information Science and Technology at Claremont Graduate University.
ABSTRACT
: Process satisfaction is one important determinant of work group collab
-orative system adoption, continuance, and performance. 
We explicate the computer-
mediated communication (
CMC) interactivity model (
CMCIM) to explain and predict 
how interactivity enhances communication quality that results in increased process 

satisfaction in 
CMC-supported work groups. 
We operationalize this model in the chal
-lenging context of very large groups using extremely lean 
CMC. We tested it with a 
rigorous ˜eld experiment and analyzed the results with the latest structural equation 

modeling techniques. Interactivity and communication quality dramatically improved 

for very large groups using highly lean 
CMC (audience response systems) over face-
to-face groups. Moreover, 
CMC groups had fewer negative status effects and higher 
process satisfaction than face-to-face groups. 
The practical applications of lean 
CMC rival theoretical applications in importance because lean 
CMC is relatively inexpensive 
and requires minimal training and support compared to other media. 
The results may 
aid large global work group continuance, satisfaction, and performance in systems, 

product and strategy development, and other processes in which status effects and 

communication issues regularly have negative in˚uences on outcomes.
KEY
 WORDS
 AND
 PHRASES
: audience response systems, 
CMC interactivity model 
(CMCIM), collaboration, humanŒcomputer interaction (
HC
I), interactivity, large 
groups, ultra-lean interactive media, ultra-lean interactivity.
THE
 PHENOMENON
 OF
 INTEREST
 in this study is process satisfaction (PS) as a subset of 
general satisfaction. Marketing research has long noted the importance satisfaction 
plays in customer adoption and repurchase (e.g., [95, 96]). 
Research in e
-commerce has shown that satisfaction is just asŠif not moreŠcritical for long-term growth and 

pro˜tability in electronic markets [9, 69]. In information systems (IS) research, satisfac
-
tion and related affect have been shown to play a strong role in system adoption and, 

more importantly, in system continuance [9, 12, 58, 84, 85]. 
Wixom and 
Todd [115] 
integrated satisfaction and the technology acceptance model (
TA
M) theory to show 

that information satisfactionŠdriven by information qualityŠcan positively affect 

perceived usefulness and that system satisfactionŠdriven by system qualityŠcan 

positively affect perceived ease of use. 
Liao et al. [57] extended the theory of planned 
behavior (
TPB) and found that satisfaction was the primary determinant of one™s inten
- THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     157tion to continue using an e
-service. 
This brief review of IS, marketing, and e
-commerce 
theory reveals the impact satisfaction has on both adoption and continuance.
In particular, PS is an important determinant of work group success. Group and PS 
largely determine team performance and are critical to establish commitment to, and 
con˜dence in, team decisions [72]. PS facilitates team acceptance of decisions and 

technologies that will bene˜t the group; conversely, dissatisfaction often inhibits team 

acceptance and results in team rejection of decisions and technologies, regardless of 

the potential bene˜ts to the group [84]. Satisfaction is a signi˜cant determinant of 

meeting success [84] and group collaboration success [1]. In contrast, lack of satis
-
faction leads to dysfunctional teams, whether face-to-face or virtual, and to a lack of 

organizational commitment [41, 66].
Given the signi˜cance of PS in IS and work group success, we address the research 
question ﬁ
How can IS promote PS in work groups?ﬂ Speci˜cally, we study the theo
-
retical foundations of PS in computer-mediated communication (
CMC)Œsupported 
groups, which is a seldom-studied area, even though satisfaction has been studied in 

many 
CMC contexts [37]. Most research involving 
CMC PS has focused on a team™s 
decision-making or meeting process with a tool (e.g., [84, 85]), the effects of work 

modality or work team proximity (e.g., [7, 47, 93]), or speci˜c system features that 

affect satisfaction (e.g., [6, 46]). 
These important studies have helped improve our 
understanding of PS in 
CMC groups; however, they do not provide an overarching 
extant theory of how PS is derived independent of a particular tool.
Our objective is to theoretically explain how 
CMC technologies can improve per
-ceived interactivity, communication quality (
CQ), and PS in groupsŠoperationalizing 
to the speci˜c case of very large groups using highly lean 
CMC. 
We operationalize our 
model in the speci˜c context of large 
CMC-supported groups because they are increas
-ingly used in system development [2, 62]. 
Unfortunately, large groups are more prone 
to communication breakdowns and interaction process losses that undermine results 

and group ﬁcontinuanceﬂ (the desire of group members to continue to work together) 

than small groups. 
Limitations in human attention, communication bandwidth, and 
cognition often negatively affect large-group stability, ef˜ciency, and productivity [3, 

97]. In addition, individual participation is frequently more limited in large groups than 

in small groups. Members of large groups are more likely to fall victim to evaluation 

apprehension, social loa˜ng, and production blocking than members of small groups 

(e.g., [39, 97]). Our research investigates how PS can minimize these problems.
The bene˜ts of highly lean 
CMC technologies in large groups have received little 
attention in the literature but show promise. 
For example, in proposing a theory on 
compensatory adaptation, 
Kock [53] found that ﬁleanﬂ electronic communication 
media, compared to face-to-face interaction, may have a positive effect on knowl
-
edge sharing, outcome quality, and group success. 
However, 
Kock™s ˜ndings were 
limited to groups of 7 to 15 members and did not differentiate between lean and rich 

electronic media. 
His ˜ndings also do not suggest attributes of electronic media that 
create group success. 
Later, 
Kock [54] found that lean electronic communication 
media may cause communication ˚uency burdens when compared to face-to-face 

communication, although his study did not address how different levels of electronic 
 158     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIEcommunication interactivity in˚uence communication ˚uency. 
The biggest limitation 
of Kock™s compensatory adaptation theory [53, 54] is that it posits that lean media 
may result in 
paradoxical
 increases in team performance outcomes due to members 
compensatingŠoften involuntarily
Šfor obstacles posed by lean electronic media. 
While this is a useful start, such built-in limitations undermine the explanatory power 
of the theory.
Other studies have shown that 
CMC technologies in˚uence team cognition, reduce 
social cues, generate more alternative solutions, and allow equal participation [24]. 

However, these studies tend to focus only on small groups. 
Finally, Nobel Prize lau
-reate Carl Edwin 
Wieman is championing the use of ﬁclickers,ﬂ an ultra-lean 
CMC technology, in education because of their promise of transforming interaction and 

engagement in the classroom [22], as preliminarily suggested in a few studies [4, 22, 

111]. The limitations of this research include a lack of theoretical grounding and a 
lack of applicability to business and organizational settings.
If it is true that lean 
CMC technologies can positively in˚uence perceived interac
-tivity and 
CQ in large groups, then 
CMC technologies are also likely to positively 
in˚uence PS in large groups. Interactivity has been shown to build shared interpretive 

contexts among group members [118], improve 
CQ for business 
Web sites, improve 
customer satisfaction [19, 36], and improve communication processes and outcomes 

(e.g., credibility, attractiveness, in˚uence, and decision quality) [15]. Interactivity is 

also a fundamental part of communication in successful teamwork, particularly in 

lean management models [36]. 
CQ leads to partnership success [74] and trust between 
communication partners [117]. 
The quality of communication during the design of an 
IS determines its success [26]. 
CQ also affects group acceptance of human resources 
and managerial innovation [89].
In this paper, we propose a theoretical model to explain how 
CMC technologies may 
bene˜t groups by increasing PS through perceived interactivity and 
CQ. We rigor
-ously test this model in what we believe is the most challenging 
CMC environment: 
large groups using extremely lean 
CMC technologies. 
We chose this environment not 
simply because it is a promising area that is underresearched but also because we are 

working from the assumption that, if our theory holds under extreme conditions, it 

will hold in conditions of smaller groups and with richer CMC media. Proposing the CMC Interactivity Model (
CMCIM)THE
 PRIMARY
 PUR
POSE
 OF
 THIS
 PAPER
 IS
 TO
 PRO
POSE
 a new theoretical modelŠthe 
CMC interactivity model (
CMCIM)Šwhich can be used to explain and predict how the 

combination of interactivity and 
CQ increases PS in interacting 
CMC groups. 
A key 
contextual assumption of this model is that 
CMC technologies generally provide for 
more lean communication interactivity than face-to-face technologies. 
Here, we brie˚y 
summarize the theoretical grounding and propositions of 
CMCIM, and then we support 
our de˜nitions and propositions in detail in the remainder of this section.Our research is theoretically grounded in interpersonal interactivity theory and 
literatureŠparticularly the theoretical basis for interactivity itself, the 
direction of 
 THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     159communication 
principle and the 
ef˜cacy 
principle. 
These theoretical principles 
lead us to propose that interactivity increases 
CQ (P1). 
We then use the expectations 
discon˜rmation theory (ED
T) to explain how increased 
CQ increases PS in groups 
(P2). Our model further recognizes that group processes can suffer from negative 
status effects, which undermine the relationship between 
CQ and PS. 
Thus, we use 
social presence theory to propose that increased social presence in a group increases 

status effects (P4), and then we use status characteristics theory to explain how these 

negative status effects adversely moderate the relationship between 
CQ and PS. 
While 
there are many potential forms of process losses in groups, 
CMCIM focuses on status 
effects because 
CMC technologies typically employ lean communication richness that 
can diminish status effects, while still providing the necessary interactivity to induce 

suf˜cient CQ to provide PS. 
Figure 1 summarizes CMCIM.Basic Scope and Conceptualization of Interactivity
The driving independent construct of 
CMCIM is interactivity; thus, we start by pro
-viding a theory-based conceptualization of interactivity. Interactivity is a particularly 

dif˜cult construct to de˜ne because it has different meanings in different contexts, 

and thus is generally poorly understood [15, 19, 49, 59]. Some of the areas in which 

interactivity has been addressed include mass media, communication and interpersonal 

communication, marketing, advertising, electronic marketplaces, mobile commerce, 

CMC, education, and 
Web sites and the Internet [15, 16, 19, 43, 49, 56, 59, 60, 92, 
100, 101, 118]. Even though several typologies of interactivity have been created, little 

work has been done to theorize the causes and effects of interactivity. 
We believe this 
de˜ciency is due to the lack of a common de˜nition of interactivity, which makes it 

dif˜cult to build the cumulative tradition necessary for substantive theory building.
One reason for confusion and disparate interactivity research ˜ndings is that inter
-activity has been conceptualized on three different levels, and authors typically do not 

differentiate between these levels. 
The literature distinguishes the three levels of inter
-activity as a 
feature
 of technology, as a 
process
 of message exchange, or as something 
Figure 1. 
CMC Interactivity Model (
CMCIM) 160     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIEthat a user 
perceives 
after using a technology or going through a process [71]. 
We have not reviewed any empirical studies that combine all three perspectives; however, 
several authors and articles have mixed all three or at least two of these perspectives 

(e.g., [15, 16, 71]). 
We assert that all three are valid perspectives, are not mutually 
exclusive, and simply represent lenses from which one can study interactivity. 
For example, a feature of a technology can lead someone to perceive that the technology 

is interactive. 
Conversely, interactive features of a technology may not always lead 
to perceived interactivity [94]: users may perceive a highly interactive feature as an
-
noying rather than interactive, or they may not use the feature. 
We focus on features 
of a technology that can lead to 
perceived interactivity.
 Perceived interactivity is a 
meaningful construct because it accounts for only those features of a technology that 

actually lead to an increase in users™ perceptions of interactivity.
In addition to the three levels of interactivity, three major contexts of interactivity are 
discussed in the literature: (1)
 interpersonal, 
which refers to two-way and reciprocal 
communication between humans [8, 82, 101, 114]; (2)
 computer-mediated commu
-nication, in which computers mediate interpersonal communication (e.g., [15, 16]); 

and (3)
 mass media,
 which comprises one-way broadcasting and media interactions 
between people and 
Web sites (e.g., [101]). 
We disregard noninterpersonal interactivity, 
such as interactions between two computers, because it is outside of our social com
-
munication scope. 
We also do not address the process of 
CMC interactivity but instead 
address technological features that should give rise to interactivity perceptions. Given 

this focus, we carefully examined perceived interactivity literature that involves 
CMC, which led us to de˜ne three key subconstructs of interactivity, as similarly conceptual
-
ized by Liu [59]Štwo-way communication, control, and synchronicity.
Grounding Interactivity in Interpersonal 
Communication TheoryWe theoretically ground perceived 
CMC interactivity subconstructs in interpersonal 
interactivity theory and literature, because 
CMC interactivity is a specialized form of 
interpersonal interactivity. Perceived interactivity was originally based on the concept 

of communication ef˜cacy,
 or users™ beliefs of control and the recipient™s ability to 
process and act on a message [94]. In a 
CMC-supported work group context, the 
CMC technology will likely in˚uence the user™s perception of control and the recipient™s abil
-
ity to process and act on the message, as the 
CMC technology transmits and presents 
the message to the recipient. 
Therefore, we include 
ef˜cacy as a theoretical basis to 
de˜ne 
CMC interactivity. 
Furthermore, building on the organizational communication 
model and the interpersonal communication model, past research has included 
direction 
of communication 
as an additional theoretical basis for interactivity [94]. 
This theory 
relates to the communication channel™s ability to facilitate two-way communication 

[94]. Because 
CMC technologies facilitate two-way communication, we also include 
direction of communication
 as a theoretical basis to characterize CMC interactivity.
Both the direction of communication and ef˜cacy principles are necessary theoretical 
components for 
CMC interactivity. 
The direction of communication implies that an 
essential component of human-to-human interpersonal interaction is the participation 
 THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     161of two or more parties in a communication exchange as senders and receivers and vice 
versa [49, 52, 71]. 
Although necessary, the mere implementation of the direction of 
communication principle alone is not suf˜cient for effective communication to take 

place. 
Communication ef˜cacy is also required, and without ful˜llment of the direction 
of communication principle and communication ef˜cacy, effective communication 

cannot occur [75, 94].Communication ef˜cacy
 is a second-order construct comprising externally based 
ef˜cacy and internally based ef˜cacy. 
Externally based ef˜cacy
 refers to the receiver™s 
ability to process the sender™s message as useful input and then to act on or respond 

to it [94]. 
This message-response process is referred to as 
reciprocity
 in a great deal 
of literature [49]. Notably, a communication exchange may occur through verbal or 

written words, facial expressions, or kinesics [120]. 
Thus, the more a receiver is able 
to process various communication forms, the more externally based ef˜cacy can be 

supported. Internally based ef˜cacy
 is one™s personal sense of communication ef˜
-cacy, or one™s perception of control over where one is and where one is are going in 

communication [75, 94].Using the direction of communication and ef˜cacy principles, we now explain 
why we include two-way communication, control, and synchronicity as theoretical 

subconstructs of perceived interactivity and how it then acts to facilitate effective 

communication.Two-way communication 
allows one or more senders and one or more receivers to 
communicate with each other [15, 16, 59] and to engage in reciprocal communication 

that is responsive to the communicating parties™ needs [43, 71, 81]. 
Two-way commu
-nication captures both the ideas of communication (direction of communication) and 

reciprocity (externally based ef˜cacy) and thus is an important subconstruct of inter
-activity. 
Hence, two-way communication is necessary for effective communication.
Control
 is a subconstruct of interactivity that denotes in˚uence over the communica
-tion experience, emphasizing individual choice and lack of obligation in the interac
-
tion [43], including the abilities to interrupt and to be spontaneous and unpredictable 

[118]. Perceived control thus directly relates to the internally based ef˜cacy
 principle. Recall that internally based ef˜cacy is the user™s perception of control over where he 

or she is and where he or she is going [94]. Some researchers describe interactivity 

in a communication system as a function of control that users can exercise over the 

system environment [116]. In 
CMC contexts, one example of such control is that us
-ers can choose to submit text anonymously [19, 50]. 
Thus, control is necessary for 
effective communication.
Synchronicity 
is ﬁthe degree to which users™ input into a communication and the 
response they receive from the communication are simultaneousﬂ [60, p.
 55]. High perceived interactivity is contingent upon the continuity of communication or syn
-
chronicity. If synchronicity is low (e.g., there are delays in communication), the 

communication ˚ow will be hindered [116] and users will be more likely to devote 

their attentionŠwhich is critical to establishing high perceived interactivityŠelse
-
where. Synchronicity thus supports effective communication by acting as a support 

for two-way communication (supporting the direction of communication principle 
 162     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIEand externally based ef˜cacy) and control (supporting the internally based ef˜cacy 
principle).Combining the three subconstructs of interactivity, we adopt the de˜nition that 
inter-personal interactivity
 is two-way interpersonal ﬁcommunication that offers individuals 

active control and allows them to communicate both reciprocally and synchronouslyﬂ 

[59, p.
 208]. Notably, effective establishment of interpersonal interactivity supports 
the implementation of the direction of communication principle and communication 

ef˜cacy, both of which are requisite for effective communication.
 CMC interactivity
 
is interpersonal interactivity in the context of 
CMC. In summary, 
Liu [59] leads us to 
infer three postulates upon which we will build propositionsŠtwo-way communica
-
tion, control, and synchronicity all lead to increased CMC interactivity.
Impact of CMC Interactivity on 
Communication QualityIn this section, we extend our model to assert that 
CMC interactivity will increase 
CQ. 
We further explain our prediction of the effects of 
CMC interactivity on 
CQ through 
the interactional view
 of communication (e.g., [110]). 
A key axiom we borrow from 
this theoretical perspective is that one alone 
cannot communicate. In other words, all 
communication symbols (e.g., spoken, written, silence, analogical codes, relationship 

and environmental factors, etc.) are interpreted by others with whom one interacts, 

whether the interaction is intentional or unintentional. Originally, this axiom was as
-
sumed to be valid only if communicating parties were in the physical presence of one 

another. 
However, we propose that 
CMC allows an extension of virtual presence. In 
our context, 
CMC interactivity is a communication symbol that is interpreted by both 
the sender and receiver during a 
CMC communication exchange. 
This is consistent 
with prior research that explains how the properties of the medium used to transfer a 

message are interpreted by communication partners [94].A closer comparison of the ef˜cacy and direction of communication principles 
with the subconstructs of 
CQ explains how 
CMC interactivity will act as a commu
-nication symbol during an interaction and enhance 
CQ. 
We de˜ne 
CQ in the terms 
of communication openness, discussion ef˜ciency, and discussion effectiveness. 

CMC-supported interactions that exhibit high internal ef˜cacy will likely increase 
communication openness between group members: members are more likely to be 

open in communication when they feel they have control in the communication. 
High 
external ef˜cacy will improve the message sender™s perception of the recipient™s abil
-
ity to process and act on the message, thereby creating more effective and ef˜cient 

discussions. 
Likewise, direction of communication will likely enhance 
CQ in terms 
of communication openness, discussion ef˜ciency, and discussion effectiveness as 

users are more likely to productively participate in discussions if they believe the 

CMC technology is capable of facilitating communication between the senders and 
receivers and vice versa.
Thus, 
CMC interactivity produces a form of interpersonal communication, and 
communication signals sent via 
CMC technologies will be interpreted by the parties 
involved. 
However, in a 
CMC context, interactivity acts as a communication symbol 
 THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     163only if parties are in the virtual presence of each other (i.e., the 
CMC technology is 
running and participants are able to access it to communicate).A wealth of literature supports the notion that 
CMC interactivity can enhance inter
-personal communication. 
For example, 
CMC interactivity can send multiple verbal 
and nonverbal communication cues [15, 16, 118]. Multiple cues not only increase the 
quality of communication but also create a heightened sense of interpersonal connect
-
edness [43, 81], which in turn improves interaction and openness within a group. 
A high-quality group discussion involves multiple perspectives that provide more open
-
ness [15, 16]. 
Hence, increased 
CMC interactivity should directly increase 
CQ (P1).
Impact of Communication Quality on Process Satisfaction
In this section, we extend our model to propose that higher 
CQ increases PS using the 
foundation of expectations discon˜rmation theory. Spreng et al. [96] de˜ne s
atisfac-
tion as an affective state resulting from an emotional reaction to a product or service. 
PS is a subset of overall satisfaction and can be de˜ned as the degree to which group 

members are happy with the way (e.g., procedures, deliberations) they arrived at an 

outcome [84, 103]. 
Although PS can be conceptualized on many levelsŠsuch as on 
an information level or a system level [69]Šhere we focus solely on PS related to 

interaction and communication between group members.Currently, the yield shift theory [12] provides the most comprehensive theoretical 
model to explain the major satisfaction effects, which were previously explainable 

only through a combination of several independent models. 
The theory explains that 
satisfaction is a result of a shift in the utility people ascribe to their goals (the goal 

produces higher utility than expected), a shift in the likelihood people ascribe to their 

goals (goal attainment was less than likely but the goal was attained), or a change in 

the goals that comprise the goal set [12]. In our study, we are speci˜cally interested 

in how 
CQ affects PS through the discon˜rmation effect.
The discon˜rmation effect is similarly explained by ED
T, a popular satisfaction 
theory from marketing. 
Although ED
T is not as inclusive as the yield shift theory, it 
has been empirically tested and provides additional insights into the discon˜rmation 

effect. 
Therefore, we build on ED
T (e.g., [96]) as modi˜ed in an IS context by Bhat
-tacherjee [9], 
Liao et al. [57], and Mc
Kinney et al. [69].
1 Traditional ED
T distinguishes 
between discon˜rmation caused by expectations and discon˜rmation caused by desires. 

Both Liao et al. [57] and Mc
Kinney et al. [69] simplify traditional ED
T by referring 
to expectations
 alone.
2 The basic idea of this model is that people have an expecta
-tion about an experience, engage in the experience, assess the experience based on 

their initial expectations, and feel satisfaction to the extent that their expectations are 

positively or negatively discon˜rmed. 
This satisfaction then drives other behaviors, 
such as consumer repurchase, system adoption, and repeat Web site visits.Since PS is a subset of satisfaction, ED
T should also apply to the development of 
PS. In fact, ED
T-based models relating to system adoption and continuance developed 
by Bhattacherjee [9], 
Liao et al. [57], and Mc
Kinney et al. [69] conceptualize satisfac
-tion as process evaluation, not outcome evaluation, and thus predict PS, not outcome 
 164     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIEsatisfaction. 
We do the same here. 
This is an important distinction because people 
can be satis˜ed with an outcome while being entirely dissatis˜ed with the process or 
the system that led to that outcome. 
Thus, PS more strongly determines process and 
system adoption [85].Perceived performance
 is a person™s perception of how an experience ful˜lled his 
or her expectations [69]. 
A con˜rmation occurs when a person™s evaluation of an ex
-perience is the same as his or her preexperience expectations. 
Discon˜rmation results 
when the outcome of an experience differs from a person™s preexperience evaluation, 

and it can be either positive or negative. 
Positive discon˜rmation
 is overperformance, 
leading to increased PS, while 
negative discon˜rmation
 is underperformance, leading 
to decreased PS. Table 1 summarizes the potential PS outcomes from EDT.We now extend ED
T to explain how expectations of 
CQ in 
CMC interactivity affect 
PS. Based on our literature review, we de˜ne 
CQ in terms of three dimensionsŠ
communication openness, discussion ef˜ciency, and task-discussion effectiveness. 

Communication openness
 is the receptiveness of a group member to the communication 

of others [64, 77, 87]. One who is open to experience evaluates threats more accurately 

and tolerates change more maturely than someone who is more closed to experience. 

In an open environment, people are more able to explore their own ideas, the group™s 

perceptions of their ideas, and the ideas of others in the group [64]. 
Discussion ef
-˜ciency [25] re˚ects how results-oriented group members are, how effectively they 
spend time on interactions, how meaningful their interactions are, and how thoroughly 

they discuss issues. 
Task discussion effectiveness
 re˚ects the degree to which group 
members participate in the discussion, develop discussion content, exchange informa
-
tion, and examine issues and ideas effectively and critically [42, 63].
Table 1. Potential Outcomes in Our Application of EDT Expectations < Expectations = Expectations > perceived 
 perceived
 perceived
 performance performance performancePerceived 
 Negative
 Negative
 Positive
performance 
 discon˜rmation
 con˜rmation
 discon˜rmation
was not 
 (decreased PS) (decreased PS,
 (increased PS)desired  but not as 
  much as 
  negative 
  discon˜rmation)
Perceived 
 Positive
 Positive
 Negative
performance 
 discon˜rmation
 con˜rmation
 discon˜rmation
was desired
 (increased PS) (increased PS, 
 (decreased PS)  but not as 
  much as 
  positive 
  discon˜rmation)
 THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     165We rely on the assumption that group members expect 
CQ in terms of communica
-tion openness, discussion ef˜ciency, and task-discussion effectiveness. 
Therefore, the 
level of PS will be a function of the degree to which users™ expectations of 
CQ are 
positively discon˜rmed in a 
CMC context. Interactivity is grounded in interpersonal 
communication [15, 49], so people will naturally judge 
CMC interactivity against 
interpersonal communication. 
This assumption also concurs with the notion that ﬁhu
-man communication processes and outcomes vary systematically with the degree of 
interactivity that is afforded and/or experiencedﬂ [15, p.
 34]. Furthermore, a host of 
CMC interactivity literature asserts the importance of 
CMC interactivity resembling 
interpersonal communication [16, 43, 81, 118].However, the media used will temper expectations. 
For example, many people would 
have lower expectations for a 
CMC interaction that involves asynchronous e
-mail be
-cause they know that this is a socially lean form of communication. 
Conversely, they 
would likely have higher expectations for a 
CMC interaction involving synchronous 
chat with a parallel video feed. 
Therefore, higher 
CQ (from more 
CMC interactivity) 
than expected will result in higher satisfaction, whereas lower 
CQ than expected will 
result in lower satisfaction. 
Hence, we propose that increased 
CQ will increase PS 
with the interaction process (P2).Impact of Status Effects on 
CMC Interactivity Satisfaction
General Impact of Status Effects
Group effects due to differences in social status are called 
status effects 
[35]. S
tatus characteristics theory 
posits that status differences are communicated through a va
-riety of verbal and nonverbal cues that are not entirely voluntary [27]. 
Furthermore, it asserts that an individual™s referentsŠpeople whose status is signi˜cantly different 
than the individual™sŠmodify an individual™s group interactions, and that status is 

transferred from one task to another. 
Considerable research on status effects attests 
to the power and subtlety of social cues in shaping the tone and content of a group™s 

face-to-face communication patterns [35, 103, 104, 105, 113, 119]. 
Knotternus and 
Greenstein [51] extended the theory of expectation formation to status effects, ˜nd
-
ing that group members perceived the performance and interaction of others based 

on status stereotypes given from task information; this reinforcement exacerbated 

inequalities. 
Accordingly, status characteristics theory predicts that status effects 
negatively impact group interactions.
One common status effect is evaluation apprehension. 
Evaluation apprehension
 oc
-curs when group members withhold ideas because they fear criticism from other group 

members (particularly their ﬁreferentsﬂ) [30, 34]. 
Those who feel they cannot or do not 
want to communicate with group members do not feel the process is as open, fair, and 

satisfying as those who feel they can fully participate. 
Another common status effect is 
conformance pressure,
 which occurs when team members do not want to criticize or 

dissent from a group because of a desire to be polite or because of fear of retaliation 
or rejection [44]. Such pressure tends to increase in larger groups, especially when 
 166     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIEthere are status differences [28]. In congruence with status characteristics theory, group 
members are most susceptible to conformance pressure with their ﬁreferents.ﬂ 
A third 
common status effect is 
˜rst advocacy effect, 
in which the group member with the 
highest status tends to speak ˜rst and has more in˚uence than later advocates.
Status effects prevent members from fully contributing to a group, which negatively 
mediates the relationship between PS and 
CQ in terms of communication openness, 
discussion ef˜ciency, and task-discussion effectiveness. 
For example, status effects 
promote less equal participation among group members, leading to lower generation 

of high-quality ideas and lower communication openness [106]. Status effects also 

lead to less objective and honest evaluation of ideas, which decreases decision qual
-
ity and group performance [23], both of which relate to task-discussion effectiveness 

and discussion ef˜ciency. 
Holingshead [48] found that groups experiencing status 
effects made poorer decisions and communicated less about critical information than 

groups with no status effects. Poor information exchange, interactions, and outcomes 

are likely to decrease PS to the degree to which a group member experiences negative 

status effects from a referent. 
Thus, we propose that status effects will be a negative 
moderator between CQ and PS (P3).General Impact of Socially Lean Media on Status Effects
Given P3, we now explain and predict how the degree of social presence affects status 
effects. 
Social presence
 is the degree to which a medium facilitates awareness of other 
people and interpersonal relationships [38]. Status characteristics theory explains 

that status differences are communicated through a variety of verbal and nonverbal 

cues. Thus, status differences are harder to communicate in media with fewer cues. 
Group members actively seek information that con˜rms status stereotypes [51]. If 

this information is removed through socially lean media, then it will be dif˜cult to 

validate such stereotypes.
Our concept of socially lean media is a direct extension of social presence theory. 
Short et al. [90] ˜rst proposed the concept of 
social presence
 as the number and 
quality of communication channels available for transmitting verbal and nonverbal 

communication cues [64]. Biocca et al. later added that social presence provides a 

ﬁsense of being with anotherﬂ [10, p. 456]. In a CMC context, 
Lowry et al. provided 

a more precise de˜nition that we adopt in our study: The degree to which a communication medium allows group members to per
-ceive (sense) the actual presence of the communication participants and the 

consequent appreciation of an interpersonal relationship, despite the fact that 

they are located in different places, may operate at different times and that all 

communication is through digital channels. [64, p. 633]Hence, the degree to which 
CMC is socially lean in providing verbal and nonver
-bal social cues should determine the degree to which status effects can be mitigated. 

Complete anonymity is the most extreme form of social leanness, and the majority of 

evidence suggests that anonymity can be highly bene˜cial to large groups. 
Anonym
- THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     167ity can increase group members™ motivation to participate [31] because it diminishes 
status effects [30]. 
For example, anonymity may alleviate conformance pressure by 
shielding a contributor from a group™s reactions, thus providing lower status group 

members with more equality [28]. Dubrovsky et al.™s [35] work on 
CMC and status 
effects supports these claims. 
They found that 
CMC reduced social information, 
which reduced status effects. 
They also found that ˜rst advocacy effects were made 
more equal between high- and low-status participants. 
Tan et al.™s [104] studies in the 
United States and Singapore later showed that 
CMC™s status-reduction effects apply 
to both individualistic and collectivistic cultures.
However, other research indicates that there are some exceptions. 
Weisband [112] 
found that anonymity social cues were increased (not reduced) if groups were aware 

of status differences going into an anonymous interaction. 
Likewise, 
Holingshead [48] 
found that mixed-status groups shared less information and made inferior decisions 

compared to non-mixed-status groups, regardless of whether they communicated face 

to face or through 
CMC. Hence, status effect reduction is likely effective with 
CMC only to the degree that group members are unaware of status differences prior to an 

interaction. Socially lean 
CMC media may reduce status effects, but it may negatively 
affect 
CQ. Given these caveats, we propose that the degree of social leanness in a 
communication media determines the degree to which status effects can be reduced; 

conversely, more social presence should cause more status effects (P4).
Operationalizing CMCIM to Ultra-Lean Interactive Media
AGAIN
, TO
 TEST
 CMCIM, WE
 DECIDED
 TO
 USE
 some of the most socially lean 
CMC media 
available, which we call ultra-lean interactive media (
ULIM). Our basis for doing so 

is that if 
CMCIM holds for ultra-lean media, it is likely to hold for more interactive 
CMC as moderated by additional status effects. 
ULIM is in the broad family of 
CMC technology that has a wide range of social 
presence. On the high end of social presence are group support systems (GSS) and 

groupware. 
GSS are interactive media with high social presence that support highly 
collaborative group processes, including decision making [76]. Similarly, 
groupware 
provides highly interactive media with high social presence; however, it does not pro
-
vide advanced decision-making tools for the group. 
Although all of these technologies 
˜t into the 
CMC family, traditional 
CMC involves media with less social presence, 
such as e
-mail, instant messaging, hypertext/hypermedia, bulletin board systems, 
computerized conferencing, and chat.We de˜ne 
ULIM as interactive group media that can facilitate group interactions 
but that have the lowest level of social presenceŠeven lower than traditional 
CMC. Speci˜cally, 
ULIM does not support full-text input, voice input, or distributed work. 
Table
 2 summarizes social presence differences for these collaborative media. Several 
high-quality studies have focused on the richness and social presence of GSS, group
-
ware, and 
CMC (e.g., [17, 29, 86, 91]). Despite the depth of this research, we are not 
aware of any theoretical applications to 
ULIM technologies. It is also important to 
note that as more handheld devices are created (e.g., iPodŽ, iPhoneŽ, cell phones, 
 168     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIETable 2. Comparing Social Presence of Major CMC TechnologiesComparison item GSS Groupware
 Traditional CMC UL
IMExample technologies GroupSystems Lotus Notes, Groove,
 e-mail, EIES, instant
 CPS, e-instruction,
 Think Tank, Central 
 Collanos Workplace,
 messaging, blogs,
 iRespond, H-ITT Desktop, Huddle
 Skype group wikis
Social presence of media Extremely high Moderate to 
 Lean to moderately
 Ultra-lean social
  extremely high
 high presence*Quick feedback?
 Yes
 Yes
 Possible (not typical)
 Possible (not typical)
Multiple cues? High Moderate
 Low
 Very low (typically one)
Use of natural language?
 Yes (voice and text)
 Yes (voice and text)
 Partial (typically just text)
 No (no text, no voice)
Personal focus
 Extremely high Extremely high Moderate
 LowŠgroup summary 
    focus
Level of training needed 
 High High Low to moderate
 Extremely low
Typical input devices
 Keyboard, mouse, 
 Keyboard, mouse,
 Keyboard, mouse,
 Handheld wireless microphone, camera
 microphone, camera
 microphone, camera
 device only; proprietary*
Full text input capability?
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
 No*Audioconferencing?
 Yes
 Yes
 No NoVideo conferencing?
 Yes
 Yes
 No NoGroup awareness?
 Yes; high
 Yes; high
 Yes; moderate
 Partial*
Group memory; meeting
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes; not formalized
 Partial*
notes? THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     169Parallelism?
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
Anonymity?
 Yes; must choose
 Yes; must choose
 Yes; must choose
 Yes; default*
Requires facilitated support?
 Yes; unless using agents
 No No Yes*
Face-to-face work support?
 Yes (ideal condition)
 Yes
 No  Yes; only work mode*
Distributed work support?
 Yes (not ideal)
 Yes
 Yes (ideal condition)
 No (must be in same 
    location)*Supports communication 
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
 No*to speci˜c group members?
Synchronous support?
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
Asynchronous support?
 Yes
 Yes
 Yes
 No*Group outlining tools? Yes
 Partial
 No NoBrainstorming tools?
 Yes
 No No NoVoting tools?
 Yes
 No No Yes
Decision support tools?
 Yes
 Partial
 No Partial
Collaborative writing tools?
 Yes
 No No NoCollaborative modeling?
 Yes
 Partial
 No NoCustomizable group
 Yes
 Partial
 No Noprocesses?
Size of groups typically 
 3 to 20 (more is 3 to 20 (more is 2 to several hundred
 7 to several hundred
supported
 possible but not ideal)
 possible but not ideal)
  
(small groups not ideal)*
* Distinguishing feature of ULIM that is not found in GSS, groupware, or traditional 
CMC. 170     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIEBlackBerryŽ, etc.), the likelihood increases that the same device can play the role 
of ULIM or of much more advanced social presence technologies.
For the 
UL
IM in our context, we have chosen to use audience response system (
AR
S) 
technology, also known as personal response systems and group response systems. 
The 
system consists of small, handheld devices that allow simple, parallel text or numeric 

input from everyone involved in a meeting or group activity. 
ARS technologies are 
typically designed for large groups, which further creates socially lean conditions. Our 

operationalizations assume that the use of large 
AR
S groupsŠwhich are susceptible to 
interaction challengesŠshould result in perceptions of more interactivity than would 

happen in large non-
ARS groups.Group process losses and status effects tend to increase with group size, especially 
in large face-to-face groups [39, 107]. 
For example, large groups inhibit individual 
participation and create more communication dif˜culties than smaller groups [97]. 

These problems may lead to other serious dif˜culties in that, relative to smaller groups, 
larger groups tend to be less stable, create more stress, and experience more evalua
-
tion apprehension, social loa˜ng, and production blocking. 
As such, large groups are 
relatively inef˜cient and unproductive at many common tasks (e.g., [39, 97]). 
Human limitations in communication bandwidth and attention cause these problems because 

simultaneous cognitive activities can interfere with one another [3]. 
Although optimal 
group size is around ˜ve to six members for most interactions [45], we employ far 

larger groups for our operationalizations.
Although ARS provides low social presence, parallelism is a feature of 
ARS that 
should increase interactivity for large groups. 
Parallelism
 is the ability of group 
members to contribute information simultaneously [31]. Parallelism may cause 

information overload or reduced attention to important information [32]; however, 

it generally allows more opportunities for group members to participate at the same 

time [31]. 
Hence, parallelism in large 
ARS groups should provide more synchronic
-ity than in face-to-face groups. 
Also, because parallelism allows more opportunities 
for contributions, group members tend to perceive more control in group interactions 

[31]. Supporting research shows that socially lean media decision groups using 
CMC perceive signi˜cantly more control than face-to-face decision groups [108]. 
For ex
-ample, Walther [108, 109] proposed that lean media allow people to better control 
information and interaction with others, which is actually more engaging and satisfying 

than in face-to-face interactions. 
Walther notes that nonverbal signals can create less 
control, more complexity, and higher expectations in face-to-face interactions and 

that these are not present in lean media interactions. 
Research has found that socially 
lean media groups can process information [86] and support knowledge sharing [55] 

better than rich-media groups for similar reasons.Parallelism should also result in reduced cognitive interference because participants 
do not have to wait to contribute their ideas. 
Cognitive interference
 occurs when the 
idea generation of a group interferes with the idea generation of individuals [30]. 
This occurs because people have limited ability to concentrate and cannot divide their at
-
tention among multiple con˚icting concepts. It may also occur because of cognitive 
 THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     171inertia. Cognitive inertia
 happens when groups focus on a limited aspect of an overall 
task, creating a group mental rut [30]. 
The reduction in production blocking, cognitive 
interference, and cognitive inertia should result in better two-way communication. 
Summarizing all the support in this section, we predict the following:
Hypothesis 1: Large ARS groups will perceive greater interactivity than will large, 

verbally interacting groups.
Given P1ŒP4 and the operationalizations of 
CQ, we predict the following:
Hypothesis 2: Large ARS groups that perceive increased interactivity will perceive 

greater increased CQ than will large, verbally interacting groups.
Hypothesis 3: Large ARS groups that perceive increased CQ will perceive greater 
increased PS than will large, verbally interacting groups.
Hypothesis 4: Increased perceived status effects in large ARS groups will de
-crease the strength of the relationship between CQ and PS (acting as a negative 

moderator).
Finally, to operationalize P4 in our context, we emphasize that interactions via 
ARS are naturally going to be more socially lean than verbal interactions. 
ARS do 
not support rich text input. Often they only support numeric input, and at most they 

support basic text input but no multimedia input (e.g., voice, sound, visual). 
All ARS support anonymity by allowing those who provide input not to be identi˜ed. 
Hence, we hypothesize the following:
Hypothesis 5: Large ARS groups will perceive fewer status effects than will large, 

verbally interacting groups.
MethodDesignTHIS
 STUDY
 EM
PLOYED
 A QUASI
-EX
PERIMENTAL
 nonequivalent groups design with multiple 
outcome measures, which is appropriate when random assignment is not possible. 
Two large sections met for two instructional quarters of the same course: large-group 
interaction without 
ARS (control group) and large-group interaction with 
ARS (treat
-ment group).Participants
A total of 346 undergraduate business majors at a large public, southern 
California uni
-versity participated, providing more than adequate a priori power.
3 All participants were 
enrolled in one of two sections of the same introductory-level IS course. Participants™ 

gender was 60.7 percent male and 39.3 percent female. 
Average age was 22 (standard 
 172     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIEdeviation [SD]
 = 2.8). Average grade point average (GP
A) was 3.01 (SD
 = 0.44). Ethic distribution was 
Asian (49.7 percent), 
Caucasian (16.5 percent), 
Hispanic (15.0 
percent), African (1.7 percent), and other/no response (17.1 percent).CMC ARS ToolWe used the 
CMC AR
S tool 
Classroom Performance System (
CPS) by eInstruction Inc. 
for this research. 
CPS provided all group members with a small, handheld, eight-button 
response pad that transmitted an infrared signal to a receiver connected to the facilita
-tor™s computer. 
The system™s software recorded participant responses and graphically 
displayed results in real time.The instructor used 
CPS to create text questions with answer choices that participants 
could select with their response pads. Question types included true/false, yes/no, and 

multiple choice ranging from two to ˜ve possible answer combinations. 
Text questions 
and answers could be augmented with graphics. 
The questions were displayed via 
computer projection. 
When used in conjunction with other software, such as Microsoft 
PowerPoint, a 
CPS toolbar allowed the facilitator to toggle between the presentation 
and CPS questions and answers. CPS provided an anonymous response mode.
As soon as the question is displayed, the system accepts responses. 
Responses trans
-mitted prior to the start of the question were ignored. 
The facilitator sets the duration 
of questions, and participants can respond whenever the question timer is running or is 

paused. All responses were recorded well within the allotted 45 seconds, thereby provid
-ing a high degree of parallelism and synchronicity in the participants™ responses.
Treatment and Control ProceduresTreatment groups used our selected 
AR
S (less social presence, more interaction 
opportunity) whereas control groups used verbal interaction (more social presence, 

less interaction opportunity). 
This study was designed to alleviate the differences in 
presentation style that could in˚uence participants™ perceptions of the 
ARS. Both the 
treatment and the control sessions were from the same course and had the same facilita
-
tor, discussions, assessments, and projects. Both treatments met at a similar time of day 

and week for a total of 30 sessions that lasted approximately one hour and ˜ve minutes 

for 10 weeks. Daily session attendance ranged from 125 to 155 participants.The research was conducted in a 180-seat music recital hall with tiered, theater-
type seating facing a 45-foot-wide stage with a large projection screen. 
The facilitator 
stood at ground level in front of the stage and presented written content and interactive 

questions via a laptop and 
LCD projector. 
The facilitator™s laptop was located on the 
podium, and the LCD projector was on a movable cart.
TreatmentParticipants in the treatment group were required to purchase response pads and 
register them on the Internet for approximately $20. 
The response pads were used for 
 THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     173recording attendance, taking nine ˜ve-point quizzes, and answering questions asked 
during lectures and discussions.Participants were given 30 to 45 seconds to answer questions using their response 
pads. At the end of the response period, a histogram displayed the number of partici
-pants who had selected each answer choice.The ARS software also facilitated discussions. During discussions, the facilitator 
would ask a question soliciting experience or opinions. 
To choose a participant to 
share his or her ideas, the software randomly selected a student from the class list and 

projected his or her name on the screen.Technology failures typically consisted of participants forgetting to bring their 
response pads to sessions, batteries running low, and slow computer reception. 
The software froze twice during the 10-week course, causing a loss of information and 

the need to readminister a quiz.ControlThe intention of the control group design and procedures was to make the non-
ARS sessions in every way similar to the treatment group, with the important exception that 

the participants would not use 
ARS devices for interaction. 
This ensured that differ
-ences in outcomes could be best attributed to use or non-use of 
ARS.Participants in the control group were asked the same questions at the same points 
in the lectures and discussions as those in the treatment group. 
The questions were 
projected using the same 
ARS software as the treatment group; however, instead of 
responding with handheld 
AR
S devices, control group participants responded by raising 
their hands when the facilitator read the answer choice. Because responses were not 

transmitted to the laptop, there was no histogram of answers; however, participants 

could physically see how many of their peers were raising their hands for a particular 

answer, and the facilitator verbally explained correct answers. 
Thus, the participants 
and their responses were not fully anonymous and had more social presence.
To mimic the random selection of participants, the facilitator generated a random 
list of participants before each session, and then simply called on participants from 

the list. 
Attendance at the control sessions was virtually the same as at the treatment 
sessions.MeasuresWe measured the second-order construct of interactivity with a reliable, 
Web-based instrument, using 
Liu™s measures of interactivity [59]. PS was measured using a 
validated scale derived from 
Tan et al. [102]. Status effects were measured using an 
instrument created and validated by Davison [25] that identi˜ed four components of 

status effects: (1)
 attempts to intimidate others; (2)
 using in˚uence, status, or power 
to force issues on others; (3)
 inhibiting other group members from participation; and 
(4) pressuring others to conform to a particular view. 
These four components closely 
mirror the outcomes of several common status effects such as evaluation apprehension, 
 174     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIEconformance pressure, ˜rst advocacy effect, and so on. 
Finally, we operationalized 
CQ as a second-order construct with three reliable and validated subconstructs and 
related measures: communication openness, discussion ef˜ciency, and task-discussion 

effectiveness. 
The Appendix provides details on the measurement scales.
AnalysisTesting Nonequivalent Groups
QUASI
-EX
PERIMENTS
 CAN
 APP
ROACH
 THE
 VALIDITY
 of controlled, randomized experiments 
as long as they have high participation rates and no major environmental differences 
exist that will likely skew the results. 
We analyzed and compared the demographic 
nature of the two condition groups to determine if there were signi˜cant differences 

in the nonequivalent groups that would bias outcome measure results. Our analysis 

found no statistical difference in any major demographic variables, including mean 

GPA, mean course grade, age, and ethnic distribution.
Establishing Factorial Validity
A key step before assessing factorial validity, which has recently come to light in 

IS research, is to determine which constructs are formative and which are re˚ective 

[33, 65], as each type has to be analyzed differently.
4 We used Diamantopoulos and 
Winklhofer [33] as the basis to determine which constructs are formative and which 
are re˚ective. 
All of our constructs were re˚ective, with the exception of discussion 
ef˜ciency and PS. Interactivity is a second-order construct made up of the ˜rst-order 

re˚ective constructs synchronicity, two-way communication, and control. 
CQ is a 
second-order construct made up of the ˜rst-order formative construct discussion ef
-
˜ciency and the ˜rst-order re˚ective constructs communication openness and task 

discussion effectiveness.
Factorial Validity of 
Re˚ective 
ConstructsWe then performed con˜rmatory factor analysis (
CFA
) on the re˚ective constructs to 
establish factorial validity, following the procedures as outlined in Gefen and Straub 
[40] and Straub et al. [99]. 
We ˜rst established convergent validity. 
According to Gefen 
and Straub, ﬁconvergent validity is shown when each of the measurement items loads 

with a signi˜cant 
t-value on its latent constructﬂ [40, p. 93]. 
To do so, we generated 
a bootstrap with 200 resamples. 
We then examined the 
t-values of the outer model 
loadings; all of the outer loadings were signi˜cant at the 0.05 
 level. 
These results 
indicate strong convergent validity in our model for the constructs.
To establish discriminant validity of our indicators, we used two common techniques: 
(1) correlating the latent variable scores and (2)
 calculating the average variance ex
-tracted (
AVE). The ˜rst approach requires one to generate correlations of the latent 
variable scores with all the measurement items. 
These correlations represent a 
CFA
  THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     175where the correlations are the actual loadings. Exact guidelines on this have not yet 
been established, but the fundamental idea is that ﬁall the loadings of the measurement 

items on their assigned constructs should be an order of magnitude larger than any 

other loadingﬂ [40, p. 93]. 
Using latent variable scores, strong discriminant validity 
was established for all items except for the ˜fth item of synchronicity, which we 

therefore dropped. The second approach that we used to establish discriminant validity was the 
AVE test. ﬁ
Conceptually, the 
AVE test is equivalent to saying that the correlation of the 
construct with its measurement items should be larger than its correlation with the 

other constructsﬂ [40, p. 94], which is similar to correlation tests with multitrait-

multimethod (M
TMM) matrices. 
The 
AVE is calculated through P
LS-Graph by 
computing the variances shared by the items of a particular construct (see 
Table 3). To establish discriminant validity, the diagonal elements must be greater than the off-
diagonal elements for the same row and column. 
The 
AVE analysis showed very strong 
discriminant validity for all subconstructs and thus further con˜rmed our choices of 

items to retain and drop.Finally, we established the reliability of the measures. 
Reliability refers to the degree 
to which a scale yields consistent and stable measures over time [98]. Partial least 

squares (P
LS) computes a composite reliability score (similar to 
Cronbach™s 
 in that 
both are measures of internal consistency) as part of its integrated model analysis (see 

Table 4). Speci˜cally, composite reliability is an index that re˚ects the impact of error 
on the measure [83]. Each construct in our research model demonstrated high levels 

of reliability that exceeded the standard thresholds.
Factorial Validity of 
Formative 
ConstructsValidating formative indicators is more challenging than validating re˚ective indicators 
because the established procedures to determine the validity of re˚ective measures 

do not apply to formative measures [79, 99], and because the procedures validating 

formative measures are less known and established [33]. 
Formative measures are 
particularly challenging because they can move in different directions, and they can 

theoretically covary with other constructs; thus, construct validity and reliability do 

not apply as easily or as readily, and procedures other than the traditional procedures 

for convergent and discriminant validity must be used [67, 79].
Researchers have traditionally used theoretical reasoning to support the validity of 
formative constructs [33], although there are approaches beyond theoretical reason
-
ing alone [67, 79]. 
Although no single technique is widely accepted for validating 
formative measures, the modi˜ed M
TMM approach, as presented in 
Loch et al. [61] 
and Marakas et al. [67], is a promising solution that we followed.
For re˚ective measures, loadings are used because they ﬁrepresent the in˚uence of 
individual scale items on re˚ective constructs; P
LS weights represent a comparable 

in˚uence for formative constructs [11]ﬂ [61, p. 49]. 
For formative items, we created 
new values that were the product of the original item values by their respective P
LS 
weights (representing each item™s weighted score). 
We then created a composite score 
 176     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIETable 3. Discriminant Validity 
Through the Square Root of AVE 1 2 3 4 5 61. Control
 AVE = 0.507 
 (0.712)2. Two-way communication
 0.547 AVE = 0.528 
  (0.727)3. Synchronicity
 0.469 0.605 AVE = 0.655 
   (0.809)4. Communication openness
 0.271 0.324 0.337 AVE = 0.769 
    (0.877)5. Discussion ef˜ciency
 0.255 0.391 0.455 0.640 AVE = 0.828 
     (0.910)6. Status effects
 Œ0.117 Œ0.260 Œ0.168 0.245 0.179 AVE = 0.803 
      (0.896)Notes: The AVE square roots are shown in parentheses. Off-diagonal elements represent the correlations between the constructs.
 THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     177for each construct by summing all the weighted scores for a construct. 
Finally, we 
produced correlations of these values, providing intermeasure and item-to-construct 
correlations.To test convergent validity, we checked whether all the items within a construct 
highly correlate with each other, and whether the items within a construct correlate 

with their construct value.
5 This was true in all cases, inferring convergent validity. 
We 
would ideally want interitem correlations to be higher within a given construct, but this 

cannot be strictly enforced as there are exceptions depending on the theoretical nature 

of the formative measure [33, 61]. 
Also, large matrices will introduce exceptions that 
are not necessarily meaningful, and thus careful theoretical judgment needs to be used 

before removing any items [33, 61, 67, 79]. 
Thus, we believe the most meaningful 
discriminant validity check with formative measures is to look at the degree to which 

items within a construct correlate to a given construct.
Finally, we used another approach to assess formative validity as suggested by Petter 
et al. [79], which involves testing the multicollinearity among the indicators. 
This is particularly important with formative indicators because multicollinearity poses 

a much greater problem than it does with re˚ective indicators. 
Hence, low levels of 
multicollinearity are usually indicated with levels of the variance in˚ation factor (VI
F) below 10, but in the case of formative indicators, the VI
F levels need to be below 3.3 

for a more stringent test [79]. In our case, the VI
F between the two constructs was 

1.0, which is far below 3.3.
In sum, using M
TMM analysis and assessing VI
F levels, we conclude that reason
-able discriminant validity exists with our formative constructs. 
Finally, because of the 
nature of formative measures, reliability checks cannot be reasonably made [33].
Testing for Common Method BiasBecause the self-reported data was collected using a paper-based survey with similar-

in-appearance scales, we tested for common method bias to establish that it was not 

a likely factor in our data collection. 
To do so, we used two approaches. 
The ˜rst 
approachŠwhich is increasingly in disputeŠwas to conduct 
Harman™s single-factor 
Table 4. Composite ReliabilityConstruct  Composite(latent variable)
 reliabilityControl 0.800Two-way communication
 0.870Synchronicity 0.883Communication Openness
 0.943Discussion ef˜ciency 0.828Status effects
 0.942 178     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIEtest [80]. 
This test required that we run an exploratory, unrotated factor analysis on 
all of the ˜rst-order constructs. 
The aim of the test is to see if a single factor emerges 
that explains the majority of the variance in the model. If so, then common method 
bias likely exists on a signi˜cant level. 
The result of our factor analysis produced 27 
distinct factors, the largest of which only accounted for 29.89 percent of the variance 

of the model.The second approach, which is more accepted, was simply to examine a correla
-tion matrix of the constructs (see measurement model statistics) and to determine if 

any of the correlations were above 0.90; if so, this quali˜es as strong evidence that 

common method bias exists [78]. In no case did our correlations reach this threshold. 

Not surprisingly, the highest correlations were with related ˜rst-order constructs that 

belonged to the same second-order construct. 
A more advanced approach has been 
proposed in Podsakoff et al. [80], but unfortunately, it was designed for models with 

re˚ective indicators only, not for mixed models such as ours. Given that our data 

passed both tests of common method bias, we conclude that there is little reason to 

believe the data exhibit negative effects from common method bias.
Manipulation ChecksGiven the strong validation results, we next performed the manipulation check. 
We predicted that the control condition would have lower perceived interactivity than the 

treatment condition (
H1); therefore, it was crucial to ensure a signi˜cant interactiv
-
ity difference existed between these conditions. 
The average perceived interactivity 
for the control condition was 5.1 (SD
 = 0.95) and 5.31 (SD
 = 0.79) for the treatment 
condition. 
Analysis of variance (
ANOV
A) showed that this difference was statistically 
signi˜cant (
F(1, 344)
 = 4.67, p = 0.03). We thus conclude that the expected manipulation 
of interactivity differences was successful and that 
H1 is supported.H5 also provides a useful manipulation check because it predicts that large groups 
using ARS will perceive fewer status effects than verbally interacting groups of the 
same size because 
ARS removes social cues and social presence. 
The difference be
-tween perceived status effects in the control condition (
 = 2.70, SD
 = 1.46) and the 
treatment condition (
 = 2.12, SD
 = 1.27) was in the predicted direction and statisti
-cally signi˜cant (F(1,344) = 13.41, p = 0.000). Thus, H5 was supported.
Testing the Baseline and Interaction ModelGiven the manipulation checks, we then tested the path model. 
We performed our 
PLS analysis, using P
LS-Graph version 3.0. P
LS is especially suited for early theory 

developmentŠsuch as the research gathered hereŠas opposed to situations in which 

theory is highly developed and further testing and extension is the objective. In such 

cases, maximum likelihood or generalized least squares are often preferred [20, 21, 

40]. P
LS is particularly helpful in cases that use interaction terms and a mix of forma
-
tive and re˚ective indicators [21], as ours does.
 THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     179Because we theorized a model that includes interaction terms (status effects), also 
known as moderators, we followed the latest techniques for testing these terms by 
creating both a baseline model and an interaction model, using the product-indicator 

approach detailed in 
Chin et al. [21]. 
A hierarchical process similar to that used in 
˜rst-generation statistical techniques assesses whether or not moderators exist in 

a model. 
First, two modelsŠone with the moderator relationship and one without 
[21]Šare constructed and compared. In creating the baseline model, the main effects 

of the interaction term need to be included; thus, status effects are included. 
We also 
added age, years of education, years of work experience, and computer experience 

as potential covariates.
The interaction term approach that we used to test our model is the well-accepted 
product-indicator approach proposed by 
Chin et al. [21] because it is the most effective 
approach in identifying interaction terms in complex path models. 
This approach adds 
three critical improvements to measuring interaction effects. 
First, this approach mod
-els paths between each exogenous and endogenous constructŠa critical step because 

ﬁwhen the main effect variables are missing in the analysis, interaction path coef˜cients 

are not true interaction effectsﬂ [21, p. 196]. Second, it standardizes or centers the 

individual items for the moderation scores.
6 Third, no information is eliminated from 
the model. 
All of the interaction indicators stand alone without being summarized and 
are free to vary on their own to take advantage of P
LS analysis.Adding the product-indicator interaction terms dramatically increases the number 
of indicators in the overall model to 159 indicators. Notably, the interaction of status 

effects and 
CQ was signi˜cant at an 
 protection level of 0.05 (
t = 2.85). As expected 
[21], adding in the interaction term decreased the strength of the path between 
CQ and PS from the baseline model (0.798 to 0.699); the 
R2 for PS also increased from 
0.651 to 0.668. 
Finally, in the interaction model, the negative path between status 
effect and PS is now signi˜cant (
t = 2.80). Our signi˜cant interaction had an effect 
size of …
 2 = 0.05 for a small interaction effect;
7 however, even small effects using the 
product-indicator approach indicate important model relationships [21].Figure 2 summarizes the results of the interaction model. Variance explained is indi
-cated for each construct as 
R2. The path coef˜cients, or 
s, are indicated on the paths 
between two constructs, along with their direction and signi˜cance. 
The signi˜cance of 
the path estimates was calculated using a bootstrap technique with 200 resamples.
Mediation CheckAs a ˜nal theoretical test, the nature of our model requires us to check our theorized 
mediating effects of 
CQ. We follow the simple test of mediation proposed by Baron 
and Kenny [5].
8 Full mediation occurs when the independent variable no longer has 
a signi˜cant effect when the mediator is included; partial mediation occurs when the 

independent variable still has a signi˜cant effect but its effect is diminished.
Based on these rules, we tested for mediation. 
First, the unmediated path between 
interactivity PS (still including covariates and the interaction terms) had a signi˜cant 

 of 0.460 and produces an 
R2 of 0.537 for PS. 
When the mediation relationship with 
 180     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIEFigure 2. 
Model with Interactions of Status Effects 
Using Product-Indicator ApproachNotes: The second-order formative constructs of interactivity and communication quality are indicated in the model by dotted lines. Interactivity is composed 
of the re˚ective ˜rst-order constructs of control, synchronicity, and two-way communication. 
Communication quality is composed of the ˜rst-order formative 
construct of discussion ef˜ciency and the re˚ective constructs of communication openness and task discussion effectiveness. ns
 = not signi˜cant; ** p 0.01; *** p < 0.001. THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     181CQ was added, the new paths were signi˜cant (interactivity to 
CQ has a 
 of 0.693 
and CQ to PS has a 
 of 0.648). Moreover, the direct path between interactivity and 
PS became insigni˜cant with a 
 of 0.068. Meanwhile, the new 
R2 for PS increased 
to 0.672. 
These results validate our model by providing strong evidence that 
CQ acts 
as a full mediator and that predicting a direct relationship between interactivity and 
PS is suboptimal and theoretically unsupported.Finally, 
Table 5 summarizes the measurement model statistics and 
Table 6 summa
-rizes the propositions, the path coef˜cients, and the t-values for each path.
DiscussionSummary of ResultsTHE
 PUR
POSE
 OF
 OUR
 STUDY
 WAS
 TO
 PRO
POSE
 and test 
CMCIM, which explains and pre
-dicts how interactivity increases 
CQ and subsequently leads to increased PS in 
CMC groups. CMC systems employ a wide range of communication technologies that are 
generally leaner than face-to-face communication. 
Furthermore, the challenges of 
communication increase with group size. 
Thus, we chose to test 
CMCIM under the 
extreme case of very large groups using ultra-lean 
CMC technologies (
ULIM), on 
the basis that if our model holds under these conditions, it will likely hold under less 
adverse conditions.
The results of our study support our hypothesis that large 
AR
S groups perceive more 
interactivity than large, verbally interacting groups (
H1). We found that perceived 
interactivity leads to an increase in perceived 
CQ (
H2). Likewise, perceived 
CQ was 
found to be a signi˜cant positive predictor of PS (
H3). 
We also found that status effects 
negatively moderate the relationship between 
CQ and PS (
H4). The full interaction 
model revealed that status effects directly decrease PS. 
Finally, large groups using 
AR
S perceived fewer status effects than large, verbally interacting groups (
H5). Figure 3 depicts the re˜ned path model that summarizes the results of the tested hypotheses, 

and outlines our ˜nal proposed version of 
CMCIM.Contributions to 
Theory and PracticePS is a particularly important phenomenon of interest because our literature review 

indicates that PS is a key determinant of system adoption and system continuance. 

Our quasi-experiment to test 
CMCIM intentionally centered on ultra-lean interactive 
media (
ULIM). Our operationalization of 
ULIM involved an 
ARS that consisted of 
handheld devices with extremely limited media capabilities that were designed for 

large-group settings, which is also useful because little theoretical work has been 

conducted with large groups using 
ULIM. Every portion of 
CMCIM was empirically 
supported in our studied context. Our experimental controls increased the likelihood 

that parallelism accounted for the predicted interactivity differences. Since parallelism 

can be used in many different ways by different 
CMC tools (e.g., chat, brainstorming, 
instant messaging) and devices of various levels of social presence (e.g., cell phones, 
 182     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIETable 5. Measurement Model Statistics (n = 346)  StandardConstruct  deviation
 1 2 3 4 5 6 71. Control
 4.97 1.142. Two-way communication
 5.13 1.20 0.5473. Synchronicity
 5.12 1.22 0.469 0.6054. Task discussion effectiveness
 4.97 1.18 0.338 0.508 0.4025. Communication openness
 4.50 1.72 0.271 0.324 0.337 0.4186. Discussion ef˜ciency
 4.78 1.74 0.255 0.391 0.455 0.486 0.6407. Status effects (7)
 2.21 1.59 Œ0.117 Œ0.260 Œ0.168 Œ0.065 0.245 0.1798. PS
 5.18 1.34 0.364 0.490 0.429 0.733 0.519 0.582 Œ0.062 THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     183ARS, laptops), our ˜ndings will likely have a wide application in practice. 
We also 
provide several other contributions to theory and practice.
First, we further clarify and validate the nature of interactivity in a 
CMC context, 
which reduces the ambiguity in the extant literature. Because 
CMC interactivity is a 
specialized form of interpersonal interactivity, we theoretically base 
CMC interactivity 
on two principles borrowed from interpersonal interactivity theoryŠcommunication 
ef˜cacy and direction of communication. In doing so, we validate perceived interac
-
tivity as a second-order construct made up of three re˚ective subcontractsŠtwo-way 

communication, synchronicity, and control. 
We found that 
ARS did indeed create 
higher levels of perceived interactivity in large groups compared to large groups 

interacting verbally only (
H1).Table 6. Summary of Path 
Coef˜cients and Signi˜cance Levels
 Expected Path
 t-value
Hypotheses and corresponding paths sign coef˜cient (df = 345)H3: Interactivity 
 CQ + 0.697 13.63***H4: CQ 
 PS + 0.699 15.29***H5: Status effects negatively moderates 
 Œ (Œ0.180) 2.85** the relationship between CQ and PS
 Two-way communication is a ˜rst-order 
 + 0.495 44.18*** factor of interactivity
 Synchronicity is a ˜rst-order factor of
 + 0.367 34.90*** interactivity
Control is a ˜rst-order factor of
 + 0.321 28.38*** interactivity
Discussion ef˜ciency is a ˜rst-order + 0.289 26.50*** factor of CQ
Communication openness is a ˜rst-order
 + 0.465 29.65*** factor of CQ
Task discussion effectiveness is a
 + 0.421 49.30*** ˜rst-order factor of CQ
** p < 0.01; *** p < 0.001.Figure 3. 
Re˜ned Version of 
CMCIM 184     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIENext, we explained the connection between interactivity and 
CQ. The interactional 
view of communication suggests one cannot 
not communicate and all communication 
signals are interpreted by the parties involved in the communication exchange [110]. 
In accordance with this axiom, the de˜ning principles of interactivity, ef˜cacy, and 

direction of communication explain that interactivity subconstructs may act as com
-
munication signals that are interpreted by parties involved in 
CMC communication 
exchanges as predicted: increases in perceived interactivity led to increased perceived 

CQ (H2).We then explained the connection between communication and PS based on an in
-novative extension of ED
T (e.g., [69, 96]) and the assumption that people will judge 

CMC interactivity in terms of interpersonal communication and the kind of media used. 
In doing so, we illustrated that increased perceived 
CQ leads to increased PS (
H3). Satisfaction has been shown to positively affect software adoption [84, 85], 
Web site 
adoption [57], perceived usefulness and perceived ease of use [115], system continu
-
ance after adoption [9], interpersonal trust [68], and trust related to systems [70]. 
Thus, 
increased satisfaction could also increase group cohesiveness, group members™ desire 

to work together again, and the group™s decision-implementation capabilities.
Moreover, we extended status characteristics theory [27] to explain and predict that 
status effects encountered during a group™s communication process can diminish PS. 

We found that status effects not only negatively moderated the relationship between 
CQ and PS (
H4) but also decreased PS directly. 
Finally, we combined status characteristics 
theory [27] and social presence theory [73] to explain and predict that the more socially 

lean an interaction, the fewer status effects participants will perceive. 
Consistent with 
this prediction, we found that large groups using 
ARS had fewer perceived negative 
status effects than large, verbally interacting groups (
H5).Using lean media to diminish status effects is of great practical importanceŠ
especially in large groups where status effects, such as evaluation apprehension, 

intimidation, dominance, and so forth, can be even stronger than in smaller groups. 

Such decreases in status effects create enhanced group member experiences that 

lead to increased satisfaction and decreased negative behaviors that diminish group 

performance, such as conformance pressure, cognitive inertia, cognitive interference, 

production blocking, advocacy effects, and so on.
Another practical contribution is our explanation of anonymity as a key factor de
-termining the level of social presence and subsequent status effects in 
ULIM groups. 
Verbal interaction alone in very large groups can be very intimidating; in mixing ver
-bal interaction with 
ULIM interaction, we saw fewer status effects due to diminished 
social presence.Limitations and Future ResearchDespite the contributions of this research, there are several limitations and future 

research opportunities. 
First, the 
ARS we employed uses a multiple-choice question 
format. 
Although this method works well for assessing basic conceptual understanding, 
it is harder to implement for questions that require a higher order of reasoning and 
 THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     185integration. Such questions could cause pacing problems: more integrative questions 
take more time to answer, and if the facilitator waits for everyone to respond, there 

can be considerable delays. 
Future research should devise tasks that maximize the 
bene˜ts of 
ARS. Similarly, we are not certain we had the ideal mix of verbal interac
-tion and 
ARS interaction. Our sessions did not replace all verbal interaction with 
ARS interactionŠparticipants could still use both. Our study cannot prescribe the ideal mix 

of ARS and verbal interaction.
This study has made a strong theoretical and empirical case that 
ARS can provide 
increased interactivity though parallelism and decreased status effects through anonym
-
ity. 
However, we did not control these features individuallyŠa group either used both 
or neither. It might be useful for future research to see how each individually affects 

interactivity and status effects. 
For example, researchers could conduct a laboratory 
experiment that varies social presence to study the importance of anonymity with an 

ARS.The large groups that we studied were in large lecture auditoriums, whereas many 
opportunities exist to test 
CMCIM with other kinds of groups. 
CMCIM could be tested 
for the potential to extend 
ULIM to many industry and government applications, such 
as large-scale consulting engagements, company meetings, executive strategy develop
-
ment sessions, focus groups, and customer feedback sessions. Increased interactivity, 

along with the associated increase in participation by large-group members, would 

likely improve decision-making results, but no clear empirical evidence exists to sup
-
port this assertion. 
ULIM may also have promise in involving large groups of users 
and developers in large-scale software development in requirements gathering and 

enterprise resource planning (E
RP) software implementation. Other research could 

examine the generalizability of 
CMCIM in other group contexts, such as medium or 

small groups using richer CMC technologies.In our study, we focused on how PS is a function of the degree to which users™ ex
-pectations of 
CQ are con˜rmed or discon˜rmed. 
Future research could examine how 
CQ may be applied to the yield shift theory [12]. 
For example, 
CQ may in˚uence PS 
by increasing the utility people ascribe to their goals, changing the goals that comprise 

their active goal set, or increasing the likelihood people ascribe to achieving their goals. 

In addition to providing a more comprehensive explanation of satisfaction effects, 

this research could provide valuable insights on other important managerial factors 

such as how 
CQ can increase con˜dence in, and dedication to, team decisions, both 
of which could possibly be theoretically explained by the three yield shifts described 

by Briggs et al. [12].Finally, recent research by Brown et al. [13] indicates that in utilitarian decision-
making contexts, ED
T may not be the best explanation for predicting satisfaction. 

Brown et al. tested three different models for explaining satisfactionŠthe discon˜r
-mation, experiences-only, and ideal-point models. ED
T accounts for both the dis
-
con˜rmation- and experiences-only models. In addition to predicting that a positive 

expectations discon˜rmation yields satisfaction, ED
T predicts performance has a 
direct and independent in˚uence on satisfaction. 
However, Brown et al. showed that 
in a utilitarian software adoption context, expectations discon˜rmation is not nearly 
 186     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIEas important in determining satisfaction as is good performance. 
We did not directly 
measure expectations discon˜rmation, so future research should consider whether 
both constructs contribute to increased PS, or whether communication performance 

alone leads to greater PS.ConclusionTHIS
 STUDY
 PRO
POSES
 AND
 PROVIDES
 initial support for 
CMCIM, which explains and pre
-dicts how interactivity, 
CQ, and status effects impact PS in groups. 
We studied 
CMCIM 
in large groups because they are especially prone to interactivity, 
CQ, and status effect 
problems. Our results dramatically reveal that groups using 
UL
IM had higher perceived 
interactivity than face-to-face groups. In addition, perceived interactivity improved 

perceived 
CQ. We found that large groups using 
ULIM had fewer status effects and 
greater PS than face-to-face groups. Since 
ULIM is inexpensive and requires little 
training and support, these results may aid the continuance and success of large, global 

work teams involved in projects such as software development, systems implementa
-
tion, product development, strategy development, and other important decision-making 

projects in which status effects and communication issues are likely.
Acknowledgments:
 The authors acknowledge funding from the Information Systems Department 
at Brigham 
Young University. 
They also appreciate the technical support of 
California State 
Polytechnic University, Pomona, and eInstruction Inc., and the feedback from 
Hawaii Interna
-tional Conference on System Sciences (
HICSS) conference reviewers and workshop participants 
at Oklahoma State 
University. 
The authors received substantial help from Detmar Straub with 
the statistical analysis and interpretation. 
Finally, they appreciate extensive reviews and edits 
from Robert Briggs, Marvin Gardner, Sarah Phelps, 
Taylor Wells, Trent Spaulding, Gunilla 
A. Sundstrom, Jordan Barlow, 
Kevin Brinkerhoff, 
Laura Rawlins, and the anonymous referees.
NOTES
1. Bhattacherjee [9] and some others call the associated theory ﬁexpectation con˜rmation 
theoryﬂ; Mc
Kinney et al. [69] call the associated theory the ﬁexpectation-discon˜rmation 
paradigm.ﬂ 
These are all variants of the expectation discon˜rmation model, which we will use 
to refer to our baseline theory.
2. Expectations are cognitive beliefs a person has about the attributes or performance of his 
or her experience at some time in the futureŠthe likelihood that an experience is associated 
with certain attributes, bene˜ts, and outcomes that are likely oriented on the future and are 

relatively malleable [96].
3. A priori power analysis determined that to achieve a medium effect size and power of 
0.80, the minimum sample size for testing this model was 79 and the minimum sample size for 

small effect size was 207. 
This analysis was conducted using GPower version 2.0 by 
Franz Paul 
and Edgar Erdfelder, Bonn 
University, Department of Psychology. 
We used 
Cohen™s guidelines 
on effect sizes: a small effect is 0.1, a medium effect is 0.3, and a large effect is 0.5.
4. Should researchers make a default assumption that all constructs are re˚ective, they risk 
invalidating the results of the factorial validity tests. 
A high percentage of the recent research in 
MIS Quarterly 
and Information Systems Research 
misspeci˜es constructs as re˚ective when they 
are actually formative, leading to problems in empirical results and theoretical interpretations, 

including the potential increase in both 
Type I and 
Type II errors [79]. 
There are four unique 
aspects of formative indicators, which are not shared by re˚ective indicators: (1)
 changes in the 
 THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     187indicators cause changes in the construct, (2)
 indicators do not have to be similar/interchange
-able, (3)
 indicators do not need to covary, and (4)
 indicators do not necessarily have the same 
antecedents and consequences.5. However, a researcher must rely on theory ˜rst to deal with any discrepancies.
6. ﬁStandardizing or centering indicators helps avoid computational errors by lowering the 
correlations between the product indicators and their individual componentsﬂ [11, pp.
 198Œ199]. 
Standardizing is used if it is thought that the indicators measure their constructs equally well. 

Because we had no theoretical reason to believe that there were unequal differences in the 

speci˜c indicators, standardizing was our methodological choice.
7. To be conservative, we only consider the change in 
R 2, shown in the …
 2 statistic, to be 
equivalent to effect size. 
This is because regression changes in 
 are a less accurate indica
-tor of effect size especially if multicollinearity exists [18]. Since P
LS and regression share 

similarities in how 
 is calculated, we also do not consider changes in 
 to be equivalent to 
effect size. 
We calculate …
 2 as [
R 2 (interaction model)
 Œ R 2 (main effects model)]
 / [1 Œ R 2 (main effects model)].
8. ﬁ
A variable functions as a mediator when it meets the following conditions: variations in 
levels of the independent variable signi˜cantly account for variations in the presumed mediator 

(i.e., Path a), variations in the mediator signi˜cantly account for variations in the dependent 
variable (i.e., Path b), and when paths a and b are controlled, a previously signi˜cant relation 
between the independent and dependent variables is no longer signi˜cant, with the strongest 

demonstration of mediation occurring when Path c is zeroﬂ [5, p. 1176].
REFERENCES
1. 
Aram, 
J.D. 
Relaxation of collaborative interpersonal relationships to individual satisfaction 
and organizational performance. 
Administrative Science Quarterly,
 16, 3 (1971), 289Œ296.2. Babar, M.
A.; Kitchenham, B.; Zhu, 
L.; Gorton, I.; and 
Jeffery, 
R. An empirical study of 
groupware support for distributed software architecture evaluation process. 
Journal of Systems 
and Software,
 79, 7 (2006), 912Œ925.3. Ball, S.
A., and Zuckerman, M. Sensation seeking and selective attention: 
Focused and 
divided attention on a dichotic listening task. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
 63, 5 (1992), 825Œ831.4. Barnett, 
J. Implementation of personal response units in very large lecture classes: Student 
perceptions. Australasian Journal of Educational Technology,
 22, 4 (2006), 474Œ494.5. Baron, 
R.B., and 
Kenny, D.
A. The moderator-mediator variable distinction in social psy
-chological research: 
Conceptual, strategic, and statistical considerations. 
Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology,
 51, 6 (1986), 1173Œ1182.6. Baurodi, 
J.; Olson, M.
H.; and Ives, B. 
An empirical study of the impact of user involve
-ment on system usage and information satisfaction. 
Communications of the ACM,
 29, 3 (1986), 
232Œ238.7. Becker-Beck, 
U.; Wintermantel, M.; and Borg, 
A. Principles of regulating interaction 
in teams practicing face-to-face communication versus teams practicing computer-mediated 

communication. Small Group Research,
 36, 4 (2005), 499Œ536.8. Berger, 
C.R. Interpersonal communication: 
Theoretical perspectives, future prospects. 
Journal of Communication,
 55, 3 (2005), 415Œ447.9. Bhattacherjee, 
A. Understanding information system continuance: 
An expectation-
con˜rmation model. MIS Quarterly,
 25, 3 (2001), 351Œ370.10. Biocca, 
F.; Harms, C.; and Burgoon, 
J.K. Toward a more robust theory and measure of 
social presence: 
Review and suggested criteria. 
Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environ
-ments, 12, 5 (2003), 456Œ480.11. Bollen, 
K., and 
Lennox, R. Conventional wisdom on measurement: 
A structural equation 
perspective. 
Psychological Bulletin,
 110, 2 (1991), 305Œ314.12. Briggs, 
R.O.; Reinig, B.
A.; and de Vreede, G.-
J. The yield shift theory of satisfaction 
and its application to the IS/I
T domain. 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems,
 9, 5 (2008), 267Œ293. 188     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIE13. Brown, S.
A.; Venkatesh, V.; 
Kuruzovich, 
J.; and Massey, 
A.P. Expectation con˜rmation: 
An examination of three competing models. 
Organizational Behavior and Human Decision 
Processes,
 105, 1 (2008), 52Œ66.14. Burgoon, 
J.K.; Burgoon, M.; Broneck, 
K.; Alvaro, E.; and Nunamaker, 
J.F., Jr. Effects of 
synchronicity and proximity on group communication. Paper presented at the 
Annual 
Convention 
of the National Communication Association, New Orleans, 
Louisiana, November 2002.
15. Burgoon, 
J.K.; Bonito, 
J.A.; Bengtsson, B.; 
Ramirez, A., Jr.; Dunbar, 
A.E.; and Miczo,
 N. Testing the interactivity model: 
Communication processes, partner assessments, and the quality 
of collaborative work. 
Journal of Management Information Systems,
 16, 3 (
Winter 1999Œ2000), 
33Œ56.16. Burgoon, 
J.K.; Bonito, 
J.A.; 
Ramirez, 
A., 
Jr.; Dunbar, N.; 
Kam, 
K.; and 
Fischer, 
J. 
Testing 
the interactivity principle: Effects of mediation, propinquity, and verbal and nonverbal modalities 
in interpersonal interaction. Journal of Communication,
 52, 3 (2002), 657Œ677.17. Burke, 
K., and 
Chidambaram, L. How much bandwidth is enough? 
A longitudinal exami
-nation of media characteristics and group outcomes. MIS Quarterly,
 23, 4 (1999), 557Œ580.18. Carte, T.A., and 
Russell, C.J. In pursuit of moderation: Nine common errors and their 
solutions. MIS Quarterly,
 27, 3 (2003), 479Œ501.19. Chen, K., and 
Yen, D.
C. Improving the quality of online presence through interactivity. 
Information & Management,
 42, 1 (2004), 217Œ226.20. Chin, W.W.; Marcolin, B.
L.; and Newsted, P.
R. A partial least squares latent variable 
modeling approach for measuring interaction effects: 
Results from a Monte 
Carlo simulation 
study and voice mail emotion/adoption study. In 
J.I. DeGross, S. 
Jarvenpaa, and 
A. Srinivasan 
(eds.), Proceedings of the Seventeenth International Conference on Information Systems.
 At-lanta: AIS, 1996, pp. 21Œ41.21. Chin, W.W.; Marcolin, B.
L.; and Newsted, P.
R. A partial least squares latent variable 
modeling approach for measuring interaction effects: 
Results from a Monte 
Carlo simulation 
study and an electronic-mail emotion/adoption study. 
Information Systems Research,
 14, 2 
(2003), 189Œ217.22. Clicker resource guide: 
An instructor™s guide to the effective use of personal response sys
-tems (clickers) in teaching. 
University of 
Colorado Science Education Initiative and 
University 
of British Columbia Carl Wieman Science Education Initiative, Boulder, 
July 1, 2008.23. Connolly, 
T., and 
Jessup, L.M. Effects of anonymity and evaluative tone on idea genera
-tion in computer-mediated groups. 
Management Science,
 36, 6 (1990), 689Œ703.24. Curseu, P.
L. Emergent states in virtual teams: 
A complex adaptive systems perspective. 
Journal of Information Technology,
 21, 4 (2006), 249Œ261.25. Davison, 
R.M. An instrument for measuring meeting success. 
Information & Manage
-ment, 32, 4 (1997), 163Œ176.26. Debrabander, B., and 
Thiers, G. Successful information-system development in relation to 
situational factors which affect effective communication between MIS-users and EDP-specialists. 

Management Science,
 30, 2 (1984), 137Œ155.27. de 
Kelaita, R.; Munroe, P.
T.; and 
Tootell, G. Self-initiated status transfer: 
A theory of 
status gain and status loss. 
Small Group Research,
 32, 4 (2001), 406Œ425.28. Dennis, 
A.R., and Gar˜eld, M.
J. The adoption and use of GSS in project teams: 
Toward 
more participative processes and outcomes. 
MIS Quarterly,
 27, 2 (2003), 289Œ323.29. Dennis, 
A.R., and 
Kinney, S. 
Testing media richness theory in the new media: 
The effects of 
cues, feedback, and task equivocality. 
Information Systems Research,
 9, 3 (1998), 256Œ274.30. Dennis, 
A.R., and Valacich, 
J.S. Computer brainstorms: More heads are better than one. 
Journal of Applied Psychology,
 78, 4 (1993), 531Œ537.31. Dennis, 
A.R.; Wixom, B.; and Vandenberg, 
R. Understanding ˜t and appropriation effects 
in group support systems via meta-analysis. MIS Quarterly,
 25, 2 (2001), 167Œ193.32. Dennis, 
A.R.; Valacich, 
J.S.; Connolly, 
T.; and 
Wynne, B.E. Process structuring in elec
-tronic brainstorming. Information Systems Research,
 7, 2 (1996), 268Œ277.33. Diamantopoulos, 
A., and 
Winklhofer, 
H.M. Index construction with formative indicators: 
An alternative to scale development. 
Journal of Marketing Research,
 38, 2 (2001), 269Œ277.34. Diehl, M., and Stroebe, 
W. Productivity loss in brainstorming groups: 
Toward the solution 
of a riddle. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
 53, 3 (1987), 497Œ509. THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     18935. Dubrovsky, V.
J.; Kiesler, S.; and Sethna, B.N. 
The equalization phenomenon: Status 
effects in computer-mediated and face-to-face decision-making groups. 
HumanŒComputer 
Interaction,
 6, 2 (1991), 119Œ146.36. Duncan, 
T., and Moriarty, S.E. 
A communication-based marketing model for managing 
relationships. Journal of Marketing,
 62, 2 (1998), 1Œ13.37. Fjermestad, J., and 
Hiltz, S.
R. An assessment of group support systems experimental 
research: Methodology and results. 
Journal of Management Information Systems,
 15, 3 (
Winter 
1998Œ99), 7Œ150.38. Fulk, J.; Schmitz, 
J.; and Stein˜eld, 
C. A social in˚uence model of technology use. In 
J. F
ulk and 
C.W. Stein˜eld (eds.), 
Organizations and Communication Technology.
 Newbury 
Park, 
CA: Sage, 1990, pp. 117Œ142.39. Gallupe, 
R.B.; Dennis, 
A.R.; 
Cooper, 
W.H.; Valacich, 
J.S.; Bastianutti, 
L.M.; and 
Nunamaker, 
J.F., Jr. Electronic brainstorming and group size. 
Academy of Management Journal,
 35, 2 (1992), 350Œ369.40. Gefen, D., and Straub, D.
W. A practical guide to factorial validity using P
LS-Graph: Tutorial and annotated example. 
Communications of the AIS,
 16, 5 (2005), 91Œ109.41. Gladstein, D.
L. Groups in context: 
A model of task group effectiveness. 
Administrative 
Science Quarterly,
 29, 4 (1984), 499Œ517.42. Gouran, D.S.; Brown, 
C.; and 
Henry, D.
R. Behavioral correlates of perceptions of quality 
in decision-making and discussions. Communication Monographs,
 45, 1 (1978), 51Œ63.43. Ha, L., and 
James, E.
L. Interactivity reexamined: 
A baseline analysis of early business 
Web sites. Journal of Broadcasting and Electronic Media,
 42, 4 (1998), 457Œ474.44. Hackman, J.R., and 
Kaplan, R. Interventions into group processes: 
An approach to improve 
the effectiveness of groups. 
Decision Sciences, 5, 3 (1974), 459Œ480.45. Hackman, J.R., and Vidmar, N. Effects of size and task type of group performance and 
member reactions. Sociometry,
 33, 1 (1970), 37Œ54.46. Hiltz, S.
R., and 
Johnson, K. User satisfaction with computer-mediated communication 
systems. Management Science,
 36, 6 (1990), 739Œ764.47. Hiltz, S.
R.; Johnson, K.; and 
Turoff, M. Experiments in group decision making: 
Com-munication process and outcome in face-to-face versus computerized conferences. 
Human 
Communication Research,
 13, 6 (1986), 225Œ252.48. 
Holingshead, 
A.B. Information suppression and status persistence in group decision 
making. Human Communication Research,
 23, 2 (1996), 193Œ219.49. Johnson, G.
J.; Bruner, G.
C.I.; and 
Kumar, 
A. Interactivity and its facets revisited. 
Journal 
of Advertising,
 35, 4 (2006), 35Œ52.50. Klein, E.E.; 
Tellefsen, T.; and 
Herskovitz, P.
J. The use of group support systems in focus 
groups: Information technology meets qualitative research. 
Computers in Human Behavior,
 23, 5 (2007), 2113Œ2132.51. Knottnerus, D., and Greenstein, 
T.N. Status and performance characteristics in social in
-teraction: A theory of status validation. 
Social Psychology Quarterly,
 44, 4 (1981), 338Œ349.52. Ko, H.; Roberts, M.S.; and 
Cho, C.-H. Cross-cultural differences in motivations and 
perceived interactivity: 
A comparative study of 
American and 
Korean Internet users. 
Journal 
of Current Issues and Research in Advertising,
 28, 2 (2006), 93Œ104.53. Kock, N. 
Compensatory adaptation to a lean medium: 
An action research investigation of 
electronic communication in process improvement groups. 
IEEE Transactions on Professional 
Communication, 44, 4 (2001), 267Œ285.54. Kock, N. Media naturalness and compensatory encoding: 
The burden of electronic media 
obstacles is on senders. Decision Support Systems, 44, 1 (2007), 175Œ187.55. Kock, N., and Davison, 
R.M. Can lean media support knowledge sharing? Investigating 
a hidden advantage of process improvement. 
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management,
 50, 2 (2003), 151Œ163.56. Lee, T. The impact of perceptions of interactivity on customer trust and transaction inten
-tions in mobile commerce. Journal of Electronic Commerce Research,
 6, 3 (2005), 165Œ180.57. Liao, C.C.; Chen, J.L.; and 
Yen, D.
C. Theory of planning behavior (
TPB) and customer 
satisfaction in the continued use of e
-service: An integrated model. 
Computers in Human Be
-havior,
 23, 6 (2007), 2804Œ2822. 190     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIE58. Limayem, M.; 
Hirt, S.G.; and 
Cheung, C.M.K. How habit limits the predictive power of 
intention: The case of information systems continuance. MIS Quarterly,
 31, 4 (2007), 705Œ737.59. Liu, Y. Developing a scale to measure the interactivity of websites. 
Journal of Advertising 
Research,
 43, 2 (2003), 207Œ218.60. Liu, Y., and Shrum, 
L.J. What is interactivity and is it always such a good thing? Implica
-tions of de˜nition, person, and situation for the in˚uence of interactivity or advertising in˚uence. 
Journal of Advertising,
 31, 4 (2002), 53Œ64.61. Loch, K.D.; Straub, D.
W.; and 
Kamel, S. Diffusing the Internet in the 
Arab world: 
The role 
of social norms and technological culturation. 
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management,
 50, 1 (2003), 45Œ63.62. 
Long, 
Y., and Siau, 
K. Social network structures in open source software development teams. 
Journal of Database Management,
 18, 2 (2007), 25Œ40.63. Lowry, P.B.; Nunamaker, 
J.F., Jr.; 
Curtis, A.; and 
Lowry, M.
R. The impact of process structure 
on novice, Internet-based, asynchronous-distributed collaborative writing teams. 
IEEE Transactions 
on Professional Communication,
 48, 4 (2005), 341Œ364.64. Lowry, P.B.; 
Roberts, T.L.; Romano, N.
C., Jr.; 
Cheney, P.; and 
Hightower, 
R.T. The impact 
of group size and social presence on small-group communication: Does computer-mediated com
-
munication make a difference? 
Small Group Research,
 37, 6 (2006), 631Œ661.65. 
Lowry, P.B.; Vance, 
A.; Moody, G.; Beckman, B.; and 
Read, 
A. Explaining and predicting 
the impact of branding alliances and 
Web site quality on initial consumer trust of e
-commerce 
Web 
sites. Journal of Management Information Systems,
 24, 4 (Spring 2008), 201Œ227.66. 
Lurey, 
J.S., and 
Raisinghani, M.S. 
An empirical study of best practices in virtual teams. 
Information & Management,
 38, 8 (2001), 523Œ544.67. Marakas, G.M.; 
Johnson, R.D.; and 
Clay, P.
F. The evolving nature of the computer self-
ef˜cacy construct: 
An empirical investigation of measurement construction, validity, reliability, and 
stability over time. 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems,
 8, 1 (2007), 16Œ46.68. Mc
Allister, D.
J. Affect- and cognition-based trust as foundations for interpersonal coopera
-tion in organizations. 
Academy of Management Journal,
 38, 1 (1995), 24Œ59.69. Mc
Kinney, V.; 
Kanghyun, 
Y.; and Zahedi, 
F.M. The measurement of 
Web-customer satisfac
-tion: An expectation and discon˜rmation approach. 
Information Systems Research,
 13, 3 (2002), 
296Œ315.70. Mc
Knight, D.
H.; 
Choudhury, V.; and 
Kacmar, 
C.J. Developing and validating trust measures 
for e
-commerce: An integrative typology. 
Information Systems Research,
 13, 3 (2002), 334Œ359.
71. McMillan, S.
J., and 
Hwang, 
J.-S. Measures of perceived interactivity: 
An exploration of the 
role of direction of communication, user control, and time in shaping perceptions of interactivity. 

Journal of Advertising,
 31, 3 (2002), 29Œ42.72. Miranda, S.M., and Bostrom, 
R.P. Meeting facilitation: Process versus content interventions. 
Journal of Management Information Systems,
 15, 4 (Spring 1999), 89Œ114.73. Miranda, S.M., and Saunders, 
C. The social construction of meaning: 
An alternative perspec
-tive on information sharing. 
Information Systems Research,
 14, 1 (2003), 87Œ106.74. Mohr, 
J., and Spekman, 
R. 
Characteristics of partnership success: Partnership attributes, 
communication behavior, and con˚ict-resolution techniques. 
Strategic Management Journal,
 15, 2 (1994), 135Œ152.75. Newhagen, 
J.E.; 
Cordes, 
J.W.; and 
Levy, M.
R. Nightly@nbc.com: 
Audience scope and 
the perception of interactivity in viewer mail on the Internet. 
Journal of Communication,
 45, 3 
(1995), 164Œ175.76. Nunamaker, 
J.F., 
Jr.; Dennis, 
A.R.; Valacich, 
J.; Vogel, D.; and George, 
J. Electronic meeting 
systems to support group work. 
Communications of the ACM,
 34, 7 (1991), 40Œ61.77. O™
Reilly, 
C.A., and 
Roberts, K.H. Task group structure, communication, and effectiveness 
in three organizations. 
Journal of Applied Psychology,
 62, 6 (1977), 674Œ681.78. Pavlou, P.
A.; Liang, H.; and Xue, 
Y. Understanding and mitigating uncertainty in online 
exchange relationships: 
A principalŒagent perspective. 
MIS Quarterly,
 31, 1 (2007), 105Œ136.79. Petter, S.; Straub, D.
W.; and 
Rai, A. Specifying formative constructs in information systems 
research. MIS Quarterly,
 31, 4 (2007), 623Œ656.80. Podsakoff, P.M.; Mac
Kenzie, S.B.; 
Lee, J.Y.; and Podsakoff, N.P. 
Common method biases 
in behavioral research: 
A critical review of the literature and recommended remedies. 
Journal of 
Applied Psychology,
 88, 5 (2003), 879Œ903. THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     19181. Rafaeli, S., and Sudweeks, 
F. Networked interactivity. 
Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication, 2, 4 (1997) (available at http://jcmc.indiana.edu/vol2/issue4/rafaeli.sudweeks.
html),82. Ramirez, A.J., and Burgoon, 
J.K. The effect of interactivity on initial interactions: 
The in˚uence of information valence and modality and information richness on computer-mediated 
interaction. Communication Monographs,
 71, 4 (2004), 422Œ447.83. Raykov, 
T., and Grayson, D. 
A test for change of composite reliability in scale develop
-ment. Multivariate Behavioral Research,
 38, 2 (2003), 143Œ159.84. Reinig, B.
A. Toward an understanding of satisfaction with the process and outcomes of 
teamwork. 
Journal of Management Information Systems,
 19, 4 (Spring 2003), 65Œ83.85. Reinig, B.
A.; Briggs, 
R.O.; Nunamaker, 
J.F., Jr.; Shepherd, M.M.; and 
Yen, J. Affective 
reward and the adoption of group support systems: Productivity is not always enough. 
Journal 
of Management Information Systems,
 12, 3 (Winter 1995Œ96), 171Œ185.86. 
Robert, 
L., and Dennis, 
A.R. 
The paradox of richness: 
A cognitive model of media choice. 
IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication,
 48, 1 (2005), 10Œ21.87. Roberts, K.H., and O™
Reilly, 
C.A. Failures in upward communication in organizations: 
Three possible culprits. Academy of Management Journal,
 17, 2 (1974), 205Œ215.88. Roberts, K.H., and O™
Reilly, 
C. Measuring organizational communication. 
Journal of 
Applied Psychology,
 59, 3 (1974), 321Œ326.89. Ryan, A.M., and 
Kossek, E.E. 
Work-life policy implementation: Breaking down or creat
-ing barriers to inclusiveness? 
Human Resource Management,
 47, 2 (2008), 295Œ310.90. Short, 
J.; Williams, E.; and 
Christie, B. 
The Social Psychology of Telecommunications.
 London: John Wiley & Sons, 1976.
91. Sia, 
C.-L.; Tan, B.
C.Y.; and 
Wei, K.-K. Group polarization and computer-mediated 
communication: Effects of communication cues, social presence, and anonymity. 
Information Systems Research,
 13, 1 (2002), 70Œ90.92. Siau, 
K.; Sheng, 
H.; and Nah, 
F.F.-H. Use of a classroom response system to enhance 
classroom interactivity. 
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management,
 49, 3 (2006), 
398Œ403.93. Simon, 
A. Computer-mediated communication: 
Task performance and satisfaction. 
Journal 
of Social Psychology,
 146, 3 (2006), 349Œ379.94. Song, 
J.H., and Zinkhan, G.M. Determinants of perceived 
Web site interactivity. 
Journal 
of Marketing,
 72, 2 (2008), 99Œ113.95. Spreng, 
R.A., and 
Chiou, J.S. A cross-cultural assessment of the satisfaction formation 
process. European Journal of Marketing,
 36, 7Œ8 (2002), 829Œ839.96. Spreng, 
R.A.; Mac
Kenzie, S.B.; and Olshavsky, 
R.W. A reexamination of the determinants 
of consumer satisfaction. 
Journal of Marketing,
 60, 3 (1996), 15Œ32.97. Steiner, I. 
Group Process and Productivity.
 New 
York: Academic Press, 1972.98. Straub, D.
W. Validating instruments in MIS research. 
MIS Quarterly,
 13, 2 (1989), 
146Œ169.99. Straub, D.
W.; Boudreau, M.
C.; and Gefen, D. Validation guidelines for IS positivist research. 
Communications of the AIS,
 13, 24 (2004), 380Œ426.100. Stromer-Galley, 
J. Online interaction and why candidates avoid it. 
Journal of Communica
-tion, 50, 4 (2000), 111Œ132.101. Sundar, S.S.; 
Kalyanaraman, S.; and Brown, 
J. Explicating 
Web site interactivity: Impression 
formation effects in political campaign sites. 
Communication Research,
 30, 1 (2003), 30Œ59.102. Tan, B.
C.Y.; Wei, K.-K.; and 
Lee-Partridge, 
J.-E. Effects of facilitation and leadership 
on meeting outcomes in a group support system environment. 
European Journal of Information 
Systems, 8, 4 (1999), 232Œ246.103. Tan, B.
C.Y.; Wei, K.-K.; and 
Watson, R.T. The equalizing impact of a group support system 
on status differentials. 
ACM Transactions on Information Systems,
 17, 2 (1999), 77Œ100.104. 
Tan, B.
C.Y.; 
Wei, 
K.-
K.; 
Watson, 
R.T.; and 
Walczuch, 
R.M. 
Reducing status effects with 
computer-mediated communication: Evidence from two distinct national cultures. 
Journal of 
Management Information Systems,
 15, 1 (Summer 1998), 119Œ141.105. Tan, B.
C.Y.; Wei, K.K.; Watson, R.T.; Clapper, D.
L.; and Mc
Lean, E.
R. Computer-
mediated communication and majority in˚uence: 
Assessing the impact in an individualistic 
and collectivistic culture. 
Management Science,
 44, 9 (1998), 1263Œ1278. 192     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIE106. Valacich, 
J.S.; Dennis, 
A.R.; and Nunamaker, 
J.F., Jr. Group size and anonymity effects 
on computer-mediated idea generation. 
Small Group Research,
 23, 1 (1992), 49Œ73.107. Valacich, 
J.S.; Wheeler, B.; Mennecke, B.; and 
Wachter, 
R. The effects of numerical 
and logical size on computer-mediated idea generation. 
Organizational Behavior and Human 
Decision Processes,
 62, 3 (1995), 318Œ329.108. Walther, 
J.B. Anticipated ongoing interaction versus channel effects on relational com
-munication in computer-mediated interaction. 
Human Communication Research,
 20, 4 (1994), 
473Œ501.109. Walther, 
J.B. Computer-mediated communication: Impersonal, interpersonal, and hy
-perpersonal Interaction. Communication Research,
 23, 1 (1996), 3Œ43.110. Watzlawick, P.; 
Weakland, J.H.; and 
Fisch, R. Changing a system. 
Change.
 New 
York: W.W. Norton, 1974.111. Weiman, C., and Perkins, 
K. Transforming physics education. 
Physics Today,
 58, 11 
(2005), 36Œ41.112. Weisband, S. Overcoming social awareness in computer-supported groups: Does ano
-nymity really help? 
Computer Supported Cooperative Work,
 2, 1 (1994), 285Œ297.113. 
Weisband, S.; Scheidner, S.
K.; and 
Connolly, 
T. 
Computer-mediated communication and 
social information: Status salience and status differences. 
Academy of Management Journal,
 38, 4 (1995), 1124Œ1151.114. Wise, K.; Hamman, B.; and 
Thorson, K. Moderation, response rate, and message inter
-activity: 
Features of online communities and their effects on intent to participate. 
Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication,
 12, 1 (2006), 24Œ41.115. Wixom, B.
H., and 
Todd, P.
A. A theoretical integration of user satisfaction and technol
-ogy acceptance. Information Systems Research,
 16, 1 (2005), 85Œ102.116. Yadav, M.S., and Varadarajan, 
R. Interactivity in the electronic marketplace: 
An exposi
-tion of the concept and implications for research. 
Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science,
 33, 4 (2005), 585Œ603.117. Young-Ybarra, C., and 
Wiersma, M. Strategic ˚exibility in information technology al
-liances: The in˚uence of transaction cost economics and social exchange theory. 
Organization 
Science,
 10, 4 (1999), 439Œ459.118. Zack, M. Interactivity and communication mode choice in ongoing management groups. 
Information Systems Research,
 4, 3 (1993), 207Œ239.119. Zhang, D.; 
Lowry, P.B.; Zhou, 
L.; and 
Fu, X. 
The impact of individualismŒcollectivism, 
social presence, and group diversity on group decision making under majority in˚uence. 
Journal 
of Management Information Systems,
 23, 4 (Spring 2007), 53Œ80.120. Zhou, 
L. An empirical investigation of deception behavior in instant messaging. 
IEEE Transactions on Professional Communication,
 48, 2 (2005), 147Œ160. THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     193Appendix: Measures Used in This ResearchLatent variable 
(type)ItemsMeasure notesInteractivity
(second-order)Subconstruct: control (re˚ective):

 Ctnl1: I felt that I had a great deal of control over my communication in 
  
this group.
 Ctnl2: While I was involved in this group, I could choose freely what I 
  
wanted to hear/read and say/contribute.
 Ctnl3: While involved in this group, I had absolutely no control over my 
  
communication.*
 Ctnl4: While involved in this group, my actions determined the kind of 
  
experiences I had.
Subconstruct: two-way communication (re˚ective):
 Two1: The facilitator effectively gathered group members™ feedback.
 Two2: The group environment facilitated two-way communication 
  
between group members and the facilitator. 
 Two3: It was dif˜cult to offer feedback to the facilitator.*
 Two4: The facilitator made me feel he or she wanted to listen to the 
  
group members. 
 Two5: The facilitator did not at all encourage group members to 
  
communicate.*
 Two6: The group environment gave group members the opportunity to 
  
communicate.
We adapted original measures from Liu [59] to 
make them consistently in past tense and more 
general to a group interaction (not a Web site 
interaction).
(continues) 194     LOWRY, 
ROM
ANO, JENKINS, A
ND GUTHRIELatent variable 
(type)ItemsMeasure notesSubconstruct: synchronicity (re˚ective):
 Synch1: The facilitator processed my input very quickly. 
 Synch 2: Getting information from the facilitator was very fast. 
 Synch 3: In the group environment, I was able to obtain the information 
  
I wanted without any delay. 
 Synch4: When I communicated with the facilitator, I felt I received 
  
instantaneous information. 
 Synch 5: The facilitator was very slow in responding to my requests.* 
  
(dropped) *Discussion ef˜ciency(re˚ective)
Eff1: To what extent would you agree that this group interaction was result 
  
oriented?
Eff2: The time spent in the group interaction was ef˜ciently used.
Eff3: Issues raised in the group interaction were discussed thoroughly.
Original from Davison [25]. Did not use Eff4 
ﬁWhat percentage of group interaction time do 
you think was spent on serious interaction? 

___%.ﬂ Expanded from a ˜ve-point scale to a 

seven-point scale (strongly agree to strongly 
disagree). In Eff1 changed 
say to agree. Used ﬁcourseﬂ language for course scenario. Changed 

meeting to group. Task discussion 
effectiveness
(formative)
Taskd1: The discussions were ineffective.*
Taskd2: The context of the discussions was carelessly developed.*
Taskd3: Issues were examined effectively.

Taskd4: Participation in the discussions was unevenly distributed.*

Taskd5: Ideas in the discussions were uncritically examined.*
Taskd6: The amount of information exchanged was suf˜cient.
Instrument application: used as is to measure 

communication task discussion effectiveness 
on the group level for the posttest. Original 

from Burgoon et al. [14]; used all original items 

except 1 and 3, as these overlap with discussion 
quality. Changed original anchors to the degree 
of agreement on seven-point Likert-type scale.
Appendix. Continued THE CMC INTERACT
IVITY MODEL     195Process satisfaction

(formative)
Satp1: Our group discussion process was ef˜cient.

Satp2: Our group discussion process was uncoordinated.*

Satp3: Our group discussion process was unfair.*
Satp4: Our group discussion process was understandable.
Satp5: Our group discussion process was satisfying.
Original from Tan et al. [102]. Reanchored on 
 
a seven-point scale from ˜ve-point scale. 

Original anchors were inef˜cient/ef˜cient, 
uncoordinated/coordinated, unfair/fair, 
confusing/understandable, dissatisfying/

satisfying; changed to only using ˜rst part of 

anchor with respondent indicating how strongly 
they agreed or disagreed (made items 1, 4, 5 
positive). For classroom use, ﬁdecision-makingﬂ 

was termed ﬁdiscussion process.ﬂ
Openness
(re˚ective)
Open1: It was easy to communicate openly to all members of this group.

Open2: Communication in this group was very open.

Open3: When people communicated to each other in this group, there 

 was a great deal of understanding. 
Open4: It was easy to ask advice from any member of this group.

Open5: We needed to adapt our style of communication to effectively 

 communicate.*
Adapted from Roberts and O™Reilly [88]; 

changed to past tense. Changed Open5 from 

ﬁtalkﬂ to ﬁstyle of communication.ﬂ Removed 

original item 3 because it theoretically deals 
more with enjoyment.
Status effects

(re˚ective)
Stat1: Some group members tried to intimidate others, e.g., by talking 

loudly, using aggressive gestures, making threats, etc. 
Stat2: Some group members tried to use their in˚uence, status, or power 

so as to force issues on the other group members. 

Stat3: I felt inhibited from participating in the interaction because of the 
behavior of other group members.
Stat4: I experienced pressure, either to conform to a particular viewpoint 

or to not contradict others.
Original from Davison [25]. Expanded from 
a ˜ve-point scale to a point-point scale 
(strongly agree to strongly disagree). In Stat3, 

changed meeting to group and discussions to 
interactions. In Stat3 and Stat4, changed 
you to I.Notes: All items use a seven-point 
Likert-type scale anchored on ﬁstrongly disagree/strongly agree.ﬂ * = reverse coded.
 