 






















 Journal of Management Information Systems / 
Spring 2012, Vol. 28, No. 4, pp. 39Œ67.
 © 2012 M.E. Sharpe, Inc. 0742Œ1222 / 2012 $9.50 + 0.00. DOI 10.2753/MIS0742-1222280403Supporting Agile Organizations with a 
Decision Guidance Query LanguageALEXANDER BRODSKY, N
ATHAN E. EGGE, AND  X. SEAN W
ANGALEX
ANDER
 BRODSKY
 is director of the Center for Smart Power 
Grids and an associate 
professor of Computer Science at 
George Mason University. 
He earned his Ph.D. and 
prior degrees in computer science and mathematics from the 
Hebrew University of 
Jerusalem. 
His research interests and publications are in the areas of decision-guidance 
and support systems, constraint databases and programming, secure information 
sharing, and smart power grids. For his research work on constraint databases and 

programming, Dr. Brodsky received a National Science Foundation (NSF) CA
REER 
Award, NSF 
Research Initiation Award, and grants from the Of˜ce of Naval 
Research and NASA. Dr. Brodsky served as conference chairman of the Fifth International 

Conference on Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming and serves as a 

program committee co
-chair of the IEEE International Conference on Data Engineer
-ing workshop on Decision 
Guidance and Support Systems. Prior to joining 
George 
Mason University, Dr. Brodsky worked at IBM™s 
T.J.
 Watson 
Research Center, at Israel 
Aircraft Industries, and was an of˜cer in the Computer Division of Communications, 

Electronics and Computer Corps, Israel Defense Forces. 
NATH
AN E. EGGE
 is a Ph.D. candidate at 
George Mason University working on a dis
-sertation on the decision-guidance query language. 
He holds dual master™s degrees in 
mathematics and computer science from Virginia 
Tech. His research interests include 
decision-guidance and support systems, database management systems, constraint 
and mathematical programming, distributed computing, and enterprise software ar
-chitecture. He has over 10 years™ experience in the industry, designing and building 
enterprise applications for Fortune 500/
Global 1000 companies. X. SEAN WANG
 is dean of the School of Computer Science at Fudan University, Shang
-hai, China. Prior to joining Fudan University, Dr. Wang was a program of˜cer at the 
U.S. National Science Foundation, and endowed Dorothean Chair and professor of 

computer science in the College of Engineering and Mathematics at the University of 

Vermont. 
He started his academic career at the Information and Software Engineer
-ing Department of 
George Mason University, after earning his Ph.D. in computer 
science from the University of Southern California, and B.S. and M.S. in computer 

science from Fudan University. Dr. Wang™s research areas include database manage
-
ment systems, information security and privacy, wireless sensor networks, streaming 

data processing, time series queries, data mining and data warehousing, and database 

theory. 
He is the principal investigator or co
-investigator of close to a dozen federally 
sponsored research projects and is a recipient of the National Science Foundation™s 

Career and 
Research Initiation Awards. 
He has published over 100 scienti˜c papers 
in the general ˜eld of database systems. 40     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANGABSTR
ACT
: Decision optimization is widely used in many decision guidance and sup
-port systems (D
GSS) to support business decisions such as procurement, scheduling, 
and planning. In spite of rapid changes in users™ requirements, the implementation of 

DGSS is typically rigid, expensive, and not easily extensible, which is in stark contrast 
to the agile implementation of management information systems (MIS) based on the 

database management systems (DBMS) and SQ
L technologies. 
This paper focuses on 
the Decision 
Guidance Query 
Language (D
GQL) designed to (re
-)use SQ
L programs for 
decision optimization with the goals of making D
GSS implementation agile and intuitive 
and leveraging existing investment in SQ
L-implemented MIS. 
The paper addresses two 
related technical issues with D
GQL: (1)
 how to annotate existing queries to precisely 
express the optimization semantics, and (2) how to translate the annotated queries into 

equivalent mathematical programming formulations that can be solved ef˜ciently.
KEY
 WORDS
 AND
 PHR
ASES
: agile organizations, decision guidance, decision support, 
optimization.BUSINESS
 MANAGERS
 FACED
 WITH
 GLO
BA
L COMPETITION
 and rapidly changing market con
-ditions are increasingly turning to decision guidance and support systems (D
GSS) to 
provide actionable recommendations on a variety of business decisions. Examples 

include manufacturing processes, sourcing, planning and scheduling, transportation 

and delivery, and inventory control. While rapid change in users™ requirements is typical 

for D
GSS, the development of D
GSS today is a rigid, time-consuming, and expensive 

process. Furthermore, existing D
GSS typically are dif˜cult to modify or extend. 
This paper makes a step toward ﬁagileﬂ development and extensibility of D
GSS using the 

Decision Guidance Query Language (DGQL).DGSS can be viewed as a class of information systems (IS) that provide users not 
only business data to support decision making but also actionable business recommen
-
dations. As observed in 
Hong et al.
 [19], to address the gap between rapid changes in 
users™ requirements and the high cost of development software [3, 22], so-called ﬁagileﬂ 

software development methods, such as Extreme Programming, have evolved. Agile 

methods, as described in 
Hong et al., are a ﬁcollection of principles and techniques 
that emphasize early and continuous delivery of softwareﬂ [19, p.
 236] in response to 
rapid changes in users™ requirements [9, 28]. 
However, agile development of D
GSS has not been addressed due to unique characteristics and challenges of DGSS.The challenge in building agile D
GSS has to do with the fact that its state-of-the-art 
implementation today involves mathematical programming (MP) and constraint pro
-
gramming (CP). MP and CP are used for decision optimization, that is, ˜nding values 

for control variables that maximize or minimize an objective within given constraints. 

More speci˜cally, the development of D
GSS usually involves (1)
 analysis and formal 
modeling of an optimization problem by an operations research expert, (2)
 imple-mentation of a model using a modeling language such as AMP
L (A Mathematical 

Programming 
Language) and MP/CP solvers, and further re˜nement of algorithms by 
MP/CP experts, and (3)
 development of the application IS and its integration with the 
 SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     41optimization module by software developers. Software and IS application developers 
normally do not possess the expertise for the D
GSS development cycle. Furthermore, 

a small change in application requirements often leads to a complete redesign of the 

formal optimization model and its implementation. Clearly, these challenges hinder 

agile development of D
GSS.In contrast, management information systems (MIS) software developers usually are 
familiar with database management systems (DBMS) and the SQ
L query language. 

Using DBMS and SQ
L allows a signi˜cantly more agile development because the 

developers can focus on declarative query and business logic while leaving the system 

details (such as ef˜cient query evaluation and transaction management, as well as fail
-
ure and recovery mechanisms) to DBMS. While nearly all IS software developers are 

familiar with DBMS and SQ
L, they typically do not have the mathematical expertise 

necessary for MP and CP. Furthermore, D
GSS are usually domain speci˜c; require 

signi˜cant expertise to develop, deploy, and maintain; and often lack the return on 

investment (
ROI) necessary to justify investment
 [17]. In addition, much investment 
has already been spent on database application development and infrastructure. Clearly, 

it is desirable to leverage this investment when building D
GSS.In this paper, we describe a D
GQL framework. With D
GQL, we provide a step 
toward making decision optimization easier and more agile, especially in applica
-
tions where database technology has been heavily used. Brie˚y, D
GQL provides a 

query-like abstraction for expressing decision optimization problems so that database 

programmers can use it without prior experience in MP/CP, and more importantly, so 

that they can reuse SQ
L programs already built into existing MIS.
A key observation that motivates the D
GQL development is that database languages 
such as SQ
L are intuitive to use for MIS, and that decision optimization in principle 

is an ﬁinverseﬂ of much of the SQ
L functionality in place. In addition, code used in 

SQL programs often contains business logic that is needed in the decision optimiza
-
tion tasks. Based on this observation, a decision optimization problem in D
GQL is 

written as a ﬁregularﬂ SQ
L program, that is, a sequence of relational views and ac
-
companying integrity constraints, together with some annotation of which database 

table column needs to be decided by the system (i.e., variables) and toward what goal 

(i.e., optimization objective). 
Here, existing SQ
L programs in MIS can be directly 
used. Essentially, D
GQL allows users to write an optimization problem as if writing 

an SQL program in a forward manner.
The technical challenge in the D
GQL approach, however, is how to execute the ﬁin
-verseﬂ decision optimization based on a ﬁforwardlyﬂ expressed code. 
This is done by 
encoding the D
GQL queries as an MP formulation, solving the MP problem, and then 
deriving the solution to the D
GQL optimization problem. A technical question with 
two interrelated parts arises: Is it possible to (1)
 encode a D
GQL program as an MP 
formulation such that (2)
 the solution can be found ef˜ciently? In this paper, we answer 
this question af˜rmatively. As such, we believe that D
GQL has the potential to achieve 
both the agility of D
GSS development and the ef˜ciency of optimization solutions. 
In terms of ef˜ciency, the overall performance of intuitive D
GQL queries compares 
squarely with expert-generated MP problems, as we show in the seventh section.
 42     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANGA common problem faced with the proposal of any new framework is acceptance 
and usage by the greater research community. By design, D
GQL extends the most 
broadly used database query language, SQ
L, and adds only a minimal annotation that 

allows translation of SQ
L queries into optimization problems. We believe that this 

approach has a good chance of being broadly used exactly because it does not require 

database programmers to learn a new language. 
The D
GQL research prototype has 
been implemented and integrated with the PostgreSQ
L database server so that it may 

be invoked directly from any application or interface that allows ordinary SQ
L state
-
ment execution, including the Postgres development environment pgAdmin.
In summary, the contributions of the paper are as follows:

its formal syntax and semantics,

formal MP models and prove its correctness, and











expert-generated models.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next section we give a motivat
-ing, running example. In the third section we brie˚y survey state-of-the-art decision 

optimization methods and point out a few related works. In the fourth section we 

use the running example to present D
GQL informally in an SQ
L-like syntax before 

we present the formal syntax and semantics of D
GQL in the ˜fth section. An imple
-
mentation of D
GQL via translation to MP is given in the sixth section. We present 

our experimental results in the seventh section, and conclude with the eighth section. 

Finally, Appendix
 A adds more detail on the reduction procedure and Appendix
 B provides a formal proof of correctness.
A Running ExampleTO MAKE
 OUR
 DISCUSSION
 CONCRETE
, consider ˜rst a simple example of a reporting MIS 
to support a procurement of˜cer who manages the purchase and delivery of various 

items to delivery locations. 
Let us assume that a database is set up with the following 
tables:demand(loc, item, requested):a tuple indicates that for a delivery location (
loc), the quantity 
requested of 
item is needed.supply(vendor, item, price_per_unit, available):a tuple indicates that a 
vendor can provide at most 
available
 quantity of 
item at the price_per_unit.orders(vendor, item, loc, quantity):a tuple indicates the order of 
item in 
quantity from 
vendor for location 
loc. SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     43With the above tables, the MIS may use the following query to provide (total) cost 
information:CREATE VIEW total_cost ASSELECT SUM(s.price_per_unit * o.quantity) AS totalFROM orders o INNER JOIN supplier sON o.vendor = s.vendor AND o.item = s.item;The above assumes that the item orders are decided elsewhere, and that the database 
is simply to record these orders. Now consider the situation that the procurement of˜cer needs to decide these orders, 
with the objective of minimizing the cost. Note that we now add a D
GSS functional
-
ity that goes beyond reporting. 
This is a typical ﬁinverseﬂ problem of the above SQ
L function. More speci˜cally, we need to assume that the 
orders table needs to be 
˜lled such that all the demands are satis˜ed while the total cost is minimized. 
This is 
a nontrivial problem, especially when there are constraints such as limiting the number 

of vendors to supply a particular location.
State-of-the-art solutions will need to model the situation in a separate decision 
optimization system to make the order decisions. Our approach is to reuse the above 

SQL program, plus some auxiliary SQ
L statements and SQ
L-like annotations (e.g., 

for adding the constraints), to automatically generate MP models that will generate 

the optimal orders. 
The resulting annotated SQ
L query is called a D
GQL query. We 
deliberately make the above query rather simple for easy presentation. One may imag
-
ine that more tables may be involved and some investment has already been made to 

debug and test the queries to make the business logic correctly re˚ected. 
This ability 
to leverage existing investment in database design through annotation is a distinct ad
-
vantage over modeling languages such as AMP
L, 
GAMS (
General Algebraic Modeling 
System), and OP
L (Optimization Programming 
Language). This is because D
GQL allows a clear separation between modeling the business objects and processes, and 

indicating which parameters are to be used for decision making. One can imagine a 

multistage decision optimization system where the output of one decision problem 

is used as the input to another. By allowing for heavy query reuse, new optimization 

problems can be created by a few annotations with little advanced planning.
Furthermore, additional information may be added to the system at different times, 
such as shipping options, packaging options, and so forth. Consider shipping options. 

As multiple shipping companies may be available with different pricing structures, it is 

useful to optimize the total shipping cost with the best shipping option. We may have 

two additional tables: 
shipping_options
 and 
shipping_orders
. An additional 
query can be added to provide total shipping cost. (Care needs to be taken to make the 

item 
orders and 
shipping_orders consistent, perhaps by using integrity constraints 
in the database.) An interesting point here is that relational database systems allow 

modularized development, which increases the productivity of the programmers and 

makes the system development more intuitive.
With the additional needed information, the procurement of˜cer may need to also 
make shipping (and other) decisions so that the total cost of items and shipping is 
 44     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANGminimized. Other requirements may come in as well, such as the time of delivery 
requirements. Again we can ﬁinvertﬂ the SQ
L function to make decision optimizations 
by reusing the SQ
L code already developed. If shipping option is added to the item 

orders, two tables, namely, 
item_orders and 
shipping_orders, need to be ˜lled 
to make the total cost optimal. 
The D
GQL query will be modular in exactly the same 
way that SQ
L queries are modular.
Related Work
AS INDIC
ATED
 IN
 HONG
 ET
 AL. [19], the existing research on agile IS focused on agile 
methods for both software developers (e.g., [1, 7, 26]) and project managers (e.g.,
 [15, 
18, 23, 29]). Agile IS were also studied from the perspective of user acceptance
 [19]. A book by Desouza
 [11] deals with different aspects of agile IS, including concep
-tualization, construction, and management. 
However, the problem of making D
GSS agile has not been addressed. Note that the work on agile IS is not suf˜cient to make 

DGSS development agile because of unique challenges in developing D
GSS. The reason for the uniqueness is that the development of D
GSS, even the simple 
example in the previous section, requires both database management and operations 

research (O
R) techniques and tools. Using O
R tools such as MP and CP poses sig
-
ni˜cant challenges. Among them is the requirement of full knowledge of the search 

space and the objective for the task at hand for ef˜cient system operation. 
The O
R modeling abstraction (e.g., AMP
L [13] and 
GAMS [5]) typically requires O
R ex
-pertise, which makes the development by information technology (I
T) professionals 

challenging. In contrast, DBMS tools are more intuitive and have been adopted by 

many application domains. 
However, DBMS query languages are not designed for 
decision optimization as they cannot express decision optimization problems, notably 

over continuous variables. Indeed, in the continuous variable case, there are potentially 

in˜nite possibilities to choose from that cannot be expressed as a regular database 

query program. For the discrete case, when potential choices are from a large space, 

populating tables with all possible choices and then performing a rank query can be 

quite inef˜cient. Although database query languages, such as SQ
L, can handle some 

limited discrete optimization computations (e.g., ˜nd a tuple that has a minimal value 

over a ˜nite set of discrete choices [20] even in the cases of expressible rank queries), 

evaluation algorithms have not typically taken advantage of MP and CP search strate
-
gies to achieve potential ef˜ciency and ˚exible optimization goals. More important, 

the optimization program will look very different from the database program query, 

increasing the complexity of system management.
Specialized optimization tools (e.g., for optimizing price-revenue, transportation, 
sourcing, production planning) have been developed to be ready for end users, or for 

integration with other systems (e.g., enterprise resource planning or enterprise resource 

management), so that operations research expertise would not be necessary. 
However, 
this approach is not extensible, and does not support general D
GSS development.
There has been extensive work on integrating data manipulation and mathematical 
programming modeling languages (e.g., [2, 4, 8, 12, 24]). 
The work of Dolk
 [12] strongly advocates the need to unify models such as optimization, econometric, simu
- SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     45lation, and data models. Dolk™s article gives an excellent introduction and overview 
to model integration and integrated modeling environments, including the integra
-
tion of schema, process, models and data, models and solvers, modeling paradigms, 

environments, and ˜nally, modeling system interfaces. Bhargava et al.
 [4] present a 
methodology and provide systematic means for integrating data and mathematical 

modeling languages. In their work, Mitra et al.
 [24] extend the syntax of Mathematical 
Programming 
Language (MP
L) so that the index sets used in the constraint formulation 
are extracted from a relational database in a ˚exible fashion. Choobineh
 [8] makes a 
tight integration of SQ
L and a mathematical programming language by creating an 

SQL-like syntax to de˜ne constraints and extract data from the database. Atamtürk et 

al.
 [2] take a similar approach and propose using SQ
L to specify ﬁblocksﬂ that represent 
matrices for linear programming models. 
The above work on integration is signi˜cant 
because it makes implementation of systems easier due to tighter integration of MP 

modeling with data extraction and manipulation.
However, in all these works, whether data manipulation and MP functionalities are 
integrated in a looser or tighter fashion, users must still work with two conceptually 

different paradigms: (1)
 data manipulation and (2)
 de˜nition of MP problems. 
Thus, the 
user of those systems must still possess the expertise of mathematical programming, 

which most database developers do not have. In contrast, in D
GQL there is no con
-
ceptual separation between data manipulation and optimization. As explained in detail 

in the fourth and ˜fth sections, the user needs to only understand the computational 

process of SQ
L, plus the concept of ﬁinverseﬂ computation, which is the instantiation 

of table columns in such a way that all of the database integrity constraints are satis˜ed, 

and a particular value computed by SQ
L is minimized or maximized.The languages most closely related to D
GQL are those that translate procedural al
-gorithms into declarative constraints. 
These languages unify procedural and constraint 
semantics, such that the same program statements determine both interpretations. 
The language Modelica
 [14] supports uni˜ed models that can de˜ne both simulation and 
optimization problems. Modelica models are translated into equations, which may 

in turn be solved by an optimizer or sorted and compiled into an ef˜cient sequential 

procedure. Within pure functions (functions without side effects), Modelica can also 

translate procedural algorithms into constraint equations. Within these functions, 

Modelica gains the advantage of specifying constraints using familiar procedural 

operations and ˚ow of control. 
However, Modelica is fundamentally an equational 
language, and it supports procedural algorithms only in this limited context.
The language CoJava [6] has a thoroughly procedural object-oriented syntax and 
semantics of Java, and adds the optimization semantics of an optimal nondeterministic 

execution path. 
Thus, CoJava presents the developer with no visible boundary between 
procedures and constraints. Familiar procedural operations and ˚ow of control can 

be used uniformly throughout an entire model, or even throughout an entire software 

system.DGQL is in the spirit of Modelica and especially CoJava to minimize the learning 
curve for database application developers and to take advantage of existing database 

queries by conforming to a well-understood syntax and semantics. While we chose 

SQL as the base language to be annotated, the same idea of annotating a database 
 46     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANGprogram and translating it to a formal optimization problem can be applied to other 
database languages, including Query-by-Example (QBE) and object relational query 

languages such as 
Hibernate Query 
Language (
HQL). Using this approach, D
GQL gives database application developers the ˚exibility to move model components freely 

back and forth between query evaluation and declarative optimization models.
Despite the challenges mentioned earlier, D
GSS are being built and deployed today. 
However, their development to date amounts to a large modeling and software devel
-
opment effort. Furthermore, as business requirements evolve, additional development 

will periodically be needed to incorporate these requirements into the optimization 

model. D
GQL, however, continues the tested database tradition in building a level 

of abstraction that is closer to the user intuition. By doing so, many applications can 

take advantage of decision optimization without large up-front investment and heavy 

long-term maintenance expenses.
DGQL by ExampleIN THIS
 SECTION
, WE USE
 THE
 EXISTING
 QUERIES
 in our logistics example shown in the 
second section to illustrate the D
GQL framework. We discuss the D
GQL formal syntax 
and semantics in the next section. Note that in this paper all database examples are 

purely SQ
L with the exception of D
GQL annotation that we indicate by 
BOLDFACE ITALICS in the code listings.Continuing with the example in the second section, we assume that the 
orders table is the one we need to ˜ll, with the objective of minimizing the total cost as 

described by the 
total_cost query (view). Instead of the given database 
orders table, we replace it with a view created by the following SQ
L statement plus an 
aug-ment annotation:CREATE VIEW orders AS AUGMENT   (SELECT d.loc, s.vendor, s.item   
FROM demand d   
LEFT OUTER JOIN supplier s   
ON d.item = s.item)WITH quantity INTEGER >=0;Note here that the nested query is a standard query, giving all possible pairings of 
vendor with item for each location, while the view creation here is a D
GQL annotation 
that indicates the resulting table of the nested query to be 
augmented with an extra 
column called 
quantity with the condition that the quantity has to be a nonnegative 
integer. 
The augmented column is the one to be ˜lled by D
GQL execution automati
-cally with optimal objective (to be annotated below).
Intuitively, with any assignment of nonnegative values to the augmented 
quan-tity column to the generated 
orders table, there is a total cost value given by the 
total_cost view. 
The task now is to automatically generate an assignment that 
gives the minimum total cost for our logistics example. 
However, if we examine the 
total_cost view, we note that table 
demand is not used. When the reporting query 
is written, we have assumed that the 
orders table is given externally and that all the 
 SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     47demands are satis˜ed by the orders. 
This latter assumption can be checked by the 
database with the following constraint:
CREATE VIEW requested_vs_delivered AS   
SELECT o.loc, o.item, SUM(o.quantity) AS delivered, 
      
d.requested   
FROM orders o   
INNER JOIN demand d   ON
 o.loc = d.loc AND o.item = d.item   
GROUP BY o.loc, o.item, d.requested   
CHECK delivered >= requested;This constraint checks if an item request is satis˜ed at a location with enough 
orders by comparing the total quantities of an item ordered for the location with the 
demand quantity at that location. 
This constraint needs to be explicitly given in order 
to generate the 
orders table correctly, and D
GQL supports the above constraint 
speci˜cation (while implementation of such a constraint in standard DBMS is not 

uniformly present).Finally, we need to specify the objective explicitly. In D
GQL, we use the following 
statement:MINIMIZE total_cost;Note that 
total_cost is the view de˜ned in the second section. 
The semantics 
of the 
MINIMIZE is to create a table for 
orders (in general, all augmented tables are 
instantiated) in which the last column is ˜lled with integer values, in the way such that 

the total cost is minimum among all possible orders to satisfy all the item demands.The above optimization problem of minimizing the cost can be solved rather eas
-ily since the optimal strategy is always to use the least costly supplier for each item. 

This strategy can be coded directly in SQ
L and provide optimal solution without 

using D
GQL or MP (although the code will look different from the reporting query, 

increasing the management complexity). 
However, in general, the capability of SQ
L in providing decision optimization is limited. For example, consider the situation that 

(1) each vendor has a limited supply of each item, and (2)
 in practice, we want to 
limit the number of (say up to three) vendors to supply all the items for a particular 

location in order to facilitate easier tracking and management. In this case, it is not 

clear how to use SQ
L to directly code an optimal solution. In D
GQL framework, this 

can be done with the following two additional constraints:
CREATE VIEW purchased_vs_available AS   
SELECT o.vendor, o.item, SUM(o.quantity) AS purchased, 
      
s.available   
FROM orders o   
INNER JOIN supplier s   ON
 o.vendor=s.vendor AND o.item=s.item   
GROUP BY o.vendor, o.item, s.available   
CHECK purchased <= available; 48     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANGCREATE VIEW vendor_restriction AS   
SELECT loc, COUNT(*) AS vendors   
FROM (SELECT DISTINCT loc, vendor      FROM
 orders o      WHERE
 quantity>0)   
GROUP BY loc   
CHECK vendors<=3;The ˜rst constraint above states that the ordered item quantity from a vendor does not 
exceed its available quantity, and the second enforces that the total number of distinct 
vendors for each location does not exceed three. With the above 
CHECK statements, 
DGQL will ˜nd the optimal solution satisfying these constraints.Note that a constraint is quite different from a selection (
WHERE) condition. Indeed, 
in our example, constraints will limit the possible 
orders table instantiations to be 
considered in obtaining the optimal solution by rejecting those that do not satisfy the 

constraints.In addition, D
GQL allows modular development. If shipping and other options are 
to be considered, we only need to annotate the relevant queries and add appropriate 

constraints in order to extend the decision optimization problem. D
GQL also takes 

the relevant existing SQ
L queries without any change in participating in decision 

optimization, reusing existing investment.
Formal Syntax and Semantics
WE NO
W GIVE
 A PRECISE
 EXPOSITION
 OF
 THE
 DGQL SYNT
AX AND
 SEM
ANTICS
. 
The philosophy 
of D
GQL is to add annotation, in the form of operators, to the standard SQ
L in order 

to express decision optimization problems. 
Like the standard SQ
L, the precise syntax 
and semantics is best explained in the relational algebra. 
Hence, in this section we use 
the approach of adding a number of operators to the standard relational algebra. 
The informal, SQL-like expressions directly correspond to these operators.
Like the standard relational algebra, we assume a given set of base relations in a 
database, each having a unique name and schema. We also assume there is a supply 

of globally unique relation names to be used for assignments, each with a schema. We 

assume the conventional notions and notation (e.g., [16]), including those of schemas, 

domains, tuples, relations, databases, and all the traditional algebraic operations, as 

well as the assignment statement (or view de˜nition). We also use a simple form of 

aggregation (as the ﬁaggregation formulationﬂ in [25]).
The annotation of D
GQL consists of three operations: augmentation, constraint, 
and optimization. All three operators are used in the example in the previous section. 

Honoring the tradition, except for the optimization operator, which is the last statement 
in any D
GQL program, we de˜ne augmentation and constraint as relational operators 

that can appear at any step of a relational expression.
For the sake of completeness, we list all the operators that can be used in D
GQL. More precisely, we de˜ne D
GQL query expressions recursively as follows:
 SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     49 1. (Base Case) Each relation name (base relation or not) is a D
GQL query expres
-sion. The schema of the expression is exactly the relation schema of the base 
relation. 2. (Traditional Operators) 
Given D
GQL query expressions 
e1 and 
e2, then 
L(e1), C(e1), e1  e2, e1  e2, e1  e2, and 
e1 Œ
 e
2 are all D
GQL query expressions. 
The operations are all the traditional relational operators, and we assume the 
schema requirement of the operators are satis˜ed by 
e1 and 
e2. The schemas of 
the expressions are as de˜ned traditionally.
 3. (Arithmetic) Given D
GQL query expression 
e, then 
[B=arith(L)](e), where 
L is a subset of numeric attributes in 
e, B is a new attribute, and 
arith(L) is an 
arithmetic expression using attributes in 
L. 4. (Aggregation) 
Given D
GQL query expression 
e and assuming 
A1, ..., An and 
B are attributes of the schema of 
e, then 
[A1, ..., An, f (B)](e) is a D
GQL query 
expression, where 
f is an aggregation function (mapping bags to values). 
The schema of the expression is 
A1, ..., An, f (B). A special case is when n
 = 0, in 
which only f (B) attribute exists for the schema of the expression.
 5. (Augmentation from 
Relation) Given D
GQL query expressions 
e1 and 
e2 and 
assuming A1, ..., An are attributes in 
e1 and not attributes in 
e2, [A1, ..., An  e1](e2) is also a D
GQL query expression. 
The schema of the expression is the schema 
of e2 extended with 
A1, ..., An. 6. (Augmentation from Domain) 
Given D
GQL query expression 
e, [Adomain](e) is also a D
GQL expression, where 
domain is a set of values of a speci˜c type, 
such as 
real
[0,) for nonnegative reals. 
This form of augmentation is equivalent 
to the above one if 
domain is taken as a (possibly in˜nite) relation with one 
attribute 
A and each value is taken as a tuple.
 7. (Constraint) Given D
GQL query expression 
e, then 
[C](e) is a D
GQL query 
expression, where 
C a condition as found in selection. 
The schema of the ex
-pression is that of e. 8. (Optimization) Given a D
GQL query expression 
e that computes a 1
-tuple relation over a schema with a single attribute, 
[min/max](e) is also a D
GQL query expression. 
The schema of the expression is that of 
e.De˜nition 1: A D
GQL query is an assignment sequence of the formR1 = e1; –; Rn = en; ,where each 
ei is a D
GQL expression and 
 is either 
min(Rk) or 
max(Rk), where 
1  k  n and 
ek must compute a single numeric value, or 
sat. That is, a D
GQL query is a sequence of assignments followed by an optimization operator or a 

satis˜ability operator.
A valid D
GQL query is one that always uses a relation name that is either a base 
relation name or one that has been de˜ned (i.e., on the left-hand side of an assignment) 

earlier in the sequence. We henceforth consider only valid D
GQL expressions.
The example in the fourth section can be easily rewritten in the D
GQL algebraic query 
form, with each view being an assignment followed by 
= min(total_cost). 50     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANGWe now de˜ne the semantics of D
GQL queries. For simplicity, we can assume that 
in a D
GQL query, each 
ei is either a single relation name (base relation name or one of 
R1, ...,
 R
iŒ1
) or a single operator applied to operands in the form of single relation names. 
In other words, each assignment is a ﬁsimple stepﬂ of copying a relation or applying 
one operation over the previously de˜ned relations. We also assume the optimization 

operator only applies to single relation name, such as (Rk) where 1  k  n.De˜nition 2: 
A D
GQL query is a 
basic assignment sequence
 if each assignment 
is a simple step as described above.
Since a D
GQL query can be rewritten into a basic assignment sequence by introduc
-ing more assignments, without loss of generality, we henceforth assume all D
GQL 
queries are basic assignment sequences if not mentioned otherwise.Intuitively, (1)
 the assignment of a D
GQL query is to give all ﬁfeasibleﬂ instantiations 
of all the relations for the left-hand side of each assignment such that the ﬁinputﬂ and 

ﬁoutputﬂ of each assignment is ﬁcorrect,ﬂ that is, given the input relations, the left-hand 

side relation is actually the result of the operator applied to the given operands; (2)
 the operator  as the last step of a D
GQL query is to ˜nd one such feasible instantiation, 
when  is 
sat, with the additional restriction that the 
ek value is the minimum or 
maximum among all the feasible instantiations, when 
 is either 
min(Rk) or 
max(Rk), respectively. For example, the D
GQL query in the fourth section obtains an assignment 
to all the views, including the view 
orders such that the total cost is minimized. In 
this way, the optimization done by D
GQL automatically ˜lls the 
orders table for the 
logistics optimization application.Different from the standard SQ
L, where the operands and the operator determine the 
output relation, the D
GQL operator augmentation introduces nondeterminism; that is, 
for the augmentation operator, in˜nitely many ﬁoutputﬂ relations may correspond to 

an ﬁinputﬂ relation. 
Therefore, a D
GQL query can have many feasible instantiations 
for the assignment sequence. And the optimization operator in the end is to choose 

one feasible instantiation.Formally, consider a D
GQL query 
R1 = e1; . . . ; Rn = en; . A (nondeterministic) 
execution path
 is a sequence of relations (r
1, ..., rn) over the schemas of 
e1, ..., en, respec
-tively. A 
partial execution path
 is a pre˜x of an execution path, that is, a sequence of 
relations (r
1, ..., ri), 1
  i  n, over the schemas of 
e1, ..., ei, respectively, or the empty 
pre˜x .De˜nition 3:
 The feasibility of a partial execution path is de˜ned recursively as 
follows. 
The empty execution path 
 is feasible. 
Recursively, (r
1, ..., ri), 1
  i  n, is feasible if (1) (r1, ..., riŒ1) is feasible and (2) the following are satis˜ed:
if ei is a 
traditional
 or 
aggregation
 operation, then r
i is the result of 
ei com
-putation when operands from 
R1, ..., R
iŒ1 are replaced with relations r
1, ..., riŒ1, respectively;
if ei is an augmentation operation 
[A1, ..., Am  Rj](Rk), where 1
  k, j
 < i, ri has the schema of 
Rk extended with 
A1, ..., Am, and is constructed by join
-ing a tuple from r
k with a single tuple (nondeterministically chosen) from 
A1,–,Am(rj). Similarly, if 
ei is 
[Adomain](Rk), where 1
  j < i, r
i has the 
 SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     51schemas of 
Rk extended with 
A, and is constructed by joining a tuple from 
rk with a single value (nondeterministically chosen) from the 
domain of A;if ei is a constraint operation 
[C](Rj), 1 
 j < i, the constraint 
C is satis˜ed 
by rj and ri = rj.We say (r
1, ..., rn) is a 
feasible execution path
 if it is a 
feasible partial execution path 
and denote by 
F(d ) the set of all feasible execution paths for 
R1 = e1; . . . ; Rn = en and input database d.De˜nition 4: The semantics of a DGQL queryR1 = e1; –; Rn = en; is de˜ned as the function : D1  2D2,where D1 is the set of all relational databases over the base database schemas, and 
D2 is the set of all databases over the schema 
S1, ..., Sn of the expressions 
e1, ..., en, respectively, as follows. For a given database 
d, (d) is the set of all databases 
d  = (r1, ..., rn) that satisfy the  operator, that is,
Case 1
: When 
=sat, (d) is the set of all feasible execution paths, i.e., 
(d) def=   F(d).Case 2
: When 
=min(Rk), (d) is the set of all feasible execution paths that 
give the minimum value computed by r
k among all feasible execution paths, 
i.e., (d) def=   {(r1, ..., rn)  F(d) |  (r 1, ..., r n)  F(d), rk  r k}.Case 3
: When 
=max(Rk), (d) is the set of all feasible execution paths that 
give the maximum value computed by r
k among all feasible execution paths, 
i.e., (d) def=   {(r1, ..., rn)  F(d) |  (r 1, ..., r n)  F(d), rk  r k}.Note that the optimal value may not lead to a unique feasible execution path, that 
is, more than one assignment to relations r
1, ..., rn may lead to the same optimal value 
for r
k. We say that a database 
d  = (r1, ..., rn)  (d ) is a nondeterministic answer to 
the D
GQL query. If 
(d ) = , we say that 
 (to denote infeasibility) is returned and 
assigned to R1, –, R
n.DGQL Reduction to MPIN THIS
 SECTION
, WE PRESENT
 A REDUCTION
 PROCEDURE
 to translate D
GQL queries to MP 
formulations. We ˜rst introduce MP with some discussion, and then give a 
sound and 
complete reduction procedure.MP and Its Computational Complexity
An MP problem has the form 
min f (x[) subject to 
C(x[), where 
x[ is a vector of vari
-ables that range over domain 
D{, f is an 
objective function from 
D{ to the set of reals 
 52     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANG, and 
C(x[) is a constraint. 
The constraint 
C(x[) is associated with a Boolean function 
that, given an instantiation of vector 
a[  D{ to 
x[, evaluates to true or false. A solution 
to the optimization problem is a vector 
a[  D{ that satis˜es the constraint 
C so that 
f (a[)  f (b{) for all vectors 
b{ that satisfy 
C. Note that 
min can be replaced with 
max in 
this formulation without dif˜culties.Formal optimization models are solved using MP algorithms. MP algorithms heav
-ily depend on the type of the problem, determined by the domains of the variables 
(e.g., reals, integers, binary, ˜nite domain), the structure of constraints 
C (e.g., linear, 
quadratic, polynomial), and the form of the objective function 
f. As an example, lin
-ear programming (
LP) is a class of MP where variables range over reals, constraints 

are inequalities between linear arithmetic expressions, and the objective function is 

linear.
The LP problem was proven to be in 
P in 
Kachiyan [21]. However, the class of 
simplex algorithms [10] is still the most widely used in practice, although its worst-

case complexity is exponential in the dimension (i.e., the number of variables). But 

even the {0,
 1} integer linear programming (I
LP) is known to be NP
-complete [27]. 
The Branch and Bound algorithm is a popular algorithm for I
LP and MI
LP (mixed-

integer 
LP). While exponential in the worst case, it has the nice property of reaching 
intermediate (not necessarily optimal) solutions. In this paper, we use MI
LP to encode 
DGQL queries and derive solutions.
Reduction ProcedureThe key idea of the reduction procedure is to use a symbolic table formulation to 

represent each step of the D
GQL query. Without loss of generality, we assume that 

every tuple in a relation has a globally unique tuple identi˜er 
tid and that when new 
tuples are introduced (e.g., by materializing a view de˜nition), new 
tids will be gener
-ated accordingly.
De˜nition 5:
 A symbolic table
 is a standard relational table with the following 
additions: (1)
 an attribute can be of a constraint variable name type (or CVN 
type), and the domain of a CVN attribute is variable names, and (2)
 there must 
be a special attribute of CVN type named 
TAF
, for tuple-active-˚ag, with domain 
of binary variable names.
As an example, below is a symbolic orders table:
TAFsupitemlocqtytaf[1]S1I1L1qty[1]taf[2]S2I2L2qty[2]where TAF and 
qty are CVN-type attributes. 
The purpose of the 
TAF attribute is to 
indicate that a particular tuple exists in the table in a feasible execution path, and the 
CVN attributes allow possible instantiations.
Symbolic tables can be instantiated as regular relational tables by instantiating 
all the variables with CVN attributes. More speci˜cally, given an instantiation of 
 SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     53variables appearing in a symbolic table, the symbolic table becomes a regular table, 
minus the 
TAF column, as follows: For each tuple 
t in the symbolic table, if 
taf[id] is instantiated to 
True, then the resulting regular table contains the tuple 
t with other 
CVN attributes instantiated and the 
TAF attribute dropped. For example, in the above 
table, if 
taf[1] = T
rue, taf[2] = False, 
qty[1] = 20, and 
qty[2] = 4, then the 
resulting table issupitemlocqtyS1I1L120Note that the TAF attribute is dropped.
The reduction to MI
LP is as follows. 
Given a D
GQL query 
R1 = e1; ...; Rn = en; , we generate a symbolic table for each 
Ri. In order to represent all the feasible execu
-tion paths, constraints are to be added so all and only feasible execution paths are 
represented. More speci˜cally, the 
reduction result
 will be a triple:({s1, ..., sn}, V, C),where {
s1, ..., sn} are symbolic relational tables, 
V is the set of all constraint variables, 
including those that appear in {
s1, ..., sn}, and 
C is a set of constraints over 
V. 
The schema 
of each si, 1  i  n, will be the schema of ei extended with the 
TAF attribute.
De˜nition 6:
 Given the reduction result ({
s1, ..., sn}, V, C) and an instantiation 
of variables in 
V to values in their corresponding domains, we say that (r
1, ..., rn) is a 
reduction instantiation
 of ({
s1, ..., sn}, V, C) if 
 i such that 1
  i  n, r
i is 
constructed by (1)
 replacing variables in 
si with their corresponding instanti
-ated values, (2)
 eliminating all tuples in 
si where the 
TAF attribute is False, and 
(3) removing the 
TAF attribute.
Before we discuss the procedure to obtain a reduction from a D
GQL query, we 
formalize the correctness of the reduction result. As discussed above, the symbolic 

tables together with the constraints should represent all and only feasible execution 

paths. To formalize this idea, we have:
Definition 7:
 The reduction result ({
s1, ..., sn}, V, C) of a D
GQL query 
R1 = e1; ...; Rn = en;  is said to be correct
 if:Soundness: Every reduction instantiation (r
1, ..., rn) of (
s1, ..., sn) that satis˜es 
constraint C is indeed a feasible execution path of the D
GQL query; andCompleteness: Every feasible execution path is a reduction instantiation of 

(s1, ..., sn) that satis˜es C.The reduction steps follow the traditional relational algebra approach in the sense 
that at each step we simply generate a new symbolic table and add appropriate con
-
straints. These steps are summarized in Algorithm
 1.Algorithm 1 produces symbolic tables 
si recursively using the symbolic tables gener
-ated earlier. 
The base case (steps 2Œ5) is to make the base database tables symbolic by 
adding a 
TAF attribute and the corresponding variables and constraints, indicating that 
 54     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANGall the tuples are ﬁactiveﬂ in the base tables. At each step of the reduction (steps
 7Œ10), a new symbolic table for 
ei is generated and constraints and variables added to 
C and 
V, respectively. We now describe the key idea behind these steps. In Appendix
 A, we 
give a complete description of these steps for each operator.
Step 7 of Algorithm 1 is to generate a symbolic table for 
si given one or two symbolic 
tables as the input. 
The schema of the output table is easily found by using the formal 
de˜nition of the D
GQL and traditional relational algebra operators. Setting up all 
the tuples in 
si is easy for most operators, but a bit challenging for others. Intuitively, 
we want to set up all the possible output tuples in 
si and use constraints involving 
taf[tid] to indicate if the tuple should actually exist in a feasible execution path. 
For example, if the operator is the selection operation, then the output table can be 

simply a copy of the input table, but in the constraint we code that an output tuple 

exists only if the selection condition is true. 
The reason we need to use constraint 
instead of simply dropping the tuple is that the selection condition may be applied to 

a CVN entry whose value is unknown at the reduction time.
The number of all possible tuples in 
si can be exponential in some cases. For ex
-ample, when ﬁgroup byﬂ is done on a CVN attribute, we need to set up 
si to prepare for 
all possible groupings since we do not yet know the values of these CVN attributes. 

In practice, we may want to restrict ﬁgroup byﬂ only on non-CVN attributes so that 

the grouping will be known at the reduction time and each group will correspond to 

one possible tuple in 
si (although the actual values in the tuple may remain CVN and 
unknown at the reduction time). Details can be found in Appendix
 A.Algorithm 1. Constraint ReductionInput: A D
GQL query R1 = e1; –; Rn = en; Output: A correct reduction ({
s1, –, sn}, V, C)Method:1: L
et V =  and C = True2: for
 each base table B do3:  
generate a symbolic table by adding a TAF attribute
4:  
for each tuple in B with tuple id tid, use CVN taf[tid] as the value under 
   T
AF, and let 
C = C  taf[tid]. Add 
taf[tid] to V.5: end for
6: for
 i = 1 to n Œ 1 do7:   G
enerate symbolic table si from the operator of ei and the input symbolic    
tables used in ei (these input symbolic tables must be from s1, ..., siŒ1 and    
those corresponding to the base tables).8:   G
enerate the corresponding Ci9:   
Add the new variables used in 
si and Ci to V10:  L
et C = C  Ci11: end for

12: return 
({s1, –, sn}, V, C) SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     55Once the symbolic output table is set up, the remaining task is to generate the 
constraint (Step
 8). This step is basically to encode the correspondence between the 
input tuples and the possible output tuples. Since we know which symbolic tuple in the 
output is generated by which input tuples, this task is relatively easy as this is in reality 

a tuple-level task. Again, we refer the reader to Appendix
 A for further details.We are now ready to address the correctness of the reduction.
Theorem 1: The reduction produced by Algorithm 1 is correct, that is, both sound 

and complete.
Using the correct reduction, the result of a D
GQL query can be derived as indicated 
in Algorithm
 2. Basically, we solve the corresponding MP problem given by the cor
-rect reduction result (Step 1). If the constraint is infeasible, then we return
  (Steps 
2Œ3). Otherwise, we use the instantiation of the variables found in the constraint 

satisfaction problem (CSP) solution (Step
 6) or MP solution (Step
 8) to instantiate all 
the symbolic tables (Step 10).Theorem 2: Algorithm 2 correctly, by De˜nition 4, computes the DGQL query 

result.
Initial Experimental Evaluation
THE
 RUNNING
 TIMES
 OF
 MATHEM
ATIC
AL PROGR
AMS
 IS
 OFTEN
 SENSITIVE
 to the way the problem 
is represented. For many classes of problems, a poor choice of mathematical representa
-
tion will cause the solver to take signi˜cantly longer to ˜nd an optimal solution. One 

concern with D
GQL (and the reduction process as described in the previous section) 
Algorithm 2. DGQL ComputationInput: A D
GQL query R1 = e1; –; Rn = en;  and a database dOutput: Query resultMethod:
1. Perform Constraint Reduction (Algorithm 1) to produce ({s1, –, sn}, V, C)2. if constraint C is infeasible then3.  
return 
4. else5.   
if  = sat then6.   
Solve the CSP for 
C and V7.   
else8.    
Solve the MP problem 
min/max VRk such that C is satis˜ed9.   
end if10.  G
iven the variable instantiation produced in Step 6 or Step 8, return the 
 
  R
eduction Instantiation (r1, –, rn) as described in De˜nition 6.11. end if 56     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANGis that the extra views and tables used in modeling add substantial overhead by intro
-ducing redundant or unnecessary variables and constraints. It is possible a simpler or 

more concise modeling may lead to a signi˜cantly faster solution.
Our hypothesis is that problems described using D
GQL are solved as ef˜ciently as 
when described using algebraic modeling languages such as AMP
L or 
GAMS. As an 
initial step to test this hypothesis, we took the logistics optimization problem from the 

second section and manually created a concise AMP
L formulation of the same problem. 
We then generated several database instances varying problem size and compared the 

running time when solved using this AMP
L model and through D
GQL reduction. We 

now present the complete AMP
L implementation of our running example:
set Vendors;set Items;set Locations;param PricePerUnit{Vendors,Items}>=0;param Available{Vendors,Items}>=0;param Requested{Locations,Items}>=0;var Orders{Vendors,Items,Locations}>=0;var OrderPlaced{Vendors,Items,Locations} binary;var ItemsPurchased{Vendors,Locations}>=0;var VendorShipped{Vendors,Locations} binary;minimize total_cost:  sum{v in Vendors} sum{i in Items} sum{l in Locations}    
PricePerUnit[v,i] * Orders[v,i,l];subject toavailable_vs_purchased {v in Vendors, i in Items}:
  
Available[v,i] >= sum{l in Locations} Orders[v,i,l];requested_vs_delivered {l in Locations, i in Items}:  
Requested[l,i] <= sum{v in Vendors} Orders[v,i,l];order_placed {v in Vendors, i in Items, l in Locations}:
  
OrderPlaced[v,i,l] = 0 ==>    
Orders[v,i,l] = 0 else Orders[v,i,l] >= 1;items_purchased {v in Vendors, l in Locations}:  
ItemsPurchased[v,l] = sum{i in Items} OrderPlaced[v,i,l];vendor_shipped {v in Vendors, l in Locations}:
  
VendorShipped[v,l] = 0 ==>    
ItemsPurchased[v,l] = 0 else ItemsPurchased[v,l] >= 1;vendor_restriction {l in Locations}:
  sum{v in Vendors} VendorShipped[v,l] <= 3;The D
GQL query and the AMP
L program were run using I
LOG CP
LEX 12.1 as 
the solver. 
The test was on Windows
 X
P running on a 2.0
GHz Core
 2 Duo with 4
GB of RAM. In both cases, the tuning parameters passed to I
LOG CP
LEX were the same 
and were typical for solving MILP problems. SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     57The size of the logistics optimization problem here is parameterized by the number 
of vendors, items, and locations. 
Given these parameters, a problem is generated by 
randomly instantiating the database tables 
supply and 
demand. Note that problem 
size corresponds to the number of decision variables in 
orders as well as the indicator 
variables (tuple-active-˚ags) implicit in 
vendor_restrictions. 
Thus, we compute 
this directly from the problem parameters, that is, 
decision variables
 = vendors
 * items * locs and indicator variables = vendors
 * items * locs + vendors
 * locs.Each random problem generated was solved using both the D
GQL reduction and 
the AMP
L program, and the solution time was measured. 
This is the CPU time spent 
searching for an optimal solution and does not include the time to load the program off 
disk, or in the case of D
GQL from the database. Only random databases that contained 
a feasible solution were included in the results. 
The solution time for both the D
GQL and AMP
L implementations was less than 0.01
 seconds for every randomly generated 
infeasible problem. The results of this experiment can be seen in Figure
 1.Note in the graph, a linear regression through the origin has slope 1.0245. 
This implies the AMP
L model is on average 
 2.45 percent faster than D
GQL. This dif
-ference is small and not signi˜cant when considering the large variation in solution 

time between the two systems for the same problem.
On closer inspection, it appears the advantage AMP
L has is limited only to those 
problem instances where a tight solution is found by CP
LEX quickly. Our D
GQL 
implementation uses Java and Java Native Interface
 to communicate with CP
LEX, and this may add overhead to small problems. Moreover, AMP
L performs limited 

presolving when converting problems into a special format that CP
LEX understands, 

which may reduce CPLEX solution time.In addition, D
GQL appears to do better on problem instances where a larger param
-eter space must be searched. 
This is due in part to the fact that the AMP
L formulation 
Figure 1.
 Scatter Plot of Solution Time (DGQL Versus AMP
L) 58     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANGhas an extra 
vendors
 * locs number of variables in its solution space (see Figure
 2). As the logistics optimization problems become larger, this extra number of variables 
will have a measurable impact on solution time. It will be interesting to investigate 

further if these extra variables are a limitation of the AMP
L modeling language or 

just our formulation of this problem.ConclusionIN THIS
 PAPER
, WE PROPOSED
 DGQL, a language designed to (re-)use SQ
L programs for 
decision optimization to make D
GSS implementation agile and intuitive and lever
-age existing investment in SQ
L-implemented MIS. We de˜ned its formal syntax and 

semantics and provided a canonical implementation of D
GQL programs by reduction 

to mathematical programming. We used examples to show that the overhead of using a 

high-level language is small when compared with manually crafted MP formulations. 

With added bene˜t of agile and intuitive high-level language, we believe that D
GQL 
provides a practical solution for decision optimization in D
GSS, especially when an 

underlying database is involved and database applications already exist.
As a database language, D
GQL opens up many research questions. For example, what 
is the expressiveness of D
GQL: how to characterize it, and is there a completeness as 

in relational algebra. Optimization opportunities are abundant and we only touched on 

a few during our canonical reduction process. Standard database techniques may help, 

but more interesting is how to use the high-level nature of the language to help ˜nd 

optimal solutions, as it is well known in the database community that more semantic 

information usually translates to better query optimization. Additional experimental 

study will be important both in terms of D
GQL ef˜ciency for a wide variety of MP 

models. Finally, it will be important to conduct usability studies on complete business 
Figure 2.
 Scatter Plot of Total Number of Variables (D
GQL Versus AMP
L) SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     59cases to measure productivity gained by using D
GQL as opposed to algebraic modeling 
languages integrated with a relational database management system directly.
Acknowledgment:
 Part of the work by Wang was supported by National Science Foundation 
grant no. 0716575.REFERENCES
1. Agerfalk, P.J.; Fitzgerald, B.; and Slaughter, S.A. Introduction to the special issueŠ
Flexible and distributed information systems development: State of the art and research chal
-
lenges. Information Systems Research, 20,
 3 (2009), 317Œ328.2. Atamtürk, A.; Johnson, E.
L.; 
Linderoth, J.
T.; and Savelsbergh, M.W.P. A relational 
modeling system for linear and integer programming. 
Operations Research, 48,
 6 (NovemberŒ
December 2000), 846Œ857.3. Beck, 
K. Embracing change with extreme programming. 
Computer, 32,
 10 (1999), 
70Œ77.4. Bhargava, 
H.K.; Krishnan, R.; and Mukherjee, S. On the integration of data and math
-ematical modeling languages. 
Annals of Operations Research, 38,
 1 (NovemberŒDecember 
1992), 69Œ95.5. Boisvert, 
R.F.; 
Howe, S.E.; and 
Kahaner, D.
K. GAMS: A framework for the management 
of scienti˜c software. 
ACM Transactions on Mathematical Software, 11,
 4 (1985), 313Œ355.6. Brodsky, A., and Nash, 
H. CoJava: Optimization modeling by nondeterministic simula
-tion. In F. Benhamou (ed.), 
Proceedings of Principles and Practice of Constraint Programming 
(CP 2006), vol.
 4204. Nantes, France: Springer, 2006, pp. 91Œ106.
7. Capiluppi, A.; Fernandez-
Ramil, J.; 
Higman, J.; Sharp, 
H.C.; and Smith, N. An empirical 
study of the evolution of an agile-developed software system. In 
Proceedings of the 29th Inter
-national Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE ™07).
 Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer 
Society, 2007, pp. 511Œ518.
8. Choobineh, J. SQ
LMP: A data sublanguage for representation and formulation of linear 
mathematical models. INFORMS Journal on Computing, 3,
 4 (Fall 1991), 358Œ375.
9. Cohen, D.; 
Lindvall, M.; and Costa, P. An introduction to agile methods. In M.
 Z
elkowitz 
(ed.), Advances in Computers,
 vol.
 62. Oxford: Elsevier, 2004, pp. 1Œ66.
10. Dantzig, 
G. Linear Programming and Extensions.
 Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1963.11. Desouza, 
K.C. Agile Information Systems: Conceptualization, Construction, and Man
-agement.
 Oxford: Elsevier, 2006.
12. Dolk, D.
R. An introduction to model integration and integrated modeling environments. 
Decision Support Systems, 10, 3 (1993), 249Œ254.13. Fourer, 
R.; Gay, D.M.; and 
Kernighan, B.W. A modeling language for mathematical 
programming. Management Science, 36,
 5 (1990), 519Œ554.14. Fritzson, P., and Engelson, V. ModelicaŠA uni˜ed object-oriented language for system 
modeling and simulation. In E. Jul (ed.), 
Proceedings of the 12th European Conference on 
Object Oriented Programming (ECOOP 98).
 London: Springer, 1998, pp. 67Œ90.
15. Fruhling, A., and Vreede, 
G.-J. de. Field experiences with e
Xtreme programming: De
-veloping an emergency response system. 
Journal of Management Information Systems, 22,
 4 
(Spring 2006), 39Œ68.16. Garcia-Molina, H.; Ullman, J.D.; and Widom, J. 
Database Systems: The Complete Book, 
2d ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2008.17. 
Gremillion, 
L.L., and Pyburn, P.J. Justifying decision support and of˜ce automation 
systems. Journal of Management Information Systems, 2,
 1 (Summer 1985), 5Œ17.18. Harris, M.
L.; Collins, 
R.B.; and 
Hevner, A.
R. Control of ˚exible software development 
under uncertainty. 
Information Systems Research, 20,
 3 (2009), 400Œ419.19. Hong, W.; 
Thong, J.
Y.L.; Chasalow, 
L.C.; and Dhillon, 
G. User acceptance of agile in
-formation systems: A model and empirical test. 
Journal of Management Information Systems, 
28, 1 (Summer 2011), 235Œ272. 60     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANG20. Ilyas, I.F.; Beskales, 
G.; and Soliman, M.A. A survey of top-k query processing techniques 
in relational database systems. ACM Computing Surveys, 40,
 4 (2008), 1Œ58.21. Kachiyan, L.G. A polynomial algorithm in linear programming. 
Soviet Mathematics 
Doklady, 20,
 1 (1979), 191Œ194.22. Lindstrom, L., and Jeffries, 
R. Extreme programming and agile software development 
methodologies. Information Systems Management, 21,
 3 (2004), 41Œ52.23. Maruping, 
L.M.; Venkatesh, V.; and Agarwal, 
R. A control theory perspective on agile 
methodology use and changing user requirements. 
Information Systems Research, 20,
 3 (2009), 
377Œ399.24. Mitra, 
G.; Lucas, C.; Moody, S.; and 
Kristjansson, B. Sets and indices in linear program
-ming modelling and their integration with relational data models
. Computational Optimization 
and Applications, 3,
 4 (1995), 263Œ283.25. Özsoyog
¬lu, G.; Özsoyog
¬lu, Z.M.; and Matos, V. Extending relational algebra and relational 
calculus with set-valued attributes and aggregate functions. 
ACM Transactions on Database 
Systems, 12, 4 (1987), 566Œ592.26. Rumpe, B., and Schröder, A. Quantitative survey on extreme programming projects. In 
M. Marchesi and 
G. Succi (eds.), 
Proceedings of the 3rd International Conference on Extreme 
Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering (XP 2002).
 Alghero, Italy: Springer, 

2002, pp. 95Œ100.27. Schrijver, A. 
Theory of Linear and Integer Programming.
 New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, 
1998.28. Thomas, D. Agile programming: Design to accommodate change. 
IEEE Software, 22,
 3 
(MayŒJune 2005), 14Œ16.29. Vidgen, 
R., and Wang, 
X. Coevolving systems and the organization of agile software 
development. 
Information Systems Research, 20,
 3 (2009), 355Œ376. Appendix A: 
Reduction ProcedureTHE
 KEY
 IDE
A BEHIND
 CONSTR
AINT
 ENCODING
 of the step 
Ri = ei of a D
GQL sequence 
R1 = e1; ...; R
n = en;  depends on the algebraic operator in 
ei. For an 
augment operator, 
the idea is to replace an augmented attribute in every tuple with a CVN attribute that will 
hold a constraint variable name (unique per tuple id). For the 
constraint
 operator, the 
idea is to extend the constraints 
C being built in the reduction with the corresponding 
constraints over variables or constants in every tuple. For all the 
deterministic operators, 
the idea is to build a symbolic representation of the result and add the constraint that 

connects the variables in the output to the variables in the input. For the 
optimization operator, the idea is to represent an optimization problem that minimizes or maximizes 

the variable value computed by the operand of the optimization operator. 
We now present our reduction formally. We will build the reduction iteratively, by 
constructing a triple 
Qi = (
Si = {
s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci), for every i, 1 
 i < n, which will be 
a reduction from the partial assignment sequence expression (
R1 = e1; ...; Ri = 
ei), as 
follows. Initially, S
0 = , V0 = , and 
C0 = T
rue. Iteratively, given 
QiŒ1, 1
  i < n Œ 1, Qi is constructed based on the query expression 
ei as follows:
If ei is a base relational name 
R, and r is the corresponding base relation, 
si will 
be constructed from r by adding the attribute 
TAF (whose value for a tuple will 
be the variable 
TAF[tid], where 
tid is that tuple™s id). 
Vi will be the union of 
ViŒ1 and the set of new 
TAF[tid]
 variables. 
Ci will be the conjunction of C
iŒ1 and the equality constraint TAF[tid] = True for every tuple in r.
 SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     61If ei is a previously assigned relational name 
Rj (1 
 j < i), then 
Qi is constructed 
by taking Vi = ViŒ1, Ci = CiŒ1, and si = sj.If ei is an augmentation-from-domain 
[A  D](
Rj), where 1 
 j < i, then 
Qi is 
constructed as follows. 
The relation 
si is constructed from 
sj by adding a CVN(D) 
attribute, and using as its value the variable name A[
tid] for every tuple in 
sj. Vi is the union of V
iŒ1 with the set of all new variables in the CVN(D) attribute. 
Finally, 
Ci = CiŒ1.If ei is an augmentation-from-relation 
[A1, –, Am  Rj](Rk), where 1
  j,k  n, then Qi is constructed as follows. 
The relation 
si is constructed from 
sk, by add
-ing attributes A
1, ..., An of type CVN (over the corresponding domains in s
j). Vi is the union of 
ViŒ1 and the set of all new variables. Finally, 
Ci is the conjunction 
of CiŒ1 and the constrainttidTidmjTAFtidTrueAtidAtids1,...,, where Tid
 is the set of all tuple ids in sk.If ei is a projection operation 
L(Rj), where 1 
 j < i, then 
Qi is constructed as 
follows. 
Vi = ViŒ1, Ci = CiŒ1, and si = L(sj), where L = L  {TAF}.If ei is a (bag) union operation 
Rj  Rk, where 1 
 k, j < i, then 
Qi is constructed 
by taking si = sj  sk, Vi = ViŒ1, and Ci = CiŒ1.If ei is an intersection operation 
Rj  Rk, where 1 
 j, k < i, then 
Qi is constructed 
as follows. Assume 
A1, ..., Al, B1, ..., Bm is the schema of both 
Rj and 
Rk, where 
A1, ..., Al are all attributes that are non-CVN in both 
sj and 
sk. For every pair of 
tuples tid1  sj and 
tid2  sk that agree on 
A1, ..., Al, construct a tuple 
tid (new id), 
with values for 
A1, ..., Al taken from 
tid1 (which are the same as in 
tid2), and the 
values for CVN attributes 
B1, ..., Bm being variable names 
B1[tid], ..., Bm[tid], as 
well as CVN({0,
 1}) attribute 
TAF. si is constructed as the bag of all such tuples. 
Vi will be the union of 
ViŒ1, the set of all new (globally unique) variables above, 
and the set of an auxiliary CVN({0,
 1}) variables 
E[tid] for every 
tid in 
si. To construct Ci, create the following new constraint for every tuple 
tid in si:EtidtidBtidBtidBtidBtidTruemm112112–TAFTAAFTAFtidtidEtid12, where tid1, tid2 are two tuples that gave rise to tuple 
tid in 
si. Note that values of 
the B attributes (e.g., 
tid1 · B1) may either be drawn from the original domain of 
B (e.g., if 
B1 is a non-CVN attribute in 
sj), or a variable name (e.g., 
B1[tid1], if 
B1 is a CVN attribute in 
sj). Finally, 
Ci is constructed as the union of 
CiŒ1 and the 
set of all new constraints above.
If ei is a set difference operation 
Rj Œ R
k, where 1 
 j, k < n, then 
Qi is constructed 
by taking 
si = sj Œ sk, Vi = ViŒ1, and 
Ci = CiŒ1. Note we assume that the set differ
-ence cannot involve augmented attributes.
If ei is a Cartesian product 
Rj  Rk, where 1 
 j, k < i, then 
Qi is constructed as 
follows. 
si is constructed by (1)
 computing sj  sk, and (2)
 replacing two attributes 
Rj · TAF and 
Rk · TAF with a single attribute 
TAF of type CVN({0,1}). 
Recall  62     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANGthat each tuple in the Cartesian product will have a new global 
tid, and then the 
value of 
TAF for that tuple will be the variable 
TAF[tid]. Vi is the union of 
ViŒ1 and 
the set of all new 
TAF variables. 
Ci is the conjunction of 
CiŒ1 and the constraints 
 TAF[tid] = TAF[tid1]  TAF[tid2], for all 
tid in the Cartesian product, where 
tid1 and 
tid2 are the ids of tuples from sj and sk, respectively, that formed the tuple 
tid.If ei is selection operation 
P(Rj), where 1 
 j < i and 
P is the selection predicate, 
then Qi is constructed as follows. 
Let P = 
Preg
  Pcvn, where 
Preg
 is the selection 
predicate that does not involve CVN attributes, and 
Pcvn is the selection predicate 
that may involve CVN attributes. 
si is constructed as 
Preg
(sj). Note that 
si has 
globally new tuple ids, and thus the variables 
TAF[tid] in tuples of 
si are new 
unique variables. For every new variable 
TAF[tid], we also create an auxiliary 
binary variable 
PB[tid]. Vi is constructed as the union of 
ViŒ1 and the set of all 
new variables 
TAF[tid] and 
PB[tid] for every 
tid in 
sj. Finally, 
Ci is the conjunc
-tion of CiŒ1 andtidTidcvnPBtidTruePPtidTAFtidPBtidTAFtid
, where Tid
 is the set of all tuple ids in 
si, tid  is the id of the tuple in 
sj from which 
the tuple 
tid in 
si originated in selection, and 
PPcvn[tid] is the constraint constructed 
from Pcvn by replacing every attribute name 
A with CVN variable 
A[tid].If ei is an aggregation 
[A1, ..., An, f (B)](Rj), 1 
 j < i, then 
Qi is constructed as 
follows. 
si is constructed from 
[A1, ..., An](sj) (with all new tuple ids), by ˜rst 
eliminating duplicates, and then adding the CVN(
D) attribute 
f (B), where 
D is 
the domain of values returned by aggregation 
f, and CVN({0,
 1}) attribute 
TAF. Vi is the union of 
ViŒ1 and all new variables 
f(B)[tid], TAF[tid], for each 
tid in 
si, and also auxiliary variables 
B [tid] for every 
tid in 
sj. Ci will be the conjunction 
of Ci-1 withtidTidtidTrueBtidBtidtidFalseBtidTAFTAF
0, where Tid
 is the set of all tuple ids in sj, andtidTidiTidtidfBtidBi, where Tid
(tid) is the set of tuple ids in 
sj that have the same values for 
A1, ..., An as the tuple tid in si.
ei is a constraint operation 
[C](Rj), where 1 
 j < i, then 
Qi is constructed by 
taking si = sj, Vi = ViŒ1, and Ci is the conjunction of CiŒ1 andtidTidCtid, where Tid
 is the set of all tuple ids in 
sj, and 
C [tid] is the constraint constructed 
from C by replacing every attribute 
A with the CVN variable 
A[tid].Finally, consider an optimization operator 
[min](Rj), where 1 
 j < n and 
ej is an 
expression that returns a table with a single value, that is, the value over the single 
 SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     63attribute of the single tuple (recall this must be the last operator in the sequence). It 
is encoded as the following MP optimization problem: 
Let v be a CVN variable (or 
a constant) corresponding to the single value in 
sj. Then, the following minimization 
problem is being constructed as follows:
min v subject to CnŒ1.For the case of 
[max](Rj), the reduction is the same, except that 
min is replaced 
with max. Finally, if the operator is 
[sat](Rj), where 
sat is a key word that indicates 
that we are only interested in satis˜ability (not optimization), the problem constructed 

is one that ˜nds a feasible instantiation to variables in 
VnŒ1. Note this can always be 
done by minimizing, or maximizing, a constant value.
Appendix B: Proof of CorrectnessIN THIS
 SECTION
, WE PRESENT
 A FORM
AL PROOF
 of correctness for both 
Theorem 1 and 
Theorem 2.Proof 1 First, we extend the de˜nition of 
correct reduction
 to 
partial reduction
 as follows. A 
partial reduction ({
s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci) for 1
  i  n of a D
GQL query 
R1 = e1; ...; R
n = en;  is correct ifSoundness: Every reduction instantiation (r
1, ..., ri) of (
s1, ..., si) that satis˜es con
-straint Ci is indeed a partial feasible execution path of the D
GQL query; and Completeness: Every partial feasible execution path (r
1, ..., ri) is a reduction 
instantiation of (s1, ..., si) that satis˜es Ci.Note that when i
 = 0, the partial reduction is ({}, 
V0 = , C0 = T
rue) and is de˜ned to 
be correct. Also note that the correct partial reduction for i
 = n is exactly the correct 
reduction.We prove the correctness of partial constraint reduction for every 1
  i  n by in
-duction on i. For i
 = 0, the reduction is correct by de˜nition. Inductively, assuming 
correctness of reduction ({
s1, ..., siŒ1}, ViŒ1, CiŒ1), we need to prove correctness for 
reduction ({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci).To prove soundness, let (r
1, ..., ri) be a reduction instantiation of ({
s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci}). We need to show that (r
1, ..., ri) is a partial feasible execution path. Clearly, (r
1, ..., riŒ1) constitutes a reduction instantiation of ({
s1, ..., siŒ1}, ViŒ1, CiŒ1). Therefore, by induction 
hypothesis, (r
1, ..., riŒ1) is a partial feasible execution path.
To prove that (r
1, ..., ri) is a partial feasible execution path, we consider cases below 
corresponding to the cases of the formal reduction of Ri = ei:Case 1:
 ei is a base relational table r. Since the constraints added by 
si are of the 
form TAF[tid] = T
rue, they are all satis˜ed and r
i = r. 
Therefore, (r
1, ..., ri) is a 
partial feasible execution path.
 64     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANGCase 2: e
i is a previously assigned relational name 
Rj, 1
  j < i. Since 
Ci = CiŒ1, ri = rj, and therefore (r1, ..., ri) is a partial feasible execution path.
Case 3: e
i is an 
augmentation-from-domain
 [A  D](Rj), 1
  j < i. Since 
Ci = CiŒ1, r
i is an augmentation of r
j, and therefore (r
1, ..., ri) is a partial feasible 
execution path.
Case 4:
 ei is an 
augmentation-from-relation 
[A1, ..., Am  Rj](Rk), where 1
  j, k < i. Since the constraints added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci must be satis˜ed, the table r
i constructed as the reduction instantiation is also an augmentation of r
k. 
Therefore, 
(r1, ..., ri) is a partial feasible execution path.
Case 5: e
i is a projection operation 
L(Rj), where 1
  j < i. Since 
Ci = CiŒ1, clearly 
reduction instantiation r
i is a projection of r
j, and therefore (r
1, ..., ri) is a partial 
feasible execution path.

Case 6: e
i is an intersection operation 
Rj  Rk, where 1
  j, k < i. The constraints 
added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci make sure that the pairs of tuples that make 
TAF variable 
True are exactly those that are equal to each other and, therefore, must be in the 
intersection. Therefore, the reduction instantiation r
i is indeed the intersection 
of rj and rk, and thus (r1, ..., ri) is a partial feasible execution path.
Case 7:
 ei is a set difference operation 
Rj Œ 
Rk, where 1
  j,
 k < i. 
The constraints 
added to C
iŒ1 to form C
i guarantee that in the instantiation of s
i, the tuples with 
TAF = True are exactly the tuples in r
j but not in r
k. Therefore, the reduction instan
-tiation ri is exactly r
j Œ rk, and thus (r1, ..., ri) is a partial feasible execution path.
Case 8: e
i is a Cartesian product 
Rj  R
k, where 1
  j, k < i. The constraints 
added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci guarantee that in the instantiation of 
si, the tuples with 
TAF = T
rue are exactly those tuples composed from a pair of tuples with the cor
-responding TAF being 
True. Therefore, the reduction instantiation r
i is exactly the 
Cartesian product rj  rk, and thus (r1, ..., ri) is a partial feasible execution path.
Case 9: e
i is selection operation 
P(Rj), where 1
  j < i and P is the selection 
predicate. The constraints added to C
iŒ1 to form C
i guarantee that the tuples in 
the instantiation of 
si with 
TAF = T
rue are exactly those that satisfy the selection 
condition. Therefore, the reduction instantiation r
i = P(rj), and thus (r
1, ..., ri) is 
a partial feasible execution path.

Case 10: e
i is an aggregation 
[A1, ..., An, f (B)](Rj), 1
  j < i. The constraints 
added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci guarantee that the reduction instantiation r
i is exactly 
the aggregation of 
[A1, ..., An, f (B)](rj). Therefore, (r
1, ..., ri) is a partial feasible 
execution path.

Case 11: e
i is a constraint operation 
[C](Rj), where 1
  j < i. The constraints 
added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci are exactly those that express 
C. Therefore, since 
Ci is 
satis˜ed, the reduction instantiation r
i satis˜es 
C, and thus (r
1, ..., ri) is a partial 
feasible execution path.
 SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     65We have shown that in all cases of the formal reduction (r
1, ..., ri) is a partial feasible 
execution path. 
Therefore, Theorem 1 is sound.To prove completeness, let (r
1, ..., ri) be a partial feasible execution path. We need 
to show that (r
1, ..., ri) is also a reduction instantiation of ({s
1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci). Clearly, 
(r1, ..., riŒ1) is a partial feasible execution path. 
Therefore, by the induction hypothesis, 
(r1, ..., riŒ1) is also a reduction instantiation of ({s1, ..., siŒ1}, ViŒ1, CiŒ1).To prove that (r
1, ..., ri) is a reduction instantiation of ({s
1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci), we consider 
cases below corresponding to the cases of the formal reduction 
Ri = ei.Case 1:
 ei is a base relational table r. Since r
i = r, r
i is a reduction instantiation of 
si when all 
TAF variables are 
True, and thus (r
1, ..., ri) is a reduction instantiation 
of ({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci).Case 2: e
i is a previously assigned relational name 
Rj, 1
  j < i. Since 
Ci = CiŒ1, ri = r
j, and r
j is a reduction instantiation of s
j, r
i is a reduction instantiation of s
j. Thus, (r1, ..., ri) is a reduction instantiation of ({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci).Case 3:
 ei is an 
augmentation-from-domain
 [A  D](Rj), 1
  j < i. Since C
i = CiŒ1
, and r
i is an augmentation from domain of r
j, r
i is a reduction instantiation in 
which new variables in 
Vi are instantiated the with values from the augmentation. 
Thus, (r1, ..., ri) is a reduction instantiation of ({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci).Case 4:
 ei is an 
augmentation-from-relation
 [A1, ..., Am  Rj](Rk), where 
1  j,k < i. Since r
i is an augmentation from relation of r
k, the corresponding 
instantiation of values into new variables in 
Vi must satisfy the constraints added 
to CiŒ1 to form 
Ci. Therefore, r
i is a reduction instantiation of 
si. Thus, (r
1, ..., ri) is a reduction instantiation of ({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci).Case 5: e
i is a projection operation 
L(Rj), where 1
  j < i. Since 
Ci = CiŒ1, the instantiation of values that corresponds to r
j satis˜es 
Ci. Therefore, r
i is 
a reduction instantiation of 
si, and (r
1, ..., ri) is a reduction instantiation of 
({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci).Case 6:
 ei is an intersection operation 
Rj  Rk, where 1
  j,k < i. The constraints 
added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci make sure that the pairs of tuples that make 
TAF variable 
True are exactly those that are equal to each other and, therefore, must be in the 
intersection. Since r
i = L(rj), the variable instantiation corresponding to r
i must 
satisfy the constraints added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci, and so r
i is reduction instantiation 
of si. Thus, (r1, ..., ri) is a reduction instantiation of ({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci).Case 7:
 ei is a set difference operation 
Rj Œ R
k, where 1
  j,k < i. The constraints 
added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci guarantee that in the instantiation of 
si, the tuples with 
TAF = T
rue are exactly the tuples in r
j but not in r
k. Since r
i = rj Œ rk, variable 
instantiation corresponding to r
i must satisfy the constraints added to C
iŒ1 to 
form C
i, and so r
i is a reduction instantiation of 
si. Thus, (r
1, ..., ri) is a reduction 
instantiation of ({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci). 66     BRODSKY, EGG
E, AND W
ANGCase 8: e
i is a Cartesian product 
Rj  Rk, where 1
  j,k < i. The constraints 
added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci guarantee that in the instantiation of 
si, the tuples with 
TAF = T
rue are exactly those tuples composed from a pair of tuples with the 
corresponding TAF™s being 
True. Since r
i = rj  rk, the variable instantiation 
corresponding to r
i must satisfy the constraints added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci, and so 
ri is a reduction instantiation of 
si. Thus, (r
1, ..., ri) is a reduction instantiation of 
({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci).Case 9: e
i is selection operation 
P(Rj), where 1
  j < i and P is the selection 
predicate. The constraints added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci guarantee that the tuples in the 
instantiation of 
si with 
TAF = T
rue are exactly those that satisfy the selection 
condition. Since r
i = P(Rj), the variable instantiation corresponding to r
i must 
satisfy the constraints added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci, and so r
i is a reduction instantia
-tion of si. Thus, (r1, ..., ri) is a reduction instantiation of ({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci).Case 10: e
i is an aggregation 
[A1, ..., An, f (B)](Rj), 1
  j < i. The constraints 
added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci guarantee that the reduction instantiation r
i is exactly 
the aggregation of 
[A1, ..., An, f (B)](rj). Since r
i = [A1, ..., An, f (B)](rj), the vari
-able instantiation corresponding to r
i must satisfy the constraints added to 
CiŒ1 to 
form Ci, and so r
i is a reduction instantiation of 
si. Thus, (r
1, ..., ri) is a reduction 
instantiation of ({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci).Case 11: e
i is a constraint operation 
[C](Rj), where 1
  j < i. The constraints 
added to 
CiŒ1 to form 
Ci are exactly those that express 
C. Since r
i must satisfy 
C to form a partial feasible execution path, the variable instantiation corresponding 
to r
i must satisfy 
Ci, and so r
i is a reduction instantiation of s
i. Thus, (r
1, ..., ri) is 
a reduction instantiation of ({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci).We have shown that in all cases of the formal reduction, (r
1, ..., ri) is a reduction 
instantiation of ({s1, ..., si}, Vi, Ci). Therefore, Theorem 1 is sound.Proof 2 Let ({s
1, ..., sn}, V, C) be the reduction produced by applying Algorithm
 1 to the D
GQL query R1 = e1; ...; Rn = en; . Assume that the constraints 
C are feasible (otherwise 
Algorithm 2 returns , which is correct). We now consider three cases:
Case 1:
 = sat. The constraints 
C and variables 
V make up a constraint satis
-faction problem. Because 
C is feasible, applying a CSP solver will produce an 
assignment of variables in 
V that satis˜es 
C. We then apply the steps in De˜ni
-tion 6 to get the reduction instantiation (r
1, ..., rn). By 
Theorem 1 every reduction 
instantiation is a feasible execution path; thus (r
1, ..., rn) is correct.Case 2: 
= min(Rk). The expression 
Rk returns a single numeric value that is 
held in the variable 
VRk. This is the objective in the mathematical programming 
problem: min VRk subject to 
C. Because 
C is feasible, applying an MP solver 
 SUPPORT
ING AG
ILE ORGANIZATIONS WITH A DECISION GUIDANCE
 QUERY 
LANGUA
GE     67will produce an assignment of variables in 
V that satis˜es 
C such that 
VRk is 
minimum. We then apply the steps in De˜nition
 6 to get the reduction instantia
-tion (r
1, ..., rn). By 
Theorem
 1 every reduction instantiation is a feasible execution 
path. Assume that r
j is not the minimal value over all feasible execution paths. 
Then the reduction instantiation is not minimal, which contradicts the fact that 
the MP solver found the minimal. 
Thus (r1, ..., rn) is correct.Case 3:
 = max(Rk). This follows from the proof of Case
 2 and the observation 
that max VRk subject to C is equivalent to 
min Œ VRk subject to C. 