 This article was downloaded by: [ECU Libraries]
On: 21 April 2015, At: 11:20
Publisher: Routledge
Informa Ltd Registered in England and Wales Registered Number: 1072954 Registered
office: Mortimer House, 37-41 Mortimer Street, London W1T 3JH, UK
Journal of Management Information
Systems
Publication details, including instructions for authors and
subscription information:
http://www.tandfonline.com/loi/mmis20
Service-Oriented Methodology for
Systems Development
Mark Keith 
a
 , Haluk Demirkan 
a
 & Michael Goul 
b
a
 Marriott School of Management, Brigham Young University
b
 W.P. Carey School of Business, Arizona State University
Published online: 08 Dec 2014.
To cite this article:
 Mark Keith , Haluk Demirkan & Michael Goul (2013) Service-Oriented Methodology
for Systems Development, Journal of Management Information Systems, 30:1, 227-260
To link to this article: 
 
http://dx.doi.org/10.2753/MIS0742-1222300107
PLEASE SCROLL DOWN FOR ARTICLE
Taylor & Francis makes every effort to ensure the accuracy of all the information (the
ﬁContentﬂ) contained in the publications on our platform. However, Taylor & Francis,
our agents, and our licensors make no representations or warranties whatsoever as to
the accuracy, completeness, or suitability for any purpose of the Content. Any opinions
and views expressed in this publication are the opinions and views of the authors,
and are not the views of or endorsed by Taylor & Francis. The accuracy of the Content
should not be relied upon and should be independently verified with primary sources
of information. Taylor and Francis shall not be liable for any losses, actions, claims,
proceedings, demands, costs, expenses, damages, and other liabilities whatsoever or
howsoever caused arising directly or indirectly in connection with, in relation to or arising
out of the use of the Content.
This article may be used for research, teaching, and private study purposes. Any
substantial or systematic reproduction, redistribution, reselling, loan, sub-licensing,
systematic supply, or distribution in any form to anyone is expressly forbidden. Terms &
Conditions of access and use can be found at 
http://www.tandfonline.com/page/terms-
and-conditions
 Journal of Management Information Systems 
/ Summer 2013, Vol. 30, No. 1, pp. 227Œ259.
© 2013 M.E. Sharpe, Inc. All rights reserved. Permissions: www.copyright.com
ISSN 0742Œ1222 (print) / ISSN 1557Œ928X (online)DOI: 10.2753/MIS0742-1222300107Service-Oriented Methodology for Systems 
Development
MARK KEITH, HALUK DEMIRKAN, AND MICHAEL GOULMARK
 KEITH
 is an assistant professor of information systems, Marriott School of 
Management, Brigham Young 
University. 
He received his Ph.D. in information sys
-tems from Arizona State 
University. 
His recent research interests concern I
T project 
methodology, the service-oriented paradigm, and information privacy with mobile 
technologies. His research has appeared, or is forthcoming, in the 
Journal of Man
-agement Information Systems,
 Journal of the Association for Information Systems,
 International Journal of HumanŒComputer Studies, Decision Support Systems,
 Com-munications of the Association for Information Systems,
 INFORMS Decision Analysis,
 and other leading journals and conference proceedings.HALUK
 DEMIRKAN
 is an associate professor of service science, information systems, 
and supply chain management at the Milgard School of Business, 
University of 
WashingtonŒ
Tacoma. He received his Ph.D. in information systems and operations 
management from the 
University of Florida. 
His recent research interests are in the 
areas of service science, innovation and ecosystem with analytics. 
He has more than 
15 years of professional work experiences on process innovations with service-oriented 
solutions and data, analytics, and business intelligence for Fortune
 100 companies. 
He is a track chair for the Analytics, Mobile, and Service Science 
Track at the 
Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (
HICSS) and a board of director for the 
International Society of Service Innovation Professionals.
MICHAEL
 GOUL
 is a professor of information systems and chair of the Department of 
Information Systems and a research faculty member of the 
Center for Services 
Lead-ership at the W.P. 
Carey School of Business at Arizona State 
University. 
He received 
his Ph.D. from Oregon State 
University. 
His recent research interests are in the areas 
of service computing, smart and self-service, and advanced analytics. 
He has served 
as journal editor, special issue editor, Association for Information Systems (AIS) vice 
president, AIS conference and program chair, and chair of the AIS Special Interest 

Group on Decision Support, 
Knowledge and Data Management Systems (SIGDSS). 
Dr.
 Goul recently held a sabbatical appointment as a William J. 
Clinton Distinguished 
University Fellow at the newest presidential school, the 
Clinton School of Public 
Service, and he the executive director of the 
Teradata University Network.
ABSTRACT
: Despite advances in software development practices, organizations struggle 
to implement methodologies that match the risk in a project environment with needed 

coordination capabilities. Plan-driven and agile software development methodolo
-
gies each have strengths and risks. 
However, most project environments cannot be 
classi˜ed as entirely ﬁriskyﬂ or ﬁstable,ﬂ suggesting the need for hybrid approaches. 

We leverage a design science approach to implement a novel hybrid methodology 

based on concepts from the service-oriented paradigm. We motivate the approach 
 228     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULusing theory on interdependence and coordination, and design the methodology 
using theory on modularity and service-dominant logic. We also examine the effects 

of its adoption at a large electrical power company over a three-year period. 
The 
results imply that service-oriented theory should be applied to the human processes 

involved in systems development in order to achieve better ˜t between project risk, 

interdependencies, and the selected methodology(ies) in order to improve overall 

project performance.KEY
 WOR
DS AN
D PHRASES
: design science, modularization, project management, service 
orientation.REPORTS
 OF
 FAILE
D INFOR
MATION
 TECHNOLO
GY (
IT) PROJECTS
 ARE
 EASY
 TO
 FIN
D. The UK™s 
Integrated Offender Management System, at a cost of almost $375
 million, is still 
not complete, 
Canadian WestJet Airline™s new passenger reservations system went 
$34
 million over budget, and Microsoft™s estimated $1
 billion 
Kin mobile phone project 
resulted in its withdrawal from the market after just two months [18].
The conclusion drawn from these failures is that the project managers (PMs) failed 
to manage project risks effectively
 [16, 43] and to match the most appropriate meth
-odology to the task
 [7, 8]. For example, traditional plan-driven methodologies (i.e., 
waterfall) assume that most project risks can be managed up front. 
However, this is 
not the case with many I
T projects. Agile software development (ASD) methodologies 
(e.g., eXtreme Programming, Scrum) have gained increased interest among research
-ers and practitioners
 [26]. To combat the high costs of change associated with plan-
driven methodologies, agile methods implement short iterations of planning, analysis, 

development, testing, and feedback. Project teams using agile methodologies plan on 

changes taking place throughout the project and therefore minimize the amount of 

up-front project planning and analysis. As a result, ASD can potentially reduce the 

project loss caused by changing scope. Plan-driven methodologies are best suited when 

the project environment is relatively stable, whereas agile methodologies are more 

appropriate when the risk for scope change is relatively greater
 [26].The problem with this dichotomy is that most I
T projects are neither mostly ﬁriskyﬂ 
nor ﬁunriskyﬂ but lie somewhere in between. Depending on a variety of factors, cer
-tain portions of an I
T project can be fairly routine while others are highly uncertain. 

However, neither methodology is optimized for handling both the risky and unrisky 

portions of an IT project with peak ef˜ciency.
Further exacerbating this problem is the fact that the appropriate infrastructures for 
each methodology are quite different. For example, although ASDs have been suc
-
cessful in many organizations (e.g.,
 [48]), they rely on certain assumptions in order 
to achieve success
 [53]. Less up-front project planning means that more of the project 
task interdependencies must be managed during project execution in the form of 

ad hoc, informal communication among team members. 
To facilitate this ﬁon-the-˚yﬂ 
coordination adequately, project teams generally require strong knowledge-sharing 

networks and high levels of expertise [53]. If there is high turnover in project teams 

or if subject matter experts leave the company, the organization may decide to support 
 SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     229knowledge sharing through a formal codi˜ed knowledge management system or some 
other mechanism that is less ideal for agile methodologies. Extracting from informa
-
tion processing theory, mis-˜ts between the information processing requirements of 

a task and the information processing capabilities of the supporting infrastructure 

cause inef˜ciencies [15].There is a need for methodologies that can thrive in hybrid environments as well 
as a need for new theoretical directions on how to realize an appropriate infrastruc
-
ture to support these techniques. In recent years, the concept of service orientation 

as a paradigm for marketing logic [56], technical infrastructures [33], application 

design [13], resource allocation, and business processes has gained momentum
 [10] and presents a potential solution to the methodology problem described above. From 

an I
T perspective, this is because of the potential that service-oriented architectures 

(SOAs) offer for greater organizational agility in environments with high risk
 [13]. However, although advancements have been made in SOAs and service-computing 

technologies, there remain inadequate methodologies to tie them all together [27]. 
This 
is not to say that methodologies for developing service-oriented systems do not exist 

(e.g., [41]). Rather, the coordination of people working across processes as supported 
by a service-oriented collaboration capability remains underaddressed [27].The purpose of this research is to identify and test design principles for a service-
oriented methodology. 
The key to a successful hybrid approach is that it must be able 
to accurately modularize the I
T project process along natural breakpoints between 

high- and low-risk activities
 [8] so that the appropriate resources, technologies, and 
coordination techniques can be applied to each task [15]. 
This approach outlined in 
this research, referred to as 
service-oriented methodology for systems development
 (SoMSD),1 is based on principles of modularity
 [2, 42, 52] and service orientation
 [14, 
56]. The principles include modularizing the software development process into the 
basic activities of individuals and groups
 [23], storing standardized service de˜nitions 
and resource requirements for each modular activity
 [6], and storing choreographies 
of these human service activities in a format that can be shared and reused during 

the planning and analysis stages of future projects
 [17]. 
The SoMSD integrates 
these existing techniquesŠsupported by a human-based SOA
 [6]Šinto a high-level 

methodology to demonstrate the hybrid use of both plan-driven and agile techniques 

in the same project life cycle based on the different interdependencies found in each 

human-based service.This research also draws from the principles of design science and relevant theory 
established by prior contributions
 [20, 21, 25, 40]. Whereas behavioral science research 
generates theories of human and organizational behavior, design science research is 

concerned with the development and subsequent performance of I
T artifacts such 

as hardware and software technologies, algorithms, user interfaces, process models, 

and methodologies
 [25]. In the design science paradigm, theory is generated as the 
knowledge contained within an artifact. It is theory about ﬁhow to do somethingﬂ
 [21]. 
This research follows Peffers et al.™s
 [40] outline of a methodology for conduct
-ing and evaluating design science research, including (1)
 problem identi˜cation, 
(2)
 solution objectives, (3)
 artifact design, (4)
 demonstration, (5)
 evaluation, and 
(6) communication. 230     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULThe problems with current software project methodologies and the objectives for 
a solution are expanded in the following section and supported by 
Thompson™s
 [49] theory on interdependence and coordination and Galbraith™s
 [15] information process
-ing theory. A description of the SoMSD is provided based on theories from the literature 
on service orientation and modular systems. 
Then the effectiveness and effects of the 
SoMSD are demonstrated by an examination of its adoption in the I
T unit of a large 

electrical power company. Finally, we review a post
 hoc examination of unintended 
consequences, the limitations of the SoMSD and its practical implications, implications 

for theory including propositions, and suggestions for future research and practice.Review of 
Current PracticesMOST
 SOFTWARE
 DEVELOP
MENT
 METHO
DOLO
GIES
 are identi˜ed as being either plan driven, 
such as the traditional systems development life cycle (SD
LC
) (i.e., waterfall), or agile 
based, which depend less on a formal plan and more on ad
 hoc adjustment throughout 
the project life cycle. 
However, in practice, many methodologies fall somewhere in 
between [58].Project risks can be divided into two categories: (1)
 the pre-design stage risk, which 
exists because of inadequate requirements analyses, and (2)
 the post-design stage risk, 
unrelated to the initial plan and analysis
 [16]. Plan-driven methods assume that most 
project requirements can be speci˜ed up front, before design and development begins. 

A meticulous process is followed to assure the quality of project requirements, plans, 

and resources. As a result, plan-driven methods are ideal for managing the pre-design 

stage risk. In contrast, agile methods assume that project requirements will change. 

Their success hinges on (1)
 being able to effectively manage changes as they arise 
and (2)
 the ability of project members to coordinate ad
 hoc throughout the project life 
cycle. 
Therefore, agile methods are ideal for post-design stage risk.Because of this, each methodology requires a different set of coordination mecha
-nisms that are designed to manage and reduce risk
 [30]. For example, plan-driven 
methods primarily make use of 
formal coordination mechanisms
 [37]. Project plans are 
detailed to a very granular level, the team structure is rigid with a formal hierarchy, and 

the roles rarely change. Alternatively, ASDs draw primarily on 
informal coordination 
mechanisms such as ad
 hoc communication during project execution
 [11]. PMs will 
design the team structure (e.g., functional versus divisional versus cross-functional), 

plans (short term versus long term), and role assignments in a way that will support 

or emphasize either formal or informal coordination.Problem DescriptionThe description above explains why most scholars view the issue of methodology 

selection as a contingency problem [3, 9] in which the most appropriate methodology 

in a given situation depends on characteristics of the task environment such as risk or 

uncertainty. 
Thompson™s
 [49] theory on interdependence explains this contingency 
problem well, as follows: 
Pooled
 interdependencies refer to the high-level dependency 
 SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     231each I
T project team member shares with all the rest. 
The PM depends on his or her 
team members to show up and get their jobs done. Each team member depends on 
other team members to complete their portions of the project so that the entire project 

will be successful. Pooled interdependencies can be easily coordinated by establish
-
ing standards
 such as the number of work hours per week, rules for collegiality, and 
other general project guidelines.Sequential interdependencies are derived from the serial nature of work˚ow. 
There is 
an order, or sequence, in which I
T project work must be accomplished. Analysis must 

happen before design, design before development, development before testing, and so 

on. Sequential interdependencies exist at even very granular levels of work˚ow. For 

example, application code routines must be created before other classes and routines 

can call them. 
Regardless of the level of abstraction, all sequential interdependencies 
can be managed through detailed 
planning.
 Although planning is more time-consuming 
and costly than standardization, it can be centralized among a small number of people 

(e.g., PM and subgroup leaders) to minimize costs.Reciprocal
 interdependencies are the result of pairs of team members or groups 
who are jointly dependent on each other. In an I
T project team, these dependencies 

regularly exist. For example, Programmer
 A creates a software module that must be 
used by Programmer
 B. If A™s code does not work correctly, B will need to inform A 
and ask for a rework. Similarly, if the scope is changed midproject, if resources are 

lost or changed midproject, or if any other manner of project risk manifests itself, the 

serial nature of work˚ow can be disrupted, and reciprocal interdependencies will exist. 

Basically, reciprocal interdependencies exist when the sequence of work˚ow cannot be 

determined beforehand. As a result, the only way to manage reciprocal interdependen
-
cies is through 
mutual adjustment,
 which refers to the ad
 hoc, informal coordination 
that takes place during project execution. Mutual adjustment is the most costly form 

of coordination because it requires that every individual or group involved be able to 

freely communicate until the work is ˜nished. 
This requires that interdependent par
-ties either be collocated or provided with suf˜cient and appropriate communication 

and collaboration tools.Interdependence theory posits that I
T project teams that have mostly sequential inter
-dependencies should adopt plan-driven software development methodologies, whereas 

teams with primarily reciprocal interdependencies should adopt agile methodolo
-
gies [49]. Figure 1 shows the theoretical contingency according to 
Thompson [49].The problem is that many software development units cannot be characterized as 
having mostly reciprocal versus sequential interdependencies. 
Rather, different seg
-ments of the I
T project may demonstrate one versus the other
 [4]. As a result, there 
is a need for hybrid methodologies that support accurate, long-range planning for 

some portions of the I
T project and support informal, ad
 hoc collaboration for other 
portions [8].Solution Objectives
Based on the above theoretical background [49] and recent research [4], an effective 

hybrid methodology should meet two high-level objectives: (1)
 accurately modularize 
 232     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULthe software development process along natural breakpoints that divide the tasks with 
predominantly sequential interdependencies from those that include mostly recipro
-
cal interdependencies, and (2)
 assign the methodology and resources appropriate to 
each type of task.Objective 1: Modularization
Objective 1 is not new. 
The concept of modularity in both systems architectures and 
development methodologies has been emphasized in research and practice for many 
years [1, 2, 60]. For example, PMs using plan-driven methodologies will typically 
generate some type of work breakdown structure (WBS)
 [46] during the planning 
phase. 
Creating the WBS involves modularizing the project tasks and assigning people 
and resources to each task. In practice, the knowledge and information required to 

generate the WBS typically comes from a PM™s experience or is based on searching 

through the WBSs of a handful of past projects
 [46]. There is relatively little research 
on practical systems designed to help PMs generate accurate and detailed WBSs
 [19]. The ability to fully understand the nature of task interdependencies and modularize 

the project process with respect to interdependencies is exactly what will help PMs to 

accurately modularize their project process and minimize their coordination costs
 [49]. 
Therefore, effective hybrid methodologies should offer a theory-reinforced approach 

to modularizing the project process.Objective 2: Methodology and 
Resource Assignment
The second objectiveŠemploying either plan-driven or agile methodologies to each 
of the modularized, independent tasks within the same projectŠis much less common 
Figure 1. 
Interdependency 
Contingency 
Theory SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     233than Objective
 1. First, it would require that the PM and team members have enough 
expertise to be able to effectively use both methodologies. Second, employing mul
-tiple project methodologies can be problematic because of the dif˜culty in changing 

entrenched human behaviors even when mandated to change by the organization
 [24]. 
This problem is exacerbated by the different types of resources required to support 

plan-driven versus agile methodologies
 [4]. For example, agile methodologies generally 
rely on having strong, informal advice-sharing networks among team members
 [53]. Team members are often required to collaborate ﬁhorizontallyﬂ with individuals neither 
above nor below them in the formal organizational hierarchy. Plan-driven methodolo
-
gies typically make use of formal communication plans that specify the exact lines of 

communication (typically ﬁverticalﬂ between supervisor and employee) to be followed 

for each information type
 [44]. 
To overcome this problem, an effective hybrid solution 
would need to accurately assess, a
 priori, (1)
 whether each work module would be best 
˜t for a plan-driven versus agile methodology and (2)
 which human- and technical-
based resources should be assigned to each work module.
Literature and Theory Review
WHILE
 HYBRI
D APPROACHES
 EXIST
 IN
 A VARIETY
 OF
 FOR
MS IN
 PRACTICE
, little research to date 
actually prescribes any detailed, formal techniques [4], with one notable exception. 

Boehm and 
Turner™s
 [8] study on the incremental commitment model (I
CM) is designed 
to help practitioners switch between agile and plan-driven methods based on the level 

of risk in the software development environment. 
The concept of I
T project risk has 
been well developed
 [7, 38, 43]. It refers to the potential for unexpected changes or 
pitfalls in the I
T project process that can lead to poor performance. 
The I
CM is designed 
to allow I
T project teams to vary their technique at certain key ﬁdecision pointsﬂ dur
-ing the process in order to rematch their methodology to changes in risk. Because of 

this process emergence, the I
CM is like an agile methodology except that it can take 

advantage of plan-driven techniques as the opportunities arise 
during the project.Our research complements the I
CM in that it requires PMs to estimate the level of 
each subprocess™s risk 
before
 the design and development phases as well as handling 
the changing of methodologies during project execution as needed. 
Up-front risk 
analysis is performed (1)
 by using service-dominant logic
 [56] to modularize the 
software development work˚ow and analyze the form of interdependence within each 

module and (2)
 with the support of an I
T service bus that allows PMs to dynamically 
assign resources to carry out each work module.
Service-Orientation and ModularizationFrom a technological perspective, the service-oriented paradigm is simply an 

ﬁapproach for separating concernsﬂ [14]. Service orientation is based on the concept 

of modularity
 [2], which refers to ﬁthe degree to which a system™s components can be 
separated and recombined, and
 . . . both the tightness of coupling between components 
 234     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULand the degree to which the ‚rules™ or the system architecture enable the mixing and 
matching of componentsﬂ
 [42, p.
 312]. For example, the division of software into 
modularized components takes place along natural ﬁbreak pointsﬂ in the application 

where there is minimal interdependence between modules. Parts of the application 

can be easily changed with marginal interference elsewhere.
As systems become increasingly modular, they also become increasingly complex 
because of the greater coordination required to manage a larger number of ele
-
ments [32]. Theory posits [32] that modular systems require (1)
 an architecture that 
speci˜es all modules and their respective functions; (2)
 interfaces for module inter
-action, coordination, and communication; and (3)
 standards for testing the module™s 
conformity to design rules.SOA is a ﬁparadigm for organizing and utilizing distributed capabilities that may 
be under the control of different ownership domainsﬂ [33, p.
 8]. It provides a uniform 
means to offer, discover, interact with, and use capabilities to produce desired effects 

consistent with measurable preconditions and expectations. 
The project process should 
be separated into natural break points. Each module should also be described with 

a standardized interface that allows it to be stored in, and accessed from, an SOA. 

Each module (now referred to as a ﬁserviceﬂ) is given a description that includes the 

contribution it makes to the overall process, potential service providers, necessary 

preconditions, and measurable postconditions and performance indicators. Finally, a 

variety of standardized service quality measures can be developed allowing organiza
-
tions to ensure that the services they use conform to prede˜ned quality metrics [45].
Although SOAs have typically been used to manage service-oriented software 
applications, their use is beginning to extend to include individuals and groups that 

can also be viewed as resources that perform services in a business process
 [6]. These human resources can be described, coordinated, and invoked as services from an SOA 

using standards for interfacing, description, and discovery
 [6, 45]. As a result, SOA is 
de˜ned as a ﬁparadigmﬂ for managing ﬁcapabilitiesﬂ because it can be used to manage 

any type of distributed capabilityŠwhether it is technical (e.g., Web service), human, 

or organizational
 [33]. SOAs facilitate the organization and utilization of services that 
may be distributed across different ownership domains. For example, just as Web 

services may reside on distributed Web servers within or outside an organization, the 

human services used to design software modules and write software code may come 

from internal personnel or external contractors and consultants. It facilitates the use 

of an SOA that can greatly speed and enhance the ability to organize and reorganize 

these services with greater agility
 [13]. We apply these concepts of service orientation, 
not to the technical architecture of the software being developed, but to the human 

services that comprise an IT project process.The Service-Oriented Methodology for Software Development
Comparing SoMSD and SoSEMethodologies for creating service-oriented systemsŠoften termed ﬁservice-oriented 
software engineeringﬂ (SoSE)
 [51]Šalready exist in many forms
 [41, 51]. 
These  SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     235methodologies are optimized for creating software systems based on architectures of 
Web services or similar technologies. With SoSE, the ﬁservice orientationﬂ lies within 

the technical architecture being developed. Alternatively, the ﬁservice orientationﬂ of 

SoMSD does not refer to the I
T project output. 
Rather, the methodology of SoMSD 
itself is service oriented
2 and independent of the I
T architecture generated. 
The SoMSD 
can be used to create systems that are service oriented, component oriented, object 

oriented, or based on any other architecture.
The difference between SoSE and SoMSD can also be examined by clearly de˜ning 
the business problems addressed by each. SoSE techniques are intended to streamline 

the creation and orchestration of loosely coupled 
technical
 services (e.g., Web ser
-vices). By customizing a methodology speci˜c to one technical architecture, SoSE 

eliminates or enhances certain project processes in order to best meet the needs of 

a service-oriented technical architecture. As a matter of consequence, SoSE closely 

resembles agile methodologies
 [41]. In contrast, SoMSD is intended to be used across 
a wide range of technical architectures. It is an ideal methodology when the I
T project 

environment is not entirely suited to a plan-driven or an agile methodology alone. 

As stated above, SoMSD is a hybrid methodology. By basing the systems develop
-
ment process on the creation and orchestration of loosely coupled 
human services, 
it allows each of the project subprocesses to be independently executed using either 

agile or plan-driven methodologies. SoMSD is a more general methodology intended 

for a variety of technical architectures, whereas SoSE is a more focused methodology 

targeting one architecture.
SoMSD RequirementsThe SoMSD has two theory-based underpinnings. First, the common software develop
-ment processes must be modeled, decomposed, and de˜ned into standardized human 

services (or human-performed activities). 
This task is not simply the modularization 
of project activities. It also involves specifying the inputs and outputs required by the 

service, the skills and resources (both human and technical) necessary to execute the 

service, and the measures of, and required levels for, service quality. Figure
 2 shows 
aspects of a service de˜nition.Similar concepts of human service patterns have also been recommended speci˜
-cally for service-oriented software architectures
 [17]. We propose that these service 
patterns can be generated for any type of I
T project architecture. 
This modularization 
should be theory driven by dividing those subprocesses that have inherently sequential 

interdependencies from those that are primarily reciprocal
 [49]. The contribution of 
this approach is that it places the focus of modularization on human interactionŠthe 

basis of I
T project processŠrather than technical architecture. A PM may divide the 

project work based on the technical architecture of the system being developed. In 

a component-based solution, 
Team 1 builds technical 
Component 1; Team 2 builds 
Component 2, and so on. 
However, both sequential and reciprocal interdependencies 
may exist within a single component. Or, a set of related components may all have 

sequential interdependencies only. As a result, it would be useful to modularize proj
-
ect work˚ow either more or less granularly than the lines that technical components 
 236     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULdictate. The PM should identify the natural breakpoints in human interdependencies 
(whether reciprocal or sequential) and divide project services appropriately. In practice, 
this task will be completed over time as new projects arise.
Second, based on modular systems theory [32], a type of SOA must be implemented 
for storing and choreographing these human services. Figure
 3 shows a hypothetical I
T project with concurrent processes being modularized based on interdependency type,
3 stored in a type of SOA of human services, and choreographed into patterns.
The SOA approach accomplishes two basic tasks. First, it consists of a repository 
for storing service descriptions (both human and technical), the service patterns 

comprising business processes, the resources used to perform services (e.g., a list of 

employees, contractors, and consultants and the services they can each provide), and 

historical patterns of resources allocated to services. Second, the SOA approach used 

during the SoMSD project execution will help managers dynamically assign resources 

to services. 
This SOA approach must be implemented up front in order to store the 
service de˜nitions that result from the modularization task.Once these requirements have been met, the SoMSD can be deployed. 
The basic 
stages of SoMSD include 
service pattern selection
 (i.e., service choreography), 
resource allocation,
 methodology selection,
 and 
service execution
 (i.e., service 
orchestration). For organizations migrating to SoMSD from a traditional plan-driven 

methodology, these steps can be easily mapped into traditional SD
LC phases (see 

Figure 4). To help describe the SoMSD process, the following subsection provides a 
hypothetical example.
SoMSD ExampleFirst, the PM searches the SOA service pattern repository for a service pattern that best 
represents the services necessary for the new project.
4 If no appropriate pattern exists, 
the PM will create a new pattern. Figure
 5 represents a hypothetical service pattern 
the PM might select as the closest match. 
The boxes labeled ﬁService
 A,ﬂ ﬁService
 B,ﬂ 
Figure 2. 
Service Entity Conceptualization SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     237ﬁService C
,ﬂ and ﬁService
 Dﬂ represent less-granular or high-level services. Each of 
these services is composed of its own pattern of subservices (A
a, A
b, A
c, B
a, B
b1, B
b2, Bb3, B
c, Ca, Cb, Cc, D
a, D
b). Some subservices are composed of their own pattern of 
sub-subservices (B
bb, B
bc). Each level (service, subservice, or sub-subservice) pos
-sesses the same generic properties (e.g., inputs, outputs, quality) and differs only in 
terms of granularity.
Figure 3. 
Visualization of SoMSD 
High-Level 
RequirementsFigure 4. 
SoMSD Process Model Mapped to Traditional SDLC 238     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULThe subservice pattern that comprises the ﬁdevelopmentﬂ service (Service
 B) demon
-strates how each activity may have multiple potential service patterns. In the example 
in Figure
 5, three components are produced in the development process (character
-ized by subservices B
b1, B
b2, and B
b3), each with a unique pattern of sub-subservices. 
Subservice B
b1 is performed by developing the component code ˜rst followed by the 
component database. Subservice B
b2 does not need a database component. Subservice 
Bb3 can be performed by developing both the code and database simultaneously.
5 Once 
a matching (or closely matching) service pattern is found, the PM performs a feasibility 

estimate of moving forward with the project. 
This feasibility analysis can be based on 
the cumulative cost estimates from each of the service descriptions.
If the project is ˜nancially feasible, the PM can then select and allocate resources. If the selected service pattern has been used previously, the PM can search the reposi
-
tory for resource allocation patterns linked to that service pattern. 
Resource allocation 
patterns are a historical record of the actual patterns of software, hardware, and human 

services assembled to accomplish prior projects. If no resource allocation patterns are 

available, the SOA mapping engine helps the PM to identify appropriate and available 

resources for each service.Figure 6 shows a hypothetical resource allocation pattern for the 
Development
 service 
only (Service
 B) from Figure
 5. The resource numbers represent unique identi˜ers. 
The example demonstrates how some people may be assigned to multiple services 

(e.g., Person
 6 works on both sub-subservice B
bc and subservice B
c). Each service, 
subservice, or sub-subservice has a set of patterns for how it might be accomplished 

depending on which resources are available.
One of the most important bene˜ts of the SoMSD is derived from this process 
of resource allocation. 
This is because ﬁpeople resourcesﬂ are stored in addition to 
technical resources. In other words, each potential project team member (including 

employees, contractors, and outsourcing partners) should be stored along with a list 
Figure 5. 
Service Pattern Example
 SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     239of standardized services that they are capable of performing. As services are de˜ned 
in greater granularity and detail, the people resources can be better utilized across all 

project services.In addition, the SOA repository should contain schedule and availability information 
so that it can dynamically assign people to services. 
The task of resource allocation 
can be streamlined, and there will be a reduced error rate and less uncertainty. A PM 

may begin by selecting a particular resource allocation pattern only to discover that 

some individuals have scheduling con˚icts with other project assignments. 
The SOA 
can search the repository of service providers and suggest alternatives. Some of the 

service providers suggested by the SOA may be external contractors or consultants 

if internal personnel are not available, as represented in Figure
 6. Thus, the SOA can 
facilitate more targeted outsourcing
 [13]Šparticularly if the outsourcing partners are 
given access to the SOA repository of service de˜nitions so that they can build their 

own service offerings based on the needs of their clients employing the SoMSD.
In Figure 7, subservice B
b3 is inverted to represent an outsourced service. Notice 
that there are no resources assigned to that service because the SoMSD organization 

does need to know how the outsourced provider is performing the serviceŠonly that it 

produces the necessary outputs.
6 When service provider availability is established, the 
SOA can schedule the time needed from each employee in its own master schedule.
Each service provider performs his or her ﬁsubprojectﬂ using the most appropriate 
methodology, whether agile or plan driven. For those services being performed in-

house, the PM may choose to mandate each service provider™s methodology based 

on the PM™s initial assessment of interdependency or allow the teams to self-select. 

The new service and resource allocation patterns that are created for the project are 

recorded in the SOA repository.
Figure 6. 
Resource Allocation Example
 240     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULHow Does SoMSD Meet Solution Objectives?
Regarding Objective
 1, we have argued that modularization should separate those 
subprocesses with sequential versus reciprocal interdependencies based on inter
-dependence theory
 [49]. 
The SoMSD requires that each modularized subprocess 
be modeled using a standardized service de˜nition. 
These service de˜nitions are 
stored in a repository that allows shared access to individuals and groups within the 
organization as well as external contractors. As seen in Figure
 2, each service de˜
-nition includes (at a minimum) the input/output requirements, the human/technical 

resources required to complete it, and quality requirements. Just as important, each 

service provider records standardized historical information such as the levels and 

types of coordination required, the methodology used, and success ratings. While the 

SOA will record which methodologies were used to perform the service in the past, 

the service de˜nition and quality requirements do not specify that an agile versus 

plan-driven technique be used. 
The methodology is independent of the service being 
performed as long as the appropriate inputs are accepted and outputs are produced 

with an acceptable level of quality.
The services that can be decomposed to a more granular level of subservices are 
those with low risk. 
These can be executed using a plan-based methodology. By con
-trast, services that cannot be decomposed to a relatively granular level have high risk 

and will need to be executed with an agile methodology. 
This could result from the 
requirements having not been adequately de˜ned or because there is no past history 

of completing those services, potentially leading to the use of agile methodologies 

for performing these services. 
The process of creating service de˜nitions for each 
task becomes a natural indicator of which methodology will be most appropriate for 

each service. 
This task makes it easier to identify smaller portions to outsource to 
external contractors.
Concerning Objective 2, the SoMSD is supported by the use of an SOA, or at the 
least, an ontology editor, which is a shared repository of services, service patterns, 
Figure 7. 
Service Outsourcing Example SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     241and resources
 [55]. During the planning and analysis phases of a project life cycle, 
this ontology allows PMs and analysts to draw from prior project knowledge and 
experience. In practice, the ontology also stores and makes accessible the records of 

actual past implementations of each service, the historical quality and performance of 

those implementations, and the typical patterns in which each service has been used. 

It enhances the knowledge base that future projects can draw from. By reusing past 

project knowledge more extensively, the risks and uncertainty that result from poor 

planning and analysis can be reduced in future SoMSD projects. 
This will reduce the 
time required to plan, analyze, and source new projects. Even if new projects are very 

different from any past project, it is still possible to reuse the more granular patterns 

of past projects if the services have been modularized to suf˜cient detail. 
The SOA, 
or ontology editor, used in SoMSD provides the PM with a more complete knowledge 

management system than is often used in practice.Results of an SoMSD ImplementationTHE
 SOMSD WAS
 ORI
GINALLY
 INVESTI
GATE
D as part of an action research project with 
the business intelligence unit of a Fortune 100 ˜nancial services organization (termed 

ﬁFSCﬂ for nondisclosure purposes) from early 2005 until late 2007. FS
C™s software 

development unit deemed agile methodologies to be too risky given their high rate 

of employee turnover and inadequate knowledge sharing across team boundaries. 

They initiated a project with us to develop an SoMSD. During this project, qualitative 

research methods were used to understand the effects of SoMSD adoption. Although 

FSC™s I
T project time and cost estimates signi˜cantly improved as a result of SoMSD 

adoption, a rich set of quantitative measures could not be released because of nondis
-
closure restrictions. Additional quantitative data were collected from another source. 

Because SoMSD is new to most organizations, theory and research assessing the 

effects are obviously limited, making the case study methodology most appropriate 

for testing the effectiveness of SoMSD
 [5].A case study was initiated with a large electrical power company (termed ﬁEP
Cﬂ for 
nondisclosure purposes). EP
C is highly recognized industry leader and trend-setter in 

advanced technologies and processes for electrical power companies. 
The EP
C case 
study took place over two years from November 2007 to November 2009. 
Their ini
-tial software development methodology was plan driven and based on the traditional 

waterfall approach. Approximately one year prior to the study (November 2006), EP
C began an initiative to model the activities of their software development process and 

break them down into the core activities in a similar manner to the service patterns 

used in SoMSD. 
They were not yet reusing these models or any resource allocation 
patterns, but a more standardized storage and reuse had been discussed for future proj
-
ects before this study began. EP
C™s I
T unit spanned multiple campuses and domains. 

The particular subunit examined within EP
C was responsible for maintaining their 

homegrown customer relationship management system. 
This unit had 60 full-time 
employees and 100 in-house contractors at any time. Demographically, on average, 

this unit was 60
 percent male, 34 years old, 68 percent 
Caucasian, 16
 percent 
Hispanic, 
 242     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULand 9
 percent African American. Four additional employees existed as part of a busi
-ness process analysis (BPA) team whose primary responsibility was to develop what 
they termed to be ﬁenhanced project process models,ﬂ which were primitive service 

patterns and resource allocation patterns.The creation of the BPA group began because many projects exceeded budget and 
schedule estimates. 
The unit director and senior management both agreed that one 
of their greatest problems was the poor business process modeling that took place 

during the planning and analysis stages. 
The BPA group was formed and operated 
directly under the unit director. Shortly after the BPA group was formed, they decided 

to model not only the AS-IS and 
TO-BE7 models of the business processes affected 
by the projects but also the software development process itself. 
This decision is the 
˜rst step in the SoMSD adoption of developing service patterns.
8 It was soon after 
this point when the formal SoMSD adoption began.
Data CollectionTo understand and measure the effect of this SoMSD adoption, a variety of objective data 
and manager perceptions were gathered from 11 separate projects. 
These projects were 
selected to provide a sample from before SoMSD adoption and through various stages of 

SoMSD maturity. Each project involved improvements to EP
C™s customer relationship 
management system. Each PM was required to complete a standardized monthly report 

that included the current progress of each of the six project stages (planning, analysis, 

design, implementation, testing, and support), actual completion dates for each stage 

and total expenditures to date by stage, projected completion dates and costs, expected 

project risks and the effects of those risks, and formalized changes to project scope. 

This allowed the unit director to know how far over or under budget the project was at 

that point. In total, 124 monthly project reports across the 11 projects were collected in 

order to investigate how project schedule and cost estimates changed over time.
In addition to project monthly reports, other formal project documentation were col
-lected, such as communication plans, documentation about the key technology resources 

used for each project, organization charts, and the governance and authorship of process 

models. Also, the actual business and project process models were collected. Finally, 45 

structured and unstructured interviews were performed with the PMs of each project, 

the unit director, senior management representatives, the chief external consultant for 

EPC management, administrative staff, and members of the BPA group. 
These inter
-views gave insight into which variables would be most relevant in capturing the effect 

of SoMSD adoption. A formal survey was administered to the PMs, the unit director, 

senior management representatives, and subject matter experts to collect additional 

perceptual data to compare management perceptions to the objective project data.
MeasuresIn general, research studies on I
T project success have focused on independent vari
-
ables concerning the various forms of risk and coordination mechanisms intended to 

manage risk (e.g.,
 [3, 16, 30, 38]). 
Therefore, in addition to collecting project per
- SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     243formance data, we also collected measures of (1)
 formal coordination mechanisms, 
(2) informal coordination, (3)
 pre-design stage risk factors, and (4)
 post-design stage 
risk factors.
The measures of coordination mechanisms are based on those used in prior research 
and ˜eld studies in particular
 [30, 35]. 
The formal coordination mechanisms mea
-sured included (1)
 the degree of SoMSD adoption, (2)
 the group structure, (3)
 the governance over business and project process modeling, (4)
 the technology used to 
create and store process models, and (5)
 the coordination between the I
T group and 
the BPA group in creating the models. SoMSD adoption is measured as the extent to 
which each project implemented the SoMSD principles relative to the other projects. 

For example, each project™s service patterns varied in terms of level of completeness 

and granularityŠand the percent of each project™s models that were reused from prior 

projects. Group structure was determined by examining formal organization charts 

and conducting interviews with the unit director. Groups with a 
divisional structure 
were those that included all of the diverse roles needed to manage an entire project 

while those with a 
functional structure included a single type of role used across many 
projects. Governance over business and project process modeling refers to whether the 

IT group or the new BPA group had responsibility for the completeness and quality 

of models. 
The technology used to create the models was either Microsoft Visio or 
Metastorm ProVision
®Ša powerful, object-based tool that offers the ability to reuse 
objects created from one model to another. 
The coordination between the I
T group 
and the BPA group was measured in terms of the percent each group contributed to the 

˜nal project models. Determining the percent contributed by each side was estimated 

based on examining the recorded attendance at meetings during the model development 

phases and the recorded authorship of electronic model documents. For example, while 

the BPA group may have governance over the models, they may ask the I
T group to 

produce certain portions and attend meetings to collaborate on the ˜nal models.Informal coordination was measured as (1)
 whether or not the PM developed a com
-munication plan, (2)
 the level of detail of the communication plan, and (3)
 the percep
-tion regarding how effective and necessary the plan was to completing the project.
Pre-design stage risk measures include the PM™s and unit director™s perception of 
how realistic project schedules and budgets were, the cost of scope changes approved 

in the pre-design stage (normalized by initial project budget), and the percent over/

under budget the project was for the pre-design stages (planning and analysis). Post-

design stage risk measures include the PM™s perception of the amount of ˚uctuation in 

requirements,9 the percent over/under budget, and the percent over/under scheduleŠall 
during the post-design stages.Overall project performance was measured (1)
 objectively by the percentage over/
under budget and schedule for the entire project and (2)
 subjectively by the combined 
perception (of the PM, unit director, and senior management representative) of how 

well each project delivered its key features and was overall successful.
Each of the perception-based variables listed above were measured based on 
existing scales
 [3, 16, 38, 43]. Of the subjective measures, only project success was 
measured using re˚ective items and exhibited strong reliability (
 = 0.82). Each 
of the other variables either used single-item measures or were based on formative 
 244     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULconstructsŠmeaning the indicators could vary independently of each other
 [28]. As a 
result, traditional tests of re˚ective measurement validity do not apply
 [36].10 Table 1 summarizes the measures.ResultsTable 2 displays the 11 projects examined during this study and the adoption criteria 
for each. Projects
 1 through 5 had no project patterns modeled at all. 
However, the 
new methodology for project process modeling and the preparation of reusable pat
-terns began during Project
 5. An increasing number of project service patterns were 
developed in Projects
 7, 8, and
 9. According to the unit director, these projects repre
-sent a more advanced SoMSD adoption than Projects
 5 and
 6, which they called the 
ﬁlearning stage.ﬂ In this stage, the BPA group member who initiated the methodology 

trained others in this group on the technique and presented to key members of EP
C 
to introduce the new methodology. Projects
 10 and
 11 had the most project processes 
modeled and were the ˜rst two to actually make use of reused process models from 

prior projects. Therefore, EPC considered these projects in the ﬁmaturing stage.ﬂ
Project CoordinationTable 3 summarizes the changes to formal coordination mechanisms as the SoMSD 
was adopted. During the preadoption period, the I
T group controlled the modeling 
that took place. During this time, EP
C used a divisional group structure that is based 

on a formal hierarchy and separated roles. 
This is typical of teams using plan-based 
methodologies [37].After the formal creation of the BPA group, the I
T group kept the modeling respon
-sibility for only one more project (Project
 5) before formal governance was handed 
over to the BPA group. In Project
 6, the I
T group once more created all of the business 
process models, but the BPA group built on these models to create a more detailed 

and modular set of models. During this time, EP
C also began a transition to a cross-

functional structure by breaking apart project groups into functional groups and then 

temporarily assigning people to temporary project teams. 
The unit director felt that as 
the project scope and responsibility became clearer, they could bene˜t by placing those 

performing similar roles into the same groups to create a ﬁjob shopﬂ environment.
During Projects 7, 8, and 9, the new BPA group made greater strides in completing 
the project modeling before the execution stages began. According to the BPA team, 

establishing a formal modeling methodology to follow made it easier to ˜nalize models 

and gain approval from management. In addition, they were careful to include the 

IT group™s help and opinion into the models they created. Also during this time, the 

BPA group developed standardized project models for the ˜rst two project stages and 

adopted the object-based modeling tool ProVision.
Table 4 summarizes the changes in informal coordination across projects. Although 
there was no expected direct effect of the SoMSD on the use or effectiveness of com
-
munication plans, the plans themselves began to improve as the SoMSD was adopted. 
 SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     245Table 1. Summary of Variables 
Captured at EPCVariables
TypeMeasure/itemRangeReferencesSoMSD adoptionPatterns 
modeledObserved
PM and BPA 
representative 
reviewed all project 
models and jointly estimated the 
percentages0Œ100%[52]Patterns reused
Observed
0Œ100%[53]Formal coordination mechanisms
Modeling ownership
Observed
Based on a review of 
project recordsIT versus BPA
N/AModeling by IT 
group
Observed
Based on a review of 
model authorship0Œ100%[29]Modeling by 
BPA group
Observed
Based on a review of 
model authorship0Œ100%[54]Modeling in Stages 1Œ2Observed
Based on a review of 
model metadata0Œ100%[16]Modeling in Stages 3Œ5Observed
Based on a review of 
model metadata0Œ100%[9]Technology 
usedObserved
Based on electronic document typesVisio versus 
ProVision[61]Group structure
Observed
Based on formal 
organization charts
Divisional versus 
functional[59, 61]Informal coordination mechanisms
Communication 
plan usedObserved
Based on project recordsYes/no
N/ALevel of plan 
detailObserved
Relative based on 
all communication 
plansHigh/medium/low
N/APlan qualityLatentThis project had realistic and explicit 

communication 
plans1 to 7a[38]Necessity of informal 
coordinationLatentThis project required frequent informal 

coordination1 to 7a[38, 52, 61]Pre-design stage risk factors
Realistic estimatesLatent-formative
This project had realistic resource 
estimates1 to 7a[29]This project had realistic scope 
estimates1 to 7a[54]This project had realistic schedule 
estimates1 to 7a[54](continues) 246     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULIt may simply be that the new focus on ﬁattention to detailﬂ that came with the SoMSD 
adoption in˚uenced the effort the PMs placed on these communication plans. 
Regard
-less, the perceived necessity of informal communication decreased as SoMSD was 

adopted. This supports the notion that increased formal coordination in the pre-design 
stage can decrease the need for informal coordination in the post-design stage
 [16]. However, the need for informal coordination will never be eliminated because some 

scope changes are unrelated to the quality of the initial plans.Variables
TypeMeasure/itemRangeReferencesScope changesObserved
Approved scope 
changes based on recorded documentationb1 to 52[53]Normalized 
scope changesObserved
Number of approved 
scope changes/total 
project budget
0 to 0.000021N/AOver/under 
budget
Observed
Based on project recordsŒ47.5% to 22.5%[9]Post-design stage risk factors
Requirements ˜uctuationLatentRequirements ˜uctuated during 

the construction, 

testing, and implementation stages1Œ7a[53]Over/under 
budget
Observed
Based on project recordsŒ33.8% to 249.7%[16]Over/under 
scheduleObserved
Based on project recordsŒ22.8% to 442.7%[9]Overall project performance
Over/under 
budget
Based on project recordsŒ52.1% to 622.7%[9]Over/under 
scheduleBased on project recordsŒ27.3% to 424.8%[9]Overall 
perceived 
successLatent-re˜ective
This project delivers 
all features and 

functionality1 to 7a[50]This project meets key objectives 
and business 

expectations
1 to 7a[56]This project overall is 
very successful
1 to 7a[56]Notes: N/A = not applicable. The references refer to either the source of the latent items or the basis for the observed measures. 
a Latent items based on a Likert scale anchored by 1
 = ﬁstrongly disagreeﬂ and 7 = ﬁstrongly agree.ﬂ 
These items were answered by each project™s PM and the unit 
director. 
b Only those designated by EPC as ﬁmediumﬂ to ﬁlargeﬂ were included. 
Table 1. Continued SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     247Table 2. Overview of the Progression of EP
C™s SoMSD Adoption by Project
Adoption stageProjectPercent of project service patterns modeledPercentage of patterns  reusedBefore adoption
10/100*0200300400Early stage
52006500Learning stage
790087009800Maturing stage
10100201110050* Project 1 initially was not modeled. 
However, because the project went far over schedule, it was 
ﬁrestartedﬂ after the testing phases revealed some major ˚aws. 
The 100 percent modeling was not 
completed until the second attempt.Table 5 summarizes the changes in pre- and post-design stage risk factors across 
projects. During the pre-design stage, the PM™s perception of how realistic the 
schedule, budget, and scope estimates were greatly increased from an average of 3.4 

(1
 = ﬁmost unrealistic,ﬂ 7
 = ﬁmost realisticﬂ) before SoMSD adoption to 6.1 by the time 
the SoMSD became mature. Similarly, the number of scope changes normalized by 

project size decreased dramatically from an average of 0.00026 before SoMSD adop
-
tion to less than 0.000001 at SoMSD maturity. Perhaps most telling, the percent that 

the project was over/under budget in the pre-design stages decreased from an average 

of 11.2
 percent over
 budget before SoMSD adoption to 5.9
 percent under budget at 
SoMSD maturity. It is important to note that this change in over/under budget is a very 

conservative estimate because the percentages pre-SoMSD were signi˜cantly altered 

each month as the project scope increased. If the initial project budgets were used, 

then the pre-SoMSD projects would have been more than 103
 percent over budget 
on average. Also, the unit director quickly learned as the SoMSD matured that she 

could stop in˚ating the budgets because of uncertainty. In particular, she no longer 

had to ﬁadd 25 percent to 40
 percent to the PM™s estimateﬂ after SoMSD maturity. 
In summary, the improvement in EP
C™s ability to meet their budget pre-design stage 

was much larger than the 17.1
 percent swing in Table 5 indicates.Post-design stage risk factors experienced similar improvements. 
The perception of 
requirements ˚uctuation decreased from 6.1 before SoMSD to 2.85 at SoMSD maturity, 

the percent over/under budget decreased from 28.3
 percent over budget to 1.6
 percent over budget, and the percent over/under schedule decreased from 213.3
 percent past schedule to 17.4 percent ahead of schedule.The change in overall project performance was similarly drastic (see 
Table 6). The percent over/under budget for the entire project (based on the initial project estimates) 
 248     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULTable 3. Changes to Formal 
Coordination Mechanisms by ProjectProject Governance
CoordinationTechnologyStructureProcess  modeling ownership
Percent of modeling contributed by 
 IT sidePercent of modeling contributed by 
 BP analystsPercent of modeling in stages 1,2/3,4,5Service pattern editorGroup  structure1IT/BPA
90/010/1000/100N/A / ProVisionDivisional2IT802090/10aN/ADivisional3IT505050/50N/ADivisional4IT100010/90N/ADivisional5IT70300/100VisioCross-functional6BPA
100100100/100bVisioCross-functional7BPA
505080/20ProVisionCross-functional8BPA
50500/100cProVisionCross-functional9BPA
2080100/0ProVisionCross-functional10BPA
5050100/0ProVisionCross-functional11BPA
5050100/0ProVisionCross-functionalNotes: N/A = not applicable. The modeling referred to above is the normal business process model that takes place in most traditional, plan-driven projectsŠnot the 
software development process modeling that is part of the SoMSD. 
a Project 2 had what the unit director considered to be the best PM she™s ever had. As a result, 
several of this PM™s coordination and risk factors appear much better than the other pre-SoMSD projects. 
b T
he ˜rst models created for Project 6 were not adequate and had to be 100 percent recreated by the BPA group. 
c T
he modeling in Project 8 was atypically pushed to the later stages because of major changes in stakeholders.
 SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     249decreased from 281.4
 percent over
 budget before SoMSD adoption to 5.5
 percent 
under budget at maturity. 
The percent over/under schedule decreased from 206.4
 percent past schedule before SoMSD adoption to 3.6
 percent ahead of schedule at maturity. 
According to survey respondents, the perception of overall project success increased 
from 5.3 (1
 = ﬁlowest success,ﬂ 7
 = ﬁhighest successﬂ) before SoMSD to 6.8 at maturity. 
However, their perception regarding each project™s ability to deliver all key features 

and objectives increased from 4.4 (1
 = ﬁlowest delivery,ﬂ 7
 = ﬁhighest deliveryﬂ) before 
SoMSD to 6.8 at maturity.
DiscussionTHE
 SOMSD WAS
 ASSOCIATE
D WITH
 CHAN
GES
 IN
 FOR
MAL
 AN
D INFOR
MAL
 COOR
DINATION
. These changes were correlated with decreases in project risk and uncertainty. Overall 

project success improved dramatically in terms of EP
C™s ability to meet budget and 

schedule estimates as well as management perceptions. 
The process by which EP
C transformed during their adoption of the SoMSD has several interesting implications 

for practice and research on SoMSD.Implications for ResearchAn underlying proposition in this study of systems development methodology is 

that theory on service orientation and modularity can inform the creation of hybrid 

methodologies such as SoMSD. 
Through the proper use of SOAs for managing ser
-vice complexities, SoMSD will improve an organization™s I
T project performance if 
Table 4. Changes to Informal Coordination by ProjectProjectCommunication plan?DetailEffectiveness 
of informal coordinationNecessity of informal coordination1No/yes
aN/A / high172Yes
Highb5b53NoN/A264Yes
Low
465NoN/A256Yes
Low
557Yes
Medium558Yes
High549Yes
High7310Yes
High6411Yes
High73Notes: N/A = not applicable. a Recall that Project 1 had to be restarted because of the failure of the 
˜rst attempt. The cell indicates that a communication plan did not exist for the ˜rst attempt while 
it did for the second. b High rating due to the quality of the PM.  250     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULTable 5. Changes in Risk Factors by Project
Pre-design stage risk factors
Post-design stage risk factors
ProjectRealistic estimates?Number of scope changesChanges normalized  by budget
Percent  over/under 
 costRequirements ˚uctuation  (1 = lowest; 
 7 = highest)Percent  over/under 
 cost Percent  over/under 
 schedule 12.1400.00002112.27Œ3.6123.622.6520.0000190.4*59.01.234.1440.0000549.76.31.8285.844.7160.00001022.5699.8442.755.130.0000029.8646.50.965.880.000007Œ47.54249.740.574.6*60.0000040.3413.8Œ22.885.770.000001Œ2.86.5*Œ33.8Œ3.695.820.000001Œ3.63Œ5.4Œ55.4106.110.000000Œ12.92.7Œ3.4Œ13.1116.110.0000011.136.6Œ21.7* Positive scores due to the quality of the PM. 
 SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     251the task environment is characterized by a mix of reciprocal- and sequential-based 
subprocesses. This is because the SoMSD represents a better ˜t between coordina
-tion strategy and interdependency than methodologies that are primarily agile or plan 

driven in nature.
Proposition 1: In task environments characterized by both reciprocal and sequen
-
tial interdependencies, hybrid methodologies, such as SoMSD, perform better 

than methodologies that are primarily agile or plan driven.
Although the results of EP
C™s SoMSD adoption clearly show changes in their 
coordination mechanisms and project risks, these changes did not follow a consistent 

chronological pattern. In other words, it cannot be concluded that project risk always 

determined coordination mechanisms or that coordination always determined risk. 

Rather, the management decisions following SoMSD adoption should be interpreted 

as an effort to achieve optimal ˜t between project risk and coordination strategies. As 

a result, we draw from information processing (IP) theory
 [15] to frame the events at 
EPC and to establish propositions.IP is a contingency theory based on achieving ˜t [15]. It posits that an organization™s 
performance is heightened when its IP need is congruent with its IP capabilities. It 

is not optimal to have either too much or too little capability. IP needs are the result 

of interdependency
 [54]. For example, reciprocal interdependencies create greater 
IP needs than sequential interdependencies
 [49]. Therefore, managers must develop 
strategies for increasing IP capabilities when too much reciprocal interdependency 

exists. 
Three strategies have been established in theory: (1)
 acquire improved technol
-ogy [12], (2)
 change group structure to collocate reciprocal interdependencies
 [49], and (3) improve horizontal communication [54].
Table 6. Overall Project Performance
ProjectPercent  over/under 
 costPercent  over/under 
 scheduleDelivers 
all key 
features and objectives?
Overall 
perceived 
success1332.995.2352153.099.65.76.53622.7205.84.75.7417.1424.844516.234.256.3655.129.46.76.77Œ52.113.955.58Œ14.0Œ27.32.73.3*9Œ15.93.95.76.310Œ1.75.67.07.011Œ9.3Œ12.76.56.5* While Project 8 exceeded budget and schedule estimates, its scope was heavily debated by 
politically motivated stakeholders, resulting in lower perceptions about its success.
 252     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULEach strategy was adopted at EP
C, but not entirely as might be predicted. Before 
EPC™s SoMSD adoption, their IP need was high. 
This is apparent from the high lev
-els of risk in Projects
 1Œ4. Scope changes increased during the ˜rst three projects, 
and the pre-design stage schedule and budgetary overages peaked in Project
 4 (see 
Table 5). As a result of their high level of risk, EP
C employed the second strategy 
above and formed the BPA group, which collocated employees with the most recip
-rocal interdependencies. Previous to this BPA group, the I
T side had to collaborate 

across formal hierarchies with the business side in order to create business process 

models. 
Conversely, the new BPA group had both formal and informal communication 
relationships with employees in the I
T and business sides, which reduced horizontal 

communication cost.Soon after the BPA group began creating models, they needed a way to store and 
share the models for reuse. Although SoMSD does not necessarily require the forma
-
tion of a BPA group, it does mandate that an SOA technology be implemented. 
The 
SOA™s repository for storing service patterns is a form of ontology
 [55] that provides 
shared access to service de˜nitions and service patterns both within the organization 

and with external partners. 
The SOA greatly increases the BPA team™s ability to process 
new project plans and resource estimates. 
Therefore, EP
C employed the ˜rst strategy 
above by adopting a new technology for IP.
As EP
C made progress in documenting service de˜nitions and patterns, it became 
clear that their existing project team-based structure was no longer necessary. For 

example, employees were originally grouped in a divisional structureŠmeaning that 

a single project team contained all the skills necessary to complete an entire project 

(see Figure
 8). As a result, all of the project interdependencies were contained within 
a single group. But, because SoMSD adoption requires modularizing project tasks 

around those with reciprocal versus sequential interdependencies, it minimizes the 

interdependencies among different project team roles. 
Therefore, the strongest recipro
-cal interdependencies will exist not between different roles (i.e., service providers), 

but between those who are working together on the same service or role. As a result, 

based on interdependence theory
 [49], organizations will group employees around 
similar functions. In a project-based environment, this translates to the use of 
cross-
functional teams where a PM borrows, or purchases, the use of service providers from 

various functional teams to create a temporary project team. 
The use of cross-functional 
teams was not a requirement of the SoMSD, but nonetheless a theoretically motivated 

outcome that was also observed at EP
C.Proposition 2: SoMSD adoption leads to, and is best supported by, the use of 

cross-functional group structures.
Consistent with IP theory, all three strategies for increasing IP capabilities were 
observed at EP
C. 
However, informal communication adjusted to ˜t not only with the 
IP needs but also with the other IP capabilities. 
This is because it is not always optimal 
to increase all types of IP capabilities if they are not needed
 [54]. 
Consequently, if 
different capabilities can act as substitutes for each other, then adding more of one 

type of capability may allow an organization to reduce another. Such was the case 

at EP
C. Recall the high level of IP need in Projects
 1Œ4 because of the high project 
 SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     253risks. Because no changes were made to the technology or group structures dur
-ing those projects, the level of horizontal communication necessarily increased in 
order to compensate. 
This is apparent from the high need for informal coordination 
stated by the PMs from Projects
 1Œ4 (see 
Table
 4). Interestingly, after the new BPA 
group was formed and cross-functional teams were adopted, the perceived need for 

informal coordination slowly began to decrease in Project
 5 and leveled out during 
Projects 8Œ11. Therefore, as formal coordination mechanisms are improved, informal 
coordination may naturally decrease in the long run until IP needs and capabilities 

balance.Proposition 3: SoMSD adoption leads to a relative decrease in informal coordi
-
nation and an increase in formal coordination.
Proposition 3 has important implications for research and theory on the role of advice 
networks
 [47]. Social network research has typically viewed advice-sharing relation
-ships as a positive indicator of individual and group performance
 [47]. 
However, EP
C™s 
results implicate that informal social network connectivityŠin the form of advice-

sharing relationshipsŠin software development environments is actually an indication 

of the degree of project risk not managed through formal means like group structures 

and technology. In other words, a high degree of informal knowledge sharing may be 

a red ˚ag that a project is facing too much interdependence and riskŠparticularly if 

the project team is employing a plan-driven methodology that should not require so 

much horizontal communication. As a result, the level of informal knowledge shar
-ing in various subprocesses within the I
T project is also a key indicator of reciprocal 

interdependencies. PMs who are decomposing their project based on interdependencies 

adoption should analyze the informal knowledge sharing and use it as an indicator of 

the type of interdependency in each subprocess.
In summary, EP
C™s results demonstrate that SoMSD adoption will mandate that 
certain new IP capabilities be adopted (e.g., SOA technology) and lead to natural 

adjustments in other IP capabilities as well (e.g., cross-functional groups and reduced 

informal coordination).Practical Implications and LimitationsWhile the SoMSD appears to have signi˜cant bene˜ts, it is important to discuss some 

of the practical implications and limitations of SoMSD adoption. Foremost, although 
Figure 8.
 Group Coordination Structures Source:
 Adapted from [34].
 254     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULEPC made no other major changes to their supporting I
T infrastructure or personnel, 
we cannot rule out the possibility of other factors in determining their drastic improve
-
ments in I
T project on-time and on-budget percentages. 
There are a variety of factors 
that could have in˚uenced their recent success. For example, simply by implementing 

a new methodology in general and gaining the buy-in from all I
T project team mem
-
bers, the PMs may have generated greater effort and interest, which could account 

for much of the success. 
The most signi˜cant confounding in˚uence might be EP
C™s 
improvement in the business process modeling of the AS-IS and 
TO-BE models. 
This traditional task of plan-driven methodologies was not well performed before the 

SoMSD implementation and was de˜nitely improved when EP
C undertook the task of 
modeling their software development processes as well. Indeed, many of the changes 

concerning formal and informal coordination mechanisms listed in 
Tables 3 and
 4 are endogenously or exogenously related to the SoMSD implementation. 
However, 
this issue of causality is one of the trade-offs made when adopting ˜eld research. 

Experimental control is exchanged for a more realistic test environment. 
Therefore, a promising area for future research would be to examine the SoMSD principles in a 

relatively more controlled experimental environment and discover how the SoMSD 

will in˚uence, and be in˚uenced by, other project factors.
It is also important to note that the SoMSD was tested in an organization that was 
currently using a plan-driven methodology. 
The steps of service pattern selection and 
resource allocation in SoMSD resembles the stages of a plan-driven methodology. 

Therefore, it may be easier in practice for an organization to switch to SoMSD if it 

is currently using a plan-driven methodology. 
This type of switch may require fewer 
changes to the existing culture and less ﬁmindshiftﬂ than switching from an agile 

methodology [26].Although we posited that the SoMSD will reduce the interdependencies in a project 
process, in practice, the SoMSD can also create new complexities and interdependen
-
cies. As discussed earlier, as systems become more modular, they also become more 

complex because of the greater number of elements that must be managed
 [2]. Software 
development is performed not by a single integrated project team, but a set of loosely 

coupled interdependent service providers. As a result, some unexpected problems can 

occur. For example, if a particular service or service provider is reused too excessively, 

bottlenecks may be created that can slow down all projects
 [22]. PMs must schedule 
the work˚ow properly so as to help manage the dependencies of the service providers 

who become bottlenecks. Future research should examine the job shop literature
 [39] to understand how to best schedule and organize SoMSD work˚ow.
In fact, the ﬁjob shopﬂ environment is one of the unique consequences of SoMSD. 
Because a list of potential service providers is stored in the SOA, PMs have the ability 

to choose the service provider they deem ﬁbestﬂ for the job. As a result, a market-like 

competition emerges where team members™ performance is evaluated by a ﬁmini-

market.ﬂ 
High performers are selected more often than low performers. As a result, 
team members become incentivized to expose all of their capabilities and perform at 

a maximum level. It also promotes continual education so that one™s list of service 

capabilities continues to grow.
 SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     255As with agile methodologies [57], the SoMSD may require cultural changes. If 
power changes hands when the structure is realigned, there may be pushback and 
resistance. Another issue that becomes exacerbated by the SoMSD is that many of the 

interdependencies are between service providers who cross organizational boundaries. 

If the SoMSD enables greater outsourcing, then PMs lose a degree of control over 

how the project is performed
 [31]. They become more vulnerable if their outsourcing 
partners fail to meet service requirements.
Perhaps the primary drawback or barrier to adoption of the SoMSD is that it requires 
a signi˜cant amount of time and effort up front to build the repository of service pat
-
terns, resource patterns, and service provider schedules and capabilities. Business 

and systems analysts must take the time to (1)
 identify the relevant services that are 
needed during typical software projects, (2)
 create standardized service de˜nitions, 
and (3)
 create an initial set of service patterns, subpatterns, and so on, and resource 
allocation patterns. In addition, standards must be developed so that the process of 

creating and storing new patterns may be accomplished in a way that will allow a 

shared understanding of the patterns by all PMs. 
The research into ontologies (the 
design of shared understanding in a given domain) would be particularly useful toward 

this end
 [55]. In addition, recent research has emerged that can help establish human 
service pattern standards [17].PMs and analysts may also ˜nd the task of modularizing project processes into ser
-vices somewhat dif˜cult in the early stages. Before SoMSD adoption at EP
C, the PMs 
typically modularized tasks based on the technical architecture. For example, 
Task 1 consisted of creating 
Technical Component 1, Task 2 was 
Technical Component 2, and so forth. 
However, after adopting SoMSD, the PMs began to focus on differences 
in human interdependency as a means of modularization. 
They had to be very obser
-vant of human behavior and seek additional feedback from developers. As a result, 

the appropriate modularization was often learned simply by trial and error. 
However, 
EPC also performed social network analyses
 [47] that helped identify bottlenecks and 
decipher between sequential and reciprocal interdependencies. Future research should 

generate techniques for identifying work˚ow interdependencies.
Also challenging is the task of storing the capabilities, schedules, and capacities of 
each potential service provider whether internal or external. 
Careful attention must 
be paid to the prioritization of services if team members can be assigned to multiple 

services at a time. Although EP
C began their SoMSD adoption without completing 

these tasks, the speed and accuracy of their resource allocation patterns were greatly 

improved as they made progress toward this end. New tools can facilitate this task, 

such as Microsoft SharePoint
 2013, which allows individual pro˜les to be recorded for 
each employee, including business and technical skills and support for shared calen
-
dars. Future research could bene˜t SoMSD by developing theory-based optimization 

models for resource allocation patterns.In this paper, we have argued that the submethodology decision for each service 
(agile versus plan driven) should be made based on the type of interdependency that 

dominates each service. 
However, other factors also in˚uence this decision such as 
service provider team size, team member tenure and skills, and more
 [4]. Existing 
 256     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOULresearch that accounts for these other factors will help guide PMs in this submethod
-ology decision making
 [4, 8]. As SoMSD techniques become more prevalent, future 
research should expand this research for the SoMSD context.
Lastly, PMs and unit directors should be aware of how their existing coordina
-tion mechanisms may need to be adapted for successful SoMSD implementation. It 

was identi˜ed above that managers may need to adopt cross-functional teams. Also, 

although the SoMSD mandates the use of an SOA, other types of technology may 

need to be adopted as well. 
However, with a focus on shared access to patterns and 
resources, the SoMSD creates unique privacy concerns from storing the capabilities 

of employees and sharing service de˜nitions with external partners. Future research 

should examine how these concerns should be managed.
ConclusionTHIS
 PAPER
 CONTRIBUTES
 A SOFTWARE
 DEVELOP
MENT
 METHO
DOLO
GY based on existing con
-cepts of modularity
 [1, 2], service orientation [13], and human service patterns
 [17] to 
provide a theoretically based solution for software development units that do not ˜t the 

assumptions of traditional plan-driven or agile methodologies. 
This research paper™s 
methodology follows the guidelines of design science experts
 [21, 25, 40] by basing 
both the motivation for, and the nature of, the methodology design on interdependence 

theory
 [49] and services science [14], providing principles of implementation, offering 
testable propositions for future research, and demonstrating its effectiveness. Although 

SoMSD is not without its limitations and assumptions, this research can inspire new 

ideas and designs in the application of service-oriented concepts to the software 

development methodology domain. Future research should examine SoMSD adoption 

considerations and further develop the principles for implementation.
NOTES
1. This approach does not refer to a methodology for creating service-oriented software. 
Rather, it is the methodology itself that is service oriented and not necessarily the software 
being developed. In the case of SoMSD, the actual system being developed may take any 

architectural form.2. It could be argued that the various SoSE methodologies are also ﬁservice orientedﬂ in that 
the subteams are grouped based on the technical services they are tasked to develop. 
However, 
SoMSD implements such teams for any type of architecture development and also formalizes 

the human service de˜nitions to a much greater extent for future reuse as discussed later.
3. The modularization of a project process is not only based on dividing processes with 
sequential versus reciprocal interdependencies. As implied in Figure
 1, by having multiple 
sections of the same interdependency type in a row, further modularization will also take place 

along other traditional, natural break points. 
However, when implementing SoMSD, the inter
-dependency is another major factor to consider when modularizing the process.
4. It is important to note that each process may have multiple legitimate service patterns. 
The ﬁbestﬂ pattern in this scenario may be determined by factors such as the availability of 

resources, need for low cost versus quick delivery, and so forth.
5. In practice, actual service patterns will likely be much more granular and de˜ne services 
at a more detailed level. 
However, the example demonstrates how each service may have mul
- SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     257tiple potential subservice patterns just as each software development project may have multiple 
potential service patterns.6. Notice that this relationship is similar to that of loosely coupled Web services in SOA-based 
systems. Web services do not need to understand the inner workings of other Web services in 

order to exchange data. SoMSD is similar except that instead of passing data between functions, 
work˚ow is being passed between human service providers.
7. In the business process modeling context, ﬁAS-ISﬂ refers to the creation of business 
process models of the 
existing
 systems and ﬁ
TO-BEﬂ refers to the creation of models of how 
the new system 
should be.8. For clarity, the remainder of the paper will refer to the typical AS-IS and 
TO-BE process 
models created for each software project as ﬁbusiness process modelsﬂ and the models created 
speci˜cally about the project process (SoMSD service patterns) will be referred to as ﬁproject 

process models.ﬂ
9. Scope changes could not be used here because they were not formally allowed at 
this point in the project. 
However, informally, requirements still ˚uctuated greatly during 
implementation.10. Several techniques for establishing formative measurement validity have been outlined 
in information systems research
 [36]. The purpose of these techniques is to ensure that the 
measurement items used best represent the real content and understanding of the factor being 

measured. Establishing content validity is of primary importance with formative constructs
 [51]. 
Therefore, we validated our formative measures by discussing the meaning behind each variable 

with EP
C™s PMs and unit director, as well as those of two other large, comparable organizations 

in the area, and then jointly agreed on the perceptual measurement items that would best capture 
the differences in the variables discussed above among the projects.
REFERENCES
1. Baker, A.
L., and Zweben, S.
H. 
Use of software science in evaluating modularity concepts. 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering,
 5, 2 (1979), 110Œ120.2. Baldwin, 
C.Y., and 
Clark, K.B. Design Rules: The Power of Modularity.
 Cambridge: MIT Press, 2000.3. Barki, 
H.; Rivard, S.; and 
Talbot, J. An integrative contingency model of software project 
risk management. Journal of Management Information Systems,
 17, 4 (Spring 2001), 37Œ69.4. Barlow, J.B.; Giboney, J.S.; 
Keith, M.J.; Wilson, D.W.; Schuetzler, 
R.M.; Vance, A.; and 
Lowry, P.B. Overview and guidance on agile development in large organizations. 
Communica-tions of the Association for Information Systems,
 29, 2 (2011), 25Œ44.5. Benbasat, I.; Goldstein, D.
K.; and Mead, M. 
The case research strategy in studies of 
information systems. MIS Quarterly,
 11, 3 (1987), 369Œ386.6. Bieberstein, N.; Bose, S.; Walker, 
L.; and 
Lynch, A. Impact of service-oriented architec
-ture on enterprise systems, organizational structures, and individuals. 
IBM Systems Journal,
 44, 4 (2005), 691Œ708.7. Boehm, B., and Bhuta, J. Balancing opportunities and risks in component-based software 
development. 
IEEE Software,
 25, 6 (2008), 56Œ63.8. Boehm, B., and 
Turner, 
R. Using risk to balance agile and plan-driven methods. 
Computer,
 36, 6 (2003), 57Œ66.9. Burns, T., and Stalker, G.M. 
The Management of Innovation.
 London: Tavistock, 1961.
10. Chesbrough, H., and Spohrer, J. A research manifesto for services science. 
Communica-tions of the ACM,
 49, 7 (2006), 35Œ40.11. Cockburn, A., and 
Highsmith, J. Agile software development: 
The people factor. 
Com-puter,
 34, 11 (2001), 131Œ133.12. Dennis, A.
R.; Fuller, 
R.M.; and Valacich, J.S. Media, tasks, and communication processes: 
A theory of media synchronicity. 
MIS Quarterly,
 32, 3 (2008), 575Œ600.13. Erl, 
T. Service-Oriented Architecture: Concepts, Technology, and Design.
 Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2005.14. Foster, I. Service-oriented science. 
Science,
 308, 5723 (May 6, 2005), 814Œ817. 258     KEITH, DEMIRKAN, AND GOUL15. Galbraith, J.
R. Designing Complex Organizations.
 Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 
1973.16. Gemino, A.; 
Reich, B.
H.; and Sauer, 
C. A temporal model of information technology proj
-ect performance. Journal of Management Information Systems,
 24, 3 (Winter 2007Œ8), 9Œ44.
17. Gholami, M.F.; Shari˜, M.; and Jamshidi, P. Enhancing the OPEN process framework with 
service-oriented method fragments. Software and Systems Modeling
 (November 2011), 1Œ30.
18. Goatham, 
R. Why do projects fail? 
CalleamConsulting, July
 22, 2011 (available at http://
calleam.com/WTPF/?page_id=2213/).19. Golpayegani, S.A.
H., and Emamizadeh, B. Designing work breakdown structures using 
modular neural networks. 
Decision Support Systems, 44, 1 (2007), 202Œ222.20. Gregor, S. 
The nature of theory in information systems. 
MIS Quarterly,
 30, 3 (2006), 
611Œ642.21. Gregor, S., and Jones, D. 
The anatomy of a design theory. 
Journal of the Association for 
Information Systems, 8, 5 (2007), 312Œ335.22. Gruman, G. Breaking SOA bottlenecks. 
InfoWorld
 (May 14, 2007) (available at www.
infoworld.com/t/architecture/breaking-soa-bottlenecks-068/).
23. Hansen, B. Experience with modular concurrent programming. 
IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering,
 3, 2 (1977), 156Œ159.24. Hardgrave, B.
C.; Davis, F.D.; and 
Riemenschneider, 
C.K. Investigating determinants of 
software developers™ intentions to follow methodologies. 
Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 20, 1 (Summer 2003), 123Œ151.25. Hevner, A.
R.; March, S.
T.; Park, J.; and 
Ram, S. Design science in information systems 
research. MIS Quarterly,
 28, 1 (2004), 75Œ105.26. 
Highsmith, J., and 
Cockburn, A. Agile software development: 
The business of innovation. 
Computer,
 34, 9 (2001), 120Œ122.27. Hillegersberg, J.; Moonen, 
H.; and Dalmolen, S. 
Coordination as a service to enable agile 
business networks. In J. 
Kotlarsky, I. Oshri, and 
L.P. Willcocks (eds.), 
The Dynamics of Global 
Sourcing: Perspectives and Practices.
 Berlin: Springer, 2012, pp. 164Œ174.
28. Jarvis, 
C.B.; Mac
Kenzie, S.B.; and Podsakoff, P.M. A critical review of construct indica
-tors and measurement model misspeci˜cation in marketing and consumer research. 
Journal of 
Consumer Research,
 30, 2 (2003), 199Œ218.29. Kearns, G., and Sabherwal, 
R. Strategic alignment between business and information 
technology: A knowledge-based view of behaviors, outcome, and consequences. 
Journal of 
Management Information Systems,
 23, 3 (Winter 2006Œ7), 129Œ162.
30. Kraut, R.E., and Streeter, 
L.A. Coordination in software development. 
Communications of the ACM,
 38, 3 (1995), 69Œ81.31. Kumaran, S.; Bishop, P.; 
Chao, T.; Dhoolia, P.; Jain, P.; Jaluka, 
R.; Ludwig, H.; Moyer,
 A.; 
and Nigam,
 A. Using a model-driven transformational approach and service-oriented architecture 
for service delivery management. 
IBM Systems Journal,
 46, 3 (2007), 513Œ529.32. Langlois, R.N. Modularity in technology and organization. 
Journal of Economic Behav
-ior & Organization,
 49, 1 (2002), 19Œ37.33. Mac
Kenzie, C.M.; Laskey, 
K.; Mc
Cage, F.; Brown, P.
R.; and Metz, 
R. Oasis reference 
model for service oriented architecture 1.0. OASIS Standard, October
 12, 2006 (available at 
http://docs.oasis-open.org/soa-rm/v1.0/soa-rm.pdf).
34. Malone, 
T.W. Modeling coordination in organizations and markets. 
Management Science,
 33, 10 (1987), 1317Œ1332.35. Malone, 
T.W., and 
Crowston, 
K. The interdisciplinary study of coordination. 
ACM Com
-puting Surveys,
 26, 1 (1994), 87Œ119.36. Marakas, G.M.; Johnson, 
R.D.; and 
Clay, P.F. 
The evolving nature of the computer 
self-ef˜cacy construct: An empirical investigation of measurement construction, validity, reli
-ability and stability over time. 
Journal of the Association for Information Systems,
 8, 1 (2007), 
15Œ46.37. Nerur, S.; Mahapatra, 
R.; and Mangalaraj, G. 
Challenges of emigrating to agile method
-ologies. Communications of the ACM,
 48, 5 (2005), 72Œ78.38. Nidumolu, S. 
The effect of coordination and uncertainty on software project perfor
-manceŠResidual performance risk as an intervening variable. 
Information Systems Research,
 6, 3 (1995), 191Œ219. SERVICE-ORIENTED METHODOLOGY FOR SYSTEMS DEVELOPMENT     25939. Nowicki, E., and Smutnicki, 
C. A fast taboo search algorithm for the job shop problem. 
Management Science,
 42, 6 (1996), 797Œ813.40. Peffers, 
K.; 
Tuunanen, 
T.; 
Rothenberger, M.A.; and 
Chatterjee, S. A design science 
research methodology for information systems research. 
Journal of Management Information 
Systems, 24, 3 (Winter 2007Œ8), 45Œ77.
41. Rodriguez-Martinez, L.; Mora, M.; Alvarez, F.; Garza, 
L.; Duran, 
H.; and Munoz,
 J. Review of relevant system development life cycles in service-oriented software engineering. 
Journal of Applied Research and Technology,
 10, 2 (2012), 94Œ113.42. Schilling, M.A. 
Toward a general modular systems theory and its application to inter˜rm 
product modularity. 
Academy of Management Review,
 25, 2 (2000), 312Œ334.43. Schmidt, 
R.; Lyytinen, K.; Keil, M.; and 
Cule, P. Identifying software project risks: An 
international Delphi study. 
Journal of Management Information Systems,
 17, 4 (Spring 2001), 
5Œ36.44. Schwalbe, 
K. Information Technology Project Management.
 Boston: 
Course Technol-ogy, 2010.
45. Sheth, A.; Verma, 
K.; and Gomadam, 
K. Semantics to energize the full services spectrum. 
Communications of the ACM,
 49, 7 (2006), 55Œ61.46. Shlomo, G. Impact of various work-breakdown structures on project conceptualization. 
International Journal of Project Management,
 12, 3 (1994), 165Œ171.47. Sparrowe, 
R.T.; 
Liden, 
R.C.; Wayne, S.J.; and 
Kraimer, M.
L. Social networks and 
the performance of individuals and groups. 
Academy of Management Journal,
 44, 2 (2001), 
316Œ325.48. Sutherland, J.; Viktorov, A.; Blount, J.; and Puntikov, N. Distributed scrum: Agile project 
management with outsourced development teams. In 
R.H. Sprague (ed.), 
Proceedings of the 
40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.
 Los Alamitos, 
CA: IEEE 
Computer Society Press, 2007.49. Thompson, J.D. 
Organizations in Action: Social Science Bases of Administrative Theory.
 New York: McGraw-
Hill, 1967.50. Tiwana, A., and Mclean, E.
R. Expertise integration and creativity in information systems 
development. 
Journal of Management Information Systems,
 22, 1 (Summer 2003), 13Œ43.51. Tsai, W.
T. Service-oriented system engineering: A new paradigm. In 
IEEE International 
Workshop on Service-Oriented System Engineering, 2005. 
Los Alamitos, 
CA: IEEE 
Computer Society Press, 2005, pp. 3Œ6.52. 
Tu, Q.; Vonderembse, M.A.; 
Ragu-Nathan, 
T.S.; and 
Ragu-Nathan, B. Measuring 
modularity-based manufacturing practices and their impact on mass customization capability: 

A customer-driven perspective. 
Decision Sciences, 35, 2 (2004), 147Œ168.53. Turk, D.; France, 
R.; and 
Rumpe, B. Assumptions underlying agile software-development 
processes. Journal of Database Management,
 16, 4 (2005), 62Œ87.54. Tushman, M.
L., and Nadler, D.A. Information processing as an integrating concept in 
organizational design. 
Academy of Management Review,
 3, 3 (1978), 613Œ624.55. 
Uschold, M., and Gruninger, M. Ontologies: Principles, methods and applications. 
Knowledge Engineering Review,
 11, 2 (1996), 93Œ136.56. Vargo, S.
L., and 
Lusch, R.F. Evolving to a new dominant logic for marketing. 
Journal 
of Marketing,
 68, 1 (2004), 1Œ17.57. Vidgen, 
R., and Wang, X.F. 
Coevolving systems and the organization of agile software 
development. 
Information Systems Research,
 20, 3 (2009), 355Œ376.58. Vinekar, V.; Slinkman, 
C.W.; and Nerur, S. 
Can agile and traditional systems develop
-ment approaches coexist? An ambidextrous view. 
Information Systems Management,
 23, 3 
(2006), 31Œ42.59. Wagner, J.A. Organizations. In A.E. 
Kazdin (ed.), 
Encyclopedia of Psychology.
 Wash
-ington, DC: American Psychological Association, 2000, pp.
 14Œ20.60. Wasserman, A.I. 
Toward a discipline of software engineering. 
IEEE Software,
 13, 6 
(1996), 23Œ31.61. Xia, W.D., and 
Lee, G.
H. Complexity of information systems development projects: 
Con-ceptualization and measurement development. 
Journal of Management Information Systems,
 22, 1 (Summer 2005), 45Œ83. 