 Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  1 ABSTRACTGlobalization of software development has resulted in a rapid shift away from the traditional collocated, on-site 
development model, to the offshoring model. Emerging trends indicate an increasing interest in offshoring even in 




such as requirements change, facilitation by vendor and client site-coordinators, control, and computer-mediated 



during requirements analysis. Further, facilitation by both client and vendor site coordinators positively impacts 
requirements analysis success. 
Keywords:
 agile development; Globally distributed software development; offshoring; requirements 
analysisFlexible Global Software Development (GSD): Antecedents of Success in Requirements Analysis
Monica Adya, Marquette University, USA

INTRODUCTIONGlobalization has resulted in software devel
-opment being outsourced to emerging and 
developing nations (Edwards & Sridhar, 2005). 
An increasing range of services and processes 
are being delivered by global vendors as per 
quality, price, and requirements independent 
of geography, suggesting a growing capabil
-ity and acceptance of global service delivery 
IGI PUBLISHINGThis paper appears in the publication, Journal of Global Information Management, Volume 17, Issue 1edited by Felix B. Tan © 2008, IGI Global701 E. Chocolate Avenue, Suite 200, Hershey PA 17033-1240, USA
Tel: 717/533-8845; Fax 717/533-8661; URL-http://www.igi-global.com
ITJ 4539  2   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.(NASSCOM, 2007). Outsourcing is the largest 
and fastest growing category within worldwide 
IT services spending. In 2006, the total spending 
on IT outsourcing was estimated at over USD 
170 billion (more than 36% of the total) with 
an above average growth at 7.3 % (NASSCOM, 
2007). Accordingly, software development has 
moved away from the traditional colocated 
model, often called on-site development, to the 
offshoring model (Edwards & Sridhar, 2006) in 
which global virtual teams collaborate across 
national borders (Carmel, 1999). Global software development (GSD) pres
-ents abundant business opportunities as well as 
challenges in terms of control, coordination, 
communication, culture, and technology. To 
address these challenges, many researchers 

capabilities (Lee, Delone, & Espinosa, 2006) 

growing agile development approaches with 
the traditional plan-based approaches (Agerfalk 
& Fitzgerald, 2006; Lee, Banerjee, Lim, Hil
-legersberg, & Wei, 2006; Ramesh, Cao, Mohan, 
& Xu, 2006). As organizations become more 
virtual, distributed development will become 
increasingly apparent throughout the entire 
software development life-cycle, particularly 
so in early stages such as requirements analysis 
(Evaristo, Watson-Manheim, & Audy, 2005). 
Despite the abundance of literature on globally 
distributed virtual teams (see Powell, Piccoli, 
& Ives, 2004) and IT outsourcing (see Dibbern, 
Goles, Hirschheim, & Jayatilaka, 2004; Yadav 
& Gupta, 2008), very few studies address the 
critical requirements analysis phase of GSD 
(Yadav, Nath, Adya, & Sridhar, 2007). 
Requirements analysis refers to that stage 
of the system development life cycle wherein 
the information and information processing 
services needed to support select objectives 
and functions of the organization are (i) de
-termined and (ii) coherently represented using 


screen prototypes (Hoffer, George, & Valacich, 
1999). Typically in GSD this phase is conducted 
at the client location since this phase requires 

-velopers. Business and systems analysts are 
physically located at the client site to perform 
this activity. Depending on the nature of the 
project, high-level design is conducted in both 
on-site and off-shore mode due to comparatively 
lower interaction needs with the client. Detailed 
design, coding, and testing are executed at the 
off-shore site (Carmel & Tijia, 2005). 
Damian and Zowghi (2002) report that in 
global projects consultant teams from the off
-shore location travel to the user site to gather and 
analyze requirements in face-to-face meetings. 
The consultants then communicate the require
-ments to the development staff at the offshore 
locations. An emerging stream of research, on 
the other hand, puts forward the phenomenon 
of distributed requirements engineering (Bhat, 
Jyoti, Gupta, & Murthy, 2006; Edwards & Srid
-har, 2005; Evaristo et al., 2005; Nath, Sridhar, 
Adya, & Malik, 2006). An interesting alternative 
being considered by software companies is the 
possibility of off-shoring a larger part of the 

possible to effectively conduct the requirements 
analysis phase from offshore location which is 
traditionally done on-site? In such a scenario, 
analysts and developers located at the off-shore 
location would interact in a virtual mode with 
the clients located at their premises to determine 
and structure the requirements. Such a shift 
could potentially improve the cost arbitrage 
of the projects for instance, by cutting down 
the travel costs incurred for sending analysts 
to the client site for face-to-face meetings and 

also provide an opportunity to build client and 
developer relationships using computer-medi
-ated communication. Recent years have also witnessed growth 
of the agile movement that focuses on produc
-ing a working solution in conjunction with 

responsiveness of the agile approach makes it 
attractive for adaptation in globally distributed 
software work. Flexibility in GSD can be in
-corporated by adapting some of the principles 

 Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  3 planning, acknowledging requirements change, 
lesser emphasis on processes and documenta
-tion, and supporting informal as well as formal 
communication (Yadav et al., 2007). 
In the requirements analysis phase of 
offshore GSD projects, the absence of analysts 
and developers at customer premises is likely 
to create a need to exercise control even in a 


deploy liaisons who coordinate activities be
-tween on-site users and offshore development 
team. These liaisons are critical for effective 
communication and coordination between us
-ers and developers (Battin, Crocker, Kreidler, 
& Subramanian, 2003). This study proposes to examine two re
-
are the antecedents of requirements analysis 

do these antecedents impact success? Founded 
on control theory, this article posits a research 
model examining relationships between process 
facilitation (by client/vendor site-coordinators), 
computer-mediated communication, control, 
change in requirements, and requirements 
analysis success. Our interactions with managers in client 

ﬁtotalﬂ offshoring of requirements engineering 
is still uncommon. However, they assert that 
in some smaller projects, up to 75% of the 
requirements analysis is carried out in offshore 
mode. For this reason, it might not be feasible 
to analyze ﬁtotalﬂ offshoring of requirements 
analysis phase in a real-life setting. Furthermore, 
as client nations face a growing shortage of 
business and systems analysts, organizations 
may be compelled to consider offshoring of 
early GSD phases. Given these arguments, 
we designed exploratory quasi-experimental 
research studies in an academic setting in
-volving management students enrolled in a 
graduate level information systems course at 
Management Development Institute (MDI), 
India, and management students enrolled in a 
graduate level IT Project Management course 
at Marquette University (MU), USA. MU stu
-dents role-played clients while MDI students 
role-played systems analysts. The article is organized as follows. In the 
next section we review the background litera
-ture. Subsequently, the theoretical foundation, 
research hypotheses, and conceptual model are 
presented, followed by research methodology, 

concludes with implications and directions for 
future research.REQUIREMENTS AN
ALYSIS IN FLEXIBLE G
SD P
ROJECTSOne of the most challenging aspects of system 
development is ascertaining ﬁwhat the system 
should do,ﬂ that is in determining the system 
requirements (Crowston & Kammerer 1998, 
p. 227). Globally distributed requirements 
analysis generally includes a team of analysts 
and users working together using technologies 
like computer-mediated conferencing, instant 
messaging, e-mails, teleconferencing, and Web-
based group support systems. There is a growing debate on 
what can be 

One school of 
thought suggests that certain activities, like cod
-
other activities, like requirements gathering, are 
better to be carried out onshore within the client™s 
country (Carmel & Tijia, 2005). On the other 
hand, there is a growing stream of researchers 
who reason in favor of distributed requirements 
engineering. Few studies have examined the 
use of virtual and globally distributed teams 
for requirements analysis. Edwards and Srid
-har (2005) studied the effectiveness of virtual 
teams in a collaborative requirements analysis 
practice. In this study virtual GSD teams at near 
and far locations participated in requirements 
analysis phase of the project. This typically 
is applicable in collaborative global product 
development exercises as described in Battin et 
al. (2003). However, in our research we study 
the requirements analysis phase of off-shored 
software projects consisting of (i) users of
 the client who specify the requirements, and (ii) 
 4   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.developers/analysts of the 
vendor located at 
an offshore development center who determine 

a virtual GSD team to comprise these two 
protagonists who rarely meet face-to-face and 
who work together using computer mediate 
communications. Damian and Zowghi (2002) studied the 

impact of distance on the ability to reconcile dif
-ferent viewpoints with respect to ﬁrequirements 

a common understanding of requirements, to
-gether with reduced awareness of local context, 
trust level, and ability to share work artifacts 

among remote stakeholders in negotiating a 

-cally dispersed customers. Damian, Eberlein, 
Shaw, and Gaines (2000) examined the effect 
of the distribution of various stakeholders in 
requirements engineering process. They found 
that highest group performance occurred when 
customers were separated from each other and 
collocated with the facilitator or system analyst. 
Our study aims to contribute to the literature 
on globally distributed virtual teams engaged in 
off-shored software requirements analysis.
FLEXIBILITY 
IN G
SDContinued dissatisfaction with the traditional 
plan-driven (
heavyweight) software develop
-ment methodologies have led to the introduction 
of various agile (
lightweight) methodologies, like eXtreme programming, Scrum, Crystal, and 
so forth (Fruhling & Vreede, 2006; Lindstrom 
& Jeffries, 2004). Practice-led agile methods 
have been proposed as a solution that addresses 
problems, such as budget/schedule overruns 
and poor quality levels, by promoting commu
-
(Agerfaulk & Fitzgerald, 2006; Augustine, 
Payne, Sencindiver, & Woodcock, 2005). The 
agile alliance movement was motivated by 
the observation that software teams in many 
corporations are entrapped in an ever-increas
-ing amount of process and documentation 
(Fruhling & Vreede, 2006). Agile approaches 
focus on fast deliverables, dynamic management 
of requirements, and fast iterations and incre
-ments (Fruhling & Vreede, 2006). While many 


-cally operationalized agile GSD (Fruhling & 
Vreede, 2006) and developed theories in this 
area (Agerfaulk & Fitzgerald, 2006). Our informal interactions with client and 
vendor organizations in the U.S. and India also 
indicate that in reality what exits is something 
in between the spectrum of the traditional and 
agile approaches. Though industry continues to 
debate whether or not agile processes are ap
-propriate for distributed teams, let alone large 
and offshore distributed teams, organizations 
like Sapient have been successful in tailoring 

-ing a mixed focus on people, process, and tools 

-ible GSD can be visualized as an ﬁagile-rigidﬂ 
approach that lies in between the traditional 
and agile approaches (see Figure 1). To highlight the differences, the key char
-
GSD environments adapted from a current 
stream of research (Furhling et al., 2006; Holm
-strom, Fitzgerald, Agerfalk, Conchuir, & Eoin, 
2006; Lee, Delone et al., 2006; Lee, Banerjee et 
al., 2006; Ramesh et al., 2006; ) are presented 
in Table 1. Flexible GSD offers ﬁrigorﬂ of the 


Tr
ad
itional A
pproac
h Flexible G
SD
 Approac
h Agile Approac
h (Rigid) 
(Agile-Rigid) 
(Agile) 
 Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  5 agile approaches within the teams (Yadav et 
al., 2007). Rigor is provided by incorporating 
formal structures of the traditional approach, 
such as development of a project plan, com
-munication plan, and project status tracking. 

planning. Elaborate project management 
techniques are tailored to make them ﬁlight-
weight.ﬂ ﬁSimple rulesﬂ (Augustine et al., 
2005) are adopted. Formal as well as informal 
channels of communication are encouraged. 
Additionally, it adopts the agile philosophy 
of embracing requirements change. The agile 
principle states that we should welcome chang
-ing requirements in software projects as they 
harness change for the customer™s competitive 
advantage (Lindstrom & Jeffries, 2004). How
-ever, Fruhling and Vreede (2006) indicate that 
the impact of requirements change has not been 
studied empirically.
UNDERLYING TH
EORETICAL FOUNDATIO
NGlobal software development is not just a techni
-cal process of building software or information 
systems but also a social process involving 
stakeholders from multiple organizational units. 
Our article draws upon 
control theory
 to study 
the impact of antecedents on success during 

Academic (Kirsch & Cummings, 1996) and 
practitioner (PMBOK, 2000) literature suggests 
that control plays an effective role in managing 

 Development Approach
DevelopmentApproach
GSD Approach
Fundamental As
-sumption-able, predictable, and can be built through meticulous and extensive planning.High-quality, adaptive 
software can be developed by small teams using prin-ciples of continuous design improvement and testing based upon rapid feedback and change.High-quality, adaptive 
software can be developed by globally distributed teams using principles of continuous improvement based upon feedback and change having some amount of planning and control.CommunicationFormalInformalFormal and informal Project Management
-Process-centric-Processes over people-Extensive milestone planning- Extensive documentation-People-centric-People over processes-Respond to change over following a plan- Lack of documentation-Equal importance to people and processes- Medium project planning-Medium documentationRequirements
-Knowable early; largely 
stablerequirements-Largely emergent; rapid 
change- Iterative development that produce working solutions at the end of each iteration to capture emerg
-ing requirements- Emergent
- Use prototypes or incremental working solu-tions to capture emerging 
requirementsSizeLarger teams (>10 team 
members)Smaller teams (2-8 team members).Smaller teams or large 
teams broken down to small sub-teams (<10 team members).
 6   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.projects. Control theory attempts to explain 
how one person or group ensures that another 
person or group works toward and attains a 
set of organizational goals. Aligned with prior 
research on control (Choudhury & Sabherwal, 
2003; Kirsch, 1997), our study views control 
broadly as attempts to ensure that individu
-als act in a manner consistent with achieving 
desired project goals. Control modes can be 
ﬁformal or ﬁinformalﬂ (Crisp, 2003) in nature, 
where former are documented and initiated by 
management, and the latter are often initiated 
by employees themselves. Control theories suggest that controllers 
utilize two modes of formal control: behav
-ior and outcome (Eisenhardt, 1985; Kirsch, 
Sambamurthy, Dong-Gil, & Russell, 2002). 
In behavior control, appropriate steps and 

controllers and then controllees™ performance 
is evaluated according to their adherence to 
the prescribed procedures. In outcome control, 

controllees to decide how to meet those output 
targets. Controllees™ performance is evaluated 
on the degree to which targets were met, and 
not the processes used to achieve the targets 
(Kirsch et al., 2002). In this study, we focus on 
the impact of formal modes of control (outcome 
and behavior) on success of GSD projects dur
-ing the requirements analysis phase.Kirsch et al. (2002) extended the control 
theory to the role of client liaisons/coordina
-tors exercising control of IS project leaders to 
ensure that IS projects meet their goals. Lee 
et al. (2006) also proposed assigning ﬁpoint 
personsﬂ/ coordinators to offshore sites for 
effective management of GSD projects. We 
draw upon this literature to study the effect 
of process facilitation by both the client and 
vendor site coordinators.  RESEARCH MODELTo reiterate, this article proposes to examine 
the following research questionsŠwhat are 
the antecedents of requirements analysis suc
-
these antecedents impact requirements analysis 

-porating discipline through formal modes of 
control, process facilitation by site-coordinators 
(at both the client and vendor sites), and task 
related computer-mediated communication in 

-ments analysis success. We also explore how 
change in requirements, which is an inherent 
assumption behind the agile philosophy, impacts 
requirements analysis success. Control theory 
guides our hypotheses and model development 
process (see Figure 2). The research model 
variables and hypotheses specifying relation
-ships between these variables are presented in 
the subsequent sections. Control Outsourced projects in GSD pose unique prob
-lems that make the task of controlling them 
particularly challenging (Choudhury & Sabh
-erwal, 2003). In the case of outsourced GSD 
projects, the controller and controllee may not 
be single individuals but teams of individuals 
representing the client and vendor organizations 
at globally distributed locations. Lee, Delone 
et al. (2006) suggest that agile methods should 
be tailored to embrace more discipline in GSD. 
Derived from control theory, we hypothesize 
that incorporating discipline by using formal 
modes of control (outcome and behavior) 

projects is likely to help in achieving success 
(Yadav et al., 2007). 
H1: Formal modes of control are positively 
related to requirements analysis success in a 

Computer-Mediated CommunicationComputer-mediated communication uses com
-puters to structure and process information, and 
uses telecommunication networks to facilitate 
its exchange (e.g., e-mails, computer conferenc
- Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  7 ing, e-groups). Rice (1987) indicates that com
-puter-mediated communication is preferred in 
cross-location interdependency tasks because of 
greater freedom from temporal and geographic 
constraints (e.g., offshoring). Computer-medi
-ated communication allows group members to 
collaboratively create meaning out of diverse 
sources of information leading to better out
-comes (DeSanctis & Gallupe, 1987). The virtual GSD environment presents 
considerable challenges to effective com
-munication including time delays in sending 
feedback, lack of a common frame of reference 
for all members, differences in salience and 
interpretation of written text, and assurance 
of participation from remote team members 
(Crampton, 2001). Hulnick (2000, p. 33) noted 
that ﬁif technology is the foundation of the vir
-tual business relationship, communication is the 
cement.ﬂ Information processing perspective of 
communication indicates that task uncertainty 

frequency of interaction between work units 
(Putnam & Cheney, 1985). Extending this to 
a GSD scenario during requirements analysis 

the remote client and the vendor teams for accu
-rately capturing and documenting requirements. 
This is likely to lead to frequent task related 
computer-mediated communication between 
globally distributed team members for success
-ful completion of requirements analysis. Thus 
we hypothesize that:H2: Task-related computer-mediated commu
-nication is positively related to requirements 

-ment.Process FacilitationLee, Delone et al. (2006) indicate that as
-signing ﬁpoint personsﬂ in offshore software 
development plays pivotal role in sensing and 
responding to emergent problems on a real time 
basis. Borrowing from IS Literature on Group 
Support Systems (GSS) process facilitation is 

and general support to groups (Miranda & 
Bostrom, 1999). Our research acknowledges 
PROCESSFACILITA
TION (Vendor)COMMUNICATION(Computer-
mediated)PROCESSFACILITA
TION (Client)REQ ANALYSIS SUCCESS-Client Satisfaction-Quality of Artifacts-Success of ProcessENVIRONMENT: Flexible GSD ()H3
aH4
aH5
aH4
bH5
bH1
H3
bH2
++++++++Figure 2. Research model
 8   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Crisp™s (2003) view on structuring borrowed 
from control theory and applies it in the context 
of GSD process facilitation where structuring 
refers to ﬁany explicit or implicit means of de
-veloping structures for control.ﬂ In the case of 
outsourced GSD projects, process facilitation 
can be provided by assigning point persons/li
-aisons/site-coordinators at both the client and 
vendor sites. We hypothesize that process facili
-tation provided by site-coordinators at offshore 
sites (client/vendor) can be a considered as a 
structure that is more likely to assist productive 
outcomes (Yadav et al., 2007). 
H3a: 
Process facilitation by vendor site-coordi
-nator is positively related to requirements analy
-
H3b: Process facilitation by client site-coordi
-nator is positively related to requirements analy
-
Structures are formal and informal proce
-dures, techniques, skills, rules, and technologies 
that organize and direct group behavior and 
processes (Anson, Bostrom, & Wynne, 1995). 
We therefore hypothesize that process facilita
-tion provided by site-coordinators (client/ven
-dor) at offshore sites can be a considered as a 
structure that is more likely to assist in formal 
modes of control: H4a: Process facilitation by vendor site-coor
-dinator is positively related to formal modes 
of control during requirements analysis in a 

H4b: Process facilitation by client site-coor
-dinator is positively related to formal modes 
of control during requirements analysis in a 

Ramesh et al. (2006) report that a primary 
ﬁpoint of contactﬂ/a project lead, for each lo
-cation in GSD helped in facilitating com
-
and Northcraft (1998) assert the fundamental 
role of a process facilitator is to improve the 

and interaction of group members in order to 
help the group achieve outcomes. Therefore, 
we hypothesize that process facilitation by 
vendor site-coordinator and also by client 
site-coordinator is likely to lead to increased 
computer-mediated communication: 
H5a: Process facilitation by vendor site-co
-ordinator is positively related to task-related 
computer-mediated communication during 

-vironment.
H5b: Process facilitation by client site-co
-ordinator is positively related to task-related 
computer-mediated communication during 

-vironment.
Requirements ChangeThe task of specifying requirements has ﬁhigh 
dynamic complexityﬂ (Briggs & Gruenbacher, 
2002). This complexity stems from the evo
-lutionary nature of requirements, which are 

information gathering (Evaristo et al., 2005). 
As organizations become more global and 
stakeholders more distributed, getting the re
-quirements right will pose a greater challenge 
(Damian et al., 2000). Flexible perspective borrowing from Agile 
philosophy states that ﬁchanging requirements 
are not necessarily bad but are welcomed as 
an opportunity to satisfy customer needs even 

-mentsﬂ (Turk et al., 2005). Although many 

dynamic management of requirements and fast 
iterations, few have been empirically examined 
(Fruhling & Vreede, 2006). Founded on the 
agile philosophy of considering requirements 
change as good opportunity to satisfy customer 
needs, we hypothesize: H6a: Members of teams that have changes 
in requirements will perceive higher level of 
requirements analysis success than those who 
have no changes.  Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  9 When requirements change, it is assumed 
that client team members are likely to experi
-ence a greater need to communicate and moni
-tor vendor team members™ behavior to ensure 
changes are incorporated. Therefore, it is likely 
that changes in requirements would probably 
lead to increase in control and task-related 
communication. H6b: Members of teams that have changes in 
requirements will perceive a higher level of 
control than those who have no changes. 
H6c: Members of teams that have changes in 
requirements will perceive a higher level of 
task related communication than those who 
have no changes. Tan and Teo (2007) recently pointed out 
that project team using agile methodology 
could be effective in responding to change in 
user requirements if it stressed collaboration 
among members and users; thus it is likely 
that changes in requirements leads to increased 
process facilitation by site coordinators (cli
-ent/vendor).H6d: Members of teams that have changes in 
requirements will perceive a higher level of 
process facilitation by vendor site-coordinator 
than those who have no changes. H6e: Members of teams that have changes in 
requirements will perceive a higher level of 
process facilitation by client site-coordinator 
than those who have no changes. RESEARCH METHODOLOGYFaculties in many universities and business 
schools have set up distributed software en
-gineering laboratories for conducting virtual 
team exercises in their courses (Edwards & 
Sridhar, 2006; Nath et al., 2007). Powell et al. 
(2004) have listed a number of studies involving 
students in global virtual teams. A controlled 

First, it makes available several teams that 
work in parallel thereby generating rich data 
for drawing conclusions. Second, it permits re
-searchers to experiment with newer approaches 
which may not yet have been explored by the 
industry. Finally, it equips and trains software 
engineering students to understand and to handle 
the challenges of working in global software 
teams (Favela & Pena-Mora, 2001). We conducted a quasi-experiment in a 
globally distributed academic setting involving 
MBA students from two countriesŠIndia and 
the USA. Students from MDI, India, posed as 
analysts from vendor side while those from 
MU, USA, posed as clients. Vendor role was 
assigned based upon the rationale that India is 
still the preferred sourcing destination with a 
58% share in worldwide offshore IT-BPO mar
-ket in spite of the expansion of global sourcing 
arena (NASSCOM, 2007). Similarly, client role 
was assigned based upon the rationale that the 
U.S. alone accounts for about two-thirds of 
the software and services exports from India 
(NASSCOM, 2007).Defining quasi-experimental designs, 
Campbell and Stanley (1966, p. 34) state that  
there are many natural settings in which a 
research person can introduce something like 
experimental design into his scheduling of data 
collection procedures (e.g., the when and to 
whom of measurement), even though he lacks 
full control over the scheduling of experimental 
stimuli (the when and to whom of exposures) 
which makes a true experiment possible.We designed a post-test control group qua
-si-experiment design of the following form:M X O1M  
O2ﬁMﬂ stands for matching (a priori equaliza
-tion of the two groups for the factors that have 
to be controlled), ﬁXﬂ stands for treatment and 
ﬁOﬂ stands for observation or measurement. Marquette University has a service learning 


-nesses in and around Milwaukee. These real 
life projects at Marquette University were 

 10   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.requirements analysis projects. This enabled 
the projects to closely mirror real business 
environments. Examples of these projects 
include a donation management system for a 

-ment system, an alumni Web site, a tracking 
system for battered and abused women, and a 
book inventory management system. Only high 
level requirements were provided, such as that 
the system must be secure and accurate, it must 
track certain information, and so forth. Many of 
the detailed level requirements were expected 
to emerge only through remote team member 
communications for requirements gathering 
and analysis. The ExperimentThe clients in the U.S. enrolled for a course in 
IT Project Management and the analysts in India 
enrolled for Management Information Systems 
(MIS) course, having comprehensive coverage 
of systems analysis and design, in January 
2007. This quasi-experiment was designed as 
a part of the course project and its duration was 
8 weeks. Students developed project artifacts 
iteratively using structured software develop
-
project environment was simulated based upon 
characteristics highlighted in Table 1. Each 
client team was paired with an analyst team. 
The teams were controlled in terms of age and 
work experience of team members and team 
size (see Table 2). 
MDI teams elicited project requirements 
from MU teams using Web-based communica
-tion technology like e-groups (Google/yahoo 
groups), text/voice/video chat (Skype/msn/ya
-hoo), and e-mail (see Table 3 and Figure 3). 
The gathered requirements were then struc
-tured using the process modeling tools such as 
Context Analysis Diagram (CAD), Data Flow 

MDI teams also modeled the data and associ
-ated relationships using Entity Relationship 
Diagrams (ERDs). Further, to give the users a 

MDI teams also created screen-based prototypes 
as part of the requirements analysis exercise. 
All these artifacts were submitted by the MDI 
teams to MU user teams in two iterations (see 
Table 4).
All the GSD teams had appointed site-co
-ordinators at both the client (USA) and vendor 
(India) sites. The quasi-experimental design was 
a post-test control group design. The treatment 
for this experiment was ﬁrequirements changeﬂ 
where noncontrol groups had major changes 
in requirements and control groups did not 
have changes in requirements. The analysts in 

-tion artifacts based on a set of high level and 
ambiguous requirements. A second set of more 
detailed requirements were then given to the 
MU client teams in the noncontrol group by 
the course faculty and the analysts then created 
the second iteration incorporating the changed 
set of requirements. The control group teams 
also developed the projects in two iterations but 

requirements at the start of the project.Variable
Levene Test
 (p>.05)F-valueAge (years).9080.782 0.726Total Work Experience
.2861.592 0.908IT Work Experience
.0830.490 0.964Table 2. ANOVA results 

-trolled
 Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  11 
SettingNon-control Group
(Treatment: Changes in Requirements)
Control Group
(No Treatment)
Flexible GSD All teams matched 
in terms of age, size, 
work experience, tech
-nology, standard devel
-opment methodologySample Size= 90 Analysts=59, Clients=33 10 client-analyst GSD teams, each team 
having 5-6 analysts (1 analyst appointed, 
by consensus, as MDI site-coordinator) and 
3-4 clients (1 client appointed, by consen
-sus, as MU site-coordinator)Sample Size= 91Analysts=56, Clients=3310 client-analyst GSD teams, each team 
having 5-6 analysts (1 analyst appoint
-ed, by consensus, as MDI site-coordina
-tor) and 3-4 clients (1 client appointed, 
by consensus, as MU site-coordinator)
MDI Analyst Project Deliverables
MU Client Project Deliverables
Week 1: 
with a copy to MDI faculty and researcher). No formal resource allocation at the analyst end. Week 1: 

-ules, Resource Allocation and Communication Plans 
(to the MU faculty).Week 3: 
Week 3: 

-gency Plans (to the MU faculty).Week 4: 
First Iteration (Context Analysis Diagrams, Data Flow 
and Screen-based Prototypes of the business IS) to MU Clients.Week 4: 
Feedback to MDI analysts.End of Week 4
Main Experiment : TREATMENT- Changes in Requirements for the Non-control Group
Week 6: 
Week 6: 
faculty.
Week 8: 
Second Iteration (Context Analysis Diagrams, Data 
-cations, and Screen-based Prototypes of the business IS) to MU Clients.End of Week 8: 
the MU faculty.

Table 4. Project artifacts
 12   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.MeasuresRequirements Analysis Success:
 Mahaney and 
Lederer (2006) developed a comprehensive 
instrument for measuring IS project success 
based on three dimensionsŠclient satisfaction, 
perceived quality of the project, and success 
with the implementation process. Baroudi 
and Orlikowski (1988) presented a short-form 
measure of User Information Satisfaction 
(UIS). Extending the dimensions of project 
success to the success of a particular phase of 

requirements analysis success in terms of cli
-ent satisfaction with the requirements analysis 
phase, perceived quality of the requirements 
analysis deliverables, and perceived success of 
the requirements analysis process. This research 
refers to the items developed by Mahaney and 
Lederer (2006) and Baroudi and Orlikowski 
(1988) to measure requirements analysis suc
-

GSD requirements analysis projects. Control: Items to measure control for this 
study have been adapted from literature on for
-mal modes of control (behavior and outcome) 
in information systems development projects 
(Kirsch, 1996; Kirsch et al., 2002; Piccoli et 
al., 2004).Computer-mediated communication: We 
extend the task related communication items 
developed by Espinosa (2002) to measure task 
related computer-mediated communication for 
this study. 
Process Facilitation: Items to measure pro
-cess facilitation for this study have been adapted 
from GSS literature on process facilitation 
(Anson et al., 2004; Miranda et al., 1999). The 
items on process facilitation were used twice. 
First, the items were used to measure process 
facilitation by the client site-coordinator and 
then they were used to measure process facilita
-tion by the vendor site-coordinator.
Requirements Change: This variable was 
introduced as a treatment in the experiment to 
study whether there is an impact of changing 
requirements on the proposed model variables. 
Requirements change was thus treated as a 
dichotomous variable (1=changes in require
-ments and 0=no changes). ANALYSISA survey instrument was used to collect data 
pertaining to the above measures at the end of 
the quasi-experiments. Two separate versions 
were developed for client and vendor team mem
-bers. Both versions included the same items for 
each construct but were worded differently to 
conform to the participant roles. The items were 
derived from available literature as described 
earlier and adapted for this study. Questions 
were randomized prior to instrument adminis
-tration to counter possible order effects in the 
responses. All items were measured on a seven 
point Likert-type scale, where one indicated 
strong disagreement and seven indicated strong 
agreement with the item. Items of the vendor 
version are given in Appendix 1 for reference. 
Demographic data was also collected through 
direct questions and analyzed. Our unit of analysis was at the individual 
level. We measured the effect of predictor vari
-ables on the outcome variable as perceived by the 
individual team members. A majority of research 
in organizational behavior had been conducted 
at the individual level of analysis (Schnake & 
Dumler, 2003). For example, leadership style 
had been examined at both individual and group 
levels in leadership research, but primarily at 
the individual level in organizational citizen
-ship behavior research (Schnake & Dumler, 

work context (Comstock & Scott, 1977) have 
individual and group level effects. Our view 
is consistent with the assertion by Choudhury 
and Sabherwal (2003) that in an outsourced 
software project although the overall context 

and vendor), the focus is still on individual(s) 

individual(s). Standard psychometric techniques were 
employed to validate measures. For construct 
 Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  13 validity Cronbach alpha was used and all con
-structs that had Cronbach alpha closer to or 

(Cheung & Lee, 2001). Factor analyses was 
conducted to examine convergent and discrimi
-nant validity. Principle component method of 
extraction with varimax rotation was used. 
The items that did not load well were removed 
(see Appendix 1). For ensuring convergent and 
discriminant validity we retained the indicators 
that loaded onto their proposed factors for the 
study.
Pilot Testing

an initial understanding and to pilot test the ques
-tionnaire items. Subsequently, we conducted the 
main experiment to test our hypothesized model. 
The pilot study was designed as a part of MU 
and MDI course projects and its duration was 
8 weeks (see Table 5). The client teams in the 
U.S. enrolled for an undergraduate course in IT 
Project Management and the analyst teams in 
India enrolled for a graduate course in Systems 
Analysis and Design in October of 2006. Each 
client team was given a set of requirements 
and the analyst team was required to develop 
project artifacts and screen-based prototypes of 
a business information system requested by the 
client team. This study was a simple post-test 
quasi-experiment design intended to pilot test 
the data collection instrument and to compre
-The ExperimentSubsequently, in our main experiment, we 
estimated the complete hypothesized structural 
model using Arbuckle™s (2006) AMOS 7.0 pro
-gram. A common practice used in conducting 
SEM analyses with latent variables involves 
creating ﬁitem parcelsﬂ based on sums or means 
of responses to individual items and then using 
scores on these parcels in the latent variable 
analysis (Russell, Kahn, & Altmaier, 1998). 
We created item parcels for success and control 
based upon rationale grounds (Kline, 2005) for 
our structural model analysis. For success (total 
seven questionnaire items) we created three 
item parcelsŠclient satisfaction (two items), 
perceived quality (three items), and success 
of implementation process (two items). For 
control, measured by a total of six question
-naire items, we created two parcelsŠbehavior 
control (three items) and outcome control 
(three items). RESULT
SSurvey responses for 20 items were generated 
from 181 respondents (client team members 
and vendor analysts) for the experiment. De
-mographic data was also collected through 
direct questions and examined. Four items to 
measure process facilitation and two additional 
items to measure control were added to the 
same instrument used in the pilot study. The 
descriptive statistics is outlined in Table 6 and 
Pearson™s product-moment correlation matrix 
and reliability analysis is shown in Table 7. 
Reliability of the measures of (i) suc
-cess, (ii) control, (iii) communication,  (iv) 
process facilitation (vendor), and (iv) process 
facilitation (client) had Cronbach Alpha values 
above 0.70 indicating construct reliability. The 
dependent variable perceived success showed 
SettingSample GSD Requirements Analysis
All teams matched in terms of age, size, work experience, technology, standard development methodology 
Total Sample Size= 102
Analysts=52, Clients=50 (16 client-analyst GSD teams. Each having 3-4 analysts and 2-3 clients)Table 5. Pilot study setting
 14   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
-ent variables proposed in the model, that is, 
control, communication, process facilitation 
vendor, and process facilitation client. There 

-cedent variables themselves which needs to be 
explored further.
Multigroup Analysis
As stated earlier, our experiment was a control 
group quasi-experiment design. One of the 
methods to incorporate group membership 
(treatment vs. control) into the model involves 
separating the data from members of the treat
-ment and the control groups and conducting a 
multiple-group analysis (Russell et al., 1998; 
Sorbom, 1981). We referred to the multigroup 

to test for invariant latent mean structures and 
Ho (2006, pp. 321-356) to estimate our hypoth
-esized structural equation model for the control 
group and noncontrol groups. Byrne (2001) suggests that the usual test 
for multigroup comparisons typically focuses on 
the extent to which differences are statistically 

from raw data) representing the various groups. 
In contrast, means of latent variables, as in our 
case, are unobservable. Thus, our focus is on 
testing for differences in the latent means for 
hypotheses 6a-e, that is, team members hav
-ing changes in requirements will have higher 
perceptions of the latent variables than team 
members having no changes in requirements. 

latent means of control, computer-mediated 
communication, process facilitation by vendor 
site-coordinator, process facilitation by client 
site-coordinator, and requirements analysis suc
-cess across control and noncontrol groups.In testing for differences in latent means, 
our baseline measurement model for each group 
*** Reliability Analysis (Cronbach alpha) on the diagonal


Total
Std. Dev.
AnalystClientSample Size (Control + Non-control)1810.48115
66Age (mean value in years)22.81.923.521.6Total Work Experience (mean value in years)
221.23.3IT Work Experience (mean value in years)
0.71.30.720.76Items123451. CONTROL6(0.837)***2. COMMUNICATION
3 .178*(0.828)***3. PROCESS FACILI
-TATION (CLIENT)
2 .168* .464**(0.755)***4. PROCESS FACILI
-TATION (VENDOR)
2 .584** .207** .178*(0.789)***5. SUCCESS7 .612** .337** .584**  .504**(0.790)***

 Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  15 is shown in Figure 4. The variances of the 

group. Means of the error terms are not esti
-mated and remain constrained to zero. Except 
constrained equal across groups. All intercepts 
for the observed measures are constrained equal 

estimated for noncontrol group and constrained 
equal to zero for the control group. The latent 
mean estimates indicate that team members 
having changes in requirements have sig
-
computer-mediated communication (H6c), 
process facilitation by vendor site-coordinator 
(H6e). But there appears to be little difference 
in perception for requirements analysis success 
(H6a) and process facilitation by client site-co
-ordinator (H6d). These results are summarized 
in Table 8.
For our multigroup analysis, there were 
two data sets (control and noncontrol groups), 
each having 11 measurement variables. The 
two covariance matrices generated from the 
two data sets contained 132 sample moments. 

(measurement) model, the critical ratio test for 
control and noncontrol group differences among 

-ence for the 16 regression weights. Therefore, 
we constrained 16 regression weights to equality 
in the multigroup path analysis model. The com
-putation of degrees of freedom and chi-square 

and group-variant model are outlined in Ap
-
of NFI, RFI, IFI, TLI, and CFI for both the 
models are close to or are above 0.90 (see Table 

of both models relative to the null model. Root 
mean square error of approximation (RMSEA) 

group-variant path models (0.077) indicated 

Figure 4. Structured means model for control and noncontrol groups 
 16   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.values ranging from 0.05 to 0.08 are deemed 
acceptable (Ho, 2006, pp. 349). The nested model comparisons statistics 
indicate that chi-square difference value for the 

(p< .05) with eight degrees of freedom (see 
Table 10). Thus the two models do not differ 

measure for group-invariant model (261.380) 
is lower than that for the group-variant model 
(268.532), indicating that group-invariant 

than the group-variant model. Hence we refer 
to the estimates of the group-invariant model 
for our analysis.Figures 5 and 6 present the path models 
for the control and noncontrol groups together 
with standardized regression weights (beta 

paths. First, we analyzed critical ratios for dif
-ferences test for experimental treatment impact 

of the individual hypotheses for both control 
and noncontrol groups. Appendix 2 presents 
the control and noncontrol group estimates 
in detail. H1 was supported which posits that 
formal modes of control are positively related to 
perceived success during requirements analysis 


-ingly, as proposed in H2, frequent task-related 



facilitation by vendor site-coordinator did not 
have a positive impact on success (H3a: control 

positive impact of process facilitation by client 


The proposed positive relationship between 
process facilitation by vendor site-coordinator 



Hypo-thesisLatent Variable
EstimateCritical Ratio (CR>+1.96)Sig.(p<.05)Hypothesis Supported?H6aRequirements analysis success.2321.760.078Not Sup-portedH6bControl.3642.337*.019*SupportedH6cComputer-mediated communication
.5102.227*.026*SupportedH6dProcess facilitation (vendor site-coordinator).3342.186*.029*SupportedH6eProcess facilitation (client site-coordinator)-.036-.217 .828Not Sup-portedTable 8. Results summary (latent mean estimates)
ModelNFI Delta1RFI rho1IFI Delta2TLI rho2CFIGroup Invariant.859.811
.925.897.923Group Variant
.867.802.927.887.924Saturated model1.0001.0001.000Independence model.000.000.000.000.000Table 9. Baseline comparisons
 Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  17 ModelDFCMINPNFI Delta-1IFI Delta-2RFI rho-1TLI rho2Group Invariant88.847.355.008.008-.009-.010Table 10. Nested model comparisons (assuming model group variant to be correct)
Figure 5. Noncontrol group (req. change) structural path model

+.96)Figure 6. Control group (no req. change) structural path model

+.96)  18   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.client site-coordinator and control (H4b: control 

process facilitation by vendor site-coordinator 
did not have a positive impact on frequent task-


impact of process facilitation by client site-


.47). Based on the results displayed in Table 
11, it can be concluded that for both the control 
and noncontrol groups, process facilitation by 
vendor site-coordinator is related indirectly to 
perception of success, being mediated by formal 
modes of control. Furthermore, the greater the 
process facilitation by client site-coordinator, 
the greater is task-related communication, and 
perception of success. Hypo-thesisPathHypoth-esizedRelationshipPath Coef-(Standardized beta)Criti-cal Ratio (CR>+1.96)Sig.(p<.05)Hypothesis Supported?H1Control Group:
Noncontrol Group:
+.547.434 4.079*4.079*.000*.000*SupportedH2computer-mediated communi
-Control Group:
Noncontrol Group:
+-.131-.131-1.746-1.746.081.081Not SupportedH3a req analysis successControl Group:
Noncontrol Group:
+-.079-.054 -.607-.607.544.544Not SupportedH3b req analysis successControl Group:
Noncontrol Group:
+.599.710 6.754*6.754*.000*.000*SupportedH4acontrolControl Group:
Noncontrol Group:
+.702.603 6.509*6.509*.000*.000*SupportedH4bcontrolControl Group:
Noncontrol Group:
+.088.1321.2741.274.203.203Not SupportedH5acomputer-mediated commu
-nicationControl Group:
Noncontrol Group:
+.177.1201.7681.768.077.077Not SupportedH5bcomputer-mediated commu
-nicationControl Group:
Noncontrol Group:
+.399.4714.631*4.631*.000*.000*Supported
 Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  19 DISCUSSIONThis study was driven by the need to better 
understand which antecedent factors impact 

projects and how. We proposed a conceptual 

-nary answers to our research questionsŠwhat 
are the factors that are of importance in the 

projects? How do they relate to requirements 
analysis success? 
control
 (both behaviour and 
outcome) positively impacts success during 
requirements analysis. Prior studies have 
primarily focused on behavior and outcome 
controls in internal software projects. Few 
studies, such as Choudhury and Sabherwal 
(2003), reported that outcome control in out
-sourced IS projects resembled that of internal 
IS development projects. They also state that 
behavior control entailed monitoring behavior 
that was ﬁexplicitlyﬂ as well as ﬁnot explicitlyﬂ 
prescribed and requires further investigation 
in other contexts. Consistent with their view, 

that having some amount of structure in the 
form of formal modes of controls positively 
impacts success. Applying the information processing per
-spective of communication (Putnam & Cheney, 
1985) to a GSD scenario, we suggest that there 

remote client and the vendor teams for accu
-rately capturing and documenting requirements. 
This is likely to lead to frequent task related 
computer-mediated communication for suc
-cessful completion of requirements analysis. 
Surprisingly, the results show that increased 
task-related communication did not positively 
impact success. A likely explanation for such 

-munications across the teams could have prob
-
information exchange.Consistent with prior literature and prac
-

environment increases task-related com
-munication and also leads to greater success 
of requirements analysis projects. However, 
increased process facilitation by vendor site-
coordinators did not lead to greater task-related 
communication. Rather, increased process 
facilitation by vendor site-coordinators lead 
to increased control which further impacted 
requirements analysis success. Consequently, 
the effect of process facilitation by vendor site-
coordinators on requirements analysis success 
is found to be mediated by control whereas 
process facilitation by client site-coordinators 
has a direct impact on requirements analysis 
success. Further, increased process facilita
-tion by client site-coordinators did not lead to 
increased control.
-ile) philosophy is that changes in requirements 
are good since requirements evolve over time 

-mation gathering iterations. In our experiment 
we introduced ﬁchanges in requirementsﬂ as a 

suggest that team members who experienced 
changing requirements also experienced greater 
control, greater computer-mediated communi
-cation, and greater process facilitation by vendor 
site-coordinator. However, these team members 
did not experience greater process facilitation 
by client site-coordinator. Since changes in 
requirements are client initiated, it is likely that 
the increased role of the client site-coordinator 

mean scores also indicated lower difference in 
perception of requirements analysis success. 
A probable explanation in this regard could be 
that changes in requirements might not have a 
direct impact on the success of requirements 
analysis phase. However, it is likely that the 
changes have greater impact on subsequent 
phases of software development and hence on 
the complete project. Also, there is likely to be 
an indirect impact via mediating factors like 
control, communication and process facilitation. 
This needs to be further explored by including 
requirements change as a model variable.  20   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.LIMITATIO
NS AND FUTURE PROPOSITIONSUse of ExperimentsLiterature in the area of virtual teams has mainly 
followed three research methodologiesŠcase 
studies, industry survey, and experiments. Ex
-perimental methods make possible the careful 
observation and precise manipulation of inde
-pendent variables, allowing for greater certainty 
with respect to cause and effect, while holding 
constant other variables that would normally be 

al., 2000). They also encourage the investiga
-tor to try out novel conditions and strategies 
in a safe and exploratory environment before 
implementing them in the real world (McGrath, 
1984). The industry is yet to adopt off-shoring 
of the requirements analysis phase. This pre
-cludes the use of case study or industry survey 
for this research. Hence, we used experiments 
where we can try out this new method. While 

our approach provides a foundation from which 
to build a future empirical industry assessment 
as the time is ripe.Use of Students as SurrogatesThere are criticisms for the use of students in 
academic experiments as surrogates. However, 
MBA students have been used as surrogate us
-ers in experiments conducted by Hazari (2005) 
and Briggs, Balthazard, and Dennis (1996). 
Even in the requirement negotiation phase, 
students with work experience were taken as 
users for developing a small system (Damian et 
al., 2000). Remus (1986) argued that graduate 
students could be used as surrogates for manag
-ers in experiments on business decision mak
-ing. Students often represent a typical working 
professional and organizational member due to 
the variety of backgrounds and goals (Dipboye 
& Flanagan, 1979). Studies in industrial orga
-nization psychology and organization behavior 
suggest that results obtained from students are 
similar to those from managers (see for example, 
Locke, 1986). Despite the fact that clients and 
analysts in our experiments had 2-4 years of 
work experience, limitations of using students 
as surrogates are still applicable in our study. 
The potential lack of realism in laboratory 
experiments using student surrogates can be 
addressed through multiple methods (McGrath, 
1984) so that the strengths of some compen
-sate weaknesses of others (Jarvenpaa, 1988). 
Simulated laboratory negotiations could be 

if the lack of realism is an issue. As a next step 
in our research, we plan to complement the 

Project ComplexityWe acknowledge that requirements analysis is 
an intensive phase and hence is not possible 
to completely replicate it in student experi
-ments. However, our objective was to study 
the research questions on comparable relatively 

of requirements analysis is not high. Though 
the experiments were carefully designed, the 
projects done were limited in scope and size 
compared to large scale industrial projects. 
However, no formal measures of complexity 
were used in the study so that we could compare 
the projects used in the experiments with real 
world industrial projects. Further research is 

on large scale industrial projects with complex 
requirements. Communication Technology
The communication technology used in our 
experiment was mainly freely available In
-ternet-based information and communication 
technology like chat, e-mail, e-groups, and 
Web conferencing. Moreover, in industry, other 
technologies like teleconferencing and video 
conferencing are also used. Further research 
is required to study the impact of different 
 Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  21 communication technologies during require
-ments analysis. IMPLICATIO
NS F
OR P
RACTICEThe use of GSD in organizations is becoming 
increasingly commonplace as corporations seek 
to take advantage of geographically dispersed 
talent for multilocation operations. This study 
yields several interesting implications for prac
-tice that can assist organizations in managing 
their offshore GSD projects more effectively. 
Despite evidence of successful agile 
software development, its application in GSD 
warrants some planning. Although there exists 
some preliminary research on applications of 
Extreme Programming (XP) in GSD (Nago-
The, Hoang, Nguyen, & Mai, 2005), it is a 
common perception that agile methods are 
not applicable in GSD. There is a need for 
increased understanding of the characteristics 
of agile methods and how they can be applied 

(Holmstrom et al., 2006). There are emerging 
examples of organizations like Sapient that 
have demonstrated the ability to run complex, 
large-scale distributed projects and have lev
-
(Barnett, 2006). Prior studies indicate that creation of 

principles of agile development can help orga
-nizations mitigate communication and control 
related risks inherent in GSD. Our study also 

need to pay adequate attention to incorporating 

-cally during requirements analysis. Our article 
makes an important contribution of delineating 

-ible approaches. In an attempt to portray reality, 

which most organizations are adopting. This 
hybrid approach incorporates the discipline 
offered by the traditional approaches and the 

Companies that are engaged in offshore 
GSD have developed strong processes around 
their global delivery model. However, whether 
the same processes and project monitoring dis
-cipline (control) will lead to success of projects 

in virtual team setting during the early stages 
of system development work has not been ex
-plored. Hence, we examined the antecedents of 
success during requirements analysis in such 
an environment. Our research indicates that cli
-ent site-coordinators play an important role in 
increasing task related computer-mediated com
-munication and requirements analysis success. 
Further vendor site-coordinators play a critical 
role in increasing control which indirectly im
-pacts requirements analysis success. Agile philosophy advocates that require
-ments change is a business world reality. Our 
study provides empirical support for the impact 
of requirements change even in the early phases 
of software development like requirements 
analysis. The results indicate that changes in 
requirements resulted in greater control, greater 
computer-mediated communication, and greater 
process facilitation by vendor site-coordinator. 
These factors are likely to further impact re
-quirements analysis success in a GSD setting. 
Another important message that this study 
conveys is that site-coordinators need not be 
project managers or team leads. Any experi
-enced team member who gets nominated by 
consensus can facilitate project processes and 
impact success of distributed projects. Further 

IMPLICATIO
NS F
ORRESEARCHContributing to existing research, this study 
empirically demonstrates the direct and indi
-rect relationships between antecedent factors 
(control, computer-mediated communication, 
process facilitation by vendor site-coordinator, 
and process facilitation by client site-coordi
- 22   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
projects. It may not always be feasible to 
make experimental and control groups adhere 
to experimental requirements in a classroom 

experimental design.

GSD environment. The scope of our research 
was limited to examining only formal modes of 
control whereas agile philosophy can probably 
also support informal modes of control, such as 
self and clan control. Future research is needed 
to understand the conditions under which self 

and hence their impact on success. By implementing dedicated client as well 
as vendor site-coordinators at each distributed 
site we also empirically determined the direct 
and indirect (via control) effects of process 
facilitation on success. Contrary to our belief, 

of task-related computer-mediated communica
-tion on success. Informal communication and 
socialization is one probable explanation that 
could have met the need for such information 
exchange. Also, given the fact that students were 
used as surrogates, informal online interaction is 
more likely to occur rather than planned formal 
interaction. This needs further investigation by 
Although several benefits have been 

studies to empirically validate the impact of 
changes in requirements, which resulted in 
greater perception of control, computer-medi
-ated communication, and process facilitation by 
vendor site-coordinator. However, requirements 
change calls for more detailed investigation as 
we studied this using a dichotomous variable 
in our multigroup analysis. Future research can 
involve measuring the level of requirements 
change and further adding it as a variable in 
our research model. Moreover, to further our 

GSD projects and their subphases, additional 
studies are needed that move beyond presently 
conceptualized variables, such as impact of 
motivation, cohesion and trust between offshore 
GSD team members, and emotional intelligence 
of individual team members. REFERENCESAgerfalk, P.J., & Fitzgerald, B. (2006). 
FlexibleFlexible and distributed software processes: Old petunias in 
new bowls? 
Communications of the ACM, 49
(10), 27-35.Anson, R., Bostrom, R., & Wynne, B. (1995). An 
experiment assessing group support system and fa
-cilitator effects on meeting outcomes. 
Management Science, 41(2), 189-208. Arbuckle, J.L. (2006). 
AMOS 7.0 computer software
. Chicago: SmallWaters.
Augustine, S., Payne, B., Sencindiver, F., & Wood
-cock, S. (2005). Agile project management: Steer
-ing from the edges. 
Communications of the ACM, 
48(12), 85-89.Barnett, L. (2006). Scaling agile worldwide: 
Sapient™s distributed agile methodology. 
Agile 
Journal. Retrieved July 27, 2008, from 
http://www.
agilejournal.comBaroudi, J.J., Orlikowski, W.J. (1988). A short-form 
measure of user information satisfaction: A psy
-chometric evaluation and notes on use. 
Journal of 
Management Information Systems, 4(4), 44-59.Battin, R., Crocker, R., Kreidler, J., & Subramanian, 
K. (2003, March/April). Leveraging resources in 
global software development. 
IEEE Software
, 70-
77.Beath, C.M., & Orlikowski, W.J. (1994). The con
-tradictory structure of systems development meth
-odologies: Destructuring the IS user relationship 
in information engineering. 
Information Systems 
Research,
 5(4), 350-77.Bhat, Jyoti M., Gupta, Mayank, Murthy, & Santhosh, 
N. (2006, September). Overcoming requirements 
engineering challenges: Lessons from offshore 
outsourcing. IEEE Software, 
38-43. Briggs, R.O, Balthazard, P.A, & Dennis, A.R. 
(1996). Graduate business students as surrogates in 
the evaluation of technology. 
Journal of End User 
Computing, 8(4), 11-17.
 Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  23 Briggs, R.O., & Gruenbacher, P. (2002). Easy winwin: 
Managing complexity in requirements negotiation 
with GSS. In 
Proceedings: 35th Annual Hawaii Inter
-national Conference on Systems Science, 
Hawaii. Byrne, B.M. (2001). 
Structural equation modeling 
with AMOS
. London: Lawrence Erlbaum Associ
-ates.Campbell, D.T., & Stanley, J.C. (1966). 


. Chi
-cago: Rand McNally.
Carmel, E. (1999). 
Global software teams: Collabo
-rating across borders and time zones
. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Carmel, E., & Tjia, P. (2005). 
Offshoring information 
technology: Sourcing and outsourcing to a global 
workforce
. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press.Cheung, C., & Lee, M. (2001). Trust in Internet shop
-ping: Instrument development and validation through 
classical and modern approaches. 
Journal of Global 
Information Management, 9(3), 23-35. Choudhury, V., & Sabherwal, R. (2003). Portfolios of 
control in outsourced software development projects. 
Information Systems Research,
 14(3), 291-314. Cockburn, A., & Highsmith, J. (2001, September). 
Agile software development: The business of in
-novation. IEEE Computer, 120-122. Comstock, D.E., & Scott, W.R. (1977). Technol
-ogy and the structure of subunits: Distinguishing 
individual and workgroup effects. 
Administrative Science Quarterly, 22,
 177-202. Crampton, C. (2001). The mutual knowledge problem 
and its consequences for dispersed collaboration. 
Organization Scienc
e, 12(3), 346-371.Crisp, C.B. (2003). 
Control enactment in global 
virtual teams. 
UMI published doctoral dissertation, 
University of Texas, Austin. 
Crowston, K., & Kammerer, E.E. (1998). Coordina
-tion and collective mind in software requirements de
-velopment. IBM Systems Journal, 37(2), 227-241. Damian, D.E, Eberlein, A., Shaw, M.L.G., & Gaines, 
B.R. (2000, May/June). Using different commu
-nication media in requirements negotiation. 
IEEE Software
, 28-36.Damian, D.E., & Zowghi, D. (2002). 
Aninsightinto
An insight into 

globally distributed requirement negotiations. In 
Proceedings: 36th Hawaii International Conference 
on System Sciences, Hawaii.DeSanctis, G., & Gallupe, R.B. 
(1987).Afounda-
(1987). A founda
-tion for the study of group decision support systems. 
Management Science, 35(5), 589-609. Dibbern, J., Goles, T., Hirschheim, R., & Jayatilaka, 
B. (2004). Information systems outsourcing: A survey 
and analysis of the literature. 

Advances in Information Systems, 35(4), 6-102.Dipboye, R.L., & Flanagan, M.F. (1979). Research 
setting in industrial and organization psychology: 

laboratory. 
American Psychologist, 32, 141-150.Edwards, K., & Sridhar, V. (2005, April-June). Analy
-sis of software requirements engineering exercises 
in a global virtual team setup. 
Journal of Global 
Information Management, 13(2), 21-41.Edwards, K., & Sridhar, V. (2006). Collaborative 
software requirements engineering exercises in a 
distributed virtual team environment. In G. Hunter & 
F. Tan (Eds.), 
Advanced topics of global information 
management (Vol. 5., pp. 178-197). Hershey, PA: 
Idea Group Publishing Eisenhardt, K.M. (1985). Control: Organizational 
and economic approaches. 
Management Science, 
31(2), 134-49.Espinosa, A.J. (2002). 
Shared mental models and 
coordination in large-scale, distributed software 
development. UMI published doctoral dissertation, 
Carnegie Mellon University. 
Evaristo, R., Watson-Manheim, M. B., & Audy, J. 
(2005). E-collaboration in distributed requirements 
determination. International Journal of E-Collabo
-ration, 1(2), 40-55. Favela, J., & Pena-Mora, F. (2001, March/April). 
An experience in collaborative software engineering 
education. IEEE Software, 
47-53.Fruhling, A., & Vreede, G.-J. De (2006). Field expe
-riences with e-xtreme programming: developing an 
emergency response system. 
Journal of Management 
Information Systems, 22(4), 39-68.
Task design: An integrated 
approach.
 Glenview, IL: Scott Foresman. 
 24   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.

-tended and unintended effects. 
Information Systems 
Research, 9
(1), 21-35.Hazari, S.I. (2005). Perceptions of end-users on 

exploratory study. 
Journal of Organizational and 
End User Computing, 17(3), 47-65.Ho, R. (2006). 
Handbook of univariate and multi
-variate data analysis and interpretation with SPSS
. Boca Raton, NY: Chapman & Hall. 
Hoffer, J., George, J., & Valacich, J. (1999). 
Mod-ern systems analysis and design
. USA: Addison 
Wesley. 
Holmstrom, H., Fitzgerald, B., Agerfalk, P.J., Con
-chuir, & Eoin, O. (2006, Summer). Agile practices 
reduce distance in global software development. 
Information Systems Management, 7-18.Hulnick, G. (2000). Doing business virtually. 
Com-munication World, 17
(3), 33-36.Jarvenpaa, S. (1988). The importance of laboratory 
experimentation in IS research. 
Communications of 
the ACM, 31
(12), 1502-1505. Kirsch, L.J. (1997). Portfolios of control modes 
and IS project management. 
Information Systems 
Research, 8
(3), 215-39.Kirsch, L.J., & Cummings, L.L. (1996). Contextual 

in systems development. 
Accounting, Management 
Information Technology, 6
(3), 191-219.Kirsch, L.J., Sambamurthy, V., Dong-Gil, K., & 
Russell, L.P. (2002, April). Controlling information 
systems development projects: The view from the 
client. Management Science, 48(4), 484-498.Kline, R.B. (2005). 
Principles and practice of 
structural equation modeling 
(2nd ed.). New York: 
Guilford. Lee, O.-K. Banerjee, P., Lim, K.H., Hillegersberg, 
J.V., & Wei, K.K. (2006). Aligning IT components 
to achieve agility in globally distributed system 
development. Communications of the ACM, 49
(10), 49-54. Lee, G., Delone, W., & Espinosa, J.A. (2006). Am
-bidextrous coping strategies in globally distributed 
software development projects. 
Communications of 
the ACM, 49
(10), 35-40.Lindstrom, L., & Jeffries, R. (2004, Summer). Ex
-treme programming and agile software development 
methodologies. Information Systems Management, 
41-52.Locke, E.A. (1986). 
Generalizing from laboratory to 

-nization, organization behavior, and human resource 
management. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.Mahaney, R.C., & Lederer, A.L. (2006). The effect 
of intrinsic and extrinsic rewards for developers on 
information systems project success. 
Project Man
-agement Journal, 37(4), 42-54. McGrath, J. (1984). 
Groups: Interaction and per
-formance. New Jersey: Prentice-Hall.Meso, P., & Jain, R. (2006, Summer). Agile software 
development: Adaptive systems principles and 
best practices. 
Information Systems Management
, 19-30. Miranda, S.M., & Bostrom, R.P. (1999). Meet
-ing facilitation: Process vs. content interventions. 
Journal of Management Information Systems, 15
(4), 89-114.
Nago-The, A., Hoang, K., Nguyen, T., & Mai, N. 
(2005). Extreme programming in distributed soft
-ware development: A case study. In 
Proceedings: 

Paris. Nath, D., Sridhar, V., Adya, M., & Malik, A. (2006). 
The effect of user project monitoring on the perfor
-mance of virtual teams in the requirements analysis 
phase of off-shored software projects. In 
Proceed
-ings:
 INFORMS Conference on Information Systems 
and Technology (CIST), 
Pittsburgh, PA.
National Association of Software and Service Com
-panies (NASSCOM). (2007). 
Strategic review: The 
IT industry in India. 
Retrieved July 27, 2008, from 
http://www.nasscom.org
/PMBOK® (2000). 
A guide to project management 
body of knowledge (PMBOK)
. Newtown Square, 
PA: Project Management Institute. 
Powell, A., Piccoli, G., & Ives, B. (2004). Virtual 
teams: A review of current literature and directions 
for future research. 

in Information Systems, 35(1), 6-36. Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  25 Putnam, L.L., & Cheney, G. (1985). Organizational 
communication: Historical development and future 
directions. In T.W. Benson (Ed.), 
Speech communica
-tion in the 20th century 
(pp. 130-156). Carbondale, 
IL: Southern Illinois University Press. Ramesh, B., Cao, L., Mohan, K., & Xu, P. (2006). 
Can distributed software development be agile? 
Communications of the ACM, 49
(10), 41-46.Remus, W.E. (1986). An empirical test of the use 
of graduate students as surrogates for managers in 
experiments on business decision making. 
Journal of Business Research
, 14(1), 1986, 19-25.Rice, R.E. (1987). Computer-mediated communi
-cation and organizational innovation. 
Journal of 
Communication, 37(4), 65-94.Russell, D.W., Kahn, J.H. & Altmaier, E.M. (1998). 
Analyzing data from experimental studies: A latent 
variable structural equation modeling approach. 
Journal of Counseling Psychology, 45
(1), 18-29.Schnake, M.E., & Dumler, M.P. (2003). Levels of 
measurement and analysis issues in organizational cit
-izenship behavior research. 
Journal of Occupational 
and Organizational Psychology, 76,
 283-301. Sorbom, D. (1981). Systems under indirect obser
-vation: Causality, structure and prediction. In K.G. 
Joreskog & H. Wald (Eds.), 
Structural equation 
models with structured means
. Amsterdam: North-
Holland.Tan, C., & Teo, H. (2007). Training future software 
developers to acquire agile development skills. 
Com
-munications of the ACM, 50
(12), 97-98. Yadav, V., & Gupta, R. (2008). A paradigmatic and 
methodological review of research in outsourcing. 
Information Resource Management Journal, 21
(1), 27-43.Yadav, V., Nath, D., Adya, M., & Sridhar, V. (2007). 
Investigating an agile-rigid approach in globally 
distributed requirements analysis. In
 Proceedings: 
11
th

(PACIS), 
Auckland, New Zealand. APPENDIX A: 
QUESTIONNAIRE I
TEMS 
for the client questionnaire and ﬁMDIﬂ for the vendor questionnaire. The items were the same; 

presented in the appendix are from the MDI vendor questionnaire.Response Scale: ﬁPlease answer each of the following questions related to the globally 
distributed development project by encircling the appropriate responseﬂSeven point scale, with 1= ﬁStrongly Disagree,ﬂ 4= ﬁNeutral,ﬂ and 7= ﬁStrongly Agreeﬂ
PROCESS FACILITATIO
NProcess Facilitation- Vendor

members. 26   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.2. My team members could have prepared as good project deliverables even if the MDI site-
coordinator had not been present.*3. The MDI site-coordinator constructively responded to our team™s needs for assistance. 
Process Facilitation- Client
members.2. My team members could have prepared as good project deliverables even if the MU site-
coordinator had not been present.*3. The MU site-coordinator constructively responded to our team™s needs for assistance. 
COMPUTER-MEDIATED
 C
OMMUNICATIO
N1. We had frequent online-meetings with MU team members for coordination and planning. 
2. We had frequent online-meetings with MU team members for requirements analysis.
3. We had frequent online formal review meetings with MU team members. 
4. I participated actively in the online discussions with MU team members.* CONTROLBehavior Control**1. The MU team members insisted on complete and on-time submission of project status 
reports. 2. The MU team members insisted on complete and on-time submission of intermediate project 
deliverables. 
-erables.Outcome Control**4. The MU team members regularly monitored the project progress. 5. A detailed project management plan was developed between our MDI team members and 
MU team members.6. The communication process between our MDI team members and MU team members was 
SUCCESSPerceived Quality**1. MDI team members have been able to come out with the best possible deliverables for 
capturing MU client requirements. Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  27 Client Satisfaction**4. The MU team members clearly understood the project deliverables submitted by MDI team 
members.5. The commitment of the MU team members in favor of the project directed goals and tasks 
were positive.Success of Implementation Process**6. The virtual team project was completed within its original schedule. * Item dropped from analysis
** Entered as item parcels in the model for analysis
APPENDIX B: R
ESULT
S OF MULTIGRO
UP AN
ALYSIS 
Model (Group-Invariant)
Model (Group-Variant)
Computation of degrees of freedom (Group-Invariant)Number of distinct sample moments        :132Number of distinct parameters to be estimated: 50Degrees of freedom (132 - 50)            : 82Result (Group-Invariant)Minimum was achievedChi-square = 161.380Degrees of freedom = 82Probability level = .000Computation of degrees of freedom (Group-Variant)
Number of distinct sample moments        :132Number of distinct parameters to be estimated: 58Degrees of freedom (132 - 58)            : 74Result (Group-Variant)
Minimum was achievedChi-square = 152.532Degrees of freedom = 74Probability level = .000 28   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Estimates (Group Invariant)
CONTROL GROUP (No Req. Change)
NONCONTROL GROUP (Req. Change)
Scalar Estimates (Maximum Likelihood Estimates)Regression Weights
Scalar Estimates (Maximum Likelihood Estimates)Regression Weights
EstimateS.E.C.R.PLabelEstimateS.E.C.R.PLabelCom<---Fac Vendor
.238.1351.768.077nc1Com<---Fac Vendor
.238.1351.768.077nc1Contrl<---Fac Client.102.0801.274.203nc6Contrl<---Fac Client.102.0801.274.203nc6Contrl<---Fac Vendor
.653.1006.509***nc3Contrl<---Fac Vendor
.653.1006.509***nc3Com<---Fac Client.672.1454.631***nc4Com<---Fac Client.672.1454.631***nc4Success<---Contrl.476.117
4.079***nc7Suc-cess<---Contrl.476.117
4.079***nc7Success<---Com-.078.045-1.746.081nc8Suc-cess<---Com-.078.045-1.746.081nc8Success<---Fac Client.605.0906.754***nc5Suc-cess<---Fac Client.605.0906.754***nc5Success<---Fac Vendor
-.064.105-.607.544nc2Suc-cess<---Fac Vendor
-.064.105-.607.544nc2fac2<---Fac Vendor
1.002124.8.075***ncv2fac2<---Fac Vendor
1.002.1248.075***ncv2outcnt<---Contrl.717.0858.426***ncv3outcnt<---Contrl.717.0858.426***ncv3fac1<---Fac Client.984.110
8.924***ncv1fac1<---Fac Client.984.110
8.924***ncv1fac5<---Fac Client1.000fac5<---Fac Client1.000fac6<---Fac Vendor
1.000fac6<---Fac Vendor
1.000behcnt<---Contrl1.000behcnt<---Contrl1.000com4<---Com.992.115
8.652***ncv6com4<---Com.992.115
8.652***ncv6com3<---Com1.000com3<---Com1.000uis<---Success.684.06710.225***ncv4uis<---Success.684.06710.225***ncv4proc<---Success.967.05816.565***ncv5proc<---Success.967.05816.565***ncv5qlty<---Success1.000qlty<---Success1.000continued on following page Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  29 CONTROL GROUP (No Req. Change)
NONCONTROL GROUP (Req. Change)
Standardized Regression Weights
Standardized Regression Weights
EstimateEstimateCom<---Fac Vendor
.177Com<---Fac Vendor
.120Contrl<---Fac Client.088Contrl<---Fac Client.132Contrl<---Fac Vendor
.702Contrl<---Fac Vendor
.603Com<---Fac Client.399Com<---Fac Client.471Success<---Contrl.547Success<---Contrl.434Success<---Com-.131Success<---Com-.131Success<---Fac Client.599Success<---Fac Client.710Success<---Fac Vendor
-.079Success<---Fac Vendor
-.054fac2<---Fac Vendor
.819fac2<---Fac Vendor
.717Out cnt<---Contrl.717Out cnt<---Contrl.742fac1<---Fac Client.761fac1<---Fac Client.824fac2<---Fac Client.726fac2<---Fac Client.788fac6<---Fac Vendor
.877fac6<---Fac Vendor
.742Beh cnt<---Control.797Beh cnt<---Control.831com4<---Com.864com4<---Com.904com3<---Com.892com3<---Com.925sat<---Success.611
sat<---Success.691proc<---Success.962proc<---Success.923qlty<---Success.808qlty<---Success.926Estimates (Group Invariant) continued
continued on following page 30   Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.CONTROL GROUP (No Req. Change)
NONCONTROL GROUP (Req. Change)
Squared Multiple Correlations
Squared Multiple Correlations
EstimateEstimateCom.216Com.270Control.522Control.427Success.649Success.735proc.925proc.852com3.795com3.856Out cnt.514Out cnt.551Beh cnt.635Beh cnt.690sat.373sat.478qlty.652qlty.858com4.747com4.817fac2.672fac2.514fac6.769fac6.551fac1.580fac1.680fac5.527fac5.621Estimates (Group Invariant) continued
 Copyright © 2009, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.Journal of Global Information Management, 17(1), 1-31, January-March 2009  31 Vanita Yadav researches and teaches in the area of information systems management at Management 

and has published a case study on global sourcing in Harvard Business School & Asia Case Research 
Center, Hong Kong. She has published research in 
Information Resources Management Journal
, presented 
papers in refereed international IS Conferences like PACIS, published book chapters and held reviewer 



faculty, school principal and social worker. Her research interests are in the area of outsourcing, offshor
-ing, global software development, collaborative technologies (Web 2.0) and their impact on IS Education, 
and IT strategy.

knowledge management systems, particularly for business forecasting. Some of her work in this area has 
been published in 
Decision Sciences Journal of Innovative Education, Information Systems Research, 
International Journal of Forecasting, and Journal of Forecasting
. Adya also conducts research on IT work
-
appears in 
Human Resource Management, Journal of Managerial Psychology, Information Technology & 
People, and Journal of Global Information Management
 among others. Adya has been co-investigator on 
several research grants including those from 3M Foundation and Naval Surface Warfare Center.

India and is a Visiting Research Fellow at Sasken Communication Technologies, India. He received his 

-
work in 
European Journal of Operational Research, Telecommunication Systems, International Journal 
of Business Data Communications and Networking, Applied Econometrics and International Develop
-ment, Information Resource Management Journal, Journal of Global Information Management, Journal 
of Regional Analysis and Policy, and Journal of Information System Security
. He was the recipient of the 
Nokia Visiting Fellowship awarded by the Nokia Research Foundation. He is a co-editor of 
International Journal of Business Data Communications and Networking
 and is on the editorial board of the 
Journal of 
Global Information Management. 
Institute, Gurgaon. Earlier he was senior vice president at NIIT Ltd., where he created and headed several 

and the CRM Practice.Nath has been a consultant in IT and managing IT to the top management of several organizations 

 Reproduced
with
permission
of
the
copyright
owner.
Further
reproduction
prohibited
without
permission.
