 1Are We Ready to be Unleashed? A Comparative Analysis between Agile 
Software Development and War Fighting.
Steve AdolphWSA Consulting Inc.  
1203 1000 Beach Ave, Vancouver, B.C. Canada steve@wsaconsulting.com 
AbstractAgile is for people, but are people prepared for agile? 
This paper compares the Agile Principles and our agile 
practices to an organization that may have 2,500 years 
experience practicing agility, the military. This paper 

suggests there are sufficient similarities between the 
nature of war fighting and the nature of software 
development to warrant a comparison between military 

war fighting philosophy and the principles of agile 
software development. While there are obvious 
limitations to this comparison, the comparison is 

enlightening because it both reveals potential 
deficiencies in our practice of agility and helps 
legitimizes agility as valid time tested approach to 

achieving success. KeywordsAgile software development, harmonious initiative, 

maneuver warfare, training, trust, leadership, doctrine 
IntroductionAgile is for People, but What About the People? “Agile is for people”1  “Individuals and interactions over process and tools” declares the agile manifesto. No matter 
how you say it, agile software development is about 
delivering value and responding to change by unleashing 

talented people’s creativity. But are we ready to be 
unleashed?  
Success through agility is a military doctrine which may 
date back 2,500 years to when Sun Tzu wrote in The Art 
of War “
Speed is the essence of war “ One hundred and 
seventy years ago, the Prussian strategist General Karl 

von Clausewitz rejected prescriptive approaches to war 

fighting and advocated agile like principles. Military strategists coined the term maneuver warfare to describe 

techniques that enable a force to win battles with minimal 
bloodshed by rapidly and opportunistically responding to 
change. The German Blitzkrieg (lightning war) is a 

famous application of maneuver warfare.  
With the software industry embracing agility we want to 
ask the question if the military has such a long history 
developing and practicing agile war fighting principles, 
are there lessons we can learn from their experience and 

training? Can military knowledge and experience help us 

discover deficiencies in our approach to agility and 

therefore improve our development and execution of 

Agile Principles? Can this knowledge help us develop a 

stronger validation of the Agile Principles? 
This paper argues the affirmative and despite the 
thankfully wide chasm between the nature of war fighting 

and the nature of software development there are lessons 
we can learn from military war fighting philosophy. This 
paper draws on the military’s experience with agility and 

identifies opportunities for improving our pursuit of 
agility. We are always reminded agility is for people
23,and this paper examines how the military prepares people 

for agility.This paper is a comparative analysis between the nature 
of war fighting and software development. We will first 

turn to the writings of the famous Prussian strategist Karl 

von Clausewitz and compare his model of the battlefield 

environment with the software development environment. 
Von Clausewitz shows us the inappropriate nature of 

prescriptive approaches to rapidly changing environments 
such as the battlefield. We will then present how modern 
militaries such as the United States Marine Corps 

(USMC) and the United States Army apply von 
Clausewitz’s ideas and effectively manage an agile force 

through the concept of harmonious initiative. We develop 

a model for supporting harmonious initiative and 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 2compare it to our Agile Principles and practices. This 
comparison reveals both strengths and weaknesses in our 

approach to agility. Finally we make recommendations 

for how we can overcome the weaknesses. 
An noteworthy side affect of this comparison between the 
Agile Principles and war fighting philosophy is the 

demonstration to skeptics that agility is not an off the 

wall, self serving concept developed by tree hugging 

socially conscious software developers. Rather it is 

conservative time tested philosophy practiced by 

successful war machines throughout history. 
Software Development and War Fighting There is nothing new in comparisons between military 

and business practices. Numerous books and papers make 
this comparison.  Tom Demarco of the Cutter Consortium 
employed this comparison in his armor versus mobility 

metaphor to characterize the changing balance between 
process and agility. The military metaphor is frequently 
used because it is dramatic, highly visible to the general 

population, and evokes strong metaphors and images. 
Unfortunately, it is the more violent metaphors that have 
often been employed as management clichés, “price 

wars”, “navigating the minefield”, “death march”, 

“seizing market share”, and “defeating the competitor”. 

Worse, military metaphors have often been 

misinterpreted as justification for a harsh, rigid command 
and control management style.  
As software developers, we are not interested in forcing 
our will on our enemies. Rather, we are interested in 
discovering ways to operate successfully in challenging, 

rapidly changing environments. Warfighting 
4, the United States Marine Corps war fighting manual describes the 

battlefield environment as one where  
“plans will go awry, instructions and information 

will be unclear and misinterpreted, communications 
will fail, and mistakes and unforeseen events will be 
commonplace.”Warfighting pg 10 
This is the environment soldiers must not only operate in 

but must also succeed in. According to the USMC: 
“We must therefore be prepared to cope—even 

better, to thrive—in an environment of chaos, 

uncertainty, constant change, and friction.” 

Warfighting pg 80 
Jim Highsmith described our work environment as a 
“Agile Software Development Ecosystem”
5 The question 
this paper asks is are people prepared to work 

harmoniously in this ecosystem where mistakes and 
unforeseen events are commonplace? 
Even in this limited context, we must use caution with 
this metaphor because there is a significant difference 

between the intensity of the battlefield and the software 

development environment. Simply, we do not ask 

software developers to face physical danger and 

potentially lay down their lives for the sake of their 

country. We only ask them to give up their personal time, 

their families and friends for the sake of the project. 
Is War Fighting Agile? When we think of war fighting we may think of heavy 

tanks rumbling across a battlefield, naval taskforces 

cutting across the oceans, the military bureaucracy, the 

incompetence and scandals so generously highlighted by 

our media we may want to answer a resounding no. It is 

certainly true that the administration of the military is a 

hidebound, non-agile bureaucracy. However, war fighting 
is another matter. What is perhaps surprising is that it is 

not just the elite services such as the U.S. Navy Seals or 

British Special Air Service (SAS) that consider 

themselves agile, 
all
 the military considers itself agile 
when it comes to war fighting. Scrum Master and retired 
US Army Colonel, Dan Rawsthorne, says that everything 

hereally needs to know about agility he learned in the 
Army.
6Karl von Clausewitz Much of  western military theory is based on the writings 

of Karl von Clausewitz (1780-1831) a Prussian officer 

whose war fighting advice for the Kaiser was collected 

and published in his famous book “On War”
7. While von 
Clausewitz provides an analytical study of war, his 
recognition of the difference between war on paper and 
war in practice should resonate strongly with us“Everything is very simple in war, but the simplest 
thing is difficult.” On War, Book 1, Chapter 7 
Von Clausewitz used the metaphors friction and fog to 
describe these countless factors that make the simple 

difficult. He described friction as“..…the influence of an infinity of petty circumstances, which cannot properly be described 
on paper, things disappoint us, and we fall short of 
the mark…Friction, as we refer to it here, is what makes the seemingly easy so difficult.” On War, 
Book 1, Chapter 7 Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 3Fog became a metaphor
 to describe uncertainty’s affect on decision-making and the execution of a battle plan: 
“the great uncertainty of all data in war is a peculiar 
difficulty, because all action must, to a certain extent, 
be planned in a mere twilight, which in addition not 

unfrequently—like the effect of a fog or moonshine—

gives to things exaggerated dimensions and an 
unnatural appearance” On War
, Book 2, Chapter 2 Like a fog, uncertainty hides information and makes 

decisions hard. Von Clausewitz further observed how the 

non-linear nature of uncertainty intensifies this fog: “issues can be decided by chance and incidents so 
minute as to figure in histories simply as anecdotes
”On War, Book 8 Chapter 4. 
How does von Clausewitz recommend we operate in an 
environment of friction and fog? Certainly not using rigid 

inflexible strategies or finely detailed plans. Von 

Clausewitz rejected such prescriptive approaches: "Given the nature of the subject, we must remind ourselves that it is simply not possible to construct a 
model for the art of war that can serve as a 
scaffolding on which the commander can rely for 
support at any time."  On War, Book 2 Chapter 2. 
Former GE CEO Jack Welch sums up Von Clausewitz’s 

attraction for agilists: “Von Clausewitz summed up what it had all been 
about in his classic On War. Men could not reduce 

strategy to a formula. Detailed planning necessarily 
failed, due to the inevitable frictions encountered: 

chance events, imperfections in execution, and the 

independent will of the opposition. Instead, the 

human elements were paramount: leadership, 

morale, and the almost instinctive savvy of the best 

generals”.8Von Clausewitz theories are essentially descriptive and 

intended to help us develop our own judgment for coping 

and succeeding in friction and fog. Given that most 

western military theory is built on von Clausewitz’s 

theories, it is instructive for us to study war fighting to 

discover practices for succeeding in an environment 

immersed in friction and fog that defies prescriptive 

solutions. While fog became a popular metaphor for uncertainty, 
von Clausewitz never used the expression “fog of war” Harmonious Initiative We often regard military command and control as the 
poster child for rigid, hierarchical decision-making. The 

phrase “command and control culture” has become a 

cliché in the agile community for describing rigorous 

process centric organizations with centralized authority. 

However, the reality is the military views rigid control as 

highly undesirable. An officer summed up this attitude 

towards rigid control: “I want to unleash my marines, not control them”9The UMSC war fighting manual clearly states that rigid 

hierarchical decision making is not part of the US 

Marine’s operating philosophy:“Efforts to fully centralize military operations and to 

exert complete control by a single decision maker 
are inconsistent with the intrinsically complex and 

distributed nature of war.” – Warfighting pg 13 
Rather than centralized control, the USMC favours a 

decentralized control structure: “In order to generate the tempo of operations we 
desire and to best cope with the uncertainty, 
disorder, and fluidity of combat, command and 
control must be decentralized”  Warfighting pg 77. 
How can command and control be decentralized and how 
can we free people to adapt without our development 

project deteriorating into randomness? The USMC 
command philosophy is based on the principle of 
harmonious initiative: 
“we cannot allow decentralized initiative without some means of providing unity, or focus, to the 
various efforts. To do so would be to dissipate our 

strength. We seek unity not principally through 

imposed control, but through harmonious initiative 

and lateral coordination within the context provided 

by guidance from above.” Warfighting pg 88. 
We may think of harmonious initiative as empowered 
people acting together as a team towards a shared 

common goal. This is the essence of agility. An analysis 
of military field manuals suggests four synergistic 
elements support harmonious initiative: 
1.Doctrine

2.Training 

3.Leadership
4.TrustProceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 4Leadership
Doctrine
Training
Trust
Figure 1Four Element Model of Harmonious Initiative.These four synergistic elements form an environment that 
supports harmonious initiative and hence an agile team. 

Using this model, we will describe each element and then 

compare that element to relevant Agile Principles and 

practices.DoctrineAn effective team requires a shared common philosophy 

to practice their profession. This requires a shared 
knowledge of methods and tools, and a common 
vocabulary, otherwise the team risks becoming like a 

dysfunctional tower of Babel working at cross purposes. 

The USMC refers to this basic shared core knowledge as 

their doctrine. “Doctrine is a teaching of the fundamental beliefs of 
the Marine Corps on the subject of war, from its 
nature and theory to its preparation and conduct.  

Doctrine establishes a particular way of thinking about war and a way of fighting. It also provides a 
philosophy for leading Marines in combat, a 
mandate for professionalism, and a common 
language. In short, it establishes the way we practice 

our profession.Warfighting pg 55 
Methodology is a part of our software development 

doctrine, whether we follow XP, Scrum, Crystal, or 

something else from the panoply of agile methodologies. 
The intent behind these methodologies is to establish a 

particular way of thinking about the conduct of 

developing software. An established doctrine helps 

facilitate trust because we each speak the same 

methodological language, we understand what our 

obligations to each other are, and we share a common 

professional philosophy.Military doctrine is authoritative and not prescriptive. 
The UMSC War Fighting Manual builds on von 

Clausewitz’s rejection of prescriptive doctrine: “Our doctrine does not consist of procedures to be 
applied in specific situations so much as it sets forth 
general guidance that requires judgment in 
application. Therefore, while authoritative, doctrine 
is not prescriptive.”Warfighting pg 56 
The delight we should take here is that agile software 

methodologies are authoritative, giving us what Jim 
Highsmith describes as “a barely sufficient methodology” 
that unshackles people’s creativity while providing 
sufficient guidance to prevent randomness. Neil Harrison 
referred to this as a “Liberating Form”
10 a minimal set of 
rules that liberate our creativity. Therefore agile software 
methodologies contribute to this supporting element for 

harmonious initiative. 
However, while methodology is a necessary part of the 
doctrinal element, it is not sufficient because 

methodology is limited to the process for creating 
software. An effective software organization possesses a 
collection of local patterns, solutions to common, locally 
occurring problems. These patterns are a key element of a 

common domain language. Whether these patterns are 

explicitly written down or simply retained in the heads of 
developers, these patterns give an organization its 
competitive advantage. While such patterns are outside 
the scope of an agile methodology, they are an essential 

part of an agile organization’s doctrine and essential to 

supporting harmonious initiative. 
TrainingWhile we are fortunate in the software development 

world that we do not face the same penalties for lack of 
training as soldiers, we should take strong interest in the 

importance that military services place on training: 
“All commanders should consider the professional 

development of their subordinates a principal 
responsibility of command.” Warfighting pg 63.
While there is general agreement within our industry 

about the importance of training, the actual support for, 

and the provision of training varies dramatically between 

organizations: Some organizations enthusiastically 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 5embrace and pursue training while in others employees 
are fortunate if they are reimbursed for their tuition. 

Commitment to training is one measure of an 

organization’s desire to embrace agility. 
Training though is more than hours spent in a classroom 
or performing canned exercises because this type of 

training does not expose the participant to the effects of 

fog and friction. This is why military training consists 

mostly of drills and exercises to practice skills under 

realistic conditions where the participants experience the 

effects of fog and friction. “Exercises should approximate the conditions of war 
as much as possible; that is, they should introduce friction in the form of uncertainty, stress, disorder, and opposing wills.”  Warfighting pg 60 
The Agile Principle of regular reflection supports this 

approach to on-the-job training. Of course it is not 
usually necessary to set up a drill project for training 

team members but we should consider taking advantage 

of the very real opportunities for fostering on-the-job 

training. This may be as simple as a developer presenting 

to her colleagues a work product she created and 
explaining the reasoning behind it. While the term “live 
fire exercise” may be an all too appropriate military 

metaphor, the value of this kind of training should not be 

underrated.“Critiques are an important part of training because 
critical self-analysis, even after success, is essential 

to improvement” Warfighting pg 61. 
However, even the organizations that embrace training 

may not experience the full benefits of training if training 

is seen only as a way for instilling basic doctrine. 

Training is also a key element for creating common 

experiences and familiarity, which are the basis of trust: 
“All officers and enlisted Marines undergo similar 

entry-level training which is, in effect, a socialization 

process. This training provides all Marines a 

common experience, a proud heritage, a set of 

values, and a common bond of comradeship. It is the 

essential first step in the making of a Marine.” 

Warfighting pg 59
.In most companies it is not practical, nor desirable to 

have the equivalent of boot camp where new recruits are 
sent for weeks of indoctrination and training to become 
good corporate soldiers. However, there is a synergistic 

relationship between training, doctrine, and trust because 
trust develops with shared experiences between 

colleagues.Much of the training delivered within companies is often 

delivered with a narrow focus; just-in-time training with 
specific employees learning the specific skills required 
for a specific project. For training to be truly effective in 

support of harmonious initiative it must be broadened 

such that members of closely related groups receive 

common training to develop a common experience and 

mutual respect. Imagine for a moment developers training 

with project managers to learn basic project management, 

project managers training with testers to learn basic test 

theory. Even developers training with marketing to learn 

what it is the company sells, and who the customers are.  
Southwest Airlines’ created the “Walk in Your Shoes”
11program which encourages employees to swap jobs. 

While this program is not regarded as a training program 
by Southwest Airlines, it is still an interesting high profile 

example of using cross functional learning to prepare 
people with different backgrounds to work 
collaboratively, one of our dearest Agile Principles. LeadershipLeadership is a term that is at best difficult to define. 

Leadership is certainly not the acts of giving orders and 
directing tasks. Rather, leadership is about inspiration and 
encouraging people to achieve. Good leaders are like 

coaches who inspire athletes to achieve accomplishments 
the coach themselves will never obtain.  
Decentralized command requires effective leadership 
because decentralized decision making risks dissipation 

of a force’s strength if the members of that force do not 

share the same vision. Unity in harmonious initiative is 

sought through what is called “commander’s intent”. 

According to the US Army’s Operations Manual,  
“US Army doctrine stresses rapid, agile operations 
based on exercising disciplined initiative within the 
commander’s intent,” 12The foundation for commander’s intent is drawn from the 

philosophy of a student of Von Clausewitz’s, Field 

Marshall Helmuth von Moltke's who is best known for 
the phrase “no plan ever survives first contact with the 
enemy”. Von Moltke believed commanders should issue 

only the most essential orders providing only general 
instructions outlining the principal objective of a mission. 
Tactical details were left to subordinates. The USMC war 

fighting manual describes how the use of commander’s 

intent supports harmonious initiative: 
“ The purpose of providing intent is to allow 
subordinates to exercise judgment and initiative—to 
depart from the original plan when the unforeseen 

occurs—in a way that is consistent with higher 

commanders’ aims….” Warfighting pg 88 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 6The philosophy of commander’s intent seems consistent 
with the Agile Principle of self-organizing teams. The 

Agile Principles encourages self-organizing teams as the 

most effective ways for coping with complexity and rapid 

change. The team collectively organizes and re-organizes 

itself to the task at hand and in response to change rather 

than by management direction. However, self-organizing 

teams are not leaderless teams
13. For just as an armed 
force without leadership is nothing more than an 

ineffective armed mob, so is a leaderless development 

team nothing more than a well-intentioned group of 

hackers.The implicit message in both von Moltke’s philosophy 
and the USMC war fighting manual is the importance of 

the leader’s vision, the ability of the leader to 

communicate that vision, to inspire others – and not 

necessarily just subordinates - to rise to the challenge of 

the vision, and to foster trust among others such that they 

may quickly develop and carryout their function in the 

support of that vision. These are not talents or skills we 

can assume everyone possess, or expect a person to 

develop on their own.While some people are gifted with the talent and 
charisma to become good leaders, potentially even great 
leaders, leadership skills still must be learned and the 
value of a leader must be recognized by the organization. 

This value is recognized in the USMC War Fighting 

manual, which states the goal of a professional military 

education is to develop creative thinking leaders. 

Approximately a third of a military career will be spent in 
formal training, with much of this training focused on 
leadership, and creative thinking in battlefield situations.A leader is not just a good developer with expert 
knowledge of Java, XML, and Junit. A good leader is 
also conversant in the matters of the problem domain and 
the business itself. Good leaders must possess some skill 

in managing inter-personal relationships. Von Clausewitz 
expressed the need for diversity in the training and professional development of leaders: 
“The commander need not be a learned statesman, 

or historian, or political commentator, however, he 

must be quite conversant in the higher matters of 

state and customary practices” Book 1, Chapter 3Training is only part of the development of an effective 

leader. Von Clausewitz challenged the idea effective 
leaders may simply be trained, and believed experience is 

a necessary ingredient for successful leadership, for as 

von Clausewitz wrote about war “without personal knowledge of war we cannot 
perceive where the difficulties lie
.” On War, Book 1, 
Chapter 7 Experience is therefore a significant component of an 

effective leader. To believe that we can simply train a 

leader falls into the MBA malaise of believing that 

intense analytical training prepares a person to become a 

corporate leader. According to Henry Mintzberg, the 

Cleghorn Professor of management studies at McGill 

University “ Leaders cannot be created in the classroom. 
They arise in context”. 14The development of leadership skills is an area of 

concern because leadership development within software 

organizations is often ad hoc if it exists at all. Agile 

methodologies unshackle gifted and creative people and 
open the opportunity for them to lead and inspire a team 

of creative individuals. Unfortunately, in many cases we 

are simply hoping people possess natural talent to exploit 

the opportunity and work together as a team. Militaries 

do not rely on hope and place a very high value on 

leadership at all levels “Our philosophy requires competent leadership at all 
levels” Warfighting pg 81. 
It is the development of leaders where we see the widest 
gulf between Agile Principles and military philosophy. 

While Agile Principles enable people to lead, they do not 

set down the importance of developing leadership skills 

as is done in military war fighting philosophy. If we truly 

believe that agile software development is about people, 

then the development of leadership and team skills must 

made explicit in the Agile Principles.  
TrustThe flexibility to quickly respond to change depends on 

quick decision making. Doctrine and training provide 

rules and guidelines for making decisions. Leadership 

provides vision and inspiration. But it is trust that enables 

us to take the initiative and make decisions quickly in an 

environment of friction and fog. Trust is often referred to 

as the “lubricant” that reduces Clausewitzian friction. The 

sociologist/economist Fukuyama wrote regarding trust
“If people who have to work together in an 
enterprise trust one another because they are all 

operating according to a common set of ethical 
norms, doing business will cost less. Such a society 

will be better able to innovate organizationally, since 
the high degree of trust will permit a wide variety of 
social relationships to emerge…. "By contrast, people who do not trust one another 
will end up cooperating only under a system of 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 7formal rules and regulations, which have to be negotiated, agreed to, litigated, and enforced, 

sometimes by coercive means. This legal apparatus, 

serving as a substitute for trust, entails what 
economists call "transaction costs." Widespread 
distrust in a society, in other words, imposes a kind 

of tax on all forms of economic activity, a tax that 

high-trust societies do not have to pay."15It is stating the obvious that trust is a key element 

supporting harmonious initiative and therefore a key 

success factor of an agile team. Several Agile Principles 
directly support the development of trust within an agile 
team and its stake holders by building confidence and 
familiarity with early and continuous delivery of 
valuable software, by requiring business people and 

developers working together and by face to face 

conversations.Unfortunately it seems that organizations treat trust as 
either a nice to have, or as some mysterious property that 
they cannot really control and may or may not emerge. 

Furthermore, organizations often have policies that 
discourage putting the team above the individual 
frequently in the form of incentive programs or 

consequences for violating rules.  Trust is not a 
mysterious property that may or may not emerge within 
a team. Neither is it something that simply decreed. 
According to the USMC: Trust is a product of confidence and familiarity. 
Confidence among comrades results from 
demonstrated professional skill. Familiarity results 
from shared experience and a common professional 

philosophy”.Warfighting pg 58 
Psychiatrist, Jonathan Shay wrote“We know a great deal about how to create trust 
among people who start out as strangers: cohesion, 

leadership, training. We know how to do this! It is 

not mysterious.”16This should be another area of concern for us because 

trust or the lack thereof is a key determinant to the 

success or failure of a project. To paraphrase Cockburn 
and Highsmith, people trump process, but politics 
trumps people
17. We seem to be assuming trust will 
automatically emerge with the introduction of an agile 
process. While agile processes are a good expression of 

trust in a team they do not on their own create an 

atmosphere of trust.  
ConclusionAgile methodologies enable us to clear away the 
cluttering impediments imposed by rote prescriptive 

methodologies and unleash our creativity. However, 

when we compare ourselves to military war fighting 

philosophy we have to ask are we ready to be unleashed?  
Are we ready to take advantage of agility? Unfortunately, 
after comparing the four synergistic elements of 
harmonious initiative to Agile Principles and practices, 
the answer is an unsatisfying “it depends”. It depends on 

the organization’s training policies, leadership and the 

development of leaders within organization and whether 

corporate policies encourage or inhibit the emergence of 

trust.At an abstract level, there is similarity between the nature 
of war fighting and the nature of software development. 

Friction and fog are good metaphors for describing the 

software development environment and agility becomes a 

necessary philosophy for succeeding in this 
Clausewitzian environment. The military approach to 

agility is based on a decentralized command structure 

where unity of purpose is achieved through harmonious 

initiative. This paper presented a four element model of 

harmonious initiative to which we compared our agile 

practices.Doctrine: The agile methodologies establish 
excellent methodological practices that 
enable people to work collaboratively to 

deliver value and rapidly respond to change. However doctrine is not just 

methodology because there are numerous 

local patterns that contribute to an 

organization’s core competency. These 
patterns must be recognized as part of an 
organization’s doctrine. Training, Within the agile community there is 
strong support for training, and an 

excellent repertoire of agile development 
courses. However, training must be seen 
as more than a tool for instilling doctrine 
within individuals but also for 

developing a shared common experience 

(e.g. cross discipline training). 

Furthermore it is unclear if we are taking 

advantage of drill training and regularly 

reflecting on the lessons learned. Leadership The concept of commander’s intent is 
consistent with the Agile Principle of 
self-organizing team. However, the Agile 

Principles do not highlight the need for 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 8developing leadership skills and the 
importance of experienced leaders. 
Trust  Trust is essential for agility and the act of 
adopting agile development practices 

serves as an excellent demonstration of 

good faith in the people of that 

organization. However, we are usually 
hoping that trust will somehow emerge. 

Worse, organizations may have policies 

that inhibit the development of trust.  We 

need to acknowledge that trust is a key 

element for supporting harmonious 

initiative and can be developed and 

encourage with policies that foster trust. Leadership
Trust
Training
Doctrine
Figure 2 Comparison of the Agile Principles Support for Harmonious Initiative to Military Warfighting Philosophy in Figure 1. The deficiency in the Agile Principles and practice is the 
implicit assumption that people are ready for agile 

software development, that they possess the needed inter 

personal and leadership skills. The military, and 

especially the US Marines go to great lengths to 

emphasize the importance of these elements for creating 

an agile organization. While our Agile Principles are built 

on collaboration, face to face conversations, and trust, we 

do not explicitly state the importance of developing the 

skills which support these principles.  Two lessons we 
should take from this comparison between the military’s 
practice of agility and our own are: 
1.use training not only as a tool for instilling 
skills/doctrine, but also to provide a common shared 
experience, as a builder of trust. 2.recognize the importance of developing experienced 
leaders,The concern is that while the Agile Principles put people 
first, there is a bias towards technical excellence within 
our Agile Principles that may cause some to undervalue 

the development of inter personal skills. The 
development of inter personal skills is sufficiently 
important to the military that they have explicitly 

incorporated them into their basic war fighting 

philosophy.  This comparison is not intended to suggest agile software 
development is an inadequate philosophy, rather it should 

be seen as a strong validation by demonstrating how 
agility is a philosophy for operating in difficult 
environments and is embraced by some of the largest and 

complex war machines. The potential deficiencies 

identified in this paper may be the result an incomplete 

appreciation of the elements that create harmonious 

initiative by management and ourselves. Furthermore, 
there may even be those who are suspicious of the 

motives of those who advocate agile software 
development. However, if agility is good enough for the 
military then perhaps it is good enough for us too.  
AcknowledgementThe author wishes to thank Jennitta Andrea, Dr. Dan 

Rawthorne, Dr. Alistair Cockburn, Shannon McMahon, 
and Carsten Hiena for reviewing the early drafts of this 

paper. The author further wishes to thank the referees for 

their suggested improvements. 
References1 Cockburn A., Highsmith J. “Agile Software 
Development: The People Factor”, 
IEEE Computer,November 2001 (pg 133). 
2 Highsmith, Jim. 
Agile Development Ecosystems. Boston: Addison Wesley, 2002 
3 Cockburn, Alistair. Crystal Clear: A Human-Powered 
Methodology for Small Teams. Boston: Addison-Wesley, 
20054 United States Marine Corps. MCDP1: Warfighting.PCN 142 000006 00, June 1997 5 Higsmith, Jim. Agile Development Ecosystems. 
6 Rawsthorne, D., private communications. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 97 von Clausewitz, Karl, On War. Berlin: Dummlers, 
Verlag, 1832. Translated by Colonel J.J Graham. English 
translation available on-line www.clausewitz.com/CWZHOME/On_War/ONWARTO
C.html 
8 Getty, H. “The Return of Von Clausewitz”, TheEconomist, March 7th 2002. Available online www.economist.com/surveys/displayStory.cfm?Story_id

=10103369 Freedman, D. H. 
Corps Business: The 30 Management Principles of the US Marines, New York: Harper Collins, 200010Harrison, N.  private communications. 
11 O’Reilly C, Pfeffer J. “Southwest Airlines: Using Human Resources for Competitive Advantage(A)” 
Graduate School of Business Stanford University HR-1A, 

1995.12 Unites States Army, “FM3-0: Operations”, US Army, 
June 2001. 13 Cockburn A., Highsmith, J. 
IEEE Computer. pg 132 14 Mintzberg, H. Managers Not MBAs: A Hard Look at the Soft Practice of Managing and Management 
Development., San Francisco:Berrett-Koehler. 2004. 15Fukuyama, Francis. 
Trust: The Social Virtues & the 
Creation of Prosperity. New York:Free Press Paperbacks,. 1995 16 Shay, Jonathan. “Trust: Lubricant for Friction in Military Operations”, 1998, Available online at //www.belisarius.com/modern_business_strategy/shay/tru
st_and_friction.htm 
17 Cockburn A., Highsmith J 
IEEE Computer pg 131. Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
