  
Does the XP environment meet the motivational needs of the software 
developer? An empirical study 
 
 
Sarah Beecham
1
, Helen Sharp
2
, Nathan Baddoo
1
, Tracy Hall
1
 and Hugh Robinson
2 
 
1
School of Computer Science, University of Hertfordshire, College Lane, Hatfield, Herts AL10 9AB, UK 
2
Dept of Computing, Faculty of Mathematics and Computing, The Open University, Walton Hall, MK7 6AA, UK
   
({s.beecham; n.baddoo; t.hall}@herts.ac.uk) ({h.c.sharp; h.m.robinson}@open.ac.uk)  
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
This paper examines how XP practice meets the 
motivational needs of software developers. Interactions with 
peers have been identified by others as one potential area of 
(de)motivation but little detail is known. The nature of this 
motivator, as expressed by software developers themselves, 
was explored through semi-structured interviews with a 
high maturity high performing team working on safety 
critical software applications in a traditional environment. 
From these interviews, we have identified seven themes 
which are characteristic indicators of peer motivation. We 
interrogate observational data from five mature XP teams 
to consider whether and how these characteristic indicators 
are present in an XP environment. We find that XP teams in 
our study had processes in place that supported many of the 
motivational needs voiced by developers coming from a 
traditional, heavyweight software development 
environment. However, the XP environment is at odds with 
other motivational needs.
 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Motivation is a complex phenomenon with many 
inter-related, context-dependent factors [22]. 
Motivation refers to the initiation, direction, intensity 
and persistence of behaviour and features in one of the 
Agile manifesto principles, ﬁbuild projects around 
motivated individuals. Give them the environment and 
support they need, and trust them to get the job doneﬂ 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org. Motivation is 
acknowledged to have a major impact on the quality 
and productivity of the software product [1-3], yet as it 
is a soft factor, and difficult to quantify, it often takes a 
backseat [1].  
In this empirical study we explore peer 
interactions, understood to have a major impact on 
software engineers™ motivation [3-7], and the 
conditions around these interactions that encourage or 
discourage motivational behaviour. Our analysis 
compares the XP environment as represented by 
observational studies of five mature XP teams, with 
the preferred conditions for high motivation as stated 
by practitioners in a traditional development 
environment.  
Several papers have been published that endorse 
the XP environment as being a preferred environment 
e.g. [8-10], that gives greater job satisfaction [11, 12], 
reduces the software development cost [13] and 
increases code quality [14]. Yet no study has placed 
the known and accepted XP values and characteristics 
directly in line with developer preferences coming 
from a traditional background, to show where needs 
are met and where values are challenged or in some 
cases are missing altogether.   
In order to consider how the XP environment 
compares to preferred conditions for high motivation, 
we look at data from interviews with software 
engineers (SEs) involved in a high-profile, safety 
critical project. The SEs are all highly motivated [15] 
having been selected specifically for their previous 
high quality performance in this CMM level 5 
organisation. Our questions were aimed at uncovering 
what characterises a motivating team member and 
what characterises a de-motivating team member. We 
use this motivating/de-motivating team member data 
to interrogate observational data collected in five 
mature XP teams.  In this way we empirically compare 
similarities and differences between perceptions of 
traditional software engineers and observed practice of 
XP teams in terms of peer interaction. 
This paper is organised as follows. In section two 
we give a background to motivation in software 
engineering as identified in the literature, including 
studies which have looked specifically at XP and Agile 
environments. In section three we explain our 
methodology that involves case studies in traditional 
and XP environments. Section four presents our results 
relating to software engineer needs in a traditional 
environment and how this compares to the XP 
  
environment. Section five discusses the strengths and 
weaknesses of the XP environment in providing the 
conditions conducive to motivating software engineers 
as stated by traditional developers. Limitations to this 
work are discussed in Section six, and in Section 
seven, we give our conclusions and suggestions for 
future work. 
 
2. Background 
 
Here, we discuss literature regarding motivation in 
software engineering and Agile or XP teams.
 
 
2. 1 Motivation in Software Engineering 
 
Motivation in Software Engineering is reported to 
have the single largest impact on practitioner 
productivity [2] and software quality management 
[16], and continues to be ‚undermined™ and 
problematic to manage [3]
.  
Motivation is increasingly 
cited as a particularly pernicious people problem in 
Software Engineering. In DeMarco and Lister™s [17] 
survey, motivation was found to be one of the most 
frequently cited causes of software development 
project failure. The Standish report [18] amplifies this 
finding by reporting that having access to competent, 
hard working and focused staff is one of ten success 
criteria for software projects.
  
Some studies in this area suggest that conventional 
approaches to motivation within the industry might be 
outdated. They have concentrated on rewards and 
recognition, e.g. [19], whereas some experts have 
identified Software Engineers as having a distinctive 
personality profile [20] that are instead motivated by 
the nature of the job, e.g. technical success, 
challenging technical problems [5, 21] and peer 
interaction [3-7]. In our systematic review of the 
literature on motivation in software engineering 1980 
Œ 2006 [22] we found an increasing awareness of the 
importance of motivating software engineers.  
Several papers in the literature cite factors relevant 
to the relationships between team members as being 
motivation factors for software engineering. For 
example, the importance of a supervisor being a good 
team builder; the developers preference for 
collaborative work, the need to belong and fit in with a 
group [23] which is physically close [24]. The 
importance of supportive relationships, team 
identification and dynamics is also a recurring theme 
[3-5, 7, 25]. 
Career path, defined as the opportunity for 
advancement, promotion prospects, and career 
planning within an organisation, is also an important 
motivator. Important motivators in this category 
include, promotion prospect/opportunity for 
professional advancement [23, 26-29], 30, 31] for the 
software developer is often characterised as having 
high growth needs [32-36].
 
Some motivation factors are reported as being 
motivating by some studies and de-motivating by 
others, for example, change and the maintenance task. 
It may be possible to account for this by considering 
the different context in which the software is being 
developed. However, little work on motivation has 
focused on the specific nature of software engineering 
itself, or of the impact of the changing environment in 
which software engineering is conducted. 
 
2.2 Motivation and XP 
 
Published studies that relate motivation or job 
satisfaction to Agile and XP emphasise the positive 
aspects of these approaches. For example, a 
longitudinal study by Syed-Abdullah et al. [9] revealed 
that XP methodology has a positive impact on an 
individual™s disposition to be happy, across time and 
situations. This finding is supported in a comparative 
study, where job satisfaction was found to be higher in 
developers using XP practices as opposed to 
developers not using XP practices [10]. Practitioners 
showed a strong preference for working in an XP 
environment, using XP practices. 
Continuing the positive theme, Melnik and Maurer 
[12] empirically compared job satisfaction in Agile 
and Non-Agile Software development teams finding 
that the greater the experience of working in an Agile 
environment the greater the job satisfaction. Melnik 
and Maurer study is particularly helpful in linking job 
satisfaction to motivation, ﬁ.. the benefits of higher job 
satisfaction mentioned have been: – increased 
individual team morale, motivation, performance 
productivity and retention.ﬂ The importance of 
motivation and teamwork is further explored in 
Asproni [11] who explains how Agile development 
methods contain the necessary ingredients to motivate 
developers to make effective teamwork possible. 
Coram and Bohner [37], take a slightly different 
view, indicating that perhaps the largest impact of 
Agile Methods is on the developers, stating that Agile 
Methods depend on strong developers that must be 
amicable, talented, skilled and able to communicate 
well (in [38]). They must be willing to work as a team, 
able to handle constant change, and resourceful 
enough to solve problems. Agile Methods are very 
lightweight methods, not affording strict guidelines 
and processes for developers to follow. Hence, they do 
not accommodate weaker developers well. In this 
theoretical study, Coram and Bohner [37] touch on the 
  
difficulty that some developers might have coming 
from a traditional background, ﬁGiven the need for a 
high level of expertise, Agile Methods may be difficult 
to employ in a traditionally staffed organization.ﬂ They 
add that it might be difficult to build a long term 
human capital strategy where skilled staff are always 
in demand. 
Law and Charron [8] also reflected on some of the 
benefits and disadvantages of XP. For example they 
found pair programming motivating in two separate 
projects because it addressed the need for learning, 
autonomy and social activity. However, Law and 
Charron (2005) do a
ccept that pairing can have a 
negative impact if pairs have personality conflicts and 
that the project might suffer from autonomy where less 
interesting work might not be tackled immediately. 
 
3. Methodology 
 
To compare similarities and differences in 
developer perceptions of what constitutes a motivating 
group member and team environment we draw on two 
empirical data sets. The first set comprises transcripts 
of a series of nine interviews with software developers 
working in a traditional development environment. 
The second is a set of observational data from five 
mature XP teams. Our overall approach is to analyse 
the interview responses to gain further insight into the 
kind of supportive relationships the developers find 
motivating, and then to use these findings to 
interrogate the observational XP data. All data was 
collected and analysed by the authors. 
 
3.1 Empirical data sets 
 
3.1.1 Semi-structured interview data from a 
traditional software development team. 
The findings 
presented are from nine semi-structured interviews 
conducted in July 2004. The interviewees were 
developers working in a large complex embedded 
software development project (LEDS) based in a large 
UK engineering company. The company considers 
LEDS to be a prestigious, high profile project. LEDS 
has been set up to showcase the high quality work of 
the company and is composed of several disciplines 
including a hardware team, a requirements modelling 
team, and a software development team. The project is 
managed by a dedicated project management team.  
The software development team was a member of 
the company™s Software Department. The Department 
was assessed at CMM level 5 in 2004. The processes 
used by the Department were therefore of high 
maturity. The LEDS software team had been hand-
picked by the Department™s managers to ensure a high 
quality outcome [15].  
We interviewed all members of the software 
project team. One week was spent on site where one 
hour, one-to-one semi-structured interviews were 
conducted.  The interview questions reflected three 
elements: 
•
 
Developer performance (what are the attributes of a 
good and bad developer) 
•
 
Motivation for performance (what encourages 
developers to be good or bad) 
•
 
Consequences (how does a good and bad developer 
impact the project/team). 
Developers were not asked directly about 
motivation, but analysing their answers to questions 
relating to good experiences and bad experiences of 
working with colleagues on this project reveals issues 
that affect their relationships with fellow team 
members, and hence may affect their motivation, as 
suggested by literature reported in section 2.1 above. 
For example, issues around progress were mentioned 
the most when discussing both the ﬁbestﬂ developer 
and the ﬁworstﬂ developer. This indicates that progress 
is a significant concern of the developers when 
considering peer interaction.    
 
3.1.2 Observational data from mature XP teams. 
Our observational data arises from ethnographically-
informed studies [39] of five mature XP teams. These 
teams are ‚mature™ in that they have been practising 
XP for at least a year (collectively or individually) 
before we have studied them. Each study lasted at least 
a week. Our observations focused on the interactions 
between team members; the data collected consisted of 
contemporaneous notes, photographs and some audio 
recordings. For the purposes of anonymity, we refer to 
these teams as Teams B, C, K, S, and W. 
Team B (composed of 12 developers and a 
business analyst) produced software applications in 
Java to support the management of operational risk 
within a large bank. The application was being 
developed in an environment of uncertainty as policy 
pertaining to operational risk had not yet been issued. 
XP within the company was championed by a senior 
manager. 
Team C (composed of eight developers, one 
graphic designer and one infrastructure specialist) 
developed web-based intelligent advertisements using 
Java. Although they had several strong clients, the 
company was working hard to satisfy its investors. 
There was no evidence to suggest that the team 
members would feel that their jobs were threatened. 
Team K (composed of 23 developers, one project 
manager and two business development staff) 
  
developed and maintained travel information 
webpages and travel alerts for a variety of customers in 
the UK. The company was doing well and expanding 
its workforce at the time of the study. 
Team S (composed of six developers, one project 
manager, three business analysts, and one domain 
expert) worked in a large international bank, and 
programmed in Java. Their project concerned the 
migration of database information from several smaller 
databases to one large database. All of the developers 
and business analysts were on short-term contracts. 
This was common within this bank, and the 
individuals were used to this kind of arrangement. 
Team W (composed of 16 developers, three 
programme managers, two testers, one technical 
author, and one development team coach) were part of 
a medium-sized company producing software products 
in C++ to support the use of documents in multi-
authored work environments. The company had moved 
to XP because it was failing to sell its products. 
Business performance had since improved and the 
threat of redundancies had faded. 
 
3.2 Analysis 
 
3.2.1 Analysis of traditional development team 
data. 
Digital audio tapes of the interviews were 
listened to and detailed notes taken at the time of the 
interviews were examined. We recorded developer 
responses to what constitutes the ‚best™ and ‚worst™ 
developer on the project in terms of performance. We 
also recorded how good and bad characteristics were 
encouraged, and how these developers impacted the 
project. We identified recurring themes in participant 
answers, and using a content analysis classification 
scheme [50] created a reduced list of categories as 
shown in tables 1 and 2. Content analysis is defined as 
ﬁobjective, systematic, and quantitative description of 
the manifest content of communicationﬂ [51]. Our 
classification scheme involved two researchers.
 
One 
researcher identified an initial set of developer 
attributes, which a second researcher looked at along 
with the associated definitions. The second researcher 
validated the identified themes by querying any 
ambiguities. The final list of attributes given in tables 
1 and 2 is a result of refining and combining the initial 
list to the satisfaction of these two independent 
researchers. 
 
3.2.2 Analysis of XP observational data. 
Tables 1 
and 2 were analysed to identify characteristic 
indicators of motivational peer behaviour, and 
conditions which affected the presence of these 
characteristics. We applied a thematic approach to 
produce cross-cutting themes that can be viewed as 
both negative and positive influences on individual 
motivation. These themes (see Table 3) were used as 
prompts with which to explore the XP observational 
data.  
Analysis of the observational data followed a 
rigorous approach based on ethnographic principles. In 
this approach, each theme from Table 3 was used to 
interrogate the observational data to see if any 
recurring patterns emerged regarding the issue being 
addressed. Throughout this interrogation, we looked 
for disconfirming as well as confirming evidence to 
support our conclusions. For example, one of the 
findings from the interview data suggested that a ‚poor 
developer™ does not admit to having a problem in a 
piece of software. We took this finding and looked 
through the observational data to see if there were any 
occasions when we observed any developers hiding 
problems. We could not find any examples of 
developers hiding problems across all XP teams, on 
the contrary, we found several examples of developers 
communicating problems. Our conclusions were then 
based on all the evidence related to this issue. 
 
4. Results 
 
4.1 Traditional development team results 
 
Tables 1 and 2 reflect the characteristics of an 
environment that traditional developers believe will 
encourage developers to be ‚good™ (best) or to be ‚bad™ 
(worst). In this context, ‚good™ means ‚people they 
want to work with™. For example, an environment with 
a very open culture leads to quality solutions and better 
flow of information among the team. This in turn 
encourages developers to develop as good 
communicators. The tables give a definition of the 
attribute (taken directly from the interview data), and 
how this attribute is encouraged (in ‚helped by™ 
column); and the impact of this attribute (in ‚outcome™ 
column).   
Table 3 is the result of identifying cross-cutting 
themes from the interview data where the following 
themes emerged: access to information, fear/ 
insecurity/confidence, openness/communication, 
progress, responsibility/ autonomy/ ownership, 
software quality, team morale.  
  
TABLE 1: Attributes of best developer on the project, how attribute is encouraged and outcome 
Attribute (desired) Defined as (from data) Helped by 
outcome 
Technically competent 
/knowledgeable/ 
experienced 
Good knowledge of programming 
language, software paradigm and 
tools. Wide knowledge of software 
as well as hardware. Looks at the 
bigger picture.  
Tools, information, Individual interest 
Training. Motivation.  
Supportive role. Project success 
Lots done and progress made. 
Good communicator/ 
sociable/ open /sharing 
/respectful 
Articulate Œteaches team tool use 
and techniques; says what is going 
right what is going wrong 
Team dynamics. Open culture. Truth 
can be voiced  
Quality of solution improved. 
Better flow of information  
Confident  
Faith in own abilities. Self 
dependent 
Encouragement. Opportunity to show 
what they can do 
Improves quality 
Motivated  
Driven/motivated. Doesn™t need 
any pushing 
Innate, enjoys hard work. interesting/ 
challenging jobs  
Lots done and progress made. 
Drives colleagues to work 
harder. 
Resourceful 
/desire to learn 
Will get/learn skills required, or 
find someone who knows. 
Individual interest. Lack of pressure. 
Ownership, autonomy, responsibility. 
Improved quality 
Scientific/engineering/o
rderly  
Works preventatively sorting things 
out before you get too far into it. 
Methodical. Thoughtful about every 
stage.  
Interest/ experience in specialist tasks.  
Ownership of code. orderly person  
Morale boosting. Adds 
adaptability- cheaper to modify. 
aids customer perception  Œ 
reputation.  
Committed  to team/ 
enjoys challenge / high 
standards/ professional 
Doesn™t get stressed. High 
expectations of themselves. Invests 
time on a difficult task 
Accountability: High visibility project 
so problems will be noticed  
Good drive to milestones 
Responsible  
Accepts responsibility (that you 
have to report bad news).  
Ownership. 
Structure. Ownership. Autonomy. 
Punitive. Feature of young age and 
personality. 
Gets rid of blame culture 
Flexible  
Learns and adapts quickly. 
Flexible/adaptable Œ able to change 
priorities.  
Receptive to new ideas and 
technology -  a natural thing 
Project flows better. Things get 
done quicker and right. 
Minimises Rework effort  
 
TABLE 2: Attributes of worst developer on the project, how attribute is encouraged and outcome 
Attribute (undesired) Defined as (from data) Helped by 
Outcome 
Technically incompetent Hacks code. Doesn™t take design 
seriously. Writes code that does not 
work. Caught up in tiny detail do not 
see the larger picture. No practical 
experience. Not logical about 
development 
Not recognising poor requirements. 
Lack of time. Fear of re-training. 
Punitive management practices for 
missed deadlines. Personalise the 
punishment for missing milestones. 
Quality slips. Problems with 
integration, dependencies, 
system reliability, Time delays, 
updating and maintaining 
artifact, complexity, completion. 
Shifts problem. 
 
Insecure / closed / 
distrustful 
Hides having a problem in a piece of 
software. Poor communication. 
Lack of faith to do anything if not 
trained. Too much watching his 
back. Does not share knowledge.  
Strong need for self promotion- 
encouraged by managers 
Expectation that people can pick 
things up. Wanting to maintain 
consistent level of attainment. 
Makes others paranoid; 
encourages them to behave 
defensively. If problems [that 
are hidden] are progress related 
affects time and money.
 
Inflexible 
Don™t like change - stuck in their 
ways. Arrogant. 
Only want to do things they want to 
do in the way they want to do it. 
Trains, children, out late.
 
Negative effect on team - less 
cohesive/friction. Change and 
lessons learnt difficult to 
implement. Poor coordination = 
delays & imperfect solutions.
 
Over-confident 
Too much confidence and faith in 
themselves. Arrogant. Self-deluded 
Œ people thinking they™re better than 
they are 
Brought up to think they are good. 
Too judgmental. Attempt to get 
recognised for promotion.
 
Other people get annoyed. 
Difficult to work with. Chooses 
work with high profile for him-
self rather than good of project.
 
Disorganised 
Take on too much at the same time 
.No foresight in needing more time 
etc 
Under pressure and trying to save 
time. Looking good more important 
than doing good work
 
Affects schedule. Quality and 
design will be poor. Affects how 
often people think about their 
work. Affects the mindset of 
others. Distracts others.
 
Uncommitted to team / 
demotivated 
Comes to work for works sake. Will 
do what you say and needs lots of 
direction.  
If project managers not good at 
motivating person. 
 
Affects colleagues and overall 
morale of team. More defects 
and latent faults. Lack of 
coordination - introduce delays 
& lead to imperfect solutions.
 
Unprofessional 
People who panic under pressure. 
Very reactive to problems 
Personal circumstances. Job 
insecurity. 
 
Can affect everyone around 
them and affect overall morale.
 
  
Table 3: Cross-cutting themes emerging from 
the interview data (both negative & positive) 
Cross-cutting 
themes 
Definition 
progress 
Relates to movement towards and 
achievement of goals, where goals 
might be milestones, meeting 
requirements, quality, timescales 
access to 
information 
Relates both to the flow of 
information regarding development 
matters, and the desire of 
individuals to acquire more 
information and to learn 
openness/ 
communication 
Relates to the flow of information, 
but it focuses more on the culture of 
the team and of individuals™ 
willingness to help others, to say 
what they believe and to encourage 
others to do the same 
responsibility/ 
autonomy/ 
ownership 
Relates to Software Engineers 
defending their best ideas, voicing 
problems, working exceptionally 
hard, a culture where people don™t 
blame others. Not waiting to be told 
what to do. Ownership of a process 
and piece of code. 
software quality 
Covers software reliability, 
integration, dependencies, 
complexity, meeting requirements, 
design, defects, latent faults, 
maintainability, solutions  
team morale 
Includes (de)motivation, team 
dynamics, drive others in team, 
morale boosting, blame culture, 
punitive management practices, 
negative effect on team, friction, 
team cohesion, annoying others, 
difficulty working with people. 
fear/insecurity/ 
confidence 
Includes both positive and negative 
characteristics. Behaviour is 
influenced by encouragement (or 
lack of it); threats from other team 
members performing too well; 
management personalising 
punishment for not meeting targets; 
treating others with distain. Job 
security. Behaviour is defensive and 
paranoid. Can be over-confident, 
which is seen as negative. 
 
4.2 XP team results  
 
We used the themes identified in Table 3 to 
interrogate observational data from the mature XP 
teams. We were looking to see what the data could 
tell us about how XP teams regard the themes. Of 
course, these themes overlap to some degree Œ for 
example, openness and communication are likely to 
affect access to information Œ but we focused on each 
one separately. 
 
4.2.1 Progress. 
Progress was mentioned several 
times in the interviews: making progress was viewed 
as positive while barriers to progress were rated 
negatively. XP teams are also concerned about 
progress. This is reflected in a constant awareness of 
progress and talk about progress. 
In all our teams, progress was carefully recorded 
and tracked with the story card being a key artefact. 
For example, in team C different coloured stars were 
used to denote the story™s status: a red star indicated 
an unfinished card, yellow a card that has been 
finished by developers and is ready for acceptance 
test, green indicated that the change has been 
accepted by the customer. In addition, a blue star 
indicated that the card was a task card, i.e. an 
element of a story card. Team K used different 
coloured annotations to capture estimates, actual 
work done, and whether or not the story was 
‚finished™.  
Another key artefact related to progress used in 
all our teams was a large visible display - the 
information radiator (or Wall) used to exhibit the 
cards. Cards were placed on the Wall in particular 
locations to indicate whether or not they were 
completed (see fig 1). For example in Team K cards 
at the top of the Wall were being worked on while 
cards at the bottom were finished. Rate of progress 
was therefore clear from one glance at the Wall. In 
Team S, there were two sections of wall Œ one for the 
analysts and one for the developers, to show the 
progress of work from analysis through to 
development. 
  
 
Figure 1 All our teams had some form of Wall for 
displaying story cards and tracking progress 
The use and focal nature of these artefacts also 
promoted awareness about progress. Stand-up 
meetings, which took place in all our teams every 
day, were held while standing around the Wall, the 
planning game where stories for the next iteration are 
chosen, inherently focuses on which stories have 
been completed and which are remaining.  
In team S we witnessed several examples of the 
frustration caused when progress was held up 
because of others™ mistakes (from outside the team), 
or lack of communication. For example, the team 
needed to access a database that was administered in 
  
France, and the administrators there controlled 
password access, but didn™t appear to communicate 
these passwords consistently to developers in the 
UK.  
 
4.2.2 Access to information. 
The flow of 
information and active dissemination regarding 
implementation problems and successes, company 
matters and personal issues, is facilitated by stand-
ups, regular meetings with customers (or customer 
proxies), and pairing, and by the visible nature of the 
Wall. The detail of how these were implemented in 
each team varied. 
The information flows around Team K are simple 
yet rich [41]. In this team, every member of the 
development team was aware about all aspects of the 
company. This was also true in Team C, but it wasn™t 
true in all our teams. For example in Team W the 
developers were divided into smaller teams to 
concentrate on individual products. When we 
enquired of one developer about progress on another 
team, they had no idea. While the information may 
not have been withheld, it was not actively 
disseminated. Indeed, the coach in Team W 
commented that part of his role was to protect the 
team from things they didn™t need to know about. 
Access to information to support individuals™ 
desire to learn is facilitated in both the availability of 
information and the culture of the team in having 
courage. When pairing, developers have access to 
several information sources including developer 
websites, internally-documented wikis, books, each 
other and customers. The desire to learn was not 
strong in all our teams, but was strong in many of 
them. For example, Team C readily committed to 
learn Python when it became clear that this was the 
most appropriate language to use. One member of 
Team B told us that he could earn more money if he 
moved to a different job, but he was happy where he 
was because he was learning new things. Team K 
decided not to employ an outside consultant to work 
on a database issue because they wanted to keep the 
knowledge ‚in house™. 
In all our teams, the use of documentation was 
limited, in line with the XP philosophy of keeping 
documentation minimal. However when estimates 
are made in the planning game, this sometimes 
assumes a certain design choice, and if this choice is 
not communicated and remembered by developers, 
then it can lead to repeated work, or implementation 
based on a different design. This in turn can have an 
effect on actual work required to complete a story. 
 
4.2.3 Openness/communication. 
In all our XP 
teams, the stand-ups and pairing appeared to be 
conducted in an open fashion. Team K would have a 
company stand-up every three weeks, and new 
members of the company were encouraged to chair 
these meetings if they wanted to. During our visit we 
observed an example of this. In some teams, 
however, it was clear that some individuals felt 
uncomfortable with this kind of approach. In team W 
one developer openly confessed that he didn™t like 
pairing because he preferred to get on with things on 
his own (however the fact that he could say this 
without fear of recrimination speaks to the open 
nature of the team itself).  
In Team S, the project manager exerted more 
control on the team and their work than we observed 
elsewhere. He called a team meeting during our 
observation, and one team member became very 
frustrated because he didn™t understand the purpose 
of the meeting and he felt that it was wasting time 
when he could be making progress. This was an 
example of lack of communication between the 
project manager and the team. 
 
4.2.4 Responsibility, autonomy, ownership. 
Responsibility is one of the characteristics of an XP 
team [52], as well as an underlying value of XP 
itself, and shared ownership is a theme we™ve seen in 
all our teams. The informative environment, 
openness of communication and regular exchange of 
ideas all contribute to this characteristic. In the 
interview tables above, there is a negative view of 
this theme, i.e. that a ‚worst™ developer wants to do 
things the way they want to and not listen to anyone 
else.  
In our XP teams, decisions have tended to be 
made by consensus across the team or across a pair, 
bolstering team ownership and team responsibility. 
We observed successful outcomes of XP teams 
running retrospectives to modify process issues 
indicating ownership of a process. XP teams are self-
organising and hence individuals take responsibility 
too. However, in one of our teams, we were told after 
the observation visit that one team member had 
significantly more influence over the team and its 
operation than others. It seems that the team as a 
whole was tolerant of this Œ an example of team 
strength. 
One downside of everyone feeling responsible 
about the project and making team decisions is that it 
becomes difficult to identify distinct contributions of 
individuals. This can cause problems in terms of 
promotion and career progression. One member of 
Team B, for example, left the XP team specifically in 
order to gain experience in other areas of the bank 
because he was aiming for promotion. In Team W, 
none of the team members was given a particular 
  
title, e.g. architect, senior (or junior) engineer, etc. 
This became an issue for individuals wanting to 
move to a different company, and so there was an 
informal agreement that for the purposes of job 
applications, individuals could decide on their own 
titles. 
 
4.2.5 Software Quality. 
A clear theme that emerged 
from Team C™s data is that coding and quality of 
code matters within an XP team [40]. This has been 
echoed throughout our teams, but the value of 
simplicity which leads developers to develop code 
that solves the current problem may result in code 
that is difficult to read. Hence refactoring (improving 
code structure while keeping the same functionality) 
is needed. However problems arise when the team is 
not given the time or opportunity to refactor. For 
example, one developer in team C became upset 
when he recognised the need for refactoring a piece 
of code that linked to software he was developing, 
but hadn™t the time available in the current story 
estimate to work on it. Part of XP™s philosophy is 
that every team member has the responsibility to 
modify code if they see that it needs improving, but 
in this case the desire for disciplined progress 
overcame the desire to improve code quality. Instead, 
the developer wrote a story card for the refactoring 
so that it could be handled in a stand-up like every 
other story, but we have not seen this kind of card in 
other teams. 
 
4.2.6 Team Morale. 
Team morale is an outcome that 
may be influenced by many things, including the 
other themes identified in this section. The presence 
of this theme confirms that team morale is a key 
concern of developer teams. This is true whether the 
development approach is traditional or agile.  
It would be inaccurate to suggest that our XP 
teams did not suffer from team morale issues. For 
example, in Team C, the regular rhythm of 
development led to significant boredom within the 
team. Team B also reported that they gave up trying 
to pair all day every day because it became too 
intense and difficult to sustain.  
 
4.2.7 Fear/insecurity/confidence. 
This theme did 
not arise often in our interview data, and is more 
common when talking about ‚worst™ developers. 
There are many causes of insecurity and fear, which 
then lead to lack of confidence. In our XP teams, 
some developers were more technically competent 
and were more confident than others, but pairing 
exposes everyone to equal scrutiny. One side-effect 
of pairing that has been reported to us by several 
developers is that continuous pairing can lead to a 
lack of confidence in your ability to solve a problem 
when left on your own. Teams C, B, and W were 
under pressure to perform well due to organisational 
situations at the time of our visits, but fear or 
insecurity is not a strong theme in our data. 
 
5. Discussion 
 
Several of the issues raised by the traditional 
development team, while recognised as significant in 
XP, are not causing XP developers a problem, i.e. XP 
teams have found ways of tackling them or avoiding 
them. How? Is it because XP team members are ‚just 
like that™ or is it the structure of the practices that 
avoids common problems in software development 
teams? 
There are clear differences in what is considered 
good and bad practice when looking at the two 
different development approaches. For example, 
commenting code is considered good practice in 
traditional development, whereas XP uses an 
alternative practice of clear naming Œ avoiding the 
need to spend time on comments. Differences in 
technical approach are also dependent on the type of 
software being developed. For example our 
traditional team were frustrated by working with 
developers who couldn™t see the bigger picture, 
something of great importance when working on 
safety-critical embedded system development.  
To explore the complex question of how 
motivational peer relationships are supported in XP 
we draw on the Agile literature and general literature 
on motivation. We incorporate findings from our 
data to consider where the practices and structure of 
XP teams support positive peer relationships, and 
where they support or conflict with views from 
traditional developers.  
 
5.1 XP practices that support the traditional 
view 
 
The need for developers to feel they are making 
progress is strong, which is to be expected in a group 
of professionals with extremely high growth need 
strength, i.e. individuals with a high need for 
personal growth and development [42, 43]. In terms 
of tracking progress, XP methods appear to meet 
these needs as shown by the display of story cards, 
regular stand-up meetings and the planning game 
which featured in all our XP teams. Should the 
developer want information the XP environment 
provides a good, accessible flow of information, as 
seen in regular meetings with customers, pairing and 
visible records on the wall. However, even in the XP 
  
environment there are no controls for external 
influences holding up progress, such as mistakes and 
withholding of information by people outside the 
team.  
The need to learn is strong in many developers, 
e.g. [3, 44], who according to our interview data, will 
use available resources to learn new techniques and 
develop new skills to solve problems. Indeed, one 
developer in our XP Team B preferred to stay in his 
current job because he had the opportunity to learn 
new things rather than move to a better paid job.  
The XP teams all limited the use of 
documentation. Controlling the flow of information 
to ensure that only useful information is circulated to 
the team, protects individuals from information 
overload.  (Regulating levels of information is likely 
to be a ‚hygiene factor
1
™ where too much information 
could be considered de-motivating.)  
Developers are motivated by working in a team 
that is open with members who can communicate 
well (poor communication was found to be de-
motivating in [24]). The informative environment, 
openness of communication and regular exchange of 
ideas helps to avoid the problem of developers hiding 
problems. There was no evidence in our XP data of 
developers hiding problems (although we cannot be 
certain), and we observed one developer speaking 
openly about his reservations with pairing, which 
suggests that he felt comfortable speaking freely 
about problems.  
XP teams are self-organising and hence 
individuals take responsibility. Yet decisions tend to 
be made by consensus across the team or across a 
pair, bolstering team ownership and team 
responsibility (e.g. retrospectives). This practice 
discourages developers from working in an insular 
myopic fashion that de-motivates other members of 
the team.  
 
5.2 XP practices that conflict with the 
traditional view 
 
In an XP team, it is difficult to identify individual 
contributions as the work is so collaborative. This 
may cause those who want promotion or career 
progression to be de-motivated. According to the 
literature, career progression is an important 
motivator [46]. Furthermore, passive programmers 
can lose their motivation in pairing activities, as the 
                                                       
 
1
 H
ygiene-motivator theory asserts that removing the de-
motivator  (or hygiene factor) will not n
ecessarily translate to 
motivating employees. It will simply maintain practitioners in their 
job and avoid dissatisfaction [45. Herzberg, F., B. Mausner and 
B.B. Snyderman, 
The Motivation to Work, 2nd Ed.
 1959, London: 
Chapman & Hall..
 
dominant programmer tends to dictate the path for 
development [8].
  
The importance of fair treatment of individuals is 
encapsulated in equity theory [47]. People are likely 
to be de-motivated if their inputs such as experience, 
education, skills and seniority, are not matched by 
outputs gained from the organization such as salary, 
recognition, opportunity for achievement and so on. 
Practitioners will compare th
e balance of their inputs 
and outputs with others [47]. In a recent study of 
software engineers, Agarwal and Ferratt found 
unequal treatment of individuals de-motivating 
where key items were: compensation, assigned work, 
and recognition [48].  Equity is relative to others. 
Therefore there is a potential problem with the XP 
environment where individual inputs into the project 
might be subsumed by the whole, again impacting 
promotion opportunities. 
Developers are known to have high growth needs, 
where task variety leads to job satisfaction [49]. 
These needs are not always met in XP. We observed 
instances where team morale was reduced by 
individuals becoming bored with the regular rhythm 
of development, where continuous pairing became 
too intense when practised day after day, and where 
developers became dependent on working in pairs, 
and lost their confidence to work alone. 
 
6. Limitations  
 
In this work we have considered two different 
ends of a spectrum Œ mature XP teams, versus a 
CMM level 5 team developing software traditionally. 
There are teams who take a balanced position 
between these extremes, integrating aspects from 
both, and we have not considered this balance in our 
discussion or in our data. 
We did not ask developers directly what 
motivates them to work productively and to produce 
high quality software. Our results are drawn from 
questions relating to how developers view good and 
bad developers in their team. Our findings in this 
paper are therefore based on the understanding that 
developers like to work with Œ and are motivated by 
Œ good developers and don™t like working with, and 
are de-motivated by working with bad developers [3-
5, 7, 23, 25]. Factors unrelated to team interactions 
are not included, such as financial compensation and 
job security. The findings we present here are all 
based on how an individual™s behaviour within a 
team might motivate or de-motivate other 
developers. 
We cannot be sure that all motivators and desired 
attributes noted by our developers in a traditional 
  
environment would be motivating in an XP 
environment. There is likely to be a shift in attitude 
when moving from a heavyweight development 
methodology to a lightweight methodology. Further 
work in this area would be to replicate the study 
made in the traditional environment and ask XP 
developers what they consider to be the best and 
worst developers they have worked with in an XP 
environment. In this way we could see more clearly 
where the differences and similarities lie between 
each group.
 
 
7. Conclusion 
 
In this paper we have presented an assessment of 
how XP practices meet the motivational needs of 
software developers, in terms of relationships with 
fellow team members. We have analysed data from 
traditional developers talking about how they view 
fellow team members, and extracted themes which 
reflect the issues uppermost in their minds. Using 
these themes we have interrogated data from mature 
XP teams, and have found that similar themes exist 
in this data too. 
The five XP teams in our study had processes in 
place that supported many of the motivational needs 
voiced by developers coming from a traditional, 
heavyweight software development environment. 
Our observations revealed that XP developers were 
able to clearly monitor project progress, share 
knowledge, support those with less experience, adapt 
quickly to changes in requirements, learn on the job, 
work independently, and communicate good and bad 
news without worrying about punitive repercussions. 
However, the XP environment doesn™t support 
the need for individual recognition, for clear career 
progression, and variety of work, and may weaken 
the developer™s ability and confidence to work alone, 
should the developer need to move out of an XP 
environment. 
 
Acknowledgements
: We are sincerely grateful to the 
companies and practitioners in this study who, for 
reasons of confidentiality, must remain anonymous. 
This research was supported by the UK™s 
Engineering and Physical Science Research Council, 
under grant number EPSRC EP/D057272
/1.   
 
References  
 
1. McConnell, S., Problem programmers
.
 
IEEE 
Software
, 1998. 
15
(2), 128, 127, 126. 
2. Boehm, B.W., 
Software Engineering 
Economics
. Advances in computing science and  
technology series, 1981, Englewood Cliffs: 
Prentice-Hall, Inc. 
3. Procaccino, J.D., J.M. Verner, K.M. Shelfer and 
D. Gefen, What do software practitioners really 
think about project success: An exploratory 
study. 
Journal of Systems and Software
, 2005. 
78
(2), 194-203. 
4. Andersen, E.S., "Never the twain shall meet": 
exploring the differences between Japanese and 
Norwegian IS professionals. In 
Proceedings of 
the 2002 ACM SIGCPR Conference on 
Computer Personnel Research
, Kristiansand, 
Norway, May 14-16, 2002, pp 65-71. 
5. Tanner, F.R., On motivating engineers, 
Engineering Management Conference, 2003. 
IEMC '03
. Managing Technologically Driven 
Organizations: The Human Side of Innovation 
and Change, pp 214-218. 
6. Klenke, K. and K.-A. Kievit, Predictors of 
leadership style, organizational commitment 
and turnover of information systems 
professionals. In 
Proceedings of the 1992 ACM 
SIGCPR Conference on Computer Personnel 
Research
, A. L. Lederer, (ed) SIGCPR '92, pp 
171-183. 
7. Linberg, K.R., Software developer perceptions 
about software project failure: a case study. 
Journal of Systems and Software
, 1999. 
49
(2-
3), 177-92. 
8. Law, A. and R. Charron, Effects of agile 
practices on social factors. In 
Proceedings of 
the 2005 Workshop on Human and Social 
Factors of Software Engineering (St. Louis, 
Missouri, May 16, 2005). HSSE '05
, pp 1-5. 
9. Syed-Abdullah, S.L., J. Karn, M. Holcombe, T. 
Cowling and M. Gheorge, The positive affect of 
the XP methodology. In 
Proceedings of XP 
2005
, 
LNCS 3556
. Springer-Verlag. 2005, pp 
218-21. 
10. Mannaro, K., M. Melis and M. Marchesi, 
Empirical Analysis on the Satisfaction of IT 
Employees Comparing XP Practices with Other 
Software Development Methodologies. In 
Proceedings of 
 
XP 2004
, 
LNCS 3092
. 
Springer-Verlag 2004, pp 166-174. 
11. Asproni, G., Motivation, Teamwork, and Agile-
Development. 
Agile Times
, 2004. 
IV
(1), 8-15. 
12. Melnik, G. and F. Maurer, Comparative 
Analysis of Job Satisfaction in Agile and Non-
Agile Software Development Teams. In 
Proceedings of XP2006
, LNCS 4044, 2006, 
pp32-42. 
13. Kuppuswami, S., K. Vivekanandan, P. 
Ramaswamy and P. Rodrigues, The effects of 
individual XP practices on software 
  
development effort. 
SIGSOFT Software 
Engineering Notes, 
2003. 
28
(6), 1-6. 
14. Müller, M.M. and F. Padberg, On the economic 
evaluation of XP projects. In 
Proceedings of the 
9th European Software Engineering 
Conference
, 2003, pp 168-177. 
15. Baddoo, N., T. Hall and D. Jagielska, Software 
developer motivation in a high maturity 
company: a case study. 
Software Process: 
Improvement and Practice
, 2006 
11
(3), 219-
228. 
16. McConnell, S., Avoiding classic mistakes 
[software engineering]. 
IEEE Software
, 1996. 
13
(5), 111-112. 
17. DeMarco, T. and T. Lister, 
Peopleware - 
Productive Projects And Teams.
 1999. 
18. Standish Report (1995) 
Standish Group Chaos 
Report
. Available from: URL 
http://www.scs.carleton.ca/~beau/PM/Standish-
Report.html
. 
19. ProjectLink (2006) 
Motivation House
.   
Available from: 
http://www.projectlink.co.uk/whoweworkfor.ht
m
, accessed 12.5.2006. 
20. Capretz, L., Personality Types in Software 
Engineering. 
International Journal of Human-
Computer Studies
, 2003. 
58
(2), 207-214. 
21. Ramachandran, S. and S.V. Rao, An effort 
towards identifying occupational culture among 
information systems professionals. In 
Proceedings of the 2006 ACM SIGMIS CPR 
conference on computer personnel research
: 
Claremont, California, USA, 2006: p. 198-204. 
22. Beecham, S., N. Baddoo, T. Hall, H. Robinson 
and H. Sharp, Motivation in Software 
Engineering: A Systematic Literature Review 
(in review). 
ACM Computing Surveys
, 2007. 
23. Jordan, E. and A.M. Whiteley, HRM practices 
in information technology management
 
In 
Proceedings of computer personnel research 
conference (SIGCPR)
, Alexandria, Virginia, 
1994, pp 57 - 64. 
24. Frangos, S.A., Motivated humans for reliable 
software products. 
Microprocessors and 
Microsystems
, 1997. 
21
(10), 605-610. 
25. Klenke, K. and K.-A. Kievit, Predictors of 
leadership style, organizational commitment 
and turnover of information systems 
professionals. In 
Proceedings of the 1992 ACM 
SIGCPR Conference on Computer Personnel 
Research
, 1992, pp 171-183. 
26. Burn, J.M., E.M. Ng Tye, L.C. Ma and R.S. 
Poon, Job expectations of IS professionals in 
Hong Kong. In 
Proceedings of the 1994 ACM 
SIGCPR Computer Personnel Research 
Conference
, 1994, pp 231-241. 
27. Garden, A., Behavioural and organisational 
factors involved in the turnover of high tech 
professionals. 
SIGCPR Comput. Pers
., 1988. 
11
(4), 6-9. 
28. Igbaria, M., G. Meredith and D.C. Smith, 
Career orientations of information systems 
employees in South Africa. 
The Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems,
 1995. 
4
(4). 319-
340. 
29. Mak, B.L. and H. Sockel, A confirmatory factor 
analysis of IS employee motivation and 
retention. 
Information & Management
, 2001. 
38
(5), 265-276. 
30. Niederman, F. and M.R. Sumner, Job turnover 
among MIS professionals: an exploratory study 
of employee turnover. 
Proceedings of the 2001 
ACM SIGCPR Conference on Computer 
Personnel Research
 (San Diego, California, 
United States), 2001, pp 11-20. 
31. Niederman , F. and M. Sumner, Decision paths 
affecting turnover among information 
technology professionals. In 
Proceedings of the 
2003 SIGMIS conference on Freedom in 
Philadelphia: leveraging differences and 
diversity in the IT workforce,
 April 10-12, 2003, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, pp 133-142. 
32. Couger, J.D. and R.A. Zawacki, What 
motivates DP professionals? 
Datamation
, 1978. 
24
(9), 116. 
33. Dittrich, J.E., J. Daniel Couger and R.A. 
Zawacki, Perceptions of equity, job satisfaction, 
and intention to quit among data processing 
personnel. 
Information & Management
, 1985. 
9
(2), 67-75. 
34. Couger, J.D. and A. Ishikawa, Comparing 
motivation of Japanese computer personnel 
versus these of the United States. In 
Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences
, 
1995. 
IV
, pp 1012-1019. 
35. Couger, J.D., Comparison of motivation norms 
for programmer /analysts in the Pacific Rim and 
the U.S
 International Journal of Information 
Systems
, 1992. 
1
(3) 16-30. 
36. Burn, J.M., J.D. Couger and L. Ma, Motivating 
IT professionals. The Hong Kong challenge
 
Information & Management
, 1992. 
22
(5) 269-
280. 
37. Coram, M. and S. Bohner, The impact of agile 
methods on software project management. In 
12th IEEE International Conference and 
Workshops on the Engineering of Computer-
Based Systems. ECBS '05
, 2005, pp 363-370. 
  
38. Highsmith, J. and A. Cockburn, Agile Software 
Development, The Business of Innovation
.
 
Computer
, 2001. 
34
(9) 120-122. 
39. Robinson, H., J. Segal and H. Sharp, 
Ethnographically-informed Empirical Studies 
of Software Practice
.
 
Information and Software 
Technology
, 2007, 
49
(6) 540-551. 
40. Sharp, H. and H. Robinson, An ethnographic 
study of XP practices. 
Empirical Software 
Engineering
, 2004. 
9
(4) 353-375. 
41. Sharp, H., H. Robinson, J. Segal and D. Furniss, 
The Role of Story Cards and the Wall in XP 
teams: a distributed cognition perspective
.
 In 
Proceedings of Agile 2006
, 2006, pp 65-75. 
42. Couger, J.D., Motivators vs. demotivators in the 
IS environment. 
Journal of Systems 
Management
, 1988. 
39
(6) 36-41. 
43. Couger, J.D., Comparison of motivating 
environments for programmer/analysts and 
programmers in the US, Israel and Singapore., 
1989. In 
Proceedings of the Twenty-Second 
Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences
, 1989. 
IV
, pp 316-323. 
44. Enns, H.G., T.W. Ferratt and J. Prasad, Beyond 
Stereotypes of IT Professionals: Implications 
for IT HR Practices. 
Communications of the 
ACM
, 2006. 
49
(4) 106-109. 
45. Herzberg, F., B. Mausner and B.B. Snyderman, 
The Motivation to Work, 2nd Ed.
 1959, London: 
Chapman & Hall. 
46. Smits, S.J., E.R. McLean and J.R. Tanner, A 
longitudinal study of I/S careers: synthesis, 
conclusion, and recommendations. In 
Proceedings of 
the 1997 ACM SIGCPR 
Conference on Computer Personnel Research
 
(San Francisco, California, United States), 
1997, pp 36-48. 
47. Adams, J.S., Inequity in social exchange, in 
Advances in experimental social psychology
. 
1965, L. Berkowitz (ed.), New York: Academic 
Press: New York. pp 267-299. 
48. Agarwal, R. and T.W. Ferratt, Crafting an HR 
strategy to meet the need for IT workers
.
 
Communications of the ACM
, 2001. 
44
(7) 58-
64. 
49. Reid, M.F., M.W. Allen, C.K. Riemenschneider 
and D.J. Armstrong, Affective commitment in 
the public sector: the case of IT employees. In
 
Proceedings of the 2006 ACM SIGMIS CPR 
conference on computer personnel research
. 
Claremont, California, USA 2006, pp 321-332. 
50. Krippendorf (2004) 
Content analysis: an 
introduction to its methodology
, London: SAGE 
51. Berelson, Bernard (1952) 
Content Analysis in 
Communication Research.
 Free Press, New 
York. 
52. Robinson, H., and Sharp, H. (2004) The 
characteristics of XP teams, in 
Proceedings of
 
XP2004
 Germany, June, pp139-147 
 
 
