 A Path for Exploring the Agile Organizing Framework in Technology Education 
  
 
Morgan C. Benton 
Department of Integrated Science and Technology 
James Madison University 
Harrisonburg, Virginia, USA 
bentonmc@jmu.edu 
Nicole M. Radziwill 
Department of Integrated Science and Technology 
James Madison University 
Harrisonburg, Virginia, USA 
radziwnm@jmu.edu
 
 
Abstract
—
 When the Agile Organizing Framework (AOF) is 
examined through the lens of the social constructivist 
pedagogy, principles and practices that define an agile learning 
environment emerge. This paper presents a translation of the 
AOF to fit the context of instruction in higher education based 
on the social constructivist perspective, and is not limited to 
software engineering education. Additional research is needed 
to observe, test and validate each of the agile enablers and 
inhibitors in the classroom, and to determine which principles 
and practices best contribute to the achievement of learning 
objectives. Furthermore, we hypothesize that integrating 
elements of the agile learning environment into agile software 
development methodologies could enhance a team’s ability to 
successfully synchronize exploitation (the continuous 
improvement of existing products and practices) with 
exploration (the identification and implementation of 
breakthrough innovations). 
 
Keywords-agile; Agile Organizing Framework (AOF); agile 
learning environment; higher education; software engineering 
education; ambidextrous; exploration; exploitation 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Designing and developing curricula in software 
engineering and technology development can be challenging, 
particularly because specific technologies can change 
rapidly. If the functional skills to which a student is 
introduced in the university can quickly become obsolete, 
how can educators best prepare students for software 
development jobs?  
One potential approach is to craft a classroom 
experience in the spirit of agile software development 
principles, in an attempt to imbue students with the capacity 
for creative and adaptive team-based problem solving so 
often observed in agile software development teams. It is 
this potential that the authors initially aimed to explore, and 
that simultaneously led to their interest in the Agile 
Organizing Framework (AOF) developed by Vidgen and 
Wang [1]. Although agile methods have been introduced 
into software engineering curricula (cf. [2]), there is no 
evidence that they have been applied in courses or programs 
outside technology development. By leveraging the AOF, 
there could be even greater potential for lessons learned by 
the agile software development community to exert wide-
reaching influence on the development of progressive 
pedagogy in many fields.  
Based on case studies examined in the context of 
complex adaptive systems theory, Vidgen and Wang 
identified the emergent capabilities of agile teams in their 
formulation of the AOF. Its three defining principles, based 
on work by Volberda and Lewin [3], are to 1) match the 
coevolutionary change rate between the development team 
and the customer, 2) optimize self-organization, and 3) 
synchronize exploitation (improvements in productivity, 
processes, and existing products) with exploration 
(innovation and the creation of new knowledge). These 
principles reflect key elements of the social constructivist 
pedagogy, namely the pursuit of shared meaning and 
evolved beliefs, planned and unplanned exploration of new 
ideas, and awareness of and reflection on one’s own 
learning process. 
Because the AOF supports the fundamental propositions 
of social constructivist pedagogy, it provides an appropriate 
foundation for identifying the characteristics, enablers, and 
inhibitors of an agile learning environment. This paper 
establishes a link between these two conceptual 
frameworks, translating the core principles of the AOF into 
practices that can be applied in a classroom setting to 
cultivate an agile learning environment.  
II.
 
P
ARALLELS TO 
S
OCIAL 
C
ONSTRUCTIVIST 
P
EDAGOGY
 
Constructivist learning theory posits that learning is an 
active process whereby humans engage in knowledge 
construction, taking in sensory input and making meaning 
out of it.  It is contrasted primarily with transmission 
approaches to learning which characterize the process of 
learning as the passive reception of new information. Karl 
Popper refers to this knowledge construction process as 
“evolutionary epistemology.” [4] The basic assumption is 
that people are not born as blank slates, rather, that all are 
born with a simple set of beliefs in place about the 
world.  Through observation and experience those beliefs 
evolve into systems that make individuals better able to 
interact with the people and phenomena that are 
encountered within their environments. 
2011 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4370-3/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2011.51131 While our efficiency at developing more “accurate” 
models of the world around us can be enhanced through the 
guidance of a teacher, constructivists hold that knowledge is 
not transmitted from teacher to student, but rather is 
reconstructed anew each time a student confronts lessons 
learned from experience and updates his or her world view 
to incorporate the new information.  Social constructivist 
learning theories thus extend the unit of analysis from 
individuals to the group to demonstrate the synergistic and 
emergent behaviors of 
groups of people
 learning and 
working in close proximity with one another. 
Constructivist pedagogical approaches tend to espouse 
the following [5]: 
•
 
Respect for individuals and groups involved in the 
learning process that leads to a genuine effort to 
understand the motivations and world view of the 
participants by the instructor 
•
 
Effort to move the group to arrive at a shared 
meaning of a context or situation via free and open 
discussion 
•
 
Exploration, planned and unplanned, of the subject 
matter being examined via formal and informal 
mechanisms 
•
 
Opportunity for individuals to change their beliefs in 
response to interaction with the context where 
knowledge and information is being experienced, 
and also to challenge those experiences 
•
 
Meta-awareness of one’s own learning processes 
 
Although the elements of the Agile Organizing 
Framework were developed without respect to or 
consideration of learning theories, direct comparison 
suggests that the AOF and social constructivist learning 
theory can and do lead to strikingly similar practices and 
conclusions. The connection itself bears further analysis and 
investigation. 
III.
 
F
ROM 
A
GILE 
D
EVELOPMENT 
T
EAM TO 
A
GILE 
L
EARNING 
E
XPERIENCE
 
The capabilities, enablers and inhibitors identified by the 
AOF emerged from analyzing the behaviors of agile and 
non-agile development teams in industry. For the AOF to be 
translated to the educational environment, we rely on the 
social constructivist view to identify how the processes and 
practices of an agile software development team mimic the 
learning process in the classroom.  
In an agile development team, individuals come together 
to achieve a tangible development objective which requires 
them to explore and understand customer requirements, learn 
new business and technical concepts and skills, and reshape 
their approaches based on new insights. Very often, they 
must also navigate complex knowledge environments where 
they must rely on other members of their teams for additional 
information and understanding. Projects of great complexity 
require that the development team distribute and use their 
collective knowledge based on the specific interests, 
aptitudes and capabilities of various team members. 
Similarly, in the classroom setting, students must explore 
and understand the instructor’s requirements for the course, 
including specifications for assignments and projects, and 
learn new concepts, topics and skills to satisfy those 
requirements. Since each student has different aptitudes, 
interests, and levels of commitment, their understanding of 
the material and the course itself will shift over the duration 
of the quarter or semester. As concepts and projects become 
more complicated, the students will increasingly rely on their 
instructor and on each other to gain additional understanding 
to complete the required work as their beliefs shift in 
response to new tacit and codified knowledge. 
The roles in the agile software development team also 
correspond directly to the roles in the classroom. The 
instructor functions as the customer, customer representative 
or project champion. The individual student or student team 
plays the same role as the developer or development team. 
Achieving a “successful learning outcome” in a classroom is 
similar to identifying a technological solution or delivering a 
project that meets the customer’s expectations. Depending 
upon how the course is structured, the instructor can fully 
assume or share the role of the project manager or software 
development manager with his or her students.
 
IV.
 
F
RAMEWORK FOR THE 
A
GILE 
L
EARNING 
E
NVIRONMENT
 
In constructing the Agile Organizing Framework, the 
authors leverage three organizing principles from Volberda 
and Lewin: matching the coevolutionary change rate (of 
understanding and shared expectations) between the team 
and customer, optimizing self-organization within the team 
and between the team and customer, and synchronizing 
exploration and exploitation. For each 
principle
, there are 
two 
capabilities
 identified; for each capability, several 
enablers
 and 
inhibitors
 of agility are identified. 
The translation of the AOF that we present as a basis for 
future research and discussion retains the three core 
principles, retains the capabilities that correspond to each 
principle, and adjust the enablers and inhibitors to match the 
educational environment. The framework for the agile 
learning environment, which has been translated from the 
AOF, is summarized in Figure 1. 
A.
 
Match Coevolutionary Change Rate 
The two agile team capabilities that were identified in 
support of this first principle, translated into the learning 
environment, are 1) coevolution of the students and 
instructor to create value in the form of stimulating the 
accomplishment of learning objectives and 2) sustainable 
working with rhythm. Students learn at different rates, and 
will adjust to the new content, the course, and the instructor’s 
style and approach in different ways. Agile enablers promote 
a growing shared understanding of requirements, frequent 
delivery of tangible artifacts to demonstrate that learning is 
being achieved, and a rhythm-based pace that helps students 
focus on the course content rather than the logistics. Agile 
inhibitors will create bottlenecks in the learning process, for 
example, where students have to wait for instructor feedback 
before proceeding. 
132 Coevolving, Self- 
Renewing Principles
 
Agile Team Capabilities
 
Agile Learning Environment Enablers
 
Agile Learning Environment 
Inhibitors
 
Principle 1:  
Match Coevolutionary 
Change Rate 
Coevolution of Students and 
Instructor to Stimulate 
Accomplishment of Learning 
Objectives 
Driven by evolving understanding and 
internalization of concepts: 
•
 
Continuous refinement of learning 
objectives, e.g. by addressing them in 
daily stand-up meetings 
•
 
Frequent iterative delivery of learning 
artifacts, e.g. sprints 
•
 
Close, effective interaction between 
instructor and students, e.g. through 
paired learning, a la pair programming 
•
 
Instructor dictating syllabus, 
schedule, and assignment details, 
and signing off on assignments 
•
 
Syllabus set in stone at the 
beginning of the course 
•
 
Weak instructor/student relationship 
 Sustainable Working with Rhythm Change is embedded in and is core to the 
learning process: 
•
 
Time-pacing through short, fixed-length 
iterations, e.g. learning sprints 
•
 
Regular and frequent breaks and closure 
•
 
Planning using small units of time 
•
 
Multilevel planning and replanning 
•
 
Small granularity of assignments and 
teaching problem decomposition 
•
 
Course pacing by planned events 
(e.g. tests)  
•
 
Unsustainable time-pacing 
•
 
Up-front planning for the whole 
course and following the plan 
rigidly 
•
 
Large granularity of assignments, 
deliverables, and plans (which 
impedes clarity and actionability) 
•
 
Overly restrictive or cumbersome 
course policies 
Principle 2:  
Optimize Self- 
Organizing 
Collective Mindfulness Self-management and team discipline: 
•
 
Shared responsibility for course 
management 
•
 
Team discipline through peer and self-
observation 
•
 
Instructor-centered course 
management without feedback from 
students 
•
 
Instructor becomes bottleneck 
•
 
Instructor externalized from 
students 
 Sharing and Team Learning Supportive structures for communication and 
collaboration visible to the team: 
•
 
Formed by interconnected practices 
•
 
Fostered by open working spaces, e.g. 
through innovative classroom layout 
•
 
Multiskilling, e.g. through forming 
student teams with redundancy of 
skillsets 
 
•
 
Over-reliance on informal 
communication and collaboration 
•
 
Tasks allocated centrally by 
instructor with little consultation 
with students 
•
 
Isolated communication and 
collaboration depending on the 
willingness and attitudes of 
individual students 
Principle 3: 
Synchronize 
Exploitation and 
Exploration 
Process Adaptation and 
Improvement 
Reviewing and improving process regularly: 
•
 
Adapt learning process to learning 
context 
•
 
Remove redundant activities and 
continuously monitor progress toward 
objectives, e.g. with burn down charts 
•
 
Actively involve students in identifying 
opportunities for improvements in the 
learning process even for already 
effective practices 
•
 
Learning process in the context of 
course management not internalized 
by students 
•
 
Learning process is imposed by the 
instructor and is seen as out of 
touch with students 
•
 
Over reliance on “common sense” 
 Product Innovation Routinizing exploration: 
•
 
Formalizing extension of assignments to 
independently explore other aspects of 
the problem 
•
 
Allocate class time for independent 
investigation 
•
 
Course time not allocated to 
individual exploration 
•
 
Focus on attendance and 
mechanically achieving minimum 
expectations 
•
Lack of team-based exploration 
 
133  
Figure 1. 
 
Translation of the AOF by Vidgen & Wang (2009) into the context of an Agile Learning Environment. 
(Note: Figure is not intended to capture all possible options in each category.) 
B.
 
Optimize Self-Organizing 
The agile capabilities that support self-organizing are 
identical in the development environment and learning 
environment: 1) collective mindfulness and 2) sharing and 
team learning. Collective mindfulness implies that each 
student in the class shares responsibility for their own 
learning and shares in the decision rights for how to 
achieve that learning in the most optimal way. Sharing and 
team learning means that communication and 
collaboration are supported by course practices that 
encourage team interactions and an expanded context for 
feedback in which students can help each other improve. 
Agile enablers for self-organization in the learning 
environment help the students take responsibility for their 
individual and collective learning, whereas inhibitors 
exacerbate the gap between student and instructor and 
make the students over-reliant on their instructors for 
guidance. 
C.
 
Synchronize Exploration and Exploitation 
Similar to principle 2, the two agile team capabilities 
that were identified in support of this first principle are 
identical in the development environment and the learning 
environment, and are 1) process adaptation and 
improvement, and 2) product innovation. The only 
difference is that for the development team, the product is 
the delivered technical solution and supporting material; in 
the learning environment, the artifacts are papers, projects 
and assignments that demonstrate learning objectives have 
been achieved. 
In the learning environment, exploitation can manifest 
in at least two distinct ways. First, the students can focus 
on ideas, topics and exercises that are closely related to the 
core learning objectives. Through their questioning, the 
instructor can incrementally refine the material to better 
demonstrate concepts. Second, the students and instructor 
can work together to incrementally improve the policies 
and procedures that are characteristic of traditional course 
management. 
Exploration, as well, can manifest in terms of the 
course content in addition to course management. Students 
can pursue new ideas that support or extend the core 
learning objectives, either independently or cooperatively 
with their instructor. Course management practices can 
also be adapted to evolve with the personal development 
of the learners to best support their intellectual growth as 
well as their growth as members of the development team. 
 
V.
 
R
ESEARCH 
Q
UESTIONS
 
We take the position that there is a rich landscape of 
research opportunities associated with exploring the 
structure of the Agile Organizing Framework (and the 
enablers and inhibitors that it identifies) in the classroom. 
Several themes can be explored, such as the link between 
an agile learning environment and learning outcomes, the 
role of an agile learning environment in producing highly 
skilled software developers who are adept at problem 
solving, and the effectiveness of an agile learning 
environment in non-technology courses. 
Examples of research questions that could be explored 
using the AOF translated into a context for the agile 
learning environment include: 
 
•
 
Can an agile learning environment enhance the 
achievement of particular learning objectives? 
•
 
Will an agile learning environment develop more 
capable entry-level software developers and 
engineers? 
•
 
Does an agile learning environment improve 
critical thinking or problem-solving skills? 
•
 
What is the effectiveness of each agile practice in 
the classroom, as described by the agile enablers? 
•
 
Are certain agile practices more effective than 
others in helping students learn? 
•
 
Are ambidextrous classrooms (that balance 
exploitation and exploration effectively) more 
productive learning environments? 
•
 
What are specific course management practices 
that support the achievement of agility (e.g. 
elements of syllabus design)? 
 
By leveraging the research that has already been done 
in agile methods, particularly exploring what agility is and 
how it can be achieved, it could be possible to create a 
vision for a new agile pedagogy. In this sense, what 
organizations have learned about how to create and deliver 
complex software solutions rapidly could enhance the 
ability of instructors in many disciplines to help their 
students achieve learning objectives. 
 
R
EFERENCES
 
 
[1]
 
Vidgen, Wang, 2009
, B. Noble, and I. N. Sneddon, “On certain 
integrals of Lipschitz-Hankel type involving products of Bessel 
functions,” Phil. Trans. Roy. Soc. London, vol. A247, pp. 529–
551, April 1955. 
(references)
 
[2]
 
Rico, 2009
, A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism, 3rd ed., vol. 
2. Oxford: Clarendon, 1892, pp.68–73. 
[3]
 
Volberda, Lewin, 2003
 I. S. Jacobs and C. P. Bean, “Fine 
particles, thin films and exchange anisotropy,” in Magnetism, vol. 
III, G. T. Rado and H. Suhl, Eds. New York: Academic, 1963, pp. 
271–350. 
[4]
 
Perkinson 1993
, 
Teachers Without Goals, Students Without 
Purposes. 
 McGraw-Hill, 128p. 
 
 
134