 Adopting Code Reviews for Agile Software Development
Mario Bernhart, Andreas Mauczka, Thomas Grechenig 
Research Group for Industrial Software 
Vienna University of Technology 
Vienna, Austria 
{mario.bernhart, andreas.mauczka, thomas.grechenig}@inso.tuwien.ac.at 
 
Abstract
ŠCode reviews have many benefits, most importantly to 
find bugs early in the development phase and to enforce coding 
standards. Still, it is widely accepted that formal code reviews are 
time-consuming and the practical applicability in agile 
development is controversial. This work presents a continuous 
differential-based method and tool for code reviews. By using a 
continuous approach to code reviews, the review overhead can be 
reduced and the effectiveness and applicability in agile 
environments shall be improved. 
Keywords-Tools; Code design; Code tuning;  Code reviews; 
Continuous;  
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Code reviews have many benefits [1, 2, 3], most 
importantly to find bugs early in the development phase and to 
enforce coding standards. Still, it is commonly accepted that 
formal code reviews are time-consuming and expensive [4]. 
Due to the lack of time and resources [5] many agile software 
development teams do not perform formal code reviews as a 
regular task during their development process. Especially at the 
end of one sprint completing a development task is usually of 
higher priority than reviewing. Further, even though the tool 
support for code reviews has made significant progress [6] and 
supports distributed development [7], code reviews still add a 
significant overhead in the development process [4]. 
The research described in this work aims towards a 
continuous inspection method and tool for agile software 
development. Continuous in this context means that code 
inspections are differential-based and automatically triggered 
by change-sets. The proposed method shall reduce the review 
overhead and improve the developer acceptance of code 
inspections. A traditional and formal code review as in [1, 2] 
often implies that the code under review is one finished artifact. 
As an alternative approach only the changes of one revision to 
one other revision of one artifact are reviewed. 
The review method was implemented and presented to a 
large audience (see [8]) and has evolved into a widely used 
review tool
1
. The broad acceptance indicates a significant 
improvement over traditional review methods. Still, the result 
has to be evaluated by future research. 
II.
 
RELATED WORK
 
Remillard in [6] discusses some tools that support 
differential-reviewing, but without any support of automatic 
scheduling of the reviews e.g. based on changesets. [11] 
proposes a change-based algorithm to calculate the 
                                                
 
1 http://www.inso.tuwien.ac.at/projects/reviewclipse/ 
accountability of developers to one development artifact and to 
assess the quality in order to indicate the need for a code 
review. Furthermore, [11] points out that code reviews have a 
social effect on the team and should be anonymous to a certain 
degree. In [3] Baker describes a change-based approach where 
code-reviews are scheduled automatically as weekly tasks from 
the changes in the source code management system (SCM). [7, 
9] discuss the importance of code reviews for distributed teams. 
Chen et al. in [10] advocate that collaboration between 
developers should be rendered within the IDE and [26] 
discusses the use of groupware support for software 
inspections.  
III.
 
C
ODE 
R
EVIEWS AND 
A
GILE 
S
OFTWARE 
D
EVELOPMENT
 
Code reviews within agile software development are 
controversial. Since pair programming inherently employs a 
certain kind of peer-review, this may be conflicting. Winkler 
and Biffl [25] compare pair-programming and a best-practice 
code inspection method and conclude that a mix of inspection 
and pair programming can be expected to work better than any 
single technique. Formal inspection methods such as in [2] tend 
to be to heavyweight for a practical use in agile processes. 
However, there is a growing interest for more lightweight and 
tool-supported code reviews in the agile community [24]. 
Further, it can be assumed that code reviews fit well with major 
agile techniques like collective code ownership and refactoring. 
IV.
 
C
ODE 
R
EVIEW 
P
ROCESS
 
The proposed method of this research mainly relates to the 
work of Baker as in [3]. Code reviews are scheduled 
automatically. Compared to [3] this is done concurrently after 
the SCM commit and not only once a week. Further, in [3] only 
one reviewer was responsible to review the work of 3-6 
developers. In contrast to that, the proposed method uses a 
flexible assignment of authors and reviewers e.g. to support 
developer peer reviews in the form {<author, reviewer, 
filter>,*}. Example mappings are <john, mike, all changes> or 
<all authors, chris, all testcases>.  The proposed method is 
based on the following workflow: 
1.
 
The  developer commits to the SCM 
2.
 
If there is a mapping that matches the author and the 
changed items, the review is automatically created for the 
respective reviewers 
3.
 
The review is executed by using a differential-view to the 
previous version of each file in the change-set and the 
results are documented 
2010 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4125-9/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2010.1844 4.
 
The review result is consumed by the author 
5.
 
A (negative) review result is followed up and may create a 
corrective task for the author 
A.
 
Process Coherence  
According to Boehm [14] and Mizuno [20] the time 
between the error injection and error identification should be 
minimized. Williams and Cockburn [23] state that agile 
methods are mainly based on feedback. With an immediate 
scheduling approach, the reviews may be executed directly 
after the commit of the code. This also minimizes the time for 
the author to get a review result. With a shorter turnaround time 
from commit to the review result, the correction can be more 
time-efficient since the developer maybe still working on the 
same artifact. 
In a typical agile continuous integration environment, the 
developers are committing in short cycles. This would lead to 
review effort that is evenly distributed within one sprint and 
therefore improves the chances that there are time and 
resources to perform the review. Compared to this, in a 
traditional environment code reviews are typically scheduled at 
the end of one iteration and therefore create a significant and 
often challenged schedule factor. 
B.
 
Information Coherence 
Zimmermann et al. [15] state that all changes that are made 
within one timeframe have strong information coherence. 
Traditional review methods use structural information such as 
modules or components to select the code under review. From 
a process perspective a set of correlating changes may be 
distributed over many structural items (e.g. a module and a 
corresponding unit test). For the proposed review method, all 
changes of one changeset define the set of code under review. 
With this approach all changes - e.g. in the code and the 
corresponding changes in testcases - are part of one review 
task. 
One other important aspect is the size of the code under 
review. Some studies [16, 17] investigated the ideal size for 
code reviews. It is commonly accepted that a smaller set of 
code leads to a more effective and efficient code review. Gilb 
et al. [18] propose a maximum of 200 lines of code or 2 hours 
per review.  In general, the changeset-based approach reduces 
the size of one single review task compared to a traditional 
approach. 
Following [10], to support the developers accepting code 
reviews as a daily task Œ like refactoring or unit-testing Œ the 
reviews shall be tool supported and be rendered directly within 
the IDE. 
V.
 
C
ODE 
R
EVIEW 
T
OOL
 
Based on the proposed method, the Eclipse-integrated code 
review tool 
ReviewClipse
 (RC) was presented [8]. Since the 
first release early 2009 RC was downloaded 10.000+ times. 
There is an active and constantly growing user community, 
giving feedback and requesting features frequently. RC 
integrates with many popular source code management systems 
to fetch the changes to automatically schedule the code 
reviews. 
One early Agilo
2
-integrated prototype that supported the 
proposed method was not accepted for day-to-day work. The 
developers reported in [19], that switching tools would prevent 
them from doing code reviews on a daily basis. 
A.
 
Review Configuration 
The reviews are scheduled automatically based on a review 
configuration. The configuration is a set of filtered assignments 
between an author and a reviewer. The filter selects the files of 
the changeset for review. Table 1 shows an example 
assignment where Mike is the senior developer and reviews the 
Java and XML of Peter, John and Ben. Chris is the test expert 
and reviews all Java testcases of all team members. 
TABLE I. 
 
E
XAMPLE 
A
SSIGNMENTS FOR 
R
EVIEWS
 
ID 
Review Assignments 
Author Reviewer Filter 
1
 
Peter Mike *.java; *.xml 
2 John Mike *.java; *.xml 
3 Ben Mike *.java; *.xml 
4 * (= allAuthors) Chris *Test*.java 
 
The review assignments and the review data are stored in 
XML and distributed via the SCM. Compared to many other 
source code review systems (see [6]) there is no need for a 
separate review server. This makes the tool appropriate for 
small development or student teams. Bernhart et al. in [21] 
report the successful use of the tool in software engineering 
education. 
B.
 
Review Scheduling and Execution 
The reviews are scheduled and executed within a review 
editor (Figure 1). This editor shows all incoming and outgoing 
reviews relevant to one user. The main table shows all 
changesets under review. The lower, left part of the editor 
shows all changed and filtered files from the selected 
changeset. A file may be compared with the previous version, 
or opened for the latest revision. In a typical continuous review 
the files will be compared to the previous revision. 
 
Figure 1. 
 
Review Editor 
The lower, right part of the editor is used to rate and 
comment the review. The review is rated with 
Passed
, 
Warning
 
                                                
 
2 http://www.agile42.com/cms/pages/agilo/ 
45 or 
Failed
, depending on the severity of any errors found. E.g. a 
coding error is rated as 
Failed
 whereas a missing 
documentation may be rated as a 
Warning
. 
Figure 2 shows the default compare editor. Typically, each 
file of the changeset under review will be opened with the 
compare editor to enable the differential-based reviewing. 
When the review is done continuously (and therefore includes 
all consecutive changes) only the differential needs to be 
reviewed to cover the complete artifact. In the example below 5 
lines of deleted code have to be reviewed since all other lines 
are unchanged and were already reviewed by a previous 
review. 
 
Figure 2. 
 
Compare Editor 
C.
 
Integration with Issuetracking 
Any review result may create a task in an issue-tracking 
system. To follow up the review result and to schedule the 
corrective re-work all information about the review is attached 
to the task. This is implemented as an action in the review 
editor using adaptors for the most common issue tracking 
systems. 
VI.
 
D
ISCUSSION
 
The application of the proposed code review method shows 
promising early results, but needs proper evaluation. The 
proposed method provides an alternative to a traditional 
approach. However, performance of the approach strongly 
depends on the review scenario. Assumingly, each approach 
performs better in different review scenarios. It has to be 
further investigated under which conditions a certain approach 
has to be preferred. 
It is controversial at what point in the continuous 
integration process a review shall be scheduled. The proposed 
method is based on post-commit reviews whereas some tools 
are supporting pre-commit reviews (see Remillard in [6]). The 
main argument for pre-commit reviews is to find bugs before 
the code gets submitted to the shared source repository.  
Code reviews improve the knowledge sharing within the 
development team (see Gilb et al. [18]). Since the proposed 
method is an ongoing process performed in parallel with the 
development, knowledge sharing does not only cover the stable 
state of one artifact but also the creation process. It can be 
assumed that knowledge of the creation process will allow the 
reviewer to gain a deeper understanding of the authors work 
and to give a more qualitative review. 
Performing code reviews may also affect the code 
ownership structures. An ongoing knowledge sharing is a basis 
for collaborative code ownership, which is by itself a major 
agile quality assuring technique as Nordberg shows in [22]. 
VII.
 
F
UTURE 
W
ORK
 
The future work aims to evaluate the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the proposed method versus a traditional method 
of code reviews. The evaluation will be carried out as an 
empirical study with professional agile teams. The teams will 
perform both methods in parallel on the same codebase. The 
effectiveness will be assessed by an expert evaluation 
combined with a comparison of the review outcome (e.g. found 
issues and the severities). For the efficiency the total review 
effort and re-work effort will be measured. Further work 
includes the investigation of the effect of the proposed method 
on the knowledge sharing, the code ownership structure and the 
refactoring. 
Based on the statement from Berczuk [12] that for 
traceability reasons any change should be related to a task e.g. 
in a task management system, the method will be elaborated to 
task-based reviews. To achieve a task-based review, the tool 
will be integrated with Mylyn [13] as a subproject under the 
name Mylyn Reviews
3
. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
M. Fagan, ﬁDesign and code inspections to reduce errors in program 
development,ﬂ 
IBM Systems Journal
, vol. 15, no. 3, pp. 182Œ211, 1976. 
[2]
 
IEEE standard for software reviews and audits. IEEE STD 1028-2008, 
pages 1Œ52, 8 2008. 
[3]
 
R. Baker, ﬁCode reviews enhance software quality,ﬂ In 
Proceedings of 
the 1997 (19th) 
International Conference on Software Engineering
, 
pp. 570Œ571, May 1997.
 
[4]
 
M. Ciolkowski, O. Laitenberger, and S. Bi

. ﬁSoftware reviews, the 
state of the practice.ﬂ Software, IEEE, 20(6):46Œ51, Nov.-Dec. 2003. 
[5]
 
L. Harjumaa, I. Tervonen, and A. Huttunen. ﬁPeer reviews in real life - 
motivators and demotivators.ﬂ 
Fifth International Conference on Quality 
Software
, 2005, pages 29Œ36, Sept. 2005. 
[6]
 
J. Remillard. ﬁSource code review systems.ﬂ IEEE Software, 22(1):74-
77, Jan.-Feb. 2005. 
[7]
 
B. Meyer. ﬁDesign and code reviews in the age of the internet.ﬂ 
Commun. ACM, 51(9):66Œ71, 2008. 
[8]
 
M. Bernhart, C. Mayerhofer, T. Grechenig, ﬁReviewClipse - Supporting 
Code-Reviews within the Eclipse IDEﬂ. Presentation at EclipseCon09 
[9]
 
M. Stein, J. Riedl, S. J. Harner, and V. Mashayekhi, ﬁA case study of 
distributed, asynchronous software inspection,ﬂ in 
ICSE ™97: 
Proceedings of the 19th international conference on Software 
engineering
, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 107Œ117, ACM, 1997. 
[10]
 
L.-T. Cheng, C. R. de Souza, S. Hupfer, J. Patterson, and S. Ross, 
ﬁBuilding collaboration into IDEs,ﬂ Queue, vol. 1, no. 9, pp. 40Œ50, 
2004. 
[11]
 
C. R. Prause and S. Apelt, ﬁAn approach for continuous inspection of 
source code,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 6th international workshop on 
Software quality
, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 17Œ22, ACM, 2008.  
[12]
 
S. P. Berczuk, ﬁSoftware configuration management patterns - Effective 
Teamworkﬂ, Practical Integration. Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
[13]
 
Kersten, M. and Murphy, G. C. ﬁUsing task context to improve 
programmer productivity.ﬂ In 
Proceedings of the 14th ACM SIGSOFT 
international Symposium on Foundations of Software Engineering
 
(Portland, Oregon, USA, November 05 - 11, 2006). SIGSOFT '06/FSE-
14. ACM, New York, NY, 1-11.  
[14]
 
B. W. Boehm, Software Engineering Economics. Prentice-Hall, 1981. 
[15]
 
T. Zimmermann, P. Weißgerber, S. Diehl, and A. Zeller. —Mining 
Version Histories to Guide Software Changes.ﬂ Saarland University, 
                                                
 
3  http://www.eclipse.org/reviews/
 
46 September 2003. 
Proc. 26th International Conference on Software 
Engineering (ICSE)
, Edinburgh, UK, May 2004. 
[16]
 
A. Porter, H. Siy, A. Mockus, and L. Votta, ﬁUnderstanding the sources 
of variation in software inspections,ﬂ 
ACM Trans. Softw. Eng. 
Methodol., vol. 7, no. 1
, pp. 41Œ79, 1998. 
[17]
 
M. Stein, J. Riedl, S. J. Harner, and V. Mashayekhi, ﬁA case study of 
distributed, asynchronous software inspection.ﬂ in 
ICSE ™97: 
Proceedings of the 19th international conference on Software 
engineering
, (New York, NY, USA), pp. 107Œ117, ACM, 1997. 
[18]
 
T. Gilb, D. Graham, and S. Finzi. ﬁSoftware Inspection.ﬂ Addison-
Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc. Boston, MA, USA, 1993. 
[19]
 
C. Mayerhofer. ﬁDesign and Development of a Module for Change-Set 
Based Code Reviews in Integrated Development Environmentsﬂ Master 
Thesis, Vienna University of Technology, 2009. 
[20]
 
Y. Mizuno. ﬁSoftware quality improvement
,ﬂ Computer, vol. 16
, pp. 66Œ
72, März 1983. 
[21]
 
M.Bernhart, C. Mayerhofer, T. Grechenig. —ReviewClipse@Class - 
Using a Lightweight Continuous Software Reviewing Tool in 
Undergraduate Software Development Educationﬁ Œ to appear in 
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual IEEE-CS Conference on Software 
Engineering Education and Training
 
[22]
 
M. E. Nordberg III, "Managing Code Ownership," 
IEEE Software
, pp. 
26-33, March/April, 2003 
[23]
 
Williams, L. and Cockburn, A. Agile Software Development: It's All 
about Feedback and Change, IEEE Computer, Vol. 36, No., 6, pp. 83-85, 
June 2003. 
[24]
 
W. Seliga, S. Ginter, ﬁEffective code reviews in agile teamsﬂ Talk at 
Agile 2009 
[25]
 
D. Winkler and S. Biffl. ﬁAn empirical study on design quality 
improvement from best-practice inspection and pair programming.ﬂ 
Product-Focused Software Process Improvement, pages 319Œ333, 2006. 
[26]
 
P. Grünbacher, M. Halling, and S. Biffl. ﬁAn empirical study on 
groupware support for software inspection meetings.ﬂ Automated 
Software Engineering, International Conference on, 0:4, 2003.  
 
47