 An investigation of Technical Debt in Automatic 
Production S
ystems   Terese Besker 
Chalmers University of Technology 
Computer Science and Engineering 
Gothenburg, Sweden 
besker@chalmers.se 
  
 Antonio Martini 
Chalmers University of Technology 
Computer Science and Engineering 
Gothenburg, Sweden 
antonio.martini@chalmers.se 
 Matthias Tichy 
Ulm University, Institute of Software 
Engineering and Programming 
Languages  Ulm, Germany  
matthias.tichy@uni-ulm.de 
Jan Bosch
 Chalmers University of Technology 
Computer Science and Engineering 
Gothenburg, Sweden 
jan.bosch@chalmers.se 
   ABSTRACT
 Technical Debt is a recent concept, borrowed from the financial 
domain. It has been recently used in software development to 

describe technical sub-optimal solutions that have short-term 

benefits but long-term extra-costs. However, no body of literature 

investigates how Automatic Production Systems companies deal 

with Technical Debt. We investigated how Technical Debt is 

known, how much it hurts and how is managed in an automatic 

production systems company. Results from one in-depth 

investigation show that the automatic production systems 
company spend quite a lot of resources because of Technical 
Debt, both in the extra-costs
 (interest) and in its management. The 
company presents moderate awareness of what Technical Debt is 

and how much is present in its systems. However, the tracking 

level is quite low. 
We, therefore, claim that Technical Debt needs 
more research in this domain, as it is a source of substantial extra-

costs and the current practices to manage it are not suitable. 
Keywords
 Technical Debt, Automatic Production Systems, management, 

survey 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Highly automated production systems are the backbone of the 
production of goods. They are used in a high variety of industrial 

sectors, e.g., automated packaging, production of chemicals, 

production of transportation vehicles. The systems are typically 

highly specialized and built on-demand.  
  
Production systems contain mechanical, electrical and software 
parts and, hence, are jointly developed by engineers from the 

different disciplines. Examples of mechanical parts can vary from 

simple pipes to complex structures transforming energy into 

lateral movements.  
Electrical componen
ts can be simple cables and sensors or 
complex power transmission systems taking electrical safety into 
account. Finally, the software mainly runs on programmable logic 
controllers and ensure the efficient and effective operation of the 
production system.  
Automatic production systems is a relatively new term to describe 
those production systems which support new features like support 

for highly variable production up to lot size 1, are connected 

worldwide to other systems ranging from other production 



service databases. For example, the production systems could 

measure wear on its parts and use the communication capabilities 

to learn how to optimize the product quality related to the current 

wear. 
Companies developing automatic production systems, like pure 
software companies, need to support continuous and fast delivery 

of customer value both in the short and long term. However, 

sustainable development can be hindered if both evolution and 

maintenance of the systems are hampered by Technical Debt
. Technical Debt (TD) has been recently studied in the Software 

Engineering literature 
[1], [2], [3], [4]. The adaptation of the 
Technical Debt concept to automatic production systems has also 

been reported in a recent paper 
[5].  Technical Debt is composed of a debt, which is a sub-optimal 

technical solution that leads to short
-term benefits as well as to 
the future payment of interest, which is the extra costs
 due to the 
presence of Technical Debt (for example, slow feature 

development or low quality) 
[6]. The principal is regarded as the 
cost of refactoring Technical Debt
.  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use 
is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advantage and that copies bear this 
notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for 
components of this work owned by others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is 
permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires
 prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org
.  XP '17 Workshops, May 22
-26, 2017, Cologne, Germany 
 © 2017 Association for Computing Machinery.
 ACM ISBN 978
-1-4503-5264-2/1 https://doi.org/10.1145/3120459.3120466
  A concrete example might be considered as the introduction of 
non-allowed dependencies in the systems, for example between 
component A that might access a private interface in another 

component B by skipping an existing standard API. The 

introduction of such dependency might save time: for example, 

implementing the call to the standard API might require 

additional work instead of calling a known interface. Skipping the 

standard (and optimal) solution will then save time in the short
-term, which is considered as borrowing time with the 

consequence of having the sub-optimal solution in place (the 

debt). Fixing this dependency would also require some refactoring 

work in component A, which is considered as the principal of the 

debt. However, if the component B, with the standard API, would 

need to be replaced, when this happens, component A would need 

to be refactored. In the meanwhile, the code might have grown 

with new functionalities, which would cause the cost of repaying 
the debt in component A to be raised. Such long-term extra-cost is 

called interest
.  Although accumulated Technical Debt might result in a gain 

between the short-term benefit and the interest paid, in many 

cases, documented in the literature and in software projects, the 

interest might largely surpass the gain, for example by leading to 

development crises 
[7]. There are several kinds of Technical 
Debt, such as Architecture Technical Debt, Testing Technical 

Debt, Source Code Technical Debt, 
etc. [3], depending on what 
artifact and on what level of abstraction the sub-optimality has 

occurred. In 2011 Guo et al. proposed an initial portfolio 

approach with the creation of Technical Debt items to be 

managed a further empirical study on tracking Technical Debt 
[8], in order to make the lack of quality and the risk visible for a 

software development team. Seaman et al. have identified the 

theoretical importance of Technical Debt as risk assessment tool 

in decision-making 
[9]. However, current literature does not 
tackle the introduction of Technical Debt management in large 
organizations developing automatic production systems, but only 
its conceptualization 
[5]. In this pap
er, we aim at providing a first 
quantification of the effort employed by the practitioners working 

with automatic production systems in managing Technical Debt. 
The main question that we want to answer in this paper is: 
RQ: How do companies developing automatic production 
systems deal with Technical Debt? 
More specifically, we want to answer the following sub-
questions: 
RQ1: How much effort do companies developing automatic 
production systems spend on paying the interest (extra-costs)? On 

which kinds of Technical Debt? 
RQ2: How much effort do companies spend in managing 
Technical Debt in automatic production systems
?  RQ3: How much is Technical Debt known and tracked in a 

company developing automatic production systems? 
RQ4: How familiar are practitioners in companies developing 
automatic production systems with the Technical Debt 

terminology? 
In order to answer these questions, we conducted an exploratory 
survey involving 40 employees with different roles at an
 automatic production systems company, followed by a group 

interview with their managers. 
The paper is organized as follows: in section II we introduce the 

methodology used in the survey, in section III we report the 

results of the survey, in Section IV 
we discuss the results and in 
section V we report our conclusions.
 2. METHODOLOGY 
In this research, a combination of quantitative and qualitative 
research approaches is used. The research is conducted by using 
methodological, source and observer triangulation. 

Methodological triangulation refers to the utilization of both 

qualitative and quantitative methods
 for gathering data and source 
triangulation 
refers
 to using different sources of 
data
 while 
observer triangulation refers using more than one observer in the 

study. Triangulation 
is important to increase 
the correctness of 
empirical
 research and therefore 
to provide
 a wider view. 
The 
following sections describe the methods used for conducting
 the 
survey and the 
supplementing
 qualitative follow
-up interviews.
 2.1 Research Design
 We conducted an exploratory study at an
 international company 
developing automatic production systems. The company has sites 

in several parts of Europe. The company supplies complete 

systems for automation services with an extensive in-house 

software development of embedded, real-time so
ftware system. 
We combined different sources of data (source triangulation) and 

different methodologies (methodology triangulation) for reliable 

results 
[10]. To fulfill these triangulation strategies, we conducted 
a survey among 40 participants. The different sources included 4
 sub-organizations and different roles, i.e. developers, architects, 

and managers. To complement such quantitative and high-level 

investigation, we followed up with a qualitative, in-depth 

interviews with 8
 managers at the automatic production systems 
company. 
2.2 Survey The web-survey was designed and hosted by the survey service 
called 
SurveyMonkey
. The survey was using a combination of 
open- and closed-ended questions. To avoid bias in the survey
, the questions were developed as neutral as possible, ordered in a 

way that one question did not influence the response 
to the next 
question
.  A first draft of the web survey was tested by four industrial 

practitioners (developer, manager, project owner, and software 

architect) and by two Ph.D. students in order to evaluate the 

understanding of the questions. During this test, we also observed 

the time that was needed. The survey was made accessible 

between February and March 2016. The survey was anonymous, 

and participation in the survey was voluntary. 
The first part of the survey gathered descriptive statistics to 
summarize the backgrounds of the respondents and their 

company. The second part of the survey included questions based 

on the previous
ly presented research questions. 
2.2.1
 Survey Data Collection  
In total, we obtained 40 complete answers from the companies. 
The survey was answered by 4
 project managers, 3 product 
managers, 3
 team leaders, 3 line managers, 1 R&D manager, 6
 software architects and 20 software developers. 
 Technical Debt can affect different artifacts and phases of the 
development process. The different kinds of Technical Debt are 

reported in Table 1 together with their literature references. 
Table 1: Kinds of Technical Debt Recognized in [3], [9], [10] 
Survey entries
 / Challenges
 Source and l
iterature 
term
 Lack or low quality of testing
 Test Debt 
[3]
 Low code quality
 Source Code Debt 
[3]
 Lack or low quality of 
requirement
 Requirement Debt 
[3]
 Lack or low quality of 
documentation
 Documentation Debt 
[3]
 Dependency violations
 Architecture Debt 
[3], 
[11]
 Complex architectural design
 Architecture Debt 
[3], 
[11]
 Too many different patterns and 
policies
 Architecture Debt 
[3], 
[11]
 Dependencies to external 
resources/software
 Architecture Debt 
[3], 
[11]
 Lack of 
reusability
 in design
 Architecture Debt 
[3], 
[11]
 Uneasy/Tensed social 
interactions between different 
stakeholders
 Social Debt 
[3], [12]
 Lack of adequate environment 
and infrastructure during 
development
 Infrastructure Debt 
[3]
  
In the second part of the survey, we asked the main six questions: 
Q1: Which of the following challenges generate the most 
negative impact on your daily software development work? 
Please rank them from 1 to 11.
 Q2: 
is wasted 

 Q3: 
is usually spent 
on Technical Debt 

 Q4: 
etc.) Technical Debt in 
our system.
  
Q5: 
 track Technical Debt in your project, what kind of 

 Q6: 
 
 For questions Q2 and Q3, since we wanted to quantify the amount 

of effort related to the interest and the management of Technical 
Debt, we provided a scale including the following options: 

-
-
 know
  
For Q4 we asked the respondents to report their agreement on a 6-

steps Likert scale: 

 
 
disagree
 and the symmetric scale for agreement.  
As for question Q5, we asked the participants to report the tools 

used in a qualitative way (text-box).  

 
 
 

 2.2.2 Survey Data Analysis 
We have analyzed the answers from Q2 and Q3 in order to 
understand the magnitude of the estimated effort spent by the 

respondents on the interest and management of Technical Debt 

(RQ1 and RQ2). We transformed the answers from categorical to 


-
calculatin

 answers.  
We applied frequency analysis on Q4: the intention was to 
understand how much the studied company was tracking 

Technical Debt (RQ3). In order to do so, we transformed the 

categorical data to a 6 Likert scale 1-





-2}, 

-
 {5
-6}. We also 
qualitatively analyzed the answe
rs in the text field for Q5 to 
understand what tools were used to track Technical Debt. 

to Q6 in order understand how much they were familiar with 

Technical Debt (RQ4). 
3. RESULTS 
This section presents the results for the research question 
presented in Section I, and the results are grouped according to 
each research questions. 
3.1 Survey Results 
RQ1: How much effort do companies developing automatic 
production systems spend on paying the interest (extra-

costs)? On which kinds of Technical Debt? 
Technical Debt has extra costs
 that are associated with its interest, 
or else those extra activities that would not have been done if the 
Technical Debt was not present. 
The first analysis of the survey data shows that the company 
waste 
32% of the development process, on average, because of 
the interest (extra-costs) generated by Technical Debt. To 
calculate the 32%, we parsed each answer by picking the middle 

point between the suggested effort span: for exampl
e, if an answer 
-
parsed it to 25.  
Then we calculated the average. This would give a good 

overview, on average, on how much costs has Technical Debt 

generated. However, we report the distribution of the answers as 

shown in 
Figure 1
. We can see how most of the answers are 
clustered between 10 % and 50 %, especially between 20 % and 

40 %. Only three respondents could not answer this question. 
In picture 
Figure 2
, we show the results of the analysis of the 
ranking reported by the respondents. These results help 
understanding which challenges generated the extra costs
 reported 
earlier.  
 The value, for each Technical Debt kind, is the average of the 
weights associated with the ranking reported by the respondents. 

For example, if one of the Technical Debt kinds were ranked as 

most hurtful by one respondent, it would be given a score of 11 

(the first out of 11 kinds), if second 10 and so on, with the weight 

1 if ranked as the last one. Given these weights, a mean value was 
calculated for each Technical Debt kind: this way, we could see 

which challenges were ranked as the most hurtful ones.  
  In Figure 2
, it seems that Technical Debt would have a major 
impact on the extra costs
 (interest) due to Requirement TD and 
Testing 
TD, while Documentation, Architecture (complex and 
lack of reusability), and Code have been reported as quite 

important as well. There is quite a difference between these kinds 

and the last five kinds, which have been reported as less hurtful. 

Also, it is possible to see that the percentiles boxes are spanning 

quite a lot of positions across the whole spectrum. Especially 
for the 25-percentile, the answers cover the entire spectrum, which 

means that the respondents ranked these kinds in quite different 

ways. However, the 50-percentiles and the medians represent a 

good indication of which ones were ranked the most hurtful. 
  RQ2: How much effort do companies spend in managing 
Technical Debt in automatic production systems
?  
(and therefore costs) related to Technical Debt. These are 

management activities
 necessary to keep Technical Debt at bay: 
for example, repaying the debt (refactoring the code), finding the 

debt, measuring it, understanding the issues, and finally 
managing, keeping track and communicating the debt that cannot 
be refactor
ed. All these activiti
es account for an additional cost.  
This additional managerial extra-cost has been identified as being, 
on average, 
24 %
 of the development time. This number has been 
calculated using the same procedure used to calculate the interest 
(see the previous section). 
The answers related to this extra-cost are reported in 
Figure 3
. We 
can see here how most of the answers lie between 10 % and 40 % 
of development time.  
RQ3: How much is Technical Debt known and tracked in a 
company developing automatic production systems? 
Having understood the costs related to Technical Debt in the 
company, we wanted to understand how much Technical Debt is 

known and actively tracked by the practitioners.  
The graph in 
Figure 4
 shows how many of the practitioners are 
aware of the Technical Debt in their system as well as how much 
they actively track it. It is important to understand if they use 

systema
tic practices to keep track of Technical Debt or if it is 
managed in an ad-hoc way.  
The comparison shows that the practitioners are in general 
moderately aware of how much Technical Debt they have in their 


ewhat 

greatly. As for the systematic tracking, this does not happen a lot, 
as most of the respondents answered 

levels). This shows that Technical Debt is moderately known 

even without tracking it. 
  Figure 1. The graph shows how much time is, on average, 
spent by the practitioners on paying the Interest (extra
-cost) associated with Technical Debt
 Figure 
2. The picture shows which Technical Debt kinds have 
been ranked as the most hurting.
 The black lines are the 
median, the white solid boxes contain 50% of the respondents, 
while the dashed lines show how 25% of the answers span 
different options.
 Figure 
3. The graph shows how much time is, on average, spent 
by the
 practitioners on managerial activities related to 
Technical Debt
    As for the few tools used for tracking Technical Debt
, the 
practitioners report Jira and Excel.  
Both these tools are not optimized to report Technical Debt, as 
one is a generic issue tracker without support for Technical Debt 

related fields (such as interest, principal, 
etc.). As for Excel, it is 
a generic purpose tool that can be customized if the users have good
 knowledge of Technical Debt already (which was not the case in 

this company for many respondents). This means that the 

practitioners do no
t track Technical Debt in an efficient and 
effective way also because of the lack of proper tools to support 

such activity. 
RQ4: How familiar are practitioners in companies 
developing automatic production systems with the 

Technical Debt terminology? 
By looking at the familiarity of the practitioners with the 
terminology related to Technical Debt, it seems that it varies a lot 

in the group. There are more respondents on the less familiar side 

of the graph.  
This is confirmed by the average and the median, both of which 

 However, as many as 
ten respondents (25% of the sample) are instead very familiar with 

the concept. This variance would require further analysis and 

investigation to understand what it depends on
. 
  3.2 Interview Results 
When we discussed the results with the managers at the company, 

we received mixed feedback. Some of the managers thought that 

the results would represent the current situation, while some other 

were somewhat surprised to see such a high price paid 
for sub-
optimal quality. Especially, they were surprised when they saw a 

few of the respondents having to deal with Technical Debt for 70 

% of their time. 
The managers commented that the time spent in paying the 
interest o
n Technical Debt and managing it would be better spent 
in doing more features and raising the reliability of the software.  
As for the management part, we understood that there is no time 
associated with exp
licit Technical Debt management. This 
activity is carried out individually by practitioners according to 

their knowledge and awareness. It 
is, therefore, an ad-hoc 
practice, and 
it is not consistent in different parts of the company. 
4. DISCUSSION
 This section presents and discusses the findings, and the 

implications of the research questions presented in Section I. The 

findings are grouped and discussed according to each research 

questions. 
RQ1: How much effort do automatic production systems 
companies spend on paying the interest on Technical 

Debt? On which kinds of Technical Debt?
 The company wastes quite a lot of effort in paying the interest o
n Technical Debt. The average interest is around 32%, which is a 
substantial amount of resources. 
From the data, it seems that, in this company developing 
automatic production systems, the most common kind of 

Technical Debt is Requirement Debt, followed by Testing Debt. 

However, Documentation Debt, Architecture Debt (especially 

Complexity and lack of Reusability) and Source Code Debt are 

also quite important. 
RQ2: How much effort do automatic production systems 
companies spend in managing Technical Debt? 
Figure 
4. The picture shows the compared distributions of the 
answers both for awareness and tracking of 
Technical Debt
. The means are also compared.
 Figure 
5. The graph shows the distribution of the respondents 
with respect to different levels of familiarity with the 
Technical 
Debt concept. We also report the mean of these answers.
  Despite the high interest paid, the company also pays quite a lot 
of resources in trying to repay Technical Debt and to keep the 

interest low. The average management effort is estimated to be 

about 24%. Combined with the previous datum, we can see how 

the automatic production systems company spends a lot of 

resources in paying the interest and managing Technical Debt. 
RQ3: How much is Technical Debt known and tracked 
by an automatic production systems company? 
Employees in the automatic production systems company are, on 
average, moderately aware of the Technical Debt in their system: 





Technical Debt, as the average 

(1.9). Would the improvement in tracking Technical Debt 

increase the awareness of Technical Debt? Would tracking 

Technical Debt in a systematic way decrease the resources spent 

on Technical Debt management and, more importantly, would it 

reduce the interest paid by the company? Future research should 

assess if the introduction of Technical Debt management in a 

company developing automatic production systems improved the 

current long-term negative effects of Technical Debt. 
RQ4: How familiar are practitioners in companies 
developing automatic production systems with the 

Technical Debt terminology? 
The knowledge of Technical Debt in the company varies a lot. 
Perhaps one of the hinders in systematically tracking Technical 

Debt is that it is not visible and recognized as a first-class entity 

such as bugs and features, as reported in 
[13]. Since the Technical 
Debt metaphor is a means to communicate the risk of poor quality 

among the different stakeholders in a company, a shared 

knowledge of such concept and its terminology would allow a 
better recognition as well as a better management. 
Implication for industrial practices 
The results here show that the current state of practice is quite 
mixed even within the same companies. Some practitioners know 

more about Technical Debt, some others are not familiar at all. 

We see this as an opportunity for companies developing 

automatic production systems to learn about Technical Debt and 

to make their employees aware of the concept, th
e terminology, 
and its use. This could increase the awareness of the Technical 

Debt as a first-class concept in the (software) development, and 

would also increase the opportunities for a systematic 

management as well as a suitable communication of the risks 

related to it.  
Although practitioners have, on average, a moderate awareness of 
Technical Debt even if without systematically tracking, this 

awareness can be increased. If we take 
into
 consideration the 
financial meaning of the Technical Debt, an organization would 

want to know what the debt is taken on and how much interest is 

paid on the debt that has been taken
. This is important to 
strategically act on this information, for example, to refactor the 

debt that has a high interest. In this perspective, a moderate 

knowledge of the existing Technical Debt is quite suboptimal, as 

it does not allow to know debt and interest, which can bear a high 

risk of productivity loss or other extra costs
.  Despite the reported knowledge of Technical Debt from some of 

the respondents, it seems that tracking is not well spread in the 
company. The main reasons are that Technical Debt is not 

recognized at a company level, which does not allow for strategic 

actions, and that the available tools do not support Technical Debt 

management. This is also reported by other studies, such as 
[13] and [14]. 
In summary, we see a need for practical improvement of 

Technical Debt management consisting in raising the awareness 
of Technical Debt, increasing its tracking, which consequently 
entails a better visualization and strategic management, as well as 

the introduction of Technical Debt -specific tools to make such 

task supported in the organizations.  
Theoretical implications 
The results in this paper support the hypothesis, reported in 
[5], that Technical Debt is a concept applicable to companies 
developing automatic production systems, and not only to 

software companies. This implies that more investigation should 

be conducted at companies developing automatic production 

systems to understand if the Technical Debt spans more 

disciplines (for example if the Technical Debt can be applied to 

mechanical engineering) and especially if Technical Debt in one 

discipline (e.g. software) would generate extra costs in other 

disciplines (e.g. electrical engineering) and vice-versa. In this 

paper, we report the existence of the overall costs and challenges, 

but a more in-depth qualitative investigation would reveal 

important details on how the different disciplines interact with 

each other in a Technical Debt perspective. 
In comparison with the survey reported in 
[14], we can see how 
the state of the practice is quite similar between generic software 
companies and companies developing automatic production 

systems
. Although the practitioners report similar prior 
knowledge and familiarity with the concept of Technical Debt
, the actual source of Technical Debt varies between the two 
surveys: in the company developing automatic production 
systems, it seems that the worse extra costs paid because of 

Technical Debt are a requirement and test level, while in the more 

generic software development the first choice as the most hurtful 

is architecture. This difference could be due to the interaction 

between different disciplines. The combination of software 

artifacts together with hardware requires clear interfaces between 

the disciplines: software modules need to conform (and to be 

tested) according to requirements that are bounded to hardware 

specifications. Such requirements might not be so stringent in a 


-optimality would not 
create as much extra cost as 
it do
es in automatic production 
systems
.  Threats to validity and limitations 
A major threat usually present in the questionnaire is related to 
construct validity: in this survey, we needed to be sure that 



they might not be familiar with it (as the results show). To 



directly (but in the last two questions), but we have used 

operationalized definitions of different kinds of debt according to 

the different kinds: for example, we have represented 




 Another threat to validity is related to 
the costs calculated in this study. The reported percentages might 
not be precise, as they have been calculated by picking the middle 
points. Therefore, the reported averaged results might deviate by 
 ± 5 % points, although this span is quite unlikely. Finally, about 
external validity threats, the study was exploratory and has 

involved only one company. This might not be representative of 

the majority of companies developing automatic production 

systems. For better generalizable results, more companies should 

be studied. Finally, to mitigate reliability biases, we have 

employed source triangulation, methodology triangulation and
, at last, observer triangulation. 
5. CONCLUSION 
The company developing Automatic Production Systems that 
we have investigated spends quite a lot of resources in paying the 
interest o
n Technical Debt, on average 32 % of the development 
time, although a similar amount of resources are employed in 

trying to manage Technical Debt and to reduce the interest. One 

of the reasons might be that Technical Debt, even if its awareness 

is moderate, is not systematically managed in the company (very 

few employees track Technical Debt). The current tools and 

practices 
 support a better strategic management of 
Technical Debt. These results reveal that Technical Debt in 

automatic production systems companies is a big challenge. 

Systematically managing Technical Debt would probably 

improve the situation, and an attempt in such direction should be 

studied in order to understand what increases the overall 

management of Technical Debt. Another target is to understand if 

Technical Debt is related to software only, or if it spans other 

disciplines as well. Our results suggest that there is a difference in 

what kinds of Technical Debt generate more effort, and this might 

be related to the combination of software and hardware 

development. Finally, more automatic production systems 

companies would need to be studied in order to understand how 

generalizable the results are. 
 6. ACKNOWLEDGM
ENTS We thank the industrial partners of the Software Center for the 
collaboration and the contribution of this study. 
 7. REFERENCES 
 [1] Besker, T, Martini, A, Bosch, J., A systematic literature 
review and a unified model of Architectural Technical Debt, 

in: Euromicro Conference Series on Software Engineering 

and Advanced Applications (SEAA), 2016. 
[2] Brown, N., Cai, Y., Guo, Y., Kazman, R., Kim, M., 

Kruchten, P., Lim, E., MacCormack, A., Nord, R., Ozkaya, 

I., others, 2010. Managing technical debt in software-reliant 

systems, in: Proceedings of the FSE/SDP Workshop on 

Future of Software Engineering Research. ACM, pp. 47
52. 
[3] Cunningham, W., 1992. The WyCash portfolio management 

system, in: ACM SIGPLAN OOPS Messenger. ACM, pp. 

2930. 
[4] Ernst, N.A., Bellomo, S., Ozkaya, I., Nord, R.L., Gorton, I., 

2015. Measure It? Manage It? Ignore It? Software 

Practitioners and Technical Debt, in: Proceedings of the 

2015 10th Joint Meeting on Foundations of Software 
Engineering, ESEC/FSE 2015. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 
pp. 50
60. doi:10.1145/2786805.2786848 
[5] Guo, Y., Seaman, C., Gomes, R., Cavalcanti, A., Tonin, G., 

Da Silva, F.Q., Santos, A.L.M., Siebra, C., 2011. Tracking 

technical debt
An exploratory case study, in: Software 
Maintenance (ICSM), 2011 27th IEEE International 

Conference on. pp. 528
531. 
[6] Kruchten, P., Nord, R.L., Ozkaya, I., 2012. 
Technical Debt: 
From Metaphor to Theory and Practice. IEEE
 Softw. 29, 18
21. doi:10.1109/MS.2012.167
 [7] Li, Z., Avgeriou, P., Liang, P., 2015. 
A syst
ematic mapping 
study on technical debt and its management.
 J. Syst. Softw. 
101, 193
220. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2014.12.027
 [8] A. Martini and J. Bosch, "The Danger of Architectural 

Technical Debt: Contagious Debt and Vicious Circles," in 

Proceedings - 12th Working IEEE/IFIP Conference on 

Software Architecture, WICSA 2015, 2015, pp. 1-10. 
[9] Martini, A., Bosch, J., Chaudron, M., n.d. Investigating 

Architectural Technical Debt Accumulation and Refactoring 

over Time: a Multiple-Case Study. Inf. Softw. Technol. 

doi:10.1016/j.infsof.2015.07.005 
[10] Runeson, P., Höst, M., 2008. Guidelines for conducting and 

reporting case study research in software engineering. Empir. 

Softw. Eng. 14, 131
164. doi:10.1007/s10664-008
-9102-8
 [11] Seaman, C., Guo, Y., Zazworka, N., Shull, F., Izurieta, C
., Cai, Y., Vetro, A., 2012. Using technical debt data in 

decision making: Potential decision approaches, in: 2012 

Third International Workshop on Managing Technical Debt 

(MTD). Presented at the 2012 Third International Workshop 

on Managing Technical Debt (MTD), pp. 45
48. 
doi:10.1109/MTD.2012.6225999 
[12] Tamburri, D.A., Kruchten, P., Lago, P., Vliet, H. van,
 2013. 
What is social debt in software engineering?, 
in: 2013 6th 
International Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects 
of Software Engineering (CHASE). 
Presented at the 2013 
6th International Workshop on Cooperative and Human 
Aspects of Software Engineering (CHASE), pp. 93
96. 
doi:10.1109/CHASE.2013.6614739
 [13] Tom, E., Aurum, A., Vidgen, R., 2013. 
An exploration
 of technical debt. 
J. Syst. Softw. 86, 1498
1516. 
doi:10.1016/j.jss.2012.12.052
 [14] Vogel-Heuser, B., Rösch, S., Martini, A., Tichy, M., 2015. 
Technical Debt
 in Automated Production Systems. Proc. Int. 
Conf. Softw. Maint. 
Ecolution
 Brem. Ger.
  