 There’s Something About Lean 
A Case Study
 
Laura Bocock 
Faculty of Computer and Mathematical Sciences 
The University of Waikato 
Hamilton, New Zealand 
lb49@students.waikato.ac.nz 
Angela Martin 
Faculty of Computer and Mathematical Sciences 
The University of Waikato 
Hamilton, New Zealand 
angela@cs.waikato.ac.nz 
 
 
Abstract
— One of the ideas gaining significant interest at 
the moment is “how can we apply Lean manufacturing 
principles to software development?” There is however, 
limited information on how Lean is being used by industry 
practitioners and if the principles and practices are as 
effective as current interest levels suggest it might be. We 
have used a case study to explore the practicalities of how 
one high-performing, open source team, has adopted Lean 
practices. We found that the exi
sting meritocratic decision-
making culture of the team under study appears to have 
greatly assisted the team’s application of Lean principles to 
their software development processes. 
Keywords – lean, agile, open source, distributed software 
development, meritocracy. 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Industry practitioners are often at the forefront of our 
discipline, breaking new ground and finding ways to develop 
software better and faster.  One of the ideas gaining 
significant interest at the moment is: how can we apply Lean 
manufacturing principles to software development? The last 
three years has seen a widespread rise in the software 
community’s interest in Lean, as evidenced by the new Lean 
conferences appearing in both North America and Europe. 
There is, however, limited information on how industry 
practitioners are using Lean and if the principles and 
practices are as effective as current interest levels suggest it 
might be. Our research is beginning to explore the 
practicalities of how Lean is being applied in industry teams, 
and this paper outlines some of our initial findings.  
In the next section we will introduce Lean. In the third 
section we will describe our research method. Next we will 
describe the results of our research, including a description 
of the impact the existing company culture had on the 
adoption of Lean principles. We will conclude the paper with 
a section that brings together and integrates the earlier 
sections as well as discussing the implications these results 
have to practice and theory. 
II.
 
A
N 
I
NTRODUCTION TO 
L
EAN
 
The Lean story starts with Kiichiro Toyoda who started 
the Toyota car manufacturing company. The Poppendiecks 
[23] explain the evolution of Lean from its start in Toyota 
manufacturing lines through to its recent adoption within the 
IT industry. Toyoda had the vision of a company that could 
do two things: firstly, deliver products ‘just-in-time’, being 
flexible to the market demand, and secondly give workers 
responsibility and empower them to make changes and 
ensure quality [23]. After Toyoda’s death in 1952 Taiichi 
Ohno continued to research and develop a system based on 
Toyoda’s vision. In 1962, Ohno with the help of Shigeo 
Shingo, successfully implemented the Toyota Production 
System across the entire Toyota company.  
The Toyota Production System enabled Toyota to be 
competitive against the American mass production methods. 
Mass production was unsuitable for the Japanese market 
where there was small demand and higher costs [26]. Instead 
Ohno designed a system that revolved around the customer; 
ensuring the customer was receiving value at every 
production step. Ohno insisted on eliminating any production 
steps that did not deliver value to the customer. Ohno also 
wanted to reduce inventory and deliver to the customer 
immediately after an order [2]; derived from Toyoda’s ‘just-
in-time’ vision. Ohno created a set of principles that were 
applied to the production processes, but these principles had 
a much wider influence, including shaping Toyota’s business 
approach and company values. Following the publishing of 
The Machine That Changed the World 
in 1990, the Toyota 
Production System became known as Lean.  
The Poppendiecks [22-24] have explored the application 
of Lean to software development. The Poppendiecks 
describe the seven principles of Lean and how these 
principles can be used within software development projects 
based on their personal experiences and research.  
Principle 1: Eliminate Waste.
 In order to ensure that 
customers are receiving value and products are being 
delivered as fast as possible, it is necessary to eliminate 
waste in the production process. To accomplish successful 
elimination of waste in software development teams the team 
must first define ‘value’ within their environment.  The team 
then identifies activities in their development process that do 
not provide value (e.g. task switching). Finally, the team 
decides how these activities could be reduced or eliminated. 
 Principle 2: Build Quality In.
 
This principle focuses on 
the need to prevent defects and create a system that responds 
immediately to problems. Continuous integration and test 
driven development are at the forefront of software 
development techniques used to ensure quality is built into 
the system. These techniques show defects quickly and allow 
2011 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4370-3/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2011.4410 the developers to assess and fix defects as they are 
introduced into the software, rather than relying on testing in 
the final stages of the development process.  
Principle 3: Create Knowledge. 
This principle highlights 
the importance of teams learning collectively and generating 
new knowledge together. Feedback is a core element of 
learning. Software development environments should 
provide teams with the opportunity to improve and learn 
throughout the process [22]. Software development team 
members should provide feedback and have access to both 
customer and technical feedback throughout the 
development process.  
Principle 4: Defer Commitment. 
In order to be 
responsive, ensure quality, and eliminate waste, teams are 
asked to wait as long as possible before making irreversible 
decisions. Teams “should try to make most decisions 
reversible” [23]. When decisions are made to be reversible it 
will allow them to be changed easily if necessary. When it is 
not possible to make a decision reversible it is suggested that 
these decisions should be made at the “last responsible 
moment” [23]. Although this moment will vary due to 
circumstances and environments, it is expected that teams 
evaluate when the latest responsible moment for each 
decision is. Leaving decisions as late as possible will allow 
the decision makers to be more informed when the time 
comes to make a decision. However, leaving crucial 
decisions too long can harm the overall project.  
Principle 5: Deliver Fast. 
Toyoda’s vision included a 
system that responded and delivered to customers 
immediately [23]. In software this principle often results in 
teams developing software in short time-boxed cycles that 
provide structures for feedback, reflection and delivery of 
working software.  
Principle 6: Respect People. 
Teams are at the heart of 
software development, so the working environment should 
enable the team to build trust, respect one another, and 
collaborate on problems. The Poppendiecks [23] would go as 
far as to say that “if you implement only one principle – 
respect for people – you will position the people in your 
organization to discover and implement the remaining Lean 
principles” [23].  
Principle 7: Optimize The Whole. 
This final principle 
aims to encourage people to understand the system as a 
whole. Instead of solving problems that arise at the surface 
level teams should investigate problems and ensure they are 
fixing the root cause of the problems [23].
 
As software development is continually evolving, the 
Poppendiecks emphasize that “there is no such thing as a 
‘best’ practice; practices must take context into account” 
[22]. The seven principles allow teams to effectively focus 
their development efforts and incorporate different practices 
into their development processes. Lean in the software 
development industry provides principles that are applicable 
to changing environments. The principles focus on ensuring 
stability and controlling that which can be controlled, to the 
best of the teams’ ability.  
III.
 
METHOD 
Information Systems Development (ISD) methodology 
researchers [14, 21] have expressed a growing concern that 
existing ISD methods do not meet the needs of today’s 
business and software development environments. Studies 
[21] in this area have begun to explore practices in natural 
settings in order to begin to address these issues. Given this 
trend, we have used a case study [7] to begin to explore how 
industry practitioners are using Lean principles and practices 
on software development projects. 
We asked leading Lean Software Development experts to 
recommend teams for our research study.  One advantage of 
this selection approach is that it helped to ensure that we 
targeted a project that is perceived as practicing Lean well. 
This paper reports our initial findings from one team, a 
highly distributed development team working in the open 
source domain. We describe the team in more detail in 
section four. 
To ensure we obtained a full understanding of the impact 
of Lean across the whole team we interviewed the Project 
Lead, the Product Strategist, the Technical Architect, a Team 
Lead and six Engineers, that is ten interviews in total. We 
used semi-structured in-depth one-on-one interviews as well 
as observations to collect the data for this research. All 
interviews were taped and later transcribed in detail. The 
interviewees were asked to validate both the transcriptions of 
the interview and the interpreted findings. The project 
observations were used to support both the interview process 
and the resulting findings.  
The data analysis process was iterative and incremental. 
We created short summary labels for each significant line of 
the transcripts. This process is called 
open coding
. We used 
comparative data analysis to compare and contrast the open 
codes, to develop the substantive codes (an abstracted 
category that fits multiple open codes).  We also wrote 
theoretical memos
 that relate the codes, drawing out the 
potential ideas or concepts held within the data.  This 
memoing process assisted us to focus on the core categories 
and the inter-relationships between the categories. We 
initially coded the transcripts within the margins and used 
index cards for the memos, as recommended by Glaser [15]. 
The term 
theoretical saturation
 is used to denote when to 
stop this process, that is, when no or very few new codes are 
discovered within the data.  Thus, the data collection and 
analysis phase stopped as theoretical saturation was reached. 
In the sections that follow, we identify the theory as it 
emerged from our analysis of the data. We use a number of 
quotes from the interviews to illustrate our findings; names 
have been avoided and we have given the team the pseudo 
name Apollo to preserve anonymity.  
IV.
 
APOLLO 
This case study looks into one successful open source 
software development project, Apollo. Apollo, unlike most 
open-source projects, has a dedicated paid core development 
team. The Apollo team is distributed worldwide with 
engineers all working from home and in almost all of the 
worlds time zones.   
11 In the following sub-sections we will describe this team 
and their processes. We will see how this team is structured, 
who is in this team, and what processes they use in their 
software development process. During our data analysis the 
following areas were uncovered as essential to this high 
performing team: decision making, respect, process changes, 
measuring, and learning opportunities. The following 
sections will describe each of these in turn. 
A.
 
Who are the team? 
The core team has thirty members that are spread across 
five sub-teams; each sub-team has a  ‘team lead’. The 
company has recently restructured the team to also include 
an overall project lead, technical architect and product 
strategist. The team consists of well-respected software 
engineers. All members of the team (including managers and 
product specialists) develop code regularly; they are all 
practicing engineers. They respect each other’s opinions and 
ideas, and work together to solve problems and improve their 
processes. The Apollo team are all experienced and have 
proven their knowledge and ability before joining the team, 
in-fact many of them were head-hunted to join Apollo. This 
created a culture where everybody values each other and the 
work they do. The abilities of team members are known and 
are rewarded.  
Many of the interviews also emphasized that the globally 
distributed nature of the team enables them to access a large 
talent base. This is perceived as highly valuable, and allows 
the project to have contributions and ideas from people all 
over the globe. 
“So the first thing about [Apollo] that really 
impressed me when I got there was that it was unlike 
any company I’d worked before… all of the people 
here were people I completely respected technically 
and professionally” (Participant 2) 
 “When we needed a [software architecture style] 
implementation right we went out and hired the guy 
who wrote the… book… our talent is amazing 
because it’s not limited by what city you live in” 
(Participant 7)  
The engineers in this team are passionate, driven and 
open minded. The team is aware of how these characteristics 
help shape their processes and the project.  
“We all absolutely love what we do… 
…This is my job, this is what I want to do, this is what 
I love to do, I'm going to make it better, I'm going to 
make it a more pleasant experience for me” 
(Participant 7) 
“[I] have been loving it because it’s the first time I’ve 
got a job where I think the product is worthwhile” 
(Participant 5)  
B.
 
How does this team work together? 
Yearly goals are set for the project in a meeting with the 
project lead, technical architect, product strategist and team 
leads in conjunction with the company founder. Apollo 
releases their software product every four weeks. Each 
release works as a “milestone” towards the yearly goals for 
the product. The “milestones” are created with contributions 
from all team members. The team creates a yearly outline 
that enables them to plan releases and sprints, and build in 
predictability. It is important for the team to ensure that they 
build in ‘slack’ within the release cycles. The planning 
weeks are at the beginning of each cycle. In parallel to the 
planning activities the remainder of the team completes 
unpolished or unfinished work. Development is driven from 
a backlog of features and bugs
. 
 
“ [Apollo] is not the kind of project where we plan 
like, okay, month one, month two, month three, month 
four, we’re going to do this.  We have sort of a 
general set of goals that we’re trying to hit for the 
year, and we have to sort of give and take to get to 
those goals.  Many things we learn along the way and 
so we only really set about maybe a month or two out 
what we’re going, what the specific priority for that 
month is”  (Participant 4)  
 “Often stuff comes up that you haven’t expected, so 
we try to build in slack into, you know, we try not to 
over-schedule, we try to pack down the schedule quite 
a bit.” (Participant 2) 
The team recently uncovered an issue in their planning 
process. They found that all of the teams were moving 
forward but not always in directions that complemented each 
other. The team has placed more effort into creating an 
integral product plan in their planning process to address 
this. The recent creation of the product strategist role gives 
emphasis to this change, and the intention of the team to 
optimize the whole, 
and consider product strategy a core part 
of their engineering process.  
In the following sections we will explore in more detail 
the practices the team uses on day-to-day basis.  
1)
 
Pre-Implementation Call 
An engineer will typically start a piece of work with a 
pre-implementation teleconference call with another 
engineer. The pre-implementation call is used to discuss their 
planned approach to this piece of work whether it is feature 
creation, bug fixing or a specific problem. This call helps the 
team to learn about new tactics, code that possibly could be 
re-used and design solutions:  
“Often you can think oh that’s really simple I’ll just 
do this... and then check with someone else about it 
and it’s actually not that simple or it’s completely up 
the wrong way, up the wrong path” (Participant 5) 
 “I could [go] off in a crazy tangent… trying to build 
the kitchen sink and not mean to” (Participant 7) 
“It might be someone who knows less because it is 
also a way of spreading the knowledge around” 
(Participant 6) 
“They both learn from each other... the end result the 
quality is much higher because they had to defend 
their approach to the other” (Participant 1) 
This technique was inspired by Lean principles: 
incorporating others knowledge to help ensure quality and 
re-use existing code to eliminate waste. The Apollo team 
12 identified the excessive number of changes prompted by the 
code review process, and realized many could be caught 
much earlier in the process. The pre-implementation calls 
also provide engineers with an avenue to share targeted 
knowledge with each other just as it is needed. 
2)
 
Reviews.  
Code Reviews are also used by this team to help them 
share knowledge and ensure quality. A code review will 
typically consist of the reviewing engineers reading the 
submitted code and discussing it with the submitting 
engineer. The engineers collaborate to improve both the 
design and the code. This technique is not new and is 
perceived as an effective one that stops bugs entering the 
code base and shares knowledge concerning the existing 
code base and standards. An additional benefit of code 
reviews is that engineers are exposed to more of the code 
base within the product. 
Engineers spend one day a week where they perform the 
code reviewer role. This role ensures that the other engineers 
are provided with rapid feedback, as the code reviewer has 
this as their top priority for that day. The introduction of the 
code reviewer role reduced the delays engineers used to 
experience when they needed to wait for others to be 
available to perform a code review. That is, it reduced waste. 
“Reviews like this … are possibly the best thing that 
has happened to me professionally. I have been 
recommending it to other companies as well.” 
(Participant 6) 
A mentoring process was used to introduce code reviews. 
This process paired experienced code reviewers with learners 
until the experienced reviewer was satisfied the learner was 
looking for the right things and asking the right questions. 
The learner was then graduated and allowed to complete 
code reviews alone.  
The team has recently noticed that the user interaction 
(UI) within the ApolloProduct needs improvement. To 
address this issue they have introduced a UI review process. 
The Apollo team modeled the UI review process on the code 
review process, and kept many of the lessons learnt with 
code reviews, including the use of a mentoring process.  
3)
 
Sprints 
In an effort to combat the problems that occur when 
engineers have little face-to-face time, engineers join 
together in ‘sprints’. This practice comes from the open 
source practice of sprinting, and is quite different to a sprint 
in Scrum. Apollo sprints are structured to allow the team to 
develop software as a co-located team, have discussions on 
plans and decisions ,and form bonds. It is also important for 
the team to train and learn from one another and use 
techniques such as pair-programming, whiteboard 
visualization and lightning talks to increase knowledge 
sharing and team bonding. The length of a sprint is typically 
one to two weeks. The team all stays together in one 
location, typically a hotel, increasing the opportunities to 
both work together and socialize together. 
“The sprints have to be for technical and product 
reasons but they are also simply to get people in a 
room and eating and talking together” (Participant 
2) 
“We try and sprint twice a year… what we actually 
do at the sprints kind of varies.  We have had 
planning sprints where we’re mostly just talking 
about what we want to do for the next six months” 
(Participant 7) 
 “The things that you talked about at the sprint are 
focal points things that stay very clear in your mind, 
the things that you can discuss easily, things you can 
refer to because you have met people and looked at 
the same piece of paper, just the fact that you looked 
at a white board” (Participant 6) 
The Apollo team comes together at an “all hands” sprint 
at least once a year. The team also has a number of 
additional sprints each with a specific focus, these includes 
sprints for team leads and management; sub-teams; cross-
team collaboration; and specific areas, such as the UI. Each 
sub-team aims to sprint together as a team twice a year. 
4)
 
Constant Communication 
Open-source communities and distributed teams are 
particularly aware of the importance of communication. 
Agile and Lean methodologies value communication and 
constant feedback and discussion. This team uses a wide 
variety of communication tools to enable them to help one 
another, gain information from users, and keep up to date 
with system and team statuses. 
“It is problematic not working together with people 
face to face… [In a distributed environment] insist on 
a lot of communication, to have voice calls…. You 
hear if somebody's frustrated when they talk” 
(Participant 3) 
 “I am part of the calls and the mailing lists and I’m 
in the loop all the time” (Participant 1) 
 “If I don't communicate I start to feel isolated … It’s 
night and day with [Apollo] we have IRC, we've got 
instant messenger…We just have these levels of 
escalation that if it’s this big call, and you know if it’s 
this big just send an email” (Participant 7) 
“I try to err on the side of as much communication as 
possible without being annoying” (Participant 4) 
The team has a firm belief in constant communication, 
and emphasizes the importance of constant communication 
between the team members and the community. The culture 
within this team is encouraging and built on knowing that 
someone is always there for you, to help you however you 
need it. Engineers spend large amounts of time in chat 
systems and are constantly available for both their team and 
their larger community. When someone needs help they 
often know who the best person to contact is. However, due 
to the distributed nature of their work environment, 
sometimes that person is unavailable. In this situation the 
team responds by opening all doors of communication to get 
the help that is needed: 
“Sometimes you will know of someone who's kind of 
an expert in a specific area and you'll try to get them, 
13 but often you'll just ask a question and see if anyone 
replies…If you get stuck you get help. You go and try 
to find out…I think easier than the non-distributor 
team….you know somebody is going to be there 24 
hours a day” (Participant 3) 
“We really encourage people if they [get] stuck, even 
just slightly like I'm not sure what to happen next, just 
talk to someone about it and it's okay to do that” 
(Participant 2) 
“If I get stuck there’s always someone to help me, 
maybe not specifically on my team but there always 
someone”  
(Participant 7) 
5)
 
Personal Communication 
Although this team has regular meetings, they cannot rely 
on face-to-face communication. They are aware of the 
personal contact they miss due to the distribution of their 
team. To combat this, the Apollo team ensures they have 
both technical and personal discussions with each other. 
During sprints there is a large amount of face-to-face 
interaction. All of the sprints emphasize spending time 
getting to know each other personally, and forming bonds. 
The team members are all located in the same hotel, and are 
able to socialize constantly for the duration of the sprint. The 
team work, eat, and drink together and have a casual and 
relaxed atmosphere. 
 “I think when you can't meet people face to face you 
actually have to put more emphasis on 
communication to make sure you don't miss 
anything” (Participant 3) 
“You have to be able to go out and have some beers 
with your co-workers…it’s good to have that 
interaction and it’s not strictly like a work 
relationship I guess” (Participant 7) 
“I think it’s incredibly important just to be able to 
build those relationships... like we were talking the 
other week as in lets plan to make sure we have an 
evening making pizza together or something just to 
make sure we’re doing things together to learn a bit 
more about each other and try and, you know, the 
stuff you do everyday when you’re working in an 
office and it collects over six months, trying to 
squeeze all that into a week.  ” (Participant 5) 
Engineers make time to engage with each other outside 
of sprints too: 
“Once a week I usually have a one on one [with my 
manager] where we don't talk about work at all just... 
personal problems…it’s basically a gripe fest” 
(Participant 7) 
“Something I’ve found quite useful lately is meeting 
up more often locally with people in the company.  So 
two weeks ago I flew… to work with one of the guys 
in my team just to be able to spend two days together 
and… not having a formal sprint but just being able 
to get together and work together.  Other times I’ll go 
into Berlin and work with another guy who’s not in 
my team, doesn’t do anything related to me but is in 
the company and who I know and just a social contact 
as well as we’ll get together and sit and work 
together for the day” (Participant 5) 
6)
 
Open Communication 
Apollo is constantly evaluating its processes and values, 
and all members of the team are able to instigate discussions 
on problems and ideas for solutions. All team members are 
asked for input to make decisions on direction, value and 
changes to the process and product.  
“It's literally just an open discussion… 
…“It's very free and open environment you just say 
I’m not comfortable with this direction because of 
this” (Participant 4) 
“We are very open to new ideas…We have times 
where it’s just open to the floor” 
 (Participant 7) 
In this section we have investigated the practices of the 
Apollo team. The practices of pre-implementation calls and 
reviews have assisted the team in 
creating knowledge, 
eliminating waste
 and constantly improving their processes.  
The use of sprints and open communication practices also 
assist Apollo to 
create knowledge
 where team members help 
each other to 
build quality in
.  
C.
 
How does this Team Make Decisions? 
The Apollo teams’ culture creates a safe environment. 
This culture is important when making decisions and all 
team members have the opportunity to explain their views, 
and understand and learn from others backgrounds and 
experience. In the distributed environment many of the 
decisions the team makes are done in calls with sub-team 
members or one-on-ones with team leads. All decisions are 
discussed by the team, from those related to what should be 
in the next release to those concerning process experiments 
or changes. Sprints are also used as a time to plan and 
discuss goals and milestones, as well as evaluate processes. 
Those who cannot attend the sprints are represented by other 
team members, and are consulted and kept in the loop. In the 
sprint we observed, one absent team member video 
conferenced in for the majority of the sprint.  
The Apollo team self-identify as a meritocracy. The 
decision-making process is a meritocracy of ideas. All ideas 
are valued equally and assessed on their merits, regardless of 
where the idea has originated. This team describes the 
decision-making to be consensus driven and involves 
everybody, without it being a top-down or bottom-up 
management approach. Often decisions end up incorporating 
ideas from all team members. Given this approach all 
decisions are accepted and viewed as a step forward for the 
project. 
 “This is not a democracy its not one person one vote 
it’s… a meritocracy …” (Participant 6) 
“I've not seen anything where it was like top-down, 
handed you know, go and make it so and no 
discussion or consensus… I'm quite comfortable with 
14 what we're doing now after a week of sitting in a 
room with twelve guys ironing it out” (Participant 4) 
“The variation will be discussed on our mailing list, 
so that everyone can contribute to the process and 
probably in the end maybe like in a forum of all the 
team…A small forum would try to kind of really 
identify the problems, then there'll be some kind of 
discussion that's really open to everyone in the team 
and everyone in the community and then to again 
have it to a smaller and higher up forum for action 
and changes” (Participant 3) 
Decisions on the overall product and the work involved 
appear to be talked about through all levels in the company. 
Engineers were aware of the job to be completed as part of 
their sub-team milestone.  
 “Around this time we'll also kind of decide what's 
going into the next milestone. It would be mostly the 
responsibility of the lead developer with everyone” 
(Participant 3) 
“We usually try and find a good middle ground for 
what we need to do…It’s kind of like a discussion 
more than it is an assignment I think” (Participant 7) 
One concern the team has recently identified is that all of 
the big picture details, such as product yearly goals, are not 
communicated effectively to engineers. The team is currently 
experimenting with process changes that will improve the 
big picture and product strategy communication within the 
team. 
 It is unclear if the Apollo team is a ‘true’ meritocracy. 
The values of meritocracy, however, are apparent within the 
team, particularly with regards to their decision-making 
processes. Each idea or decision is debated on merit. 
D.
 
How do they improve their processes? 
The Apollo team improves their processes relentlessly, 
constantly reflecting and changing. Although the Apollo 
team perceive themselves to be Lean and Agile, it is 
important that this team were already doing this before the 
team formally adopted these methods. The open environment 
established by the team culture allows any one to suggest a 
change and begin experimentation.  This team is not biased 
towards methods or specific practices. The engineers believe 
in trials and are driven to improve their development 
methods and tools. Team members are constantly looking for 
places in their process that will enable them to increase both 
the quality and quantity of code they provide. Typically each 
feature will have a cover sheet that asks the engineer to 
reflect and provide feedback on how the process could be 
improved. During team calls and sprints the team reflects on 
bottlenecks and problems they have faced, and discuss 
options for change. Ideas concerning process improvements 
are circulated throughout the team and experiments are run. 
“We do like the notion that our process is continually 
improved … as a team always looking at the process 
and seeing what could be better” (Participant 6) 
 “That's one of the great things about [Apollo Org] 
its kind of this organization where as soon as you see 
a problem just say and we'll figure out what to do 
about it” (Participant 7) 
“Someone will have an idea about how this process 
could be improved so they’ll send an email out to our, 
our internal list saying request for comments, here’s 
what I’m thinking… everyone will comment on it and 
they’ll say yip lets run this as an experiment… 
…Trying to ensure that people are being reflective 
and constantly evaluating how things are being done 
and how we can improve it, great let’s put an 
experiment and try it…We pick the cherries from the 
different processes…You’ve just got to adapt and try 
and find ways to make the best of the situation” 
(Participant 5) 
“We believe in experiments because we believe in 
science…We’re experimenting with this style of doing 
things which maybe it will work maybe won’t” 
(Participant 2) 
“It’s not a cookie cutter approach in Lean” 
(Participant 10) 
The team did experiment with one Lean tool in this 
space, value stream mapping. A value stream map is a tool 
used by teams to visualize their processes [22]. A value 
stream map shows each step in a process, the time it takes to 
move through each step, and the time between. The goal of 
the map is to highlight potential waste. The next step in value 
stream mapping is to improve the process, focusing on ways 
to reduce or eliminate the waste. The Apollo team used this 
tool to improve their code review process: 
 “The value stream mapping exercise that we did 
there was useful.  One of the things it pointed out was 
that round trips for us are extremely expensive” 
(Participant 2) 
Interestingly enough, although most participants relayed 
to us the story of the one time they had used a value stream 
map, most were not aware of using this technique again 
(years later). One participant’s comments might help shed 
some light on that:
 
“I thought that’s the problem I’ve always had with 
value stream maps is that sometimes they seem not to 
offer more value than just kind of what intuitively you 
could say about the process… I didn’t need this 
process to tell me that no
t working on something for 
half a year is a little bit funny” (Participant 3) 
Although Lean emphasizes the importance of 
measurement in order to access the impact of change this 
team does not regularly track or measure processes. 
Engineers are aware that items they are working on may be 
years old and there is no way of tracking how long it has 
taken for a bug to be found and fixed:  
“[The bug] could be from three years ago” 
 (Participant 5). 
The evaluation, reflection and experimentation already 
done by the Apollo team suggest the results of measuring 
and tracking are often found without formal processes.  
15 E.
 
Learning 
The Apollo team has a passion for learning, they all 
believe their processes enable them to continue to learn, and 
often saw joining the Apollo team as a great learning 
experience. This passion for learning is evident in their 
practices of cross team collaboration, constant reading and 
communication, and process improvements, including pre-
implementation calls, reviews, commenting, blogs and 
lighting talks at team meetings.   
 “We're really keen to learn” (Participant 2) 
“The thing that I like the most I guess, I love 
learning.  Learning, it’s a passion for me and I think 
in [Apollo] there’s so many opportunities to learn” 
(Participant 5) 
The team emphasizes the importance of 
creating (shared) 
knowledge
, learning from each other, and constantly 
improving their practices. 
F.
 
How do the Apollo team practices cause problems? 
The Apollo team has developed a set of practices that 
help to ensure constant visibility and responsiveness. 
However, in this section we will explore the “thorns” that 
exist in the “bed of roses”. In particular we shall highlight 
the interruptions, and the impact these interruptions have on 
the engineers. We will also examine the causes of task 
switching and unfinished work. Finally, we will express how 
the team processes factor into causing these problems, and 
what the team has done to reduce the negative impacts of 
their “thorns”.  
7)
 
Interuptions 
Many things in the Apollo team’s environment can cause 
interruptions. The team have to structure their day and tasks 
around necessary communication. Engineers discussed how 
practices, such as pre-implementation calls, reviews, and 
IRC communication, could be interruptive and frustrating: 
“Interruptions can be a killer, if you get interrupted 
all day you may get nothing done. A different way of 
looking at it is you get lots of stuff done just not the 
one thing you were working on.” (Participant 6)   
DeMarco and Lister [10] and others [2, 23] emphasize 
how interruptions can compromise a developer’s ability to 
remain in a state of flow. Engineers are aware of getting into 
a state of flow and often not being able to sustain this for a 
long period of time. The majority of interruptions within this 
case study are a result of direct communication. The team is 
aware of the waste that can be generated due to interruptions, 
and they do their best to streamline this process. For 
example, daily team status calls are at a set time each day, 
and are time boxed to 15-20 minutes.  
The Apollo team are constantly aware of their common 
goal, and they all have an attitude that any improvements are 
an improvement overall. This attitude facilitates the team to 
prioritize supporting others, and ensuring project and team 
health. Communications that support the whole of the project 
are not seen as interruptions because of the value that is 
gained by having them. This value includes the necessity for 
communication in a distributed environment, and the 
opportunity for team members to share knowledge and ideas. 
Other interruptions are often due to supporting the 
community and other team members. The impact of the 
review process is detailed in the following sub-section. 
8)
 
Reviews and Multi-Tasking 
The review process often leads to the need for engineers 
to multi-task: 
 “It forces you to start doing more than one thing… 
then it's the risk of basically you never finish it…If I 
put a patch up and then for the rest of the day can’t 
do anything about it because I’m waiting for someone 
to get around to it or the person who needs to review 
it is in Boston and they’re asleep and they won’t be 
awake, that just really takes such energy out, it forces 
you to start doing more than one thing…it’s the risk 
of basically you never finish it, you never get around 
to finishing it because it was always a secondarily 
important thing that you were doing 
opportunistically.” (Participant 2)  
Members of the team must wait for a review to be 
complete, during which time they often begin new features 
or bugs to keep their work flowing. Engineers overlap tasks 
in order to stay productive and focused. Additionally, the 
code review process took engineers away from their own 
work so that they could review someone else’s code. Once 
the on-call reviewer was introduced there was less 
interruption from other engineers asking for a review. 
In order for the on-call reviewer role to be successful the 
Apollo team members all needed to become reviewers.  
Engineers expressed that this training process also increased 
interruptions. Some engineers reflected on times when they 
were aware of the queue for the on-call reviewer, so they 
would ask other engineers to review their code instead. 
Examples of this practice bring attention to the possible 
overload of reviews for one on-call reviewer. The team 
however, believed that while not perfect, the introduction of 
an on-call reviewer reduced the number of interruptions 
each engineer had. 
9)
 
Changing Priorities 
During the interviews a number of engineers reflected on 
how the priorities of their tasks changed frequently. They 
explained that new high priority tasks could interrupt work 
already in progress. The constant changing of requests 
increased the amount of task switching and work-in-progress 
for an engineer:  
“If [main customer] come and tell us that something 
is very urgent we're likely to say okay we'll work on it 
immediately and do other things later.” (Participant 
3)  
“Every once in a while I have to assert other things 
and drop everything I’m doing and fix things but for 
the most part I can stick to what I do. I do often end 
up being tech support… …Someone up the chain will 
say this absolutely needs to get done and it maybe 
that… at the end of NZ's day they haven't done it so 
16 or I won’t be able to get to it, so can you please do 
this the first thing tomorrow.” (Participant 7)  
The Apollo team was proud of their flexibility and 
responsiveness to changes in priorities. Typically one might 
expect a Lean team to start to measure the problem once it 
was recognized as a problem. The Apollo team, however, 
has not done that. The interviewees did not elaborate on the 
reasons for not implementing a measurement process, but at 
the moment it seems they value their perceived 
responsiveness as more important. 
10)
 
Getting Value from Interruptions.  
Understanding value is vital when implementing Lean 
principles. In order to effectively identify and eliminate 
waste, teams must understand what it is that is providing 
value. In these sub-sections we have identified that 
interruptions were often a result from communication 
between team members. This
 communi
cation is necessary 
for the practices of pre-implementation calls and reviews to 
be effective. The Apollo team recognized the interruptive 
nature of pre-implementation calls, reviews and general 
interaction. The addition of pre-implementation calls 
effectively reduced the time engineers spent unblocking one 
another and altering reviewed code. The time an engineer 
spends on pre-implementation calls, reviews and general 
help were viewed as positive and deliberate interactions. The 
Apollo team has optimized their processes to reduce the 
negative impact of interruptions. 
Having multiple tasks in progress and incomplete work 
are recognized as areas of waste in software development [2, 
22, 23]. Software developers, however, are often expected to 
regularly switch tasks and have many tasks in progress [20, 
23]. Anderson [2] and the Poppendiecks [23] understand that 
task switching involves the developer mentally switching in 
order to work on different tasks. It is well known that 
software development is complex and involves a lot of 
concentration [2, 19, 23]. These authors also demonstrate 
how task switching often resu
lts in neither task being 
completed within the ideal time. Engineers in this case were 
expected to respond immediately to changes and switch 
focus. In the case of reviews, the engineer is forced to begin 
other tasks during the delay period as a result of the review 
process. In an effort to reduce the problems caused by the 
review process an on-call reviewer role was instigated. This 
role has provided a focus for fast feedback and review 
turnover. The Apollo team has recognized both the “waste” 
and “value” of interruptions and multi-tasking, and at the 
moment it appears engineers are willing to cope with a few 
“thorns” in order for the “roses to stay healthy”. 
V.
 
DISCUSSION 
In this paper, we have provided a detailed explanation of 
who the Apollo team is, how they work together, make 
decisions, and improve their processes. These aspects of the 
team’s culture are crucial to understanding the high level of 
respect and openness the team exhibits. In this discussion we 
shall explore how this open and meritocratic decision-
making culture has aided the team’s implementation of Lean. 
This section will focus on the con
cept of visibility within the 
team and their processes. 
Visibility of Decisions.
 The engineer’s involvement in 
decisions encourages an open and safe environment, and 
improves the team’s implementation of Lean. In open source 
and meritocratic societies decisions incorporate opinions 
from group members [8, 9]. Community members are 
encouraged to discuss ideas and make decisions openly. 
When exploring how decisions are made in the Apollo team, 
we found similarities to the open source and meritocratic 
experiences.  In section 4.3 “How does this team make 
decisions?”  we have illustrated how all the Apollo team 
members are involved in the decision-making processes. 
Engineers are given the opportunity to raise concerns, put 
forward ideas, and provide input into the direction of the 
product through their team leads and public discussions. 
Team leads are trusted by their team members to represent 
their views and concerns in planning sessions and 
discussions. Ideas are viewed on their merits and given equal 
consideration. 
All of the engineers have influence over their processes 
and experiments. This influence reflects the Lean 
encouragement to allow workers to improve their own 
processes, as the workers are the ones who know the most 
about them [23]. Encouraging engineers to improve their 
processes enhances their passion and motivation for the 
overall project. Team members use the opportunity to 
provide feedback and ideas as another way to show other 
team members their skills and knowledge. This is an 
important step for members who are wanting to progress 
within the team. The team members expressed that making 
decisions is a collaborative effort and the outcomes of 
decisions are accepted, at least in part, because of the open 
decision making process. This section highlights how the 
decision making process provides the team with a platform 
to respect others, continuously improve processes, and 
eliminate waste together. 
Visibility of Work. 
The communication practices of 
daily meetings, pre-implementation calls and reviews, 
highlight how the work produced by an engineer is 
constantly visible to other team members. In Lean software 
development an emphasis is put on improving and creating 
knowledge amongst team members [23]. Regular feedback 
loops and open communication are seen to provide learning 
opportunities for developers [22].  The knowledge gained 
through the communication practices described in this paper 
enables the team to build quality into the development cycle.  
Ensuring team member’s work is visible also provides other 
areas engineers are able to reflect on and investigate when 
attempting to eliminate waste from their processes. 
Visibility of People.
 In a distributed development 
environment social communication can often be lost. Social 
interaction is perceived to increase the effectiveness of 
communication in general [3] as well as promote the team 
culture [11]. Open source and Lean researchers [3, 4, 17, 22, 
25, 30] highlight the importance for teams to interact on a 
social level. In this paper we have illustrated that as a 
distributed team, Apollo did not automatically get the casual 
interaction that co-located teams experience. The team 
17 identified the use of constant, personal and open 
communication practices to reduce the impact of distribution. 
These practices also enable the Apollo team to build trust, 
respect and friendships. The culture of Lean is founded on 
the respect for the workers, in the case of software 
development teams; members should be respected by one 
another and the organization [23]. It is clear that the Lean 
principle of respecting others is ingrained into the Apollo 
team culture. Sharing knowledge and experiences among 
team members also increases the knowledge base of team, 
which is important in Lean software development.  
We have discovered that the multiple communication 
techniques used by the Apollo team, supported them in 
providing transparency of their work, and their processes to 
each other. Given there was high transparency in the Apollo 
team environment; the team easily adopted the principles of 
Lean.  Transparency in these areas provides instant visibility 
of the current state of the project.  Individuals and the team 
collaboratively, are able to evaluate and reflect easily on the 
work flow of members and the whole system. This ensures 
waste can be identified and the flow improved constantly. 
It is worth considering the idea that the meritocratic 
decision-making within this team appears to have had 
significant impact on its ability to implement Lean 
principles. This case study has provided insights into 
possible small steps that could be taken by teams as a 
platform for Lean implementation. Providing visibility in all 
areas of software development could greatly assist teams in 
the adoption of Lean. 
VI.
 
CONCLUSION 
In this study we set out to explore the practicalities of 
how Lean is being applied in industry software development 
teams. We have begun this research by investigating one 
team’s experiences implementing the Lean principles. 
Exploring the Apollo team’s processes and understanding the 
team’s culture has shown that software development teams 
can work successfully in a distributed, open source 
environment using Agile and Lean practices.  They are 
aware of the difficulties in directly implementing practices 
from methodologies given their working environment, and 
choose to “cherry pick” those that suited them.  It is 
important to note that members of this team did not create 
their processes with the intention of being Lean or Agile. 
Instead the values demonstrated are a consequence of the 
team culture and experience. It is worth considering the idea 
that the meritocratic nature of the team appears to have had 
significant impact on its ability to implement and enforce 
Lean principles.  
Throughout this study we have noticed that there appears 
to be a mutually beneficial relationship between meritocratic 
decision-making culture and Lean software development. In 
this case the Apollo team are clear they already had a 
meritocratic decision-making culture prior to adopting Lean. 
However, we are not convinced that this relationship is one 
way only, and the relationship between the culture of an 
organization and their software development processes may 
be more like the quandary of the chicken or the egg: Which 
comes first?
 
VII.
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
Our thanks to the Apollo Team. A number of organizations 
have helped cover our travel expenses, these are: Adscale, 
NetValue and the Marsden Software Process Improvement 
(SPII) Research Fund. Finally, we would like to 
acknowledge the assistance of Scott Avery with four of the 
initial interviews and the transcription of those interviews. 
VIII.
 
REFERENCES 
[1]
 
Al-Ani, B., and Redmiles, D. 2009. Trust in Distributed 
Teams: Support through Continuous Coordination," 
IEEE 
Software
. 26, 6 (Nov/Dec 2009), 35-40. 
 
[2]
 
Anderson, D. 2004. 
Agile Management for Software 
Engineering
. Prentice Hall Professional Technical Reference. 
New Jersey, USA. 
[3]
 
Boden, A., Avram, A., Bannon, L., and Wulf, V. 2009. 
Knowledge Management in Distributed Software 
Development Teams - Does Culture Matter? 
Fourth IEEE 
International Conference on Global Software Engineering
. 
18-27 
[4]
 
Bose, I. 2008. Lessons Learned from Distributed Agile 
Software Projects: A Case-Based Analysis. 
Communications 
of the Association for Information Systems
. 23. 619-632 
[5]
 
Capra, E., Francalanci, C., and Merlo, F. 2008. An Empirical 
Study on the Relationship Between Software Design Quality, 
Development Effort and Governance in Open Source Projects. 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
. 34, 6 (Nov/Dec 
2008), 765-782.  
[6]
 
Colwell, B. 2005. Pecking Orders. 
Computer
. 38, 5 (May 
2005), 8-10.  
[7]
 
Creswell, J. 2007. 
Qualitative Inquiry & Research Design. 
Sage Publications Inc. California, USA. 
[8]
 
ubran, D., Booth, K. S. 1999. Coordinating Open-Source 
Software Development.  
IEEE 8th International Workshops 
on Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative 
Enterprises
, 61-68.  
[9]
 
Dall’Agnol, M., and Succi, G. 2003. Lean Management – a 
metaphor for extreme programming. 
Agile Processes in 
software engineering and extreme programming. 4
th
 
International Conference, XP 2003. 
 
[10]
 
DeMarco, T. and Lister, T. 1999. 
Peopleware: Productive 
Projects and Teams Second Edition
. Dorset House Publishing 
Co. New York. USA. 
[11]
 
Dueas, J. C., Hugo, A., and Parada, G. 2007. Apache and 
Eclipse: Comparing Open Source Project Incubators. 
IEEE 
Software
. (Nov/Dec 2007). 
[12]
 
Düring, B. 2006. Trouble in Paradise: the Open Source 
project PyPy, EU-funding and Agile Practices. 
Proceedings of 
Agile Conference 2006. 
221-231. 
[13]
 
 Eibl, G. 2003. An E-Education Collaboration Model Based 
on the Open Source Idea The Collaboration Model. 
14th 
International Workshop on Database and Expert Systems 
Applications 
(DEXA'03), 317-321.  
18 [14]
 
Fitzgerald, B. 2000. Systems Development Methodologies: 
The Problem of Tenses. 
Information Technology and People
. 
13,3, 174 – 185. 
[15]
 
Glaser, B. G. 1978. Theoretical Sensitivity: Advances in the 
Methodology of Grounded Theory. 
The Sociology Press
 
[16]
 
Glaser, B. G., and Strauss, A. L. 1967. The Discovery of 
Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qualitative Research. 
Chicago: Aldine.
 
[17]
 
Green, R., Mazzuchi, T., and Sarkani, S. 2010. 
Communication and Quality in Distributed Agile 
Development: An Empirical Case Study. 
World Academy of 
Science, Engineering and Technology.
 61, 322-328.  
[18]
 
Highsmith, J. 2002. Agile Software development Ecosystems. 
Addison-Wesley. 
[19]
 
Ko, A. J., DeLine, R., and Venolia, G. 2007. 
Information 
Needs in Collocated Software Development Teams. 
International Conference on Software Engineering. IEEE 
Computer Society. Washington, DC. 344-353
 
[20]
 
Mehta, M., Anderson, D., and Raffo, D. 2008. Providing 
value to customers in software development through lean 
principles. Software Process, 13(1). 101-109. 
[21]
 
Nandhakumar, J. and Avison, D. E., 1999. The Fiction of 
Methodological Development: A Field Study of Information 
Systems Development.
 Information Technology and People.
 
12,2, 1 – 28. 
[22]
 
Poppendieck, M., and Poppendieck, T. 2003. Lean Software 
Development: An Agile Toolkit. 
Addison-Wesley. 
[23]
 
Poppendieck, M., and Poppendieck, T. 2006. 
Implementing 
Lean Software Development: From Concept to Cash
. 
Addison-Wesley. Massachusetts, USA.
 
[24]
 
Poppendieck, M., and Poppendieck, T. 2010. 
Leading Lean 
Software Development: Results Are Not The Point
. Addison-
Wesley. Indiana, USA.
 
[25]
 
Ramesh, B., Cao, L., Mohan, K., Xu, P. 2006.
 
Can distributed 
software development be agile? 
Communications of the ACM
. 
49, 10 (October 2006), 41-46.  
[26]
 
Russo, B., Scotto, M., Sillitti, A. and Succi, G. 2010. 
Agile 
Technologies in Open Source Development
. Information 
Science Reference. New York, USA. 
[27]
 
Thomas, D. and Hunt, A. 2004. Open Source Ecosystems. 
IEEE Software. 
21, 4 (July/August. 2004), 89-91.  
[28]
 
Wasserman, A. I., Capra, E. 2007. Evaluating Software 
Engineering Processes in Commercial and Community Open 
Source Projects. 
First International Workshop on Emerging 
Trends in FLOSS Research and Development
 (FLOSS'07: 
ICSE Workshops 2007), 1-5.  
[2
9]
 
Zannier, C., and Maurer, F. 2007. Comparing decision 
making in Agile and non-Agile software organizations. 
Agile 
Processes in software engineering and extreme programming. 
8
th
 International Conference, XP 2007
.  
[30]
 
Zopf, S. 2009. Success Factors for Globally Distributed 
Projects. 
Software Process: Improvement Practice. 
14, 355–
359.   
 
19