 The impact of human factors on agile projects
Aline Chagas, Melquizedequi Santos, Célio Santana, Alexandre Vasconcelos  
Centro de Informática 
–
 CIn, 
Universidade Federal de Pernambuco 
–
 UFPE 
Recife, Pernambuco 
–
 Brasil 
{acrm2, mcs6, casj, amlv}@cin.ufpe.br 
Abstract
—
This research aims to provide more evidences about 
the impact of human factors in agile software projects. In this light 
we have conducted a systematic literature review (SLR) to 
investigate which human factors impact agile projects and 
conducted a survey in software companies in order to verify their 
perceptions. Considering the SLR, we found 48 resulting studies 
where most cited human factors were: Communication (23 
papers), Collaboration (6 papers) and Trust (8 papers). The survey 
was answered for 
186 companies that consider communication the 
most important factor.So we conclude that Communication, Trust 
and Collaboration are important factors in projects using agile 
methods but others factors need to be more investigated due the 
perception of its value to the industry.
Keywords
—–
 Human Factors; Agile Software Development;    
Systematic Literature Review. 
I.I
NTRODUCTION
The nature of software develo
pment activity is centered on 
people and their relationships, in
teractions and collaboration. It 
means that activities performed 
by stakeholders depend, not 
only of technical aspects, but also how individuals’ connections 
will work along the product development [1]. Pirzadeh [1] 
states human factors are related to different aspects of the 
human being and it could impact in the final software product.
These factors are defined in three categories:  (i) 
individual
factors are related to human 
characteristics of team members 
such as personality; (ii) 
interpersonal
 factors are related to 
human factors among individuals who affect or are affected by 
engineering or software development process, such as 
cooperation, group learning and work in teams; (iii) 
organizational
 factors are related to company issues such as 
decision making. Vidgan and Wang [2] consider software 
development activity as a complex adaptive system (CAS) 
since the   complex system (software development context) can 
be adaptive to its environment 
and how innovative properties of 
a system emerge from the interaction of its lower level 
components (people). 
Considering agile software development, the value of 
interaction between people is made explicit in agile manifest in 
the first "individuals and interactions over processes and tools" 
and third statements "customer collaboration over contract 
negotiation" and in the sixty pr
inciple: "The most efficient and 
effective method of conveying information to and within a 
development team is face-to-
face conversation” 
[3]. Cockburn 
[4] states that human factors ca
n be described as any human 
issue caused by a team when people work together. Specifically 
in agile software development, this concept is related to any 
human aspect involved in the formation of teams to build 
software, since this kind of activity is focused on people 
interaction. Sharp [5] defines human factor as some types of 
social factors that arise from va
rious interactions and need 
occur to allow the flow of software development process. 
Cockburn and Highsmith [6] emphasize some human 
factors for agile development methods such as: cordiality, 
talent, skills and communication. These factors can emerge 
when a group of individuals is working together in teams. Sharp 
[5], Dybå and Dingsøyr [7] and Pirzadeh [1] reported that 
human and/or social factors, on different perspectives, are 
observed in traditional software development and agile 
environments especially in eXtreme Programming (XP). 
Pirzadeh [1] states that researches considering human factors in 
software development are scarce. It is still for necessary further 
researches to measure the impact of human factors in the 
software development process as a whole including agile 
environments. This is our motivation to conduct the research 
about the impact of human factors in agile projects. We 
performed a secondary study (systematic literature review - 
SLR) and a survey aiming to investigate which human factors 
are perceived as importan
t in agile projects. 
Besides this introductory section, this paper presents 
another four. In Section two, the related works are presented.
In Section three we present the research methodology. Section 
four describes the analysis and di
scussion of the results. And in 
Section five we present the conclusions. 
II.R
ELATED 
W
ORKS
Pirzadeh [1] conducted a systematic review to identify and 
characterize human factors that 
influence the process of 
software development. The research covered all software 
projects environments considering both: (i) people working in 
all development lifecycle and (ii) project managers. She   
proposed the following categories to human factors: (i) 
organizational, (ii) interpersonal an
d (iii) individual. According   
the author, the individual factor was the one that presents most 
influence in software projects specially activities related to 
requirements elicitation. Livermore [8] conducted an online 
survey to investigate which “factors” were related to successful 
implementation of agile methods in organizations. The author 
listed factors such as: (i) training, (ii) management 
involvement, (iii) external resources access and (iv) corporation 
size. These results only considered technical and organizational 
aspects not addressing human factors. 
2015 Agile Conference978-1-4673-7153-7/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/Agile.2015.1187 Law and Charron [9] publishe
d an experience report 
presenting the effects of agile
 practices in social factors. The 
authors did not described how they selected the following   
social factors: (i) sharing of kn
owledge, (ii) motivation and (iii) 
customer collaboration. Based on
 the data collected from two 
software projects, the authors ha
ve succeeded in identifying the 
relevance of these three social factors in software projects. 
Gandomani 
et al
.[10] conducted a qualitative study in order to 
investigate how human factors impact the adoption or transition 
to agile. Semi-structured interviews were conducted and data 
analysis was performed using grounded theory. They suggested 
that some human factors facilitate, while others prevent, 
changes from traditional approaches to agile. The enabling 
factors were: (i) team involvement, (ii) management 
commitment, (iii) competent technical leaders and (iv) team 
work. The challenging factors were: (i) resistance to change, (ii) 
cultural differences, (iii) lack of
 collaboration and (vi) lack of 
agile behavior. In addition, the au
thors provided some insights 
about how changes affect people involved in agile projects. The 
observed statements were: (i) 
enthusiasm for change, (ii) 
concern for change, (iii) indifferent to change, (iv) need for 
change and (v) unrealistic ex
pectations on agile adoption. 
Finally, they added that providing incentives and motivation are 
important facilitators for th
e transition to agile. 
Melo 
et al
.[11] conducted a study part primary and part 
secondary that exposes factors that motivate or discourage 
developers in agile software proj
ects. The authors conclude that 
the main motivations were: (i) autonomy, (ii) learning, (iii) 
feedback and (iv) team work. The demotivators were: (i) 
changes, (ii) work more than 8 hours frequently, and (iii) no 
identification with the work. The research conducted by Melo 
et al
. was not intended to determine the impact of these 
motivators in agile projects. These related works were classified 
in four categories: (i) investigation of influence of human 
factors in software development in traditional and agile 
environments; (ii) general factors that contribute to successful 
adoption of agile, (iii) primary studies suggesting human factors 
related to agile development an
d finally (iv) the what 
(de)motives agile developers. This
 research is part primary and 
part secondary, because in the secondary study we aiming to 
find which human factors, re
cognized by researchers, are 
noticed in agile projects. The prim
ary study, based on a survey, 
was carried out to corroborate (or not) with the secondary study. 
The main goal of the survey was to identify the perception of 
companies, which adopts agile methods, in which human 
factors are most evident in agi
le projects and how they impacts 
agile projects. 
III.R
ESEARCH 
M
ETHODOLOGY
We performed asystematic literature review and a survey to 
identify the influence of human factors in agile projects. In the 
survey all the data collection was performed by questionnaires 
showed on appendix B available on-line 
(https://www.dropbox.com/sh/d4bpcpv1ubvc826/AADziFdK
RPsRo17guJArpyo4a?dl=0).  
A.Systematic Literature Review  
This SLR is based on th
e protocol established by 
Kitchenham 
et al.
 [12].  The first step was to identify others 
secondary studies related to 
human factors in agile 
development. We found only one secondary study by 
Livermore [8], which was not related to agile development. 
1)Research Questions: 
After finding the unique candidate secondary study that 
would satisfy our curiosity, we need to determine the research 
questions that should be answered in order to attend our research 
goals. We elaborate two research questions (RQ), related to the 
secondary study, which are listed above: 
RQ1: Which human factors affect the use of agile methods? 
RQ2: What is the impact of human factors in projects 
supported by agile methods? 
RQ3: Which human factors are highlighted by industry in 
agile projects?
2)Search Strategy: 
The 
search strategy
 is available on-line 
(https://www.dropbox.com/sh/d4bpcpv1ubvc826/AADziFdKR
PsRo17guJArpyo4a?dl=0). 
3)Extraction and Analysis: 
Our extraction was performed on the 48 final selected 
papers. Initially, we copied the excerpts of the papers presenting 
the evidence in one Excel spreadsheet. After this step we 
conduct a thematic analysis to identify the human factors and the 
main categories related to them. 
A.Survey 
Our survey was based questionn
aires based on two sources: 
(i) an online questionnaire and 
questionnaires applied in Agile 
Brazil 2015 conference. The surveys were conducted in order 
to clarify the perception of human factors in agile software 
development projects. We ha
d proposed another research 
question (RQ3) related to the industry that is:RQ3: Which 
human factors are highlighted by industry in agile projects?  
The online survey was the faster,broader and easier way to 
obtain a large quantity of answers. The questionnaire was 
prepared using Survey Monkey tool. The questionnaires 
applied on Agile Brazil 2015 confer
ence was intended to collect 
more answers. The data collection happened from 20 October 
2014 to 20 November 2014. It was available online through a 
linkon the Survey Monkey and disseminated to experts in agile 
methods through e-mail and Agile Brazil 2014.The 
questionnaire event can be view
ed inAppendix Bavailable on-
line
(https://www.dropbox.com/sh/d4bpcpv1ubvc
826/AADziFdKRPsRo17guJArpyo4a?dl=0).Wereceived 186 
responses ofdifferent companies.
IV.R
ESULTS 
A
NALYSIS
This section presents a summary of the results found on this 
research aiming to answer th
e research questions that were 
proposed. 
A.RQ1: Which human facto
rs affect in the use of agile 
methods? 
In the SLR, we noticed that human factor is related to every 
interaction or human capacity 
exercised during the software 
development. We could addr
ess and encompass social, 
cognitive, human, personal and sociological aspects 
88 extrapolating Cockburn [4] and Sharp [5] definitions to human 
factor. In the 48 studies selected, we found 12 human factors, 
presented in Table II available on-line 
(https://www.dropbox.com/sh/d4bpcpv1ubvc826/AADziFdK
RPsRo17guJArpyo4a?dl=0), that were considered relevant. 
Besides human factors, we also suggest seven (7) major 
categories: (i) team, (ii) pr
oject success, (iii) software 
development, (iv) requiremen
ts, (v) agile practices, (vi) 
decision-making and (vii) client involvement. We also want to 
identify which human factors were related to these categories.  
If a human factor is present in that environment, how it affects 
(positive or negative)? And if th
e human factor is absent, there 
will be any influence? 
TableIII available on-line (https://www.dropbox.com 
/sh/d4bpcpv1ubvc826/AADziFdKRPsRo17guJArpyo4a?dl=0) 
presents our findings to all these questions. We divided the 
results throughout seven categories and which, and how 
(positively or negatively), human factors affects aspects related 
to those categories. We seek the perception of presence or 
absence of the human factor, e.g. if collaboration is present or 
declaredly absent in teams asp
ects, and, if the presence or 
absence is positive (+) or negati
ve (-)in that environment.   
These aspects are presented in ne
xt research question. The most 
observed human factors were: (i) communication, (ii) 
collaboration and (iii) trust corroborating with following 
principles of the agile manifesto: 
(Principle 4)
–“B
usiness 
people and developer must work
 together daily throughout the 
project”. (Collaboration).
(Principle 5)
–“Build projects 
around motivated individuals. Give them the environment and 
support they need, and trust them to get the job done”. (Trust).
(Principle 6)
–“The most efficient and effective method of 
conveying information to and within a development team is 
face- to-
face conversation”. (Communication).
 To this research 
question we were just interested in “which” human factors 
affects agile softwa
re projects, but we also want to know “how” 
this human factors influences agile projects. To discover it we 
still have one more research
 question to answer.   
B.RQ2: What is the impact 
of human factors in projects 
supported by agile methods? 
Based on results of RQ1, we analyzed the impact of these 
human factors in agile projects. The collected evidences 
showed how these human factors influence agile projects.  The 
absence or presence of human fact
or was inserted into a column 
called status and the impact can be
 positive  (+)  or negative (-)
due this presence or absence. The impact of human factors can 
be viewed in Table III available on-line 
(https://www.dropbox.com/sh/d4bpcpv1ubvc826/AADziFdK
RPsRo17guJArpyo4a?dl=0). Consid
ering the results shown in 
Table III, we could  notice  that almost  every  time  when  a  
factor  was  present,  the  impact  was positive  and  when  a  
factor  was  absent  the  impact  would  be negative. But, some 
exceptions were observed:  
(i) Team autonomy
.Two studies, [s1462] [s0203]; 
suggested that team autonomy could be negative in agile   
projects
: “When members of highly autonomous teams stayed 
together for a long time, those teams gradually turned into 
silos.” [s1462] and “The high individual autonomy resulted in 
developers focusing on their own module; and not knowing 
what others were doing.” [s0203
].(ii) Software Development 
Communication:
 One study [s0906] suggests that high 
communication is a negative aspect: 
“Our results indicate that 
an increased reliance on le
ss informative communication 
channels results in higher defect rates.” [s0906], it suggests.
(iii) 
Requirements Client Involvement:
 The involvement of the 
client could negative when managing requirements. According 
Hoda [s4011]
: “Getting customer representatives t
o clarify 
requirements is also a problem because of 
their unavailability.”
. 
(iv) Decision Making Autonomy:
 Ghanam et al. [s1462] 
suggested that autonomy is a negative aspect considering the 
process of decision-making
: “in some team
s, high autonomy 
had an impact on decision-making, where the team considered 
certain issues internal without paying much attention to the 
consequences of their decisions on the underlying platform.” 
[s1462].These exceptions lead us to reflect about the 
importance of presence or absence of a specific human factor 
without understand de context. 
RQ3: 
Which human factors are highlighted by industry in Agile 
projects? 
We collected data through a questionnaire containing 
nine questions related to human factors in the context of agile 
methods. The questions 1 to 3, ar
e referred that the population 
of the respondents. The profile of the people can be seen in the 
Figure 1 to 3. 
Fig. 1. The profile of the people 
Fig. 2. Time in the company  
89 Fig. 3. Years of experience 
The questions 4 and 5 were designed to understand which 
agile methods were most used. We found that the most widely 
used agile method is Scrum and ti
me of use of agile methods 
cover the range 2-5 years. 
Fig. 4. Agile methods most used 
Fig. 5. Time using agile methods
From questions 6-9, we used twelve factors found in SLR 
related to four categories:(i) de
velopment of agile projects, (ii) 
team interaction, (iii) success of projects and (iv) decision 
making. In this survey, we did not considered the categories (a) 
requirements, (b) client involvement and (c) agile practices 
because they emerged in a late stage of the thematic analysis 
and the questionnaire were already
 launched and the number of 
answers was considerable large. We
 prefer to present our most 
accurate result even it being diff
erent of that used on survey. 
The questions 6 to 9 are: 
Q6
 -Which of these human factors is
highlighted during the development of agile projects? 
Q7
 -
Which of the following factors do you consider that positively 
impact the interaction of an agile development team of 
software? 
Q8
 - Which of the following factors do you consider 
that positively impact the success of agile projects? 
Q9
 - Which 
of the following factors do you consider that positively impact 
on decision making within an agile project? 
The scores were represented by percentage. The results as a 
whole can be viewed at the Table IV available on-line 
(https://www.dropbox.com/sh/d4bpcpv1ubvc826/AADziFdK
RPsRo17guJArpyo4a?dl=0).
  
Comparison between SLR and Survey 
Based on results found in the SLR and Survey, it was 
possible to establish a comparison of 
“
quantitative data
”
between the categories and human factors, which were found in 
the SLR and also highlighted in the survey as shown in Table
Vavailable on-line (https://www.dropbox.com/sh/d4
bpcpv1ubvc826/AADziFdKRPsRo17guJArpyo4a?dl=0).The 
idea of this comparison is just
 to observe the % of citations in 
SLR and % of companies that recognizes the importance of a 
human factor in that context.  The comparison showed in Table 
V suggests thatcommunication factor is mentioned, among
other factors,in the categories time, success of projects, 
software development and decision-making.IT was 
corroborated insurvey datawherecommunication factor is 
emphasized in allcategories questioned in the survey.Besides 
communication, weneed toemphasize other factors perceived 
ina positive way:
(I)Considering the survey, most of the respondents, when 
asked about team category pointed the value of communication, 
collaboration and trust. These factors are also the most cited in 
SLR but, Leadership and Knowledge, which had the same 
number citations than collaboration, factors were less 
recognized as important in the su
rvey. (ii) Back to the survey, 
in the category “
success of the projects
”
 the factor customer 
engagement had almost the same importance communication 
what is far of the results in SL
R. (iii) Considering the category 
development of projects the surv
ey just highlight the perception 
of the importance of communication when compared with 
knowledge and client involvement. 
(iv) and, in decision-making 
category,the survey and SLR presented similar data. 
Some exceptions were found when comparing the data from 
the SLR and the Survey because it was not possible to find the 
same factor highlighted by the industry and in the academy, as: 
1- In category success of the projects, the companies 
recognized the value of the fa
ctors collaboration (67.7%) and 
motivation (45.2%). But, there were no researches about this 
factor considering success of pr
ojects. 2- In category software 
development we can notice the perc
eption of the importance of 
leadership (54.3%) and motivatio
n (59.7%) factors without any 
research considering them. 3- In category decision making the 
experience factor (56.5%) was highlighted positively, but we 
want to emphasize the importance of experience that is the same 
of communication. 
90 V.C
ONCLUSION
We found many evidences about the influence of human 
factor in agile software development either in individual, 
interpersonal and organizational   sphere.   We   want   to 
highlightthe   number   of evidences found about (individual,
interpersonal OR organizational) factors where 48 papers 
related to this category. This pa
pers related to 12 factors found 
in this SLR suggest that important studies on human aspects 
have been conducted.  Thus, our perception is that researches 
about human factor is incipient and only concepts and initial 
thoughts comprehends its impact when considering agile 
methods. The most cited human factors were: Communication  
(23 papers), collaboration  (6 papers) and trust (8 papers).  
These factors were the most important in the SLR, because they 
are important to the principles of Agile Manifest when 
describing that communication is the most important means of 
information exchange.Collabor
ation in teams using agile 
methods as a key aspect to use information efficiently and 
Collaboration in teams using agile methods as a key aspect for 
use of information efficiently and mutual trust. 
The four exceptions found in the study suggests that even if 
such aspects are extremely im
portant for agile methods, some 
sharply may hinder the adoption of these methods as can be 
seen with respect to autonomy in self-organizing teams and   
result in decision making and cust
omer engagement during   the 
agile software development, in the requirements phase. Such 
exceptions need to further inv
estigation to know if they occur 
in other contexts. Based on the primary studies we conclude that 
Communication, Trust and Collaboration are most cited factors 
when describing human factors on
 agile projects. It is worth 
mentioning that other factors have given importance as 
knowledge, leadership and motivation as results of SLR. 
Finally, we conclude that such exceptions found in the 
comparison of data between SLR and allow Survey suggest that 
larger studies still need to be performed. 
A.Threats to Validity 
Kitchenham  [13] and Sjoberg et al. [14] point out that the 
main limitations and threats to validity of this type of study are:  
(1) inaccuracy in the data extr
action;  (2) classificationerrors;  
(3) select only studies in a specif
ic period; (4) selection bias; (5) 
credibility; (6) results transferring. 
In order to mitigate these limitations and threats, the 
following strategy was adopted: (1) The approach of synthesis 
and thematic analysis that in
cluded the data extraction of 
publication was used, context and evidence in a systematic and 
structured way, as process suggested by Cruzes and Dybå [15]. 
(2) The selection was made with two or more researchers at 
every stage of examination.  The conflicts were resolved at a 
meeting between the researchers. (3) All studies published since 
the beginning of the agile manifesto in 2001 until 2012 were 
selected. (4) To avoid bias in the 
studies selection, meetings and 
guides were conducted at every stage of research. In the case of 
extraction phase, there was also
 a random extraction developed 
by another researcher, who served for comparison in relation to 
extraction by the research author. 
(5) To increase the credibility, 
multiple data sources as the main 
conference on agile area for 
manual search were used, as well the top four automatic search 
engines of software engineering  cited  by  Kitchenham et  al.  
[12] and Dybå and Dingsøyr [7]. (6) To increase the results 
transfer of this review, th
e protocol and its phases were 
described, including data extra
ction and synthesis process. 
B.Future Works 
Considering this results so
me future researches are
suggested such as: 
(1) A qualitative research supporte
d based on interviews, in 
order to verify the results of th
is research and its perception of 
industry. Thus, with the findings of this SLR and the qualitative 
research is intended to develo
p a deep understanding of the 
influence of human factors in agile methods. (2) Others 
secondary studies could be conducted to find evidences of why, 
in what contexts these human factors affect agile teams.  This 
research is only devoted to “map” what   and how human 
factors 
affects agile projects, but we do not   know why and in which 
contexts.   
R
EFERENCES
[1]L.  Pirzadeh.  "Human  Factors  in  Software  Development: A Systematic 
Literature Review. Master of Science Thesis in Computer Science and 
Engineering". Department of Computer Science and Engineering.-
Division of Networks and Distributed Systems. Chalmers university of 
technology. Göteborg, Sweden. 2010. 
[2]R. Vidgen and X. Wang. "Coevolving systems and the organization of 
agile software development". Information Systems Research, 20(3), pp. 
355-376, 2009. 
[3]Agile  Manifesto.  Available  in  <http://agilemanifesto.org/>.  Last access 
in feb. 26 2015. 
[4]A. Cockburn. "Agile Software Development". Boston: Wesley. 2002. 
[5]H. Sharp and H. Robinson. "Some Social Factors of Software 
Engineering: the maverick, community and technical practices". Human 
and  Social Factors of  Software En
gineering (HSSE). St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA, 2005.   
[6]A. Cockburn and J.  Higsmith. "Agile Software Development: The People 
Factor". Computer, 34 (11) pp. 131-133, 2001. 
[7]T. Dybâ and T. Dingsøyr. "Empirical Studies of Agile Software 
Development: A Systematic Review". Information and Software 
Technology, Butterworth-Heinemann Newton, MA, USA, 50(9), pp. 833-
859, 2008. 
[8]J.  Livermore.  "Factors  that  Impact  Implementing an  Agile Software  
Development Methodology". SoutheastCon. Proceedings, IEEE, 2007.   
[9]A. Law and R. Charron. "Effects of Agile Practices on Social Factors'. 
Human and Social Factors of Software Engineering (HSSE). St. Louis, 
Missouri, USA, 2005. 
[10]T. Gandomani, H. Zulzalil, A. Ghani, A. Sultan and K. Sharif. "How   
Human   Aspects Impress   Agile   Software   Development Transition   
and   Adoption".   International   Journal   of   Software Engineering and 
Its Applications Vol.8, No.1, 2014. 
[11]C. Melo, Santana, C. and F. Kon. "Developers motivation in agile teams". 
Software Engineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA), 2012 38th 
EUROMICRO Conference on. IEEE, 2012. 
[12]B.  Kitchenham. "Guidelines for  performing Systematic Literature 
Reviews in Software Engineering". Software Engineering Group, School 
of Computer Sciencesand Mathematics, Keele University, and 
Department of Computer Science, University of Durham.[S.l.], 2007.   
[13]B. Kitchenham. "What's up with software metrics? - a preliminary
mapping study". J. System. Software, 2010. 
[14]D. Sjoberg, J. Hannay, O. Hansen, V. Kampenes, A. Karahasanovic, N. 
Liborg and A. Rekdal. "A survey of controlled experiments in software 
engineering". IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., 2005. 
[15]D. Cruzes and T. Dybå. "Recommended Steps for Thematic Synthesis in 
Software Engineering". ESEM, 2011.  
91