 Balancing Hands-on and Research Activities:A Graduate Level Agile Software Development Course 
Joseph Chao Department of Computer Science Bowling Green State University Bowling Green, OH 43403 jchao@bgsu.eduAbstractAgile software methodologies promote developing better 
software faster and have been gaining popularity in 
industry. However, agile methods are still unfamiliar in 

the academic world. While it is important to introduce 
agile methods to undergraduate students, we believe that 
having a graduate-level course in agile development is 

as crucial. We offer a graduate-level topic course that is 
dedicated to teaching agile software development while 
emphasizing both hands-on experience and research 

activities. In this course, students first work on a series 
of projects with real customers and then propose and 
conduct research on topics in agile development. The 

result of this approach has been well received by 
students and has stimulated student research interests in 
the area. This paper describes our experiences in 
offering the course. 1.Introduction 
Developers in the United States wasted over $55 
billion, against $255 billion in project spending, on 
failed and poorly run software projects in 2002, 

according to the Standish Group 2003 CHAOS Report 
[15]. These failures can be traced to a lack of 
understanding of the business issues being addressed and 

the failure to use appropriate implementation 
methodologies. The solution is not in creating better 
technologies, but in the way in which systems are 

developed. 
Agile software development is a new set of software 
methodologies, lead by eXtreme Programming (XP), 

which promises to produce better software more quickly 
and more cheaply. By emphasizing effective 
communication, striving for customer satisfaction, and 

responding to changes, agile methods have shown 
strength in recent years, and more and more people in 
industry are convinced that agile methods are viable 
solutions to the software crisis that has been building 
over the last forty years. However, as with most 

technology-related approaches, many academics are 
behind the curve on agile development.  
The good news is that academics are catching up. 
Many academics have reported adaptations of agile 

methods in classroom settings, though mostly in 

undergraduate studies. In many instances, key practices 
in XP were introduced to lower-level Computer Science 
(CS) students in programming proficiency courses. Pair 

programming is the most studied and the most applied 
XP practice in the classroom, as noted in [3], [5], [7], [9], 
[12] and [20]. The benefits of pair programming are well 

documented in [4] and [13]. Many other XP practices are 
also used in lower-level CS classes. For example, 
students in [16] learned unit testing and refactoring in 

their Java programming course, 
students in [1] used 
small releases and refactoring in addition to pair 

programming, and the CS1 course in [10] adopted all XP 
practices. For upper-level CS courses, educators often 
try to integrate XP or agile development methods into 

software engineering or senior capstone project courses. 
Examples can be found in [6], [8], [11], [18], [19] and 
[21]. While most found XP integration a success, a 

survey [14] showed that students in a senior software 
engineering class opposed the idea of using XP for the 
course. One reason cited was that students felt that XP is 

not for beginners, since it requires some prior knowledge 
of the software development life cycle to fully 
understand and appreciate the concept behind it. 
2.The course description 
The CS department at our university offers BS and 
MS degree programs, but not a doctoral program. While 

it is important to introduce agile methods to 

undergraduate students, we believe that introducing agile 
methods to our MS students is as crucial. Since most of 
our MS students work in the software development field 

after graduation, it is critical for them to learn these 
breakthrough agile methods before entering the job 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 market. However, without a well-designed course 
dedicated to agile development, they are forced to learn 
from other sources and/or by other means. Furthermore, 
since they typically stay in the program no more than 

two years, there may not be enough time for them to 
really understand agile methods or research additional 
topics in the area. 
We proposed a graduate topic course, titled "Agile 
Software Development,” that is designed to introduce 

agile software development methodologies to our 

graduate students. The course was approved by the CS 
department and was first offered in fall semester, 2004.  
The prerequisite to this course is previous experience 
in software engineering, which can be satisfied either by 
previous coursework in software engineering or 

equivalent work experience upon instructor approval. 
This restriction is intended to allow the instructor to omit 
explanations of the basics of the software development 

life cycle, or details of various traditional software 
processes such as waterfall models or other incremental 
or iterative models. 
Both hands-on software project development and 
research activities are required in this course. The final 

student grades for the course are determined by exams 

(fifty percent), software projects (twenty-five percent), a 
research paper and a presentation (fifteen percent), and 
class participation (ten percent). 
The course was well received by students, though 
most of them had never heard of XP or agile software 

development prior to the course. During our first 

iteration there were fourteen students enrolled in the 
class.  Since there are only forty one total students in the 
MS program, this was considered high for a topic course. 
Students in the class were excited about learning new 
and better software methodologies.  
3.Course objective 
The objective of this course is to introduce various 
agile methods and stimulate student research interests in 

the area of agile software development. With that in 

mind, the course first provides an overview of the entire 
agile movement in the software industry, and then 
focuses on teaching XP practices. By focusing on a 

single well-formed and better-defined methodology such 
as XP, students can develop a better understanding of 
how to apply agile methods to a complete software 

development life cycle. Students are informed that the 
course will emphasize software development processes 
rather than technologies, and focus on development 

activities rather than the final products.  That is, while 
students will definitely learn new technologies and 
produce software systems along the way, the main 

objective is to learn the development process – agile 
methods – and to be able to conduct research in the area.  
The development environment for the first iteration 
of this course was Microsoft .NET with C#, due to its 

widespread use and its availability in our institution. 
However, neither the technology nor the tool was the 

focus of this course; rather students must engage in their 
own learning process and acquire the necessary skills 
through their own efforts. For instance, on the first day 

of the class, students were informed that at the end of 
three weeks they were expected to be familiar with .NET 
and C#. The schedule of this course was ambitious. In a 
sixteen-week semester, students learned agile methods 

(particularly XP), worked on three projects exercising all 
twelve XP practices, and conducted research on 
advanced agile-related topics. In addition, two of the 

three projects were real-world development projects with 
actual customers. The idea was to introduce some XP 
practices quickly and engage students in XP projects as 

soon as possible. While students worked on their first 
project, the instructor simultaneously prepared them for 
the next project that demanded more agile practices. By 

the mid point of the semester students had obtained 
adequate agile skills to think creatively and propose 
research topics.  
4.Balancing hands-on and research 
activities 
One difference between graduate and undergraduate 
students is their research ability. Further, it is evident 

that students learn software engineering concepts better 

when provided with hands-on exercises. To provide a 
course that encompassed both hands-on exercises and 
research, we adopted a textbook [17] that was written to 
support a hands-on project-based approach, and 
supplement the book with papers and other handouts on 

the subject of advanced agile topics.  We also require a 
research project.  
The lectures in the first half of the semester cover 
most of the chapters in the textbook to ensure that 
students gain a thorough understanding of XP and agile 
development concepts. At the midway point of the 

semester, as students work on development projects, the 
research project begins. One of the take-home midterm 
exam questions requires that students write a two to five-

page single-spaced research proposal on an agile 
development-related topic. 
It was not surprising that students in the first iteration 
of the class were eager to work on development projects 

applying their newly acquired knowledge in XP and 
agile development. However, we were pleasantly 

surprised to find that many students also enjoyed doing 
research in agile development. Our observation was that 
students were curious about the new methodologies and 
wanted to know more. The take-home midterm question 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 that required a research proposal served to stimulate 
their interest. For hands-on activities, we adopted a phase-in 
approach in which a series of projects – small, medium 

and large – were used to phase-in students on XP 
practices. This approach was advocated in [6], in which 
it was found that such an approach avoids overburdening 

students with too many new practices. However, our 
motivation was to quickly introduce sufficient concepts 
and skills so that students could start on the small project 

sooner.  
The small project required students to develop a 
handful of object classes to perform some simple tasks 
such as counting words and validating passwords. 
Students worked in pairs for this project. The objective 

of the project was to have students practice the XP 
concepts of pair programming and test-driven 
development with nUnit. By the fifth week of class 

students were ready to begin their second (medium) 
project with real customers. Both the medium and the 
large projects involved real customers on real-world 

projects.5.Real-world projects with real customers 
While more tightly controlled projects allow each 
student the opportunity to practice crucial development 

skills, we believe it is better for graduate students to 
learn agile methods using real-world projects with real 
customers. Real-world projects expose students to 

situations and learning opportunities that cannot be 
replicated in tightly controlled projects. There is no 
better way to practice XP or other agile methods than 
working with real customers on real-world projects 
where communication is vital and changes are highly 

anticipated. Both real-world projects and agile methods 
involve communication, frequent feedback, and 
customer satisfaction-skills that many undergraduates 

have not yet developed.  Graduate students are typically 
more mature and more motivated to learn, and therefore 
are better able to handle the demands of real-world 

projects.5.1.The first real customer project 
The medium project was the first real-world project 
with real customers. For this project, the fourteen 
students formed three teams to work on three different 
projects proposed by three different customers. We were 

fortunate to have an even number of students to practice 
pair programming throughout the semester. One team of 
four worked for a nonprofit organization on a “Horse 

Race” game application to be used in a fundraising event. 
Another team of four developed a “Meeting Agenda” 
web application for an academic department at the 
university. The system allows authorized members to 

view, add, delete or modify agenda items for scheduled 
meetings. The remaining six students worked with a 
local elementary school developing a “Billing System” 

for their extended-day childcare service. 
The project was time boxed at four weeks. All XP 
practices such as pair programming, test-first, the 

planning game, small releases, metaphor, simple design, 
collective ownership, and coding standard were to be 
strictly applied. The use of user stories and storyboards 

were also required. During this project, a version control 
tool, Microsoft SourceSafe, was introduced and put into 
practice. While it was not possible to have on-site 
customers in an academic setting, all teams started the 
project with an initial face-to-face customer meeting.  
In that meeting, the team played the XP planning 
game with the customer. After explaining the software 

process in plain English to the customer, the whole team, 

both the student and the customer, worked together and 
created a set of story cards arranged in the order of 
priority. The instructor observed the first customer 

meeting of each team to ensure that the meeting was 
effective and the project was understood. This added to 
the instructor’s workload since the meetings were held 

outside of the regular class time. However, we believed 
that this was necessary since students often didn’t know 
how to start a project, or even how to ask good questions 

to elicit user requirements. Furthermore, getting the 
whole team (including the customer) together was not an 
easy task. At the end of the allotted four weeks, the Horse Race 
team delivered a superb product and had an end-of-

project lunch celebration sponsored by the customer. 
Unfortunately, the Meeting Agenda team produced a 
low-quality product that lead to an unhappy customer. 

The team tried to mend fences by “maintaining” the 
product after the delivery. However, the customer finally 
gave up on the project, and the team had their first failed 

project in the real world. Fortunately, there were no hard 
feelings since we did explain to the customers at the 
beginning of each project that there were risks involved 

due to student learning. 
The Billing System team unwisely committed to 
more than ten weeks worth of work, thinking that they 

could do it in four weeks if they worked hard enough. 
The instructor observed the situation and decided not to 
interfere at that point. The team of six bright students 

worked extremely hard on the project but, as the 
instructor expected, they were way behind schedule after 
the first two iterations (two weeks into the project since 

they had chosen to use one-week iteration). They also 
violated an important XP practice, sustainable pace. To 
make a long story short, they enlisted the instructor’s 
assistance and negotiated with the customer for a two-
phase plan. Phase 1 was to be completed when the 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 medium project was due at the end of the fourth week, 
and Phase 2 became their large project, providing them 
with an additional eight weeks for the project. This 
project provided them with a valuable lesson that they 

would never have learned without working with real 
customers. 
5.2.Student experience on the real projects with 
real customers Students were very appreciative of the opportunity to 
work with real customers. Many students commented 
that having real customers was the one thing that they 
did not want to see changed in this course. Other 
comments were also positive, such as “working on 

problems for real clients gives us experience on real 
world issues” and “working with real clients gives us an 
early exposure to real-life work environments.”  
As much as they valued real customers, students 
lacked the experience of working and communicating 

with them. One major issue was that, unlike a controlled 

classroom project, there was no clear scope on any of the 
projects. Without prior real customer experience, it was 
difficult for students to come up with a reasonable 

estimation on the project. As a result, the Meeting 
Agenda team misunderstood the customer requirements 
and ended up with a failed project, and the Billing 

System team underestimated the scope and exceeded 
their budgeted time by two hundred percent. 
Nevertheless, all students agreed that this was a great 
experience and that they had learned a lot from real 

projects. Student feedback reaffirmed that real customers 
were critical when learning agile methods. 
5.3.The large project 
The two large projects started in the ninth week, 
when students were regrouped into two teams of six and 

eight. As noted earlier, one of the large projects was 
Phase 2 of the Billing System, and was conducted by the 
original six-student Billing System team that began the 

project. In this phase they placed greater emphasis on 
customer communication and satisfaction. As a result 
they were able to complete the system on time, on 

budget, and with satisfied customers. The other large 
project was to develop a “School Website” for the 
elementary and junior high school that commissioned 
the Billing System project. The website consists of three 
main areas: parent, teacher and student areas. 
The large projects went much more smoothly than the 
medium projects. The success can be attributed to 

previous project experience, better planning, and the 

synergy among team members.  
6.The research project 
The research project also started in the ninth week of 
the semester. As mentioned previously, one of the 
midterm exam questions required students to write a two 
to five page proposal on a research topic in agile 

software development that had not been discussed in 
class. Each student was required to find a topic of 
interest, to perform preliminary research, and to describe 

the research objective along with a proposed approach. 
The quality of the student proposals was excellent, and 
many were above and beyond our expectations.  
The research projects were to be conducted in pairs, 
following the concept of pair programming. Some of the 

fourteen student proposals were combined and others 
were modified. Ultimately seven topics were chosen 
through the combined efforts of the students and the 

instructor. The final seven topics were as follows. 
Better ways to deal with the issues of personality 

traits in pair programming 
Automated GUI testing 
The effectiveness of refactoring in an XP 

environment 
Agile modeling - its viability and adaptability 
What is Scrum? 
DSDM and its combination with XP 
Crystal software development methodology: can 

a mixture of XP and Crystal improve overall 
effectiveness? 
Each of the seven students who wrote the original 
proposals was assigned to lead the research and was 
paired with one of the other seven students. Each pair of 

students was required to turn in a research paper and to 
give a thirty-minute presentation on the topic. 
The research requirement was a valuable course 
component for a variety of reasons. It served to expose 
students to rudimentary research design and techniques. 

The presentations provided the opportunity for students 
to practice their communication skills and to be exposed 
to additional advanced concepts beyond the one that they 

personally researched. Overall the research presentations 
were well done and greatly enhanced the class. 
7.Student perceptions 
Since this was the first agile development course ever 
offered in our department, and since the course involved 

so many new pedagogical approaches, the instructor 
monitored student progress closely. The overall 

feedback from students, based on an end-of-semester 
survey of the fourteen students, was overwhelmingly 
positive. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 All students indicated that they learned a great deal 
about agile development and that they would like to 
learn more. Most of them were convinced that agile 
and/or XP methods were viable solutions to today's 

software development. However, one student was 
skeptical about XP, and stated that “while I like the 
course, my experience with XP so far has not been 

positive.” Students indicated that their favorite aspect of 
the course was the opportunity to work with real 
customers, and the feature that they most disliked was 

the amount of work required. Many of them also stated 
that they liked the research aspect of the course, since 
they not only learned how to conduct research but also 
benefited from the results of others’ research.  
Students were much more motivated once the project 
began since they were finally able to put their 
knowledge to the test. Use of the phase-in approach 
allows student to start working on a project early. As 

pointed out by [6], the approach avoided overburdening 
students with too many new practices at once. However, 
the approach also created a heavy workload for both 

students and the instructor.  
There was not much breathing room with three 
hands-on projects and one research project. In a sixteen-

week semester, students had two weeks to learn the tools 
and technologies required by the course, two weeks for 
the first (small) project, four weeks for the second 

(medium) project, and eight weeks for the third (large) 
project. While working on the large project, they 
simultaneously had to work on the research project. 

Three students declared that the workload in the class 
was “more than any other classes I have ever taken.” 
One student commented that “it feels as though the 
project is my second job.” Two students reported that 
they put in more than twenty hours a week for the real 

world projects.  The student suggestions for reducing the workload 
included the following: 
Reduce the number of projects or have smaller 

projects.Do not assign both a development project and the 
research project at the same time. 
Provide more time or more people on the 
projects.It is unlikely that adding people to projects will 
reduce workload, considering the added overhead 

required by team communications. We observed that 

while this was a demanding course, the workload was 
manageable with good teamwork and a more equal 
distribution of work among team members. Students, 

like many professionals, often do not understand the art 
of teamwork. In fact, we felt the need to give a lecture 
near the middle of the semester titled “teamwork is an 
individual skill” based on [2]. Teamwork seemed to 

improve considerably after the lecture. 
Another reason that students had problems with the 
workload was their lack of real customer experience. 

Since a major portion of the project grades were based 
on customer satisfaction, students felt obligated to do 
everything the customers requested. Based on student 

feedback, the next time that we offer this course we will 
present the “team work is an individual skill” lecture 
earlier in the semester, and will also consider reducing 

the number of projects. 
In terms of the workload for the instructor, each 
project involved a great deal of preparation, monitoring, 
mentoring, and grading, all of which were time 
consuming. The incorporation of real-world software 

projects entails maintaining customer relationships, 
coordinating meetings, and ensuring quality products. It 
is inevitable that as more projects are required, the 

instructor workload increases. However, we felt that the 
course outcomes in both student learning and student 
satisfaction made the additional workload worth the 

effort.8.Conclusion
This paper describes our experience in offering a 
graduate-level agile software development course that 

emphasizes both hands-on experience and research 
activities. The course was well received by students and 
many of them expressed interest in learning more about 

agile methods. Since the students all had prior 
background in software development, they were able to 
grasp the concepts behind agile methods quickly and 
apply those concepts to real-world projects with real 
customers. 
Use of a phase-in approach, in which students were 
assigned small, medium, and large projects successively, 

worked well in providing students with hands-on 

experience much sooner than the more commonly used 
approach of a single large project assigned closer to the 
middle or end of the course.  However, the shorter and 

more frequent deadlines stressed some students. In 
future iterations of the course we may consider reducing 
the number of projects. 
Students enjoyed working on real-world projects with 
real customers.  They learned many valuable real-world 

lessons from working on the projects, something that is 

generally not possible with tightly controlled classroom 
projects. Students also liked the research requirement, 
which allowed them to learn more advanced topics about 

agile development. 
Our first foray into teaching agile software 
development at the graduate level was both satisfying 

and instructional.  While student feedback indicates that 
some tweaking of the format is in order, students 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 expressed overall satisfaction with the approach.  This 
demonstrates that although teaching agile development 
almost requires a real-world project, careful planning 
and organization make it not only possible, but 

rewarding to both the student and the instructor. 
9.References 
[1]Astrachan, O.L., Duvall, R.C., and Wallingford, E., 
Bringing Extreme Programming to the Classroom
, in XP 
Universe, Raleigh, NC, USA, July 2001. 
[2]Avery, C, Walker, M. and Murphy, E. Teamwork is an 
Individual Skill: Getting Your Work Done When Sharing 
Responsibility, Berrett-Koehler Publishing, 2001. 
[3]Bevan, J., Werner, L., and
 Dowell, C.M., Guidelines for 
the Use of Pair Programming in a Freshman 
Programming Class, in 
15th Conference on Software 
Engineering Education and Training (CSEET'02)
,Kentucky, USA, 2002. 
[4]Cockburn, A., and Williams, L., The Costs and Benefits 
of Pair Programming, in eXtreme Programming and 
Flexible Processes in Software Engineering-XP2000
,Italy, 2000. 
[5]DeClue, T.H., Pair Programming and Pair Trading: 
Effects on learning and Motivation in a CS2 Course, 
Journal Of Computing Sciences in College (JCSC). 
18:5,2003.[6]Fenwick, J., 
Adapting XP to an Academic Environment 
by Phasing–In Practices, in 
XP/Agile Universe 2003,New Orleans, LA, USA, August 2003. [7]Hanks, B., McDowell, C., Draper, D., and Krnjajic, M., 
Program Quality with Pair Programming in CS1, in 
Annual Joint Conference on Integrating Technology into 
Computer Science Education (ITiCSE)
,2004.
[8]Johnson, D. and Caristi, J., Extreme Programming and 
the Software Design Course, in 
XP Universe, Raleigh, NC, USA, July 2001. 
[9]McDowell, C., Werner, L., Bullock, H., and Fernald, J., 
The Effects of Pair-Programming on Performance in an 
Introductory Programming Course, in 
33rd ACM 
Technical Symposium in Computer Science Education
,Covington, Kentucky, 2002. 
[10]McKinney, D., Froeseth, J., Robertson, J., Denton, L.F., 
and Ensminger, D., Agile CS1 Labs: eXtreme 
Programming Practices in an Introductory Programming 
Course, in 
XP/Agile Universe 2004
, Calgary, Canada, 
August 2004. [11]Melnik, G., and Maurer, F., introducing Agile Methods 
in Learning Environments: Lessons Learned, in 
XP/Agile 
Universe 2003, New Orleans, LA, USA, August 2003. 
[12]Nagappan, N., Williams, L., Ferzli, M., Wiebe, E., Yang, 
K., Miller, C., and Balik, S., Improving the CS1 
Experience with Pair Programming, in 
34th Technical 
Symposium in Computer Science Education, SIGCSE 

2003, Reno, Nevada, 2003. 
[13]Padberg, F., and Muller, M.M., Analyzing the cost and 
Benefit of Pair Programming, in 
Ninth International 
Software Metrics Symposium (METRICS'03)
, Sydney, 
Australia, 2003. 
[14]Sanders, D., 
Student Perceptions of the Suitability of 
Extreme and Pair Programming
, in 
XP Universe,Raleigh, NC, USA, July 2001. 
[15]Standish Group, 2003 CHAOS Chronicles, The Standish 
Group International (http://www.standishgroup.com), 

summarized at http://www.findarticles.com/cf_dls 
/m0EIN/2003_March_25/99169967/p1/article.jhtml  
[16]Steinberg, D.H., 
The effect of unit tests on entry points, 
coupling and cohesion in an introductory Java 
Programming Course, in XP Universe, Raleigh, NC, USA, July 2001. 
[17]Steinberg, D.H., and Palmer, D.W., 
Extreme Software 
Engineering–A Hands on Approach
, Pearson-Prentice 
Hall, 2004. [18]Wainer, M., Adaptations for Teaching Software 
Development with Extreme Programming: An 
Experience Report, in 
XP/Agile Universe 2003
, New Orleans, LA, USA, August 2003. [19]Williams, L., and Upchurch, R., Extreme Programming 
for Software Engineering Education, in 
31st ASEE/IEEE 
Frontiers in Education 2001 Conference
, Reno, NV, 
USA, 2001. [20]Williams, L., Wiebe, E., Yang, K., Ferzil, M., and Miller, 
C., In Support of Pair Programming in the Introductory 

Computer Science Course, 
Computer Science Education, 
12:3, 2002. 
[21]Wilson, D., Teaching XP: A Case Study, in 
XP Universe,Raleigh, NC, USA, July 2001. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
