 Successful Integration of Agile Development Techniques within DISA 
 
 
Sean Cohan 
Pragmatics, Inc 
cohans@pragmatics.com
  
 
 
Abstract 
 
The Department of Defense (DoD) and the Defense 
Information Systems Agency (DISA) have historically 
operated on 18-36 months release cycles for major IT 
projects. DISA is now striving towards delivering 
smaller components in 30-60-90 day release cycles. 
This paper discusses Pragmatics™ successful 
implementation of agile development techniques into a 
non-agile shop, our introduction of agile development 
techniques to DISA to help them achieve their goal of 
delivering high quality software on shorter release 
cycles, and our lessons learned along the way.  
 
1. Introduction 
 
One of the most successful and important contracts 
for Pragmatics has been the Joint Operational Planning 
and Execution System (JOPES), a major DoD 
Command and Control (C2) program. DISA, the 
project sponsor for JOPES, is responsible for planning, 
engineering, acquiring, fielding, and supporting global 
net-centric solutions to serve the needs of the 
President, Vice President, the Secretary of Defense, 
and other DoD Components.  
In early 2004, I was hired at Pragmatics as the lead 
engineer responsible for moving JOPES towards the 
DoD and DISA mandated Service Oriented 
Architecture (SOA). I knew how to establish J2EE web 
applications and web services that would meet the 
desired SOA. In my previous position, I had started 
using automated tests and automated builds. Realizing 
the benefit of being able to repeatedly prove that my 
software worked, I also knew I wanted to establish 
automated software testing and software builds at 
Pragmatics. I recognized, however, that I would not 
have the time to establish such an environment nor 
would I be able to adequately train developers in how 
to perform automated testing. Therefore, I began 
interviewing candidates who shared my goals. One 
candidate I interviewed was Michael Gallaher. Not 
only was he very knowledgeable with automated 
software testing and software builds; he was also well 
versed in agile development methodologies and 
practices. During the interview Mr. Gallaher said, ﬁI 
can help establish the automated software testing and 
build environmentﬂ. As a result, Mr. Gallaher became 
our agile coach and began establishing the Pragmatics 
agile development environment.  
 
2. The Agile Beginning  
 
In early 2004, Pragmatics began introducing the 
agile development practices of test-driven development 
(TDD), continuous integration, collective code 
ownership, refactoring, iterative development, and 
collaboration with customers/end users. The initial 
agile team consisted of myself, the agile coach, one 
mid-level developer, and two junior developers. While 
the traditional non-agile developers, program 
managers, and customer focused on the current release, 
the agile team began developing the next release of 
applications designed to meet DISA™s objectives for 
migrating to an SOA consisting of n-tiered, thin client 
web applications and data exposed on the network via 
SOAP over HTTP web services. 
The coach quickly established some basic 
infrastructure for the agile team: a Wiki for the 
knowledge repository (we™re currently using 
DokuWiki), an open-source source code repository 
(Subversion), and an open-source continuous 
integration tool (we™re currently using Vulcan).  
The coach also introduced the concept of paired 
programming and open spaces. Initially, I was not 
convinced upper management would approve pair 
programming and an open area. I suspected upper 
management would believe a pair of programmers 
would only get half the work done that two individuals 
working separately could produce. I also suspected 
upper management wouldn™t approve the use of a large 
room for the open agile area since no rooms were 
available. The coach was not deterred. As a result, he 
was able to get upper management™s buy-in for pairing 
programmers together and the use of a small back 
corner of office space for the open agile area. 
 Corkboards, white boards, and pairing tables were 
brought in to equip the agile area, and the agile team 
was off and running.  
From this beginning, the agile team grew to over 20 
developers and the practices they put into place grew to 
become embraced by the corporation as strategic 
business practices, as well as by the customer as a 
means to increase the quality of software and shorten 
release cycles within DISA.  
 
3. The Importance of the Coach 
 
With the basic infrastructure in place, the team 
began reengineering one of the existing applications 
into a Struts, J2EE web application. The coach began 
teaching developers how to go about testing software 
using TDD, the use of story cards to document high 
level requirements, the use of task cards to document 
story tasks, how to estimate tasks and stories using 
points, how to hold daily stand up meetings, how to 
continuously integrate, the concepts of collective code 
ownership, and how to mercilessly refactor code. 
Initially, developers struggled with how to write 
story cards and then break the stories down into tasks, 
how to estimate stories and tasks with the use of points 
(arbitrary values that give a general indication of the 
degree of difficulty for the story/task). With the help of 
the coach, most developers were able to grasp these 
concepts and put them to use.  
We found that most developers new to TDD 
struggled with writing tests. The experience of the 
coach was essential here as he provided extensive 
hands-on instruction to individual developers on how 
and when to write tests. Most developers were able to 
pick up the basics and perform TDD within their pair. 
A common tendency for developers new to TDD was 
to write large amounts of code first and then write test 
code later. The coach played a key role here retraining 
developers to write the test code first and the payload 
code afterwards.  
Another tendency for developers new to agile 
development was to work for extended periods on code 
without checking it into the source code repository. 
Here the coach reinforced the necessity for frequent 
check-ins and continuous integration. 
A common tendency for paired developers was that 
one developer began to dominate the keyboard while 
the other watched. Another tendency was pairs did not 
rotate often enough. The coach would look for these 
tendencies and encourage (nudge) keyboard exchanges 
when it was not occurring frequently enough, and mix 
up the pairs to facilitate cross training.  
Had we not had an experienced agile coach who 
could overcome these types of problems, we would not 
have been as successful establishing our agile 
development environment. His knowledge of what 
needed to be done, his mentorship over developers on 
the proper application of agile development techniques, 
and his care to ensure the agile development practices 
did not fall by the wayside was essential to our 
success.  
As important as the coach was, he also attributes 
our success to having a few highly sk
illed and 
productive developers mingled in with the agile team. 
The coach could rely on these individuals to setup 
necessary infrastructure and properly apply agile 
development techniques. These developers led by 
example and established a high standard of quality for 
others to follow.  
 
4. Improved Continuous Integration Tool 
 
Early in the establishment of the agile environment, 
the agile coach implemented a continuous integration 
environment using an open source tool. The team 
successfully used this tool for a year, however, they 
became increasingly annoyed at some of its limitations 
(e.g., having to wait until all components were built 
before notification of the success or failure of any one 
component). As a result, Chris Eldredge, one of our 
most talented agile developers, took it upon himself to 
develop the Vulcan open source continuous integration 
framework. Not only did he correct the limitations of 
the previous product, he added the capability to report 
on Test Code Coverage (TCC) for all projects by 
plugging in the Emma open source TCC tool (we are 
now using the Cobertura product). These reports are 
part of the metrics that have helped Pragmatics achieve 
CMMI Level 4.  
The developer also tailored the tool to generate 
build artifacts and software packages in a format 
required by our DISA customer. These modifications 
made it possible for our internal IV&V group to 
automatically generate software applications in the 
format required by DISA as well as test the 
installation, deinstallation, and ensure the software met 
all DISA delivery requirements. Now once our 
Pragmatics IV&V manager signs off on a software 
package, our Pragmatics CM manager delivers the 
automatically generated package to DISA. 
 
5. Management Support and Time to 
Mature 
 
When the agile team began establishing the agile 
environment, current non-agile programmers, their 
project managers, and our DISA customer were 
focused on completing and delivering applications that 
 they had been working since 1998. Although not their 
primary focus, management supported the agile team 
by allowing them to establish an open area, allowed 
them to try pair programming, perform TDD and 
continuous integration, and provided them with 
requested materials (e.g., corkboards, whiteboards, 
pairing stations, etc.).  
Within a short period of time, management saw the 
benefits of agile development as developers were able 
to demonstrate automated tests of their software, the 
continuous integration environment, and initial 
working versions of web applications that were on 
their way to meeting DISA™s objectives. Management 
began to recognize TDD and continuous integration as 
strategic discriminators against competition and began 
to market the agile environment as a means to provide 
potential customers with a greater assurance of 
receiving high quality software. Pragmatics also began 
to demonstrate agile practices to potential customers 
and included agile development methodologies in new 
proposals. 
The supportive approach by management 
contributed to the successful establishment of our agile 
environment by giving the agile team the time they 
needed to not only establish the agile environment, but 
also truly learn the agile practices. The agile team was 
able to establish a development rhythm as well as 
develop self-sufficient agile teams. Management gave 
the agile team freedom to learn new tools and 
techniques for developing software, as well as 
encouragement to improve the agile development 
environment. 
 
6. Support from our DISA Customer 
 
Shortly after starting agile development, we brought 
over the JOPES DISA customer to demonstrate our 
agile practices: we demonstrated TDD by running the 
automated tests over the payload software; we 
demonstrated our continuous integration framework 
showing build and test reports; we explained our 
iteration boards and the use of story and task cards; and 
we explained our three-month internal release process 
even though DISA did not require software delivery 
for 12 months or more.  
Our DISA customer was impressed with the 
processes we had put in place and encouraged us to 
continue. Over the next year, we hosted various 
members of the JOPES customer team for end-of-
iteration demo days to further explain our agile 
practices. We also hosted other program offices within 
DISA for demonstrations of our agile practices.  
 
7. DISA Moves Towards Agility 
 
About a year into our agile development, a new 
Director took over at DISA. A primary objective for 
the new Director was to change the time it took to get a 
release of software into production. Historically, it has 
taken DoD and DISA 18Œ36 months to field systems. 
The Director, having met with Google representatives, 
was impressed with their 30-60-90 day release cycle 
and desired to implement similar processes within 
DISA. He favored fielding partial capabilities rather 
than building large, expensive, monolithic systems that 
took so long to develop and test that once they were 
fielded, they were outdated. Fielding partial 
capabilities would allow users to quickly provide 
feedback where ﬁgood ideas will take off and bad ideas 
will die offﬂ. With the DISA Director calling for 
shorter, smaller, quicker releases, DISA departments 
would have to find ways field releases quicker. 
During this time, we were demonstrating our agile 
practices to other entities within DISA including the 
Branch Chief of the DISA Test Engineering (TE) 
division. TE was interested in our automated testing 
capabilities and how they could be 
leveraged/integrated within the DISA TE group. We 
discussed how our automated tests could be handed 
over to DISA TE groups to run in their test 
environments. With the subsequent JOPES release, we 
did indeed pass our automated web services tests on to 
DISA testers. As web services technology was new to 
them and they were uncertain as to how to best test 
services, they were receptive to se
tting up our test 
frameworks within their test environment.  
We also suggested that DISA TE become more 
involved with software projects while still in 
development rather than waiting until the software was 
delivered to DISA. As a result, the TE Branch Chief is 
taking active steps to integrate DISA testers with 
development projects. In May 2007, he presented 
ﬁWanted: Agile Testersﬂ at the DISA Customer 
Conference where he discussed the need to integrate 
testers within development projects.  
 
8. DISA Moves to Shorten the Release 
Cycle 
 
Up to this point, once we delivered our software, 
various entities at DISA needed six to nine months 
before the software would be approved for production. 
Once test servers were built, the DISA TE group would 
test the software in what is known as a System 
Integration Test (SIT). Once the SIT was completed, 
another test group would perform interoperability tests 
in what is know as System Acceptance Test (SAT). 
 Once the SAT was complete, select end users would 
perform end user testing in what is known as the 
Operational Test (OT). Once the OT was complete, 
security engineers would perform security tests. Once 
all of these stages are passed, the software would 
receive its Approval to Operate (ATO) at which time it 
could be scheduled to move into production.  
Both the DISA TE group and our JOPES DISA 
customer were looking for ways to shorten the length 
of time it took to move delivered software into 
production. One approach was to convince test groups 
to work in parallel during the test events rather than 
serially. Our JOPES DISA customer decided to 
leverage our three-month internal release cycle and 
have us begin delivering our web services on a three-
month release cycle. In the spring of 2007, Pragmatics 
delivered its first three-month release. Our JOPES 
DISA customer™s confidence in our ability to deliver 
high quality, working software every three months is 
directly attributable to the implementation of our agile 
techniques and our internal three-month iterative 
release cycle. 
With our current release, TE testers are working to 
become integrated with our Pragmatics testers earlier 
in the test phase. We are hosting our web applications 
and web services in our Pragmatics lab making them 
available for TE testers to test prior to deployment in 
the DISA test lab. In this way, TE can test our software 
prior to upcoming test events at DISA thereby 
shortening the time it takes to test at DISA. TE has 
commented that this has been a tremendous help to 
them, and they wish more contractors would make 
their software available in this way so it could be tested 
earlier. 
We are also beginning to see frameworks set up at 
DISA that support automated testing and certification. 
DISA is establishing the Federation Development 
Certification Environment (FDCE) intended to be the 
‚sandbox™ where parallel testing and certification 
events can occur. When deployed, software modules 
will be registered in the FDCE Portal, testers will be 
able to perform automated tests on them, certifiers will 
be able to certify that software is ready for production, 
and deployers will be able to automatically deploy the 
software into production. The FDCE will be DISA™s 
agile framework that enables 30-60-90 release cycles.  
 
9. Successful Deliveries 
 
In March 2006, we delivered to DISA our first 
applications developed using agile development 
techniques. These applications were successfully put 
into production in the fall of 2006. In March 2007, we 
delivered nine more applications using agile 
development techniques. These are scheduled for 
fielding in the fall of 2007. In June 2007, we delivered 
our first three-month release and are on track for 
delivering additional three-month releases in August 
and November of 2007.  
 
10. Challenges  
 
The introduction of agile development has been a 
success for both Pragmatics and our DISA customer. 
As a result, our DISA customer authorized more work 
be performed using our agile development practices. 
From a small team in the back corner of the office, we 
have grown to over 20 developers and expanded to 
virtually an entire floor. Although successful, we faced 
growing pains that are described below. 
 
10.1 Lack of Onsite Customer/End User 
 
Our end users are geographically distributed so we 
were unable to have any on site with us. Although we 
brought our DISA customer over as often as they could 
make it for end-of-iteration demo days, they were not 
end users nor could they provide the functional 
expertise of end users. Fortunately, a number of our 
testers are former end users and were able to act as 
pseudo end users. These Subject Matter Experts 
(SMEs) were able to provide valuable feedback to 
developers on what the end users wanted and needed.  
An approach we took to overcome the lack of on-
site end users was to make the web applications and 
web services we were developing available on the 
Internet. This allowed actual end user SMEs to 
evaluate the applications prior to putting them into 
production. On several instances the SMEs pointed out 
where we had missed requirements and had not built 
the right thing. Making the software available for 
actual end user feedback allowed us to fix missed 
requirements prior to delivering the software to our 
DISA customer. 
 
10.2 Integration of Non-Agile Developers  
 
We faced a variety of challenges integrating non-
agile developers into the agile environment. Non-agile 
developers were briefed on several occasions as to 
what was happening with the agile teams and the 
practices we were following. Initial concerns for non-
agile programmers included the noise level in the open 
area, not wanting people looking over their shoulder 
while they developed software, not wanting to lose 
status as senior engineers and team leads, not wanting 
applications they spent the last several years 
developing being replaced, not wanting to lose control 
 over developmental functionality, and doubt whether 
new web applications would adequately meet users 
performance and responsiveness expectations.  
In terms of noise in the open space, we™ve learned 
that expanded open areas help keep the noise to a 
comfortable level. Additionally, developers had to be 
reminded from time to time to lower their voices. Over 
time the team learned to stay within an a
cceptable 
noise level.  
Some non-agile developers are still reluctant to 
move in to the agile area because they are either not 
comfortable pairing or they don™t want to lose their 
senior team lead positions. We have expressed to them 
that their domain knowledge is very valuable to the 
new agile developers and that they would be able to 
make significant contributions to the agile team. At the 
same time, they would update their current skills and 
learn knew programming languages. As more and 
more of the legacy software is replaced by new 
reengineered solutions and more of their peers move to 
join the agile teams, these developers are coming 
closer the realization that they will have to give agile 
development a try.  
It is understandable that non-agile developers were 
not pleased that their applications were being 
reengineered, especially since these applications hadn™t 
yet made it into production. However, they realized 
that DoD and DISA had mandated that applications 
become web-based and net-centric and that they must 
accept this fact. 
Problems experienced with the first wave of non-
agile developers that joined the agile team included 
confusion as to how to determine and document story 
tasks, lack of confidence signing up for tasks, 
resistance to pairing, wanting to go off and develop 
code on their own, developing large amounts of code 
without writing any tests, and resenting other 
developers modifying the code that they had written. 
Here the coach mentored non-agile developers on what 
was expected of them and reinforced how to go about 
performing agile practices. Pairing up non-agile 
developers with agile developers usually alleviated this 
for most non-agile developers. Some never became 
accustomed to the agile environment however. For 
these few cases, the developers either asked to be 
transferred elsewhere within the company or left 
Pragmatics. This was generally best for both the 
resistant developers as well as the agile team.  
A common initial response from non-agile 
developers was they were somewhat intimidated by all 
that there was to learn in the agile environment, from 
new computer languages, frameworks, tools, IDEs, 
story and task cards, estimation, and TDD. Pairing 
most certainly helped them learn the technology, the 
agile practices, and become comfortable with the new 
environment.  
  
10.3 Endless Iterations 
 
Early on, the agile team was responsible for 
reengineering applications that would ultimately 
replace applications that had not yet been put into 
production. As such, the applications being developed 
by the agile team would not be delivered to the 
customer for a year for more. Initially, the agile team 
worked on an iterative development cycle consisting of 
two-week iterations. While the two-week iterations did 
provide good structure for dividing the work into 
smaller more manageable chunks, they lacked adequate 
milestones for the developers to realize a true sense on 
accomplishment. The iterations just keep going on and 
on.  
In order to complete some of the tasks required for 
an actual release, the agile team put into place three-
month internal releases consisting of six, two-week 
iterations. The three-month internal releases provided 
the opportunity to perform release planning and 
allowed the team to perform most of the steps required 
for a full release of a given application. This included 
providing all software needed for installing and 
deinstalling the applications as well as all application 
documentation required for delivery. The objective for 
the internal releases was for applications to be 
installable into production, albeit as a percentage of the 
completed to-be product functionality. This gave the 
team a greater sense of accomplishment and experience 
with all aspects of the application packaging and 
delivery. 
During this time, the DISA Director was also 
looking to field software on shorter release cycles. Our 
three-month release cycles supported this objective by 
providing the process and model for our DISA 
customer to receive and field software on shorter 
release cycles.  
 
10.4 Integration of IV&V Group 
 
At the beginning of the move to agile development, 
our IV&V group (a team of six testers) was busy 
testing the current release of software developed using 
non-agile techniques. They had no automated test tools 
in place and only performed manual testing. Their 
testing practices consisted of developing test 
documents containing individual test cases, manually 
running the test cases, recording results, and creating 
problem reports. This testing tended to occur more 
towards the end rather than throughout the 
development effort. In addition, they were used to 
 working from their offices and not as part of the 
development team. As such, the agile team experienced 
a number of difficulties trying to get the testers 
involved earlier in the agile iterations.  
Eventually, one of the six testers was assigned to 
work with the agile team. This tester attended stand up 
meetings and end-of-iteration demo days. Although we 
encouraged his participation writing functional tests, he 
preferred to have the developers write the functional 
tests and run them at end-of-iteration demo days while 
he continued to perform manual testing.  
We experienced problems trying to get the testers to 
test on an iteration-by-iteration basis. The agile team 
was developing working features with every iteration, 
however, the testers were not testing the new features 
after every iteration. Instead, they were testing non-
agile applications and hadn™t established a test cycle 
that could keep pace with the agile iterations.  
As more testers began testing the applications 
developed by the agile team, we found testers would 
test functionality outside the scope of the iteration and 
write problem reports on areas developers had not yet 
completed. They preferred to test the entire application 
rather than only the features added in previous 
iterations. We had difficulty constraining them to test 
only features that were signed off as being complete at 
the end of the iteration.  
Things have begun to improve. The agile and IV&V 
teams have gone through a large release where nine 
applications were developed and delivered using agile 
practices. We have held some reflection sessions where 
we focused on things that worked well as well as areas 
that could be improved upon. Some ways we are 
improving are more testers are attending stand-up 
meetings, they are attempting to sync up their test 
efforts to test only the features developed during an 
iteration, more testers are willing to write functional 
tests using tools such as soapUI, and the test group is 
now evaluating automated functional test tools to 
regression test the GUIs of our applications.  
 
11. Lessons Learned 
 
The most important factor influencing the 
successful establishment of agile development within 
Pragmatics was the hiring of an experienced agile 
coach. His real world experience with and knowledge 
of agile development practices, his dedication to the 
establishment of our agile development environment, 
his commitment to train developers in the proper 
application of agile practices, and his care to ensure the 
agile practices continue was essential to the successful 
implementation of agile development within 
Pragmatics. Without the presence of an experienced 
coach, agility most likely would not have been 
successfully established within Pragmatics. 
In addition to the coach, a key to our success was 
the support provided by management to allow the 
establishment of an agile team and giving them a 
chance to prove themselves. Management™s support 
allowed the team to apply agile practices, learn and 
apply new tools, and evolve the agile environment. As 
a result, the corporation now markets the improved 
software development practices established by the 
agile team as strategic business practices. 
Lastly, DISA™s desire to establish shorter release 
cycles along with Pragmatics™ TDD, continuous 
integration, and three-month release cycles combined 
to allow DISA and Pragmatics to broaden the 
implementation of agile practices within DISA. 
 
12. Acknowledgements 
 
I would like to thank, Michael Gallaher, our agile 
coach for providing the guidance and inspiration for 
our agile development; Art Gomez, Vice President of 
Pragmatics Software Engineering Division, for 
sponsoring and supporting our agile development 
efforts; Chris Eldredge, Software Engineer, for his 
outstanding development skills evidenced by the 
development of the Vulcan continuous integration 
framework; and our agile development team for their 
motivated dedication to the successful implementation 
of our agile practices. Special thanks also to Tammie 
Brawley, our DISA NECC Adaptive Planning Branch 
Chief, for supporting our agile development efforts, 
Dr. Steven Hutchinson, DISA TE Branch Chief, for his 
work to shorten test cycles by integrating testers and 
development teams, and Lt. General Croom, DISA 
Director, for his work changing the DISA culture to 
move towards an agile environment where shorter, 
smaller releases containing smaller components are 
preferred over the large, monolithic releases of the 
past. 
