 The Failure of the Off-shore Experimen
t: A Case for Collo
cated Agile Teams 
 
 
Beth Cohen Mark Thias 
Luth Computer Specialists, Inc. Spokes, Inc. 
bfcohen@luthcomputer.com
 
mark@thespokesnetwork.com
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Over the past few years distributed and offshore 
teams have been held up as the most cost effective 
delivery model for IT projects of all types. Yet case 
studies do not support these assumptions.   The authors 
had the opportunity to compare the productivity, 
quality and performance of collocated agile teams with 
distributed agile teams and found that the collocated 
teams perform substantially better.  In the first case a 
collocated team was eight times more productive, 
while in the second case, transferring the work to a 
collocated team saved the project from certain 
disaster.  From these examples and others, there are 
strong indications that companies should be 
rediscovering collocated project teams as the old/new 
paradigm for delivering real value for their IT 
projects.  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
There has been much industry hype about the 
benefits of using off-shore and distributed software 
development teams.  Some outsourcing companies are 
claiming as much as 30% savings over traditional 
development methods.  However, real metrics for 
quality, efficiency and productivity based on several 
case studies comparing collocated and distributed 
development teams do not support this rosy picture.  
This paper looks at two different cases where agile 
collocated teams delivered better quality work in 
significantly less time and with fewer resources, even 
more cost effectively than agile distributed teams.  The 
cases demonstrate the difficulties of managing 
distributed software development teams. We found 
that, ultimately, excellent communication is the best 
predictor of success and that team collocation 
encourages close interactions and maximum 
productivity. 
 
2. Distributed to collocated conversion 
 
A large financial institution decided to review its 
assumptions about the effectiveness of the off-shore 
team for an upcoming major project due to previous 
poor outcomes for time to market and quality on a 
previous analogous project using off-shore resources.  
Since the project was to develop a high profile banking 
application designed to protect the company from 
identify theft fraud, project success was an imperative. 
 
2.1. Original team configuration 
 
The original estimate of work, based on similar 
previous projects, was for a team 20 contractors on-site 
and an additional 60 in Hyderabad, India.  In addition, 
the team would use a full time project manager and 
part-time support from domain experts, a functional 
analyst and architects from the client to support 
requirements gathering and quality assurance. 
 
2.2. Converting to agile 
 
After a review of the requirements, it looked like a 
collocated cross 
functional team using Scrum/XP 
practices could bring significant improvements to the 
development efforts.  The team consisted of a Scrum 
Master, 5 software developers, 1 functional analyst 
(FA), 1 Business Subject Matter Expert (SME) and 2 
testers.  They had support from additional business 
SMEs and a relational database team as needed.  Note 
that team members were all new to each other, the 
technology and agile methodologies.   
By applying agile methodologies and keeping the 
team local, the project was able to complete the work 
on time using only 10% (10 Full Time Equivalent 
(FTE) workers) of the original estimate and improve 
the time to market by 50%.  The success of the team 
and the project was due to the implementation of 
radically different processes than anything the 
company had done before. The financial institution 
was happy with the high degree of flexibility, 
2009 Agile Conference978-0-7695-3768-9/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2009.8251 improved communications, reduced hand-offs, and 
rapid customer feedback that resulted in a higher 
quality product, delivered earlier and with a smaller 
team. 
 
2.3. Project barriers 
 
To help sell the new agile model within the 
company, the project sponsors gave it a 
Pilot
 status 
with full support from upper management.  This helped 
smooth political barriers so the team was able to 
rapidly commit the staff, licenses and space for a team 
room.  The decision to exclude the Indian contractors 
from the pilot team caused friction with the company 
management, who were vested in the off-shore 
contractor model.   
The departmentalized nature of the organization 
created more challenges.  The customer and QA 
management were initially reluctant to commit full 
time resources to the team. The staff had little 
understanding of their new cross functional roles, 
while their managers were worried that they were 
losing the flexibility to task switch their resources into 
other work if needed. 
 
2.4. Evangelizing agile 
 
The following is a list of the key process and 
implementation improvements that allowed the 90% 
improvement in team efficiency.  What is important to 
note is that the team saw itself as a cohesive whole, 
rather than a set of individuals who each had a specific 
function or role. 
Ł Each team member was expected to be cross-
functional.  FA™s and SME™s found themselves testing, 
developers flushed out requirements and testers created 
customer demos for rapid project feedback. 
Ł The core team was empowered to make all the 
decisions. 
Ł The team shared work space for maximum team 
communications. 
Ł All the team members had access to each other™s 
tools.  This became especially useful as the use of 
Quality Center (QC) was expanded to support Test 
Driven Development (TDD).   
Ł The stories (or functional requirements) were 
created jointly by all the members of the team, 
including the customer, FA, developers and testers.  In 
fact, QC became the glue between requirements, code 
and test and is a key component in the implementation 
of effective TDD.  Another big advantage of the testers 
being so close to the team and the process was their 
knowledge of each story as it changed over time, so 
they were better able to discover and develop negative 
tests.   
Ł The stories were broken down into two week 
iterations by the developers themselves, who had the 
most intimate knowledge of how long it would take to 
do the work.  Iterations were then planned based on the 
estimates. 
Ł As the developers worked on iterations, they are 
able to go into QC to find the requirements (the tests) 
as well as any other pertinent documents.  Since the 
customer was also on the team, any ambiguities could 
be discussed and resolved immediately.   
Ł Any additional tests needed fully test the 
functionality would be added to QC and, in effect, 
update the requirements (remember tests are 
requirements).  In this way, code, test and requirements 
were always 100% in sync.  Since the QC document 
connected to QTP tests, this maintained complete 
requirements to test traceability. 
Ł The stories were demonstrated to the customer 
giving them an opportunity to comment and make 
changes before too much effort had been wasted on 
invalid requirements.  Changes were quickly reflected 
in modified tests updated in QC.   
Ł Traditional unit testing was not an option, so it 
was decided to expand the traditional use of QTP and 
create more tests and increase coverage of each feature.  
The collaboration between the developers and testers in 
the team room made this possible, gaining the benefits 
of automated unit level regression testing using a 
functional testing tool against a commercial case tool. 
Ł To keep the team on track, delivery metrics were 
captured during each iteration.  Burn-down charts were 
displayed showing team iteration speed and projected 
next release date as well as projections for the overall 
work backlog. 
Ł In effect, the phenomenal quality boost increased 
confidence in the product because the demos were 
effectively bug-free. 
 
3. Exposing distributed team weaknesses 
 
The second case illustrates the power of collocation 
to expose problems early. The project delivery was an 
embedded C system for a medical device application.  
The software needed to be extremely robust and 
reliable. Management was nervous because the final 
deadline was only 4 months away, yet no working 
software had been demonstrated despite much coding 
activity.  One of use (Mark Thias) was asked to review 
the project status and make recommendations to insure 
on time delivery.   
The team was composed of 50 developers 
distributed between two companies and three locations.  
252 There were 13 company architects in the US and 30 
company developers in India.  In addition, the 
company hired an independent consulting company 
that contributed seven developers who worked at their 
own site.  
 
3.1. Uncovering the truth 
 
After a quick review of the previous eight months 
of work and meetings with the project manager and 
two senior architects, the real story quickly emerged.  
The good news was that the project had a stable set of 
requirements.  On the other hand, it was clear that none 
of the work was estimated, there was no tracking of 
what had been completed or what was functional, or 
any way to determine metrics to gauge the team™s 
speed or productivity.  The project manager claimed 
the project was on schedule, but since he had no 
working modules, there was no proof.  Both architects 
concurred that they would have something functional 
in about twelve months; eight months later than 
management expected. 
The next step was to quantify just how much work 
actually needed to be completed and where the 
productivity problems lay.  Since the project had stable 
requirements, creating Use Cases rather than stories 
made the most sense as a way to break the project into 
manageable pieces.  The work was estimated in Ideal 
Developer Days (IDDs) where an IDD was a perfect, 
uninterrupted developer day.  All the developers 
participated in the estimation process.  The initial 
estimate produced 2100 IDDs which was already an 
eye opener.   
As the developers planned the first three week 
iteration, more reality set in.  Developers were now ﬁon 
the hookﬂ to produce working modules at the end of 
the iteration, so they had to create a reasonable amount 
of work that they felt confident they could deliver 
within the timebox.  On average, they committed to 
seven IDDs per developer, or 350 IDDs per iteration. 
So based on the 2100 IDD backlog, there was now six 
months of work; not great, but within striking distance 
of the required four month deadline.   
As it turned out at the end of the first iteration, the 
team delivered less than 100 IDDs.  Extrapolating 
these results would mean delivering in 21 months, 
completely unacceptable to the now panicked 
corporate management team.  At this point some 
retrospectives started to uncover where the problems 
lay.  The first metric that jumped out was that the 30 
off-shore developers delivered less that 10% of their 
commitment, with five developers delivering 0 IDDs.  
The off-shore developers were very dependent on the 
on-shore team which further reduced overall team 
productivity.  The excessive lack of productivity from 
the offshore team was caused by a combination of 
problems:  
Ł The offshore team had limited hardware access, so 
they were unable to integrate and test with the same 
capacity as the on-shore people.  Untested code was 
checked-in with the expectation that the on-shore team 
would validate and fix it.  Not supplying the off-shore 
team with all the needed hardware and network access 
is unacceptable no matter what the methodology.  The 
issue was addressed immediately and corrected. 
Ł The off-shore team demonstrated a serious lack of 
programming skills.  In fact, fewer than 15% of the 
offshore developers were competent in the 
programming language of choice.  Despite the ﬁon the 
groundﬂ reports of poor engineering practices and lack 
of skilled programmers off-shore, this concern was 
largely ignored.  It would take several more futile 
iterations, embarrassing customer demos and lost 
credibility before this issue was taken seriously. 
 
253 3.2. Metrics 
 
As shown in 
Figure 1: Team Velocity
, the team was 
nowhere near the level of productivity required to meet 
the four month deadline.  Subsequent iterations 
essentially demonstrated the same thing: heavy 
reliance on the underperforming off-shore team to 
deliver huge chunks of work, a subsequent failure to 
deliver, and a failure to respond to the reality of the 
situation.   
Based on the data shown in 
Figure 1
, the iteration 
was 30% efficient.  Yet, some groups were delivering 
as promised as can be shown in 
Figure 2
.  The seven 
developer Hot Shot, Inc group represented 14% of the 
total team, yet was consistently assigned 18% of the 
total work and had a delivery rate of 78%.  While the 
off-shore team represented 60% of the total team, was 
assigned 54% of the total work with a delivery rate of 
only 27%.  The vast difference in performance 
efficiency was due to Hot Shot™s co-location, high skill 
level and comfort with agile methodologies. 
Despite the clear evidence, it was very difficult for 
the management team to accept that their strategic 
directive of growing the engineering staff in India as a 
means of reducing cost to stay competitive was indeed 
flawed.  Iteration after iteration, they were faced with 
abysmal productivity numbers yet they remained 
frozen with indecisiveness.  In the end, work 
previously assigned to the off-shore team was 
transferred to Hot Shot, Inc.  The quality of the small, 
collocated Hot Shot, Inc. team™s work was excellent 
and their productivity remained high.  Contrary to the 
executive management™s expectations, Hot Shot™s 
overall cost was actually much lower compared to the 
off-shore team due to their vastly higher productivity 
and quality.   
This case illustrates how agile practices challenge 
assumptions about the off-shore model to quickly 
expose a team™s weaknesses by capturing real metrics 
of project progress.  The company management had 
made the assumption that their contract with the 
outsourcing company would ensure the Indian 
developers would complete the project on time and 
within budget.  Sadly, they found to their detriment 
that relying on a contract for protection is unwise.  
Agile estimating, planning and tracking metrics were a 
crucial part of the project.  By using agile 
methodologies and a seasoned collocated subgroup, the 
team was able to deliver the project in spec and on 
time, and so avert potential disaster. 
 
4. Creating powerful teams 
 
Clearly while the promise of off-shoring as a big 
cost savings bonanza is a mirage, highly productive 
and cost effective software development is not only 
possible, but achievable, by using agile techniques and 
investing in collocated development teams.  To achieve 
the highest level of productivity and communications, 
creating collocated teams is
 the preferred option.  
Some of the factors that really make a collocated team 
so productive are: 
Ł
 
Customer/developer partnership 
Ł
 
Cooperation through collocation 
Ł
 
Short development iterations 
Ł
 
A focus on quality 
Ł
 
Eliminating waste through learning 
 
 
 
4.1. Customer/developer teams 
 
254 In a distributed team model, often the development 
team is not only not the business owner, but not even 
part of the same company.  As a result, the developers 
have no sense of ownership of the product nor do they 
share the same fundamental goals.  The sponsoring 
company is interested in a quality product that meets 
their requirements, while the consulting company is 
interested in delivering the product as cheaply as 
possible with little or no regard for quality or future 
maintainability. 
One of the biggest advantages to the agile approach 
is that the customer works closely with the teams Œ in 
fact becomes a full functioning member of the team.  
Each development iteration gives the customer 
(whether internal or external) the opportunity to verify 
that the requirements are met as the project develops.  
The customer also has the opportunity to evaluate 
whether they have provided the right requirements, 
because they can quickly see the results of their input 
to the product.  In this way, defects in requirements are 
exposed and corrected early.   
 
4.2. Cooperation through collocation 
 
The most difficult hurdle to get over when using a 
distributed development team is the problems of 
distance and other related risk factors.  With modern 
communications and the ubiquitous Internet, it might 
seem that the need for face to face communications can 
be eliminated.  However, many studies have shown the 
effect of regular personal communications on 
productivity.   In contrast, a high functioning 
collocated team will be in continuous communications.  
Not only are there daily check-in meetings to catch any 
issues as they arise, but the team is often working in a 
shared environment.  It is much easier to consult with a 
co-worker on a question about some piece of code 
when that person is sitting in the next cubicle.  The 
value of close proximity for improved productivity 
cannot be over stressed.   
 
4.3. Short iterations  
 
A typical distributed offshore team will generally 
deliver software in six month increments.  Since there 
is little or no insight into the inner workings of the 
team during the long development cycle, it is obvious 
how defects and waste can easily become hidden 
within the process, resulting in low quality software 
deliverables.   
In contrast, collocated teams are grounded in 
practices that consume and implement improvement 
ideas at every turn.  Software is broken down and 
delivered in 2-4 week iterations with a retrospective or 
kaizen session being held at the completion of each 
iteration module.  Progress is measured in terms of 
tested, working software, not time or code completed 
milestones.  During each iteration defects and waste 
are exposed which leads to the highest quality and 
lowest cost.  Retrospectives generate ideas for 
improvements which can be implemented right away in 
the next iteration.  To keep the project on track, a light 
set of metrics is created and applied to determine the 
benefit of each new idea as it
 is incorporated into the 
product.  Over time, the team is more productive while 
the software quality improves.   
 
4.4. A Focus on quality 
 
The unit testing practices of typical distributed 
teams are often not as rigorous as collocated teams 
because they are not part of the core development 
process.  Most consider unit testing to be a delay rather 
than the quality improvement tool it is.  Since most 
distributed teams have split the QA function to another 
group, testing is not a high priority, so all the actual 
testing is left to the functional testing team, which is 
not focusing on the code itself.  This can reduce code 
review coverage, sometimes to as little as 10%-15%. 
Collocated software teams focus on quality by 
developing automated unit tests for each and every 
function in the software.  This has the side effect of 
reducing wasted effort by automating the build and 
integration process and ensuring a bug free 
demonstrable system on a daily basis.  Since the 
product remains functional throughout the 
development cycle, the team has greater flexibility to 
respond to changes in requirements and functions that 
come from the business owners and the team owns an 
understanding of the inner workings of the software, a 
key component to future continuous learning and 
improvement ideas. 
 
4.5. Eliminating waste through learning 
 
Distributed teams gain no advantage in sharing 
ideas realized during the development process.  
Offshore teams are accustomed to being handed 
completed requirements, a defined architecture and are 
expected to do exactly what th
ey are contracted to do.  
In fact, the climate and culture of distributed teams are 
to get the work done as fast and as cheaply as possible 
generally by throwing resources and time at every 
problem.  Due to these factors, their participation in 
improvement ideas is often fruitless or even irrelevant 
since they have little insight into the business 
requirements of the deliverables.  To them, the long-
term quality and maintainability of the software is not a 
255 priority, since they will be long gone before any 
problems will crop up. 
Collocated organizations, on the other hand, are 
always looking for ways to continuously eliminate 
waste and constantly implement improvement ideas.  
The best people to identify waste and generate ideas 
for continuous improvement are the people doing the 
work, of course.  Stakeholders can easily go to the 
software developers, the architects, the testers and ask 
for new innovative features or new technologies that 
can help gain a competitive advantage.  While 
programmers are engaged in their work on one project, 
lots of creative ideas are realized that can be used 
immediately or for other projects.  In this way, a 
company can maintain an innovative backlog of 
product ideas.   
 
5. Conclusion 
 
The underlying assumptions about distributed 
teams™ relative labor costs, skill sets and productivity 
are now shown to be incorrect and increasingly less 
justifiable.  To combat these trends and reverse the 
rapid decline in productivity and quality, it is time to 
take back the software development process by 
applying development methodologies that allow better 
team communications, faster delivery times and higher 
quality products by using agile practices.  By applying 
these principles along with the creation of continuous 
improvement and continuous learning environments, it 
is possible to create small, powerful, adaptive, 
sustainable software teams that far out perform any 
off-shore or distributed development team. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
256