 Introducing Agile into a Software Development  
Capstone ProjectCyril Coupal and Kelvin Boechler Computer Systems Technology Program, Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, S7K 3R5 
coupal@siast.sk.caboechlerk@siast.sk.caAbstract.Conveying principles of software analysis, design and 
implementation in a classroom setting is problematic. 
When the course involves actual hands on development 
with clients drawn from industry, the challenges are 
magnified. This paper discusses the experiences and observations of a set of 10-month independent external 
projects undertaken by final year students in the 
Computer Systems Technology Program using Agile for 
the first time. We compare situations and observations of 

projects developed following an Agile [1] approach with 
XP Programming [2], to our previous projects developed 
in a traditional approach. Based on these observations, 

an Agile approach seems to support learning, provide a 
valuable practical experience and produce useable 
software within an academic environment. 
1.The Capstone Project Course
The two-year diploma Computer Systems Technology 
Program (CST) at the Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 

Science and Technology (SIAST) Kelsey Campus has 
been in existence for approximately 20 years. During this 
time, one course has set the program apart from similar 

programs at sister campuses. The capstone project course 
focuses on team analysis, design and implementation of 
an Information Technology (IT) based application for 
clients drawn from industry or from some other program 
within SIAST. The course was originally developed to help the 
student obtain an experience-based appreciation for their 

knowledge development and acquired soft skills. It was 

placed in the later portion of their education to utilize as 
much of their newly acquired knowledge as possible in 
actual development. 
The two one-term courses associated with the capstone 
project are COSA280 Rapid Application Development
,andCOSA290 Visual Application Development 
[3]. Both 
names reflect the leading edge approach to software 

development in place at the time the courses were first 
introduced.COSA280 was introduced to expose the 
student to the concepts of developing prototypes in a 
Rapid Application Development (RAD) environment. The 
beginnings of the course preceded, by some years, 
widespread integrated development environments (IDEs) 
based on graphical user interfaces (GUIs). 
COSA290 was introduced to present students with visual development 
environments as they became more commonplace. With 
the introduction of object-oriented systems and the 
evolving sophistication of IDEs to provide drag-and-drop 

development, the formal approach to rapid application 
development through prototyping in the capstone project 
was largely abandoned. The names of the courses have 

remained, however. 
1.1.Nature of the Project Class 
The second year CST 
COSA280-290
 classes span two 
terms from the middle of August until the end of April. 
There are two instructors assigned to the courses for the 
full year. During this time, up to 50 students in groups of 
5...8 members, work approximately 4 hours per week 

during assigned class time. Each group is assigned to a 
specific project with an external client. These projects are 
completely independent of each other, drawn from 

businesses in industry.  
The scope of the project tends to be limited due to the 
short, fixed duration of the courses and the limited size 
and expertise of the groups. Often the client is exploring 
some idea and their own IT department does not have the 

time to pursue the idea, or the client is looking for a 
solution to a small problem and does not want to spend 
funds on development. There 
is no cost to our client organizations to take part in this project, other than a time 
commitment.The group interacts with their client to analyze, design and implement a working computer-based application to 

fill some need of the client. The client understands that 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 the application is expected to require significant 
refactoring to provide what the client requests in 
production form after the project terminates. Thus a 
partially functioning application can still be useful to the 

client as it helps determine needs and potential solutions 
even if not all of the required functionality is implemented 
within the course time.  
The mark reflects the degree to which the needs of the 
client were identified and how well the implementation 

demonstrates the likelihood of an IT solution being 

possible and effective in addressing those needs. 
1.2.Former Project Development Process 
The historic approach to software development within 
the two classes utilized the waterfall model [4] of 
software development. During the fall term, students were 
expected to interact with the client and develop an 

analysis model. Although the time for completion of this 
model was flexible, it had to be formalized by the end of 
the term. Students were encouraged to be into design 

model development before the end of the first term.  
The second term usually consisted of a push to 
complete the design model by midterm break and then 

implement the model in a development environment by 
the end of the second term. Formal client sign-off on 
documentation and models was the milestone allowing 

students to advance to the next stage of development. 
Coding was largely forbidden except where exploration of 
some concept or idea was necessary. The models 

presented to the client have evolved from early 
documentation with Entity-Relationship [5] data models, 
algorithms and structured code, to Unified Modeling 
Language (UML) [6] models being used currently. 
1.3.Former Project Successes and Failures 
In the early years of the course, projects were deemed 
successful, as a satisfactory percentage of the client 
requirements were usually implemented and useable. 
Deliverables to the client included all documentation, 

models and source code. In a
ddition, any database tables 
developed for the application were given to the client. If 

the final product was incomplete or unstable, having 

complete and accurate models was beneficial to the client. 
The client could then approach a commercial developer 
with the models and student software for development of 

the actual production version. Often this was unnecessary 
because the project was useful enough that the client did 
not need to incur the cost of developing an actual 

production version, even though the student software was 
not production quality. Students seemed proud of their 
achievement and were happy to demonstrate their 

working product. The functioning application formed a 
significant portion of their evaluation. 
As later projects became more complex, less and less 
functionality required by the final product was possible to 

implement. In response to this trend, student evaluation 
shifted more towards analysis and design models, which 

were more significant, and away from implemented code. 
Another difficulty with these more complex projects 
was that the students could not estimate the complexity of 

the implementation during analysis and design model 
development. They found that what appeared fairly 
simple in their models would, in reality, be quite complex 

to implement, especially within the relatively short period 
of time left for implementation. As they became aware 
that they could not implement any significant amount of 
production functionality, students would become 
disappointed or depressed. Their focus then turned to the 

mark they hoped to receive rather than on the completion 
of the project with satisfactory software. With each year, 
students appeared less satisfied with the outcome of the 

project.In section 2.1 we discuss the student behavior that 
underlined the need for change in our approach to 

software development within the capstone project course. 
2.Rationale for Change to an Agile
ApproachAny approach to software development that enhances 
learning while increasing productivity, from the client and 

student standpoints, is desirable. Due to the sophistication 
of today’s business technology environment, requirements 
are generally poorly defined or unknown at the initiation 

of the project. Traditional approaches to software 
development have no longer proven ideal for development 
of applications [2]. A number of observations into client 
and student behavior pointed the project course towards 
an Agile/XP approach. 
2.1.Observed Student Behavior
Typically, during the analysis and design phases, 
students would settle into roles, partitioning the work 

among themselves. Each person would become adept at 

their given task but would not participate in other tasks 
outside their chosen area. We had groups where a single 
student would do documentation for the entire 8 months 
and never write a line of code. This “silo effect” on 
division of labor was detrimental in a number of ways: 
Although the capstone project was to be a major 
learning experience, students would learn only their 
individual area of work. There was little motivation to 

work in an area the student found difficult. The group 
would discourage participating in tasks for which the 
student did not excel, because this would slow progress 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 as others helped the less skilled student develop their 
abilities.The students would become quite possessive of their 

own work. This would lead to a resistance to change or 

delete any portion of their contribution from the project. 
Thus, rather than change to a possibly better solution 
they would maintain their original solution and continue 

to try and make it succeed.  
Students would often work in separate rooms, by 

themselves, so that they could concentrate on “their” 
tasks.Because of the silo effect on tasks, we would find we 
were repeatedly helping different students within the 
same project group solve the same problem. For 
example, one student may have a problem manipulating 

dates. After solving the problem with the student, we 
would find that another student was having a similar 
date problem. We also found that if a student 

discovered a solution, that knowledge would not likely 
become known to the rest of 
the group or other groups. 
Team cohesion would usually start to erode as time 
became short and it became evident the group would not 
complete the project. Rather than pull together, whoever 
was responsible for coding usually began heroic measures 
to attempt to complete the functionality while non-coding 
members polished the documentation or sat idly by since 

they knew nothing of the code base developed to date. 
Although traditional methods were formally employed 
in the project class, students often exhibited agile-like 

behavior. We discovered students were coding 
functionality even though the evaluation structure did not 
provide marks for coding or functionality in that 
particular phase of the project. Although the traditional 
approach emphasized the importance of completing a 
correct model, the students and the client would both 

deem the application code of greater importance. The 
subsequent conflict between what the course required the 
students to produce and what they and their client wanted 

produced, eroded interest and morale reducing the 
likelihood of successfully completing the project. 
As the evaluation structure evolved into one that was 
model-centric, student effort shifted as well. Students 
would often become obsessed with perfecting the models, 
focusing mostly on diagram layout. Given increasing 

complexity, significant model content was often provided 
by the instructors since the students had insufficient 
expertise or experience to identify and capture that 
content themselves.  
During this period of development, we observed the 
silo effect with some group members uninterested in 

analysis and design, working on programming 
assignments from other classes, or simply surfing the 

web. With the end of the project months away, the 
students did not feel the need to work diligently on the 
project: an assignment due tomorrow seemed more 
important than a project to be delivered in six months. 
Periodically, students would be presented with 
information in another class that they would eventually 

need to complete their project. However, because 
implementation was left until the latter part of the project, 
this information would be largely forgotten and have to be 

relearned. Since implementation often resulted in a heroic 
effort, by a few, to complete the remaining functionality, 
this information was never assimilated properly or widely. 

Misunderstandings and confusion were evident in the 
kinds of questions that the students asked often indicating 
a fundamental misunderstanding of the concepts learned 
earlier but not previously employed in a project setting. 
The project class did little to increase student interest in other classes as the other classes focused more on 

implementation issues. 
2.2.Observed Client Behavior 
A difficulty that faced most clients was to understand 
the models presented to them by the students during their 

informational meetings. Most of our clients had no 
background in software development. The students would 
attempt to explain to the client the models and the 
consequences of decisions, based on those models, during 

the first few meetings. Eventually the clients would come 
to understand something of the model content but never to 
the level where they could make informed decisions about 

future requirements and functionality. This resulted in a 
significant loss of time that could have been put to use 
identifying functionality. Prototype screens became very important, as projects 
grew more complex, since both students and client could 

easily understand the graphical nature of a screen and 

relate it to functional requirements. The difficulty was that 
the screen became the focus of client/student interaction 
with effort being expended on screen presentation. Colors, 

choice and position of controls tended to dominate the 
effort while major design decisions were ignored until it 
became impossible to ignore them further.  
2.3.Changing Client Expectations 
Early projects were successful because they tended to 
be small standalone non-networked applications designed 

for DOS® and Microsoft® Windows 3.1 environments. 
Applications were usually file based, with minimal 
reporting. Database requirements were largely met by 

Dbase® [7]. Later, with the introduction of Microsoft 
Access® and the ability to produce Windows forms in the 
Access IDE, Access became the environment of choice 

for many project efforts. 
As client expectations increased, projects became more 
complex. Networking became common in many business 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 environments and applications were no longer standalone. 
As the Internet became more ubiquitous, applications 
were expected to have web-based and email components. 
Often applications were expected to interact with 

commercial products to produce charts and formatted 
documents. 
The traditional approach to software development still 
produced good models but more effort than ever before 

was being expended capturing and perfecting the model. 
As a consequence, the groups implemented less and less 

functionality. In our final year using traditional software 
development, 2003-2004, not one project achieved even 
50% of agreed-to functionality by the end of the project 
course. Most projects achieved far less. Clients still 
obtained a good model and found the exercise valuable 

but did not have anything remotely useful, from a 
functional standpoint. At the end, even heroic efforts 
involving many out-of-class hours, by the students and 

instructors, did not significantly increase the useful 
functionality of the final deliverables.
2.4.Changing Employer Expectations 
In parallel to the evolving changes in the nature of the 
project, there was evidence that employer expectations 
were changing as well. Recruitment notices made 

references to many skills not common only a few short 
years ago. The typical diploma graduate today requires 
knowledge of networks, Internet protocols and 

applications, web-based presentation of information and 
interfaces to shared data. The graduate requires 
knowledge in multiple environments and platforms. 

Virtually every application has a database component of 
some kind.  
Student exposure to many different development 
languages and environments is desirable. Employers tend 
to expect our graduates to have a significant amount of 
hands-on experience with these languages and 

environments. This hands-on experience has largely been 
what distinguishes our graduates from those of computer 
science programs at university. 
3.Current Class Nature 
The current academic year began in August 2004. We 
returned from the Extreme Programming and Agile 

Methods – XP/Agile Universe 2004 [8] conference armed 
with many ideas and support material for altering the 
nature of the project course to be more Agile. To formally 

change the course content and direction within an 
academic institution such as ours can take up to 18 
months for all approvals and calendar changes. Our first 

hurdle, as instructors of the course, was to implement an 
Agile approach and XP programming in a manner that did 
not conflict with published descriptions and outcomes for 
the course. We thus used an “agile” approach and 

modified what we understood of Agile to fit our needs 
while remaining within the context of published course 
descriptions [3].  
This is the first introduction of Agile and XP 
Programming into the program. Our second-year students 

had no previous exposure to the practices and concepts 

they were to employ within the current projects. A crash 
course in Agile and XP Programming was delivered 
during the first month of the course. 
3.1.Our Flavor of Agile/XP 
Groups tend to be 6 members in size giving us up to 8 
projects. The class has two blocks of time, two hours in 

length each week for project development. The course 
spans 17 weeks in the fall term and 15 weeks in the spring term providing approximately 128 hours of designated 

class time for development. The students understand that 
time outside the designated class time will be required to 
accomplish typical projects. Groups must agree among 

themselves when and how much time in addition to class 
time will be spent on completing the project. 
In order to use index cards as suggested by XP [9], we 
introduced removable corkboards to the labs. The boards 
are small (48”x36”) and mounted on brackets so that they 

can be easily removed when the labs are in use by other 
classes. These boards are used to display story and task 
cards that are relevant to the current release. During the 

work period, the students remove the task on which they 
are working; otherwise, the card is to be displayed. We 
take digital images of the task boards as an ongoing 

record of project progress.  
Figure1.Taskboardduringrelease
In addition, the labs are fitted with whiteboards and 
data projectors that can be used as required. The students 
are encouraged to use the whiteboards to explore models 
and architecture. When they develop something they wish 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 to keep, we take a digital picture of the whiteboard; the 
picture becomes part of the documentation. There is also a 
small boardroom with whiteboard and network 
connection where the students may meet with their clients 

and make presentations. 
Figure2.Whiteboardimageofamodel.
At the beginning of the class in the fall, we discussed 
with the students how we were going to manage the 
projects this year, employing iterations with one iteration 
per release [9]. The activities during our first release did 
not differ much from previous years. Students met with 

their clients and obtained a first description of the project. 
Students were expected to produce a Project Charter and a 
UML Use-Case model of the project along with a first set 
of stories by the end of the release that lasted 
approximately three weeks. The instructors then divided 

the remaining time in the term into fixed release blocks 
leading them to release often [2].
Each release follows a standard general format. In the 
first class period of the release, if a previous release was 
just completed, the students are expected to produce a 
retrospective [11] identifying what worked well and what 

did not during the release. Students are then to prepare a 
release plan for the current release that lists the stories to 
be implemented. Stories are broken down into tasks with 

an estimated completion time on each task card. All 
current release stories and tasks are to be displayed on 
their board.  
Tasks include code development, model development 
and additional documentation. The incrementally 
developed UML models that reflect the current state of 

the application under development form part of the 
deliverables for the release. 
Each two-hour period begins with groups conducting a 
short standup meeting [10] to identify what will be 

accomplished during that work session.  
Although Agile/XP requires clients to be on site [2, 
11], our clients are usually not on site during 

development, unless the client is from another program 
within the institute. Thus most client contact is through 

email and phone calls. Meetings are limited to special 
occasions on or shortly after release dates. However, 
clients are advised that communication will be frequent 
and that we require quick responses to all inquiries. 
Following XP pair programming, students are expected 
to work in pairs on all tasks. Each pair of students shares a 

computer workstation and workspace. The labs are 
arranged as a series of rows of tables across the room with 

up to four workstations on the row. Access to each row of 
tables is from the center of the room [12]. Other classes 
are held in these labs during the day. The labs are 

normally available for additional time after hours and on 
weekends. 
As tasks are completed, the task card is checked off 
and the actual time recorded, as well as the names of the 
students who worked on the task. The back of the card 
and additional cards are used to record time if the task 

requires multiple two-hour sessions and XP pairs to 
complete. 
To guard against the silo effect mentioned above, 
instructors are enforcing the co-ownership [10] of the 

project deliverables by making sure everyone works on all 
kinds of tasks at some point in the project development. 
This is monitored through analysis of the task cards. If 
someone is becoming entrenched in one kind of task it 

becomes quickly evident. The instructor/coach can then 
step in and reiterate the importance of working on all 
different tasks regardless of the strengths and weaknesses 

of the individual. 
We encourage a spike [10] effort only when they truly 
need to experiment with an idea or component to see if it 

will be useful in completing the task at hand. Spikes are 
discouraged as a learning tool. When a student is blocked 
by how to go about doing something, we request that they 

quickly check with their group and then come see one of 
the instructors. Often the block is simply because they did 
not know how to proceed. If, however, they have a novel 

or nontraditional problem to address, they are encouraged 
to spike a possible solution. 
Test-driven development (TDD) [13] is also 
encouraged and forms a small part of the evaluation 

structure. Because this is our first attempt at using an 
Agile/XP approach in this course, we have no formal 
infrastructure to support TDD. We demonstrated and 
encouraged the use of assert functions found in the 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 languages employed, to develop code through assertions. 
This works well with their knowledge of abstract data 
type definitions and the UML pre- and post-conditions 
specified on class methods. Other courses in the program 

have begun incorporating TDD into their material as a 
way of reinforcing the TDD aspect of the capstone 
project.3.2.Classroom Management 
Two instructors are assigned to the project course for the full year. This course represents only a portion of the 

teaching load for each instructor. Instructors are not 
considered part of the group and therefore do not 
contribute directly to completing tasks. Instructors act 

mostly as coaches and observers during the process. We 
will get involved only when we see a difficulty that needs 
addressing or when a student pair is having difficulty with 

a programming concept or language feature. Often issues 
dealing with things like environment will cause a 
difficulty of which the student is previously unaware or 

unprepared to deal with. The project coach or any 
instructor with knowledge in the area of concern is the 
first source of assistance to the student. 
Attendance is taken as a formality at the start of each 
two-hour work period. Otherwise, instructors walk 

through the lab periodically to observe, but the students 
work largely on their own. 
Instructors also attend meetings between the client and 
the student group where possible. Occasionally meetings 

are held at a time when an instructor cannot be present. In 
these cases, the group is expected to provide a full report 

of the meeting to the instructor. Where an instructor is in 
attendance, only a meeting summary is required to be 
provided to the client confirming the outcomes of the 

meeting. 
3.3.Observed Student Behavior 
Almost immediately it became apparent that student 
interest was higher this year than in previous years. 
Students began developing screens and functionality almost immediately. The requirement to maintain 

synchronicity between the developed portion of the 
application and UML models did not seem to be difficult 
since maintaining the model component was minimal and 

supported code and database table development. Because 
functionality was being placed into the product under the 
guidance of the client, students were less obsessed with 

getting screen layouts perfected. They seemed to realize 
that the screens would be refactored in the weeks ahead 
and that a less than perfect screen could be perfected once 

functionality was completed. It should be noted that at a 
career fair early in the fall term, a number of companies 
asked students about the Agile approach and whether they 
were studying Agile concepts in their courses. This 

certainly added to the interest the students had in learning 
Agile.Not all students quickly grasped the usefulness of the 
standup meeting. Some saw the meeting as a waste of 

time since they already knew what 
they were going to do 
during the work period. Over time it seemed to become 
clear to them that the meeting did provide a mechanism 
for knowing what everyone was going to do during the 
work period and what problems existed for others. 
Creating and maintaining task cards seemed to be 
another concept that did not evidence its value initially. 

Students seemed to consider maintaining the task cards as 
an imposition and not of any real value. However, over 
time, the groups that did not embrace the task card 

concepts as readily, began to notice that the other groups 
got down to work quickly and seemed more focused and 
organized in their approach to the work of the day. By the 

beginning of the second term, all groups were 
aggressively managing their stories and task cards, using 
them as both a road map towards work still to do, and as a 

record of work accomplished. Students seemed to get a 
sense of satisfaction whenever they could add another 
completed task card to the pile. Students also quickly 

realized that task card time was an indicator of the amount 
of work they contributed to the project over the release. 
This was a valuable record of their individual contribution 

for later assessment. 
A single strong personality within a group still creates 
difficulties [14]. However, by using the concept of co-

ownership and selective pairing, we can address the 
difficulties of a single individual making all decisions and 
reduce any negative effects of such a personality [15]. The 
concept of co-ownership has established a shared 
responsibility to ensuring the success of the project. 

Students do not seem willing to wait as long to bring up 
an issue where one or more individuals are not co-
operating with the rest of the group. Having co-ownership

formally defined as a course parameter has empowered 
students who would not otherwise feel willing to bring up 
a difficulty and leads to resolution of such difficulties 
much earlier in the project. This, in turn, has had a two-
fold effect: the stronger student has had to relinquish 
some tasks to others perhaps not as skilled in the task. 

Secondly, weaker students have had to address these tasks 
and have discovered that they can accomplish what is 
needed even though they lacked confidence initially.  
The requirement to deliver often has had an interesting 
effect on when certain problems come to light. In 

previous years, the only delivery in most cases was at the 

end of the project. Whatever software had been developed 
was packaged and presented to the client. It would 
invariably be at this time that any problems with the 
installation, due to factors such as operating system 
incompatibilities, missing runtime libraries, missing 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 support software, and difficulties with connecting to 
servers (ex. making a connection through a firewall) 
would appear. Often there was not enough time for such 
difficulties to be overcome and the client would be left 

with an application that was not useable. In the current set 
of projects, the first release included first time installation 
of any support software. The 
problems mentioned above 
began appearing immediately with this release. Students 
were quick to realize that getting the runtime software 
correctly installed and configured 
was important. They would identify the various components and set up test 
machines with environments matching the client 
environment. Within a few releases, installation of most 
software went without error. Having these problems 
appear much earlier in the proj
ect also provided a good 
opportunity to discuss installation issues and ways to 
overcome difficulties. Thus students learned about and 
experienced first hand, encountering and solving 

installation problems. 
In a number of our projects, the initial environment 
chosen for development was rejected in favor of another 

environment. The ability to change environments or 
languages while continuing to
 develop is very valuable. In 
previous years such a change would be impossible due to 
the lateness of source coding and the difficulties with 
“personal” ownership of code and the reluctance to 
discard already programmed functionality. 
Often, knowledge about some concept, such as 
client-server interaction, does not really become important 

to the students until they have to utilize that knowledge 

(for example, to set up a client-server environment). In the 
Agile/XP approach, they are involved with applying such 
knowledge much earlier and over a longer period of time. 
Often their need for this knowledge precedes the 
presentations in other courses leading to pointed questions 

and motivation to learn more in those courses. 
Retrospectives and frequent releases give students the 
opportunity to reassess their practices. For example, 

during the first term, two groups misunderstood the 
Agile/XP approach to be an unstructured, anything goes 
way of developing software. Repeatedly we emphasized 

that they were going to run into trouble if they did not 
become more disciplined. The first term ended with these 
two groups far behind the other groups in terms of 

progress. As a result both groups received a low mark.  
When the second term started, we reiterated that Agile/XP 
practices required discipline. Both groups began 

following the process more carefully and by the end of 
February, both groups were not only experiencing major 
successes but had outpaced the other groups in terms of 

project velocity.  
4.Deliverables used for Student / Group 
EvaluationEvaluation of projects in a course like ours is always 
problematic. First, not all projects are of equal 
complexity. Many project-specific issues impact the 
complexity of an application. Thus complexity must be 

considered when assigning marks at the end of the course. 
Under the Agile/XP approach, marks can be assigned 
based on releases. We can evaluate group and individual 

performance based on what was agreed to be released 
compared to what was actually released. The effects of 
complexity are diminished because the released 
functionality becomes 
the focus of 
evaluation and all groups tend to deliver a similar quantity of functionality. 
Because of the Agile/XP emphasis on testing functionality 
before including it in a release, the delivered functionality 
tends to be less error prone. 
Evaluation of performance is based on the following 
criteria:Were all tasks chosen for the release actually delivered? 
Was functionality tested and useable by release time? 
Did each group member complete a similar amount of 
work based on his or her task cards? 
How well did estimates match actual times for task 
completion? 
Was everyone taking part in all group activities: client 

meetings, standup meetings, spikes and tasks? 
Did students work in XP pairs on all tasks? 
Deliverables to the client include: 
Any new runtime software required to support the 
current functionality. Any support files of data. 
Database tables and data content necessary for the 

current release functionality. Updated UML models synchronized to the current 

completed functionality. 
Testing reports including unit and acceptance tests. 
User documentation for the functionality being 

released.Working, tested functionality as defined in the release 
plan, provided to the client at the beginning of the 
release period. 
A number of interesting things come to light when the 
client is given a small set of functions that can be used. 

Assumptions appear about what was wanted or how the 
user will navigate a screen. Often the client discovers 
something that the students thought was wanted by the 

client but was not. After the release the client will come 
back with changes because it has become apparent that 
the way they thought they would do things is now 

obviously not the best approach. Through the process of 
multiple releases, the client and student group have the 
ability to tune the functionality to a more usable form. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 Again this was not something possible in traditional 
approaches since actual use of the application only came 
at the end of the project. 
5.Observed Effects of the Agile Approach 
on Project Activities and Outcomes A number of benefits and some drawbacks are 
becoming evident. 
5.1.Benefits
Positive aspects of Agile observed to date in the 
project course include: 
Encountering installation problems very early in the 
development process, often with the delivery of the first 

release, allows more time for resolution. 
There is better documentation of individual student 

work. Task cards record actual time spent by each 

student. It is a simple matter to tally the hours per 
student and then determine where time is being wasted 
because of other unproductive activities (i.e., web 
surfing, working on assignments from other classes). 
Dysfunctional groups become apparent much earlier. 
For example, in one group, cohesion problems were 
quite visible by the second release. 
Early coding has increased student interest in the 
project from the beginning. 
Early releases of partial functionality allow clients to 

better understand what is being created and make 

suggestions or changes while it is still feasible to 
modify the functionality. 
Coaches can obtain a better understand of the progress 

(velocity) of the project on a weekly basis. 
It is easier to bring the project back on track when a 
deviation is made due to misunderstanding of 
requirements, or due to a poor choice of solution for a 
particular problem. 
Releases contain both conceptual items, such as models 
and documentation, and items the client can begin using 
immediately. This makes it easier for the client to relate 

the functionality and the models. 
The visible progress apparent in every release seems to 

be a motivator for the students to undertake the next 

release with enthusiasm. 
Refactoring previous functionality is not seen as a 

difficulty because it is part of the process unlike in 
previous projects where any changes to working 
functionality were avoided. 
Task cards help focus the group on work to be 
completed; there is rarely a question from a group 
member such as “What should I do next?” 
Students have shown greater interest in their other 
courses since material in the other courses is often 
immediately relevant to what they are doing in the 
project. Other instructors are stating that they are 
observing greater interest and participation over 
previous years. 
All students can observe the activity and progress of other groups. This also acts as a competitive motivation 
to continue to move forward.  
Students used to abandon quality in an effort to produce 
as much functionality as possible to meet their goal. 
Now, each release is a mini-project which is achievable. 
Any problems with released functionality can be 
refactored in the next released. With less functionality 

to produce, we have observed more use of error-
handling and transaction control in the delivered code. 
5.2.Drawbacks
Drawbacks we observed were: 
The Agile/XP approach can appear less disciplined to 
students. Students can become undisciplined if not 

closely monitored by their instructors to be following 
the Agile/XP approach carefully. Evaluation requires a 
component that measures how well the students follow 

the process. This acts as motivation to adhere to the 
Agile/XP approach during the early stages of the 
project.Clients are not present on site or during work periods, 
as they are supposed to be in an Agile/XP approach. We 
have experienced difficulty with getting timely answers 

to questions, or quick evaluations on releases. 
Periodically a group has had an unproductive work-
period because a client response did not arrive on time. 

Better task identification and organization should 
overcome this in the future. 
Organizing the evaluation material and performing 

evaluations have been somewhat problematic; we are 
still learning all the possible ways in which evaluations 

can be performed. 
Due to the formal descriptions of the course, we are 

limited by how fully we can embrace Agile/XP; course 

outcomes must be met even if they do not blend well 
with Agile/XP. Due to the functional requirements of a release, the 
instructors may have to teach material scheduled to be 
taught in some other class at a later date. This tends to 
be offset by an increased student interest in that class 

when the material is presented. 
6.Observed Effects of the Agile Process on 
ProjectsThe following observations have been made affecting 
the project deliverables: 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 Early coding has given clients something concrete to 
understand and manipulate; this, in turn, has produced 
better feedback from clients and more focused effort on 
the part of students.
Problems with requirements and solutions are 
encountered early in the development effort due to 
frequent releases; because releases are small, 
refactoring does not impose any major penalties to 
progress.
Clients have an easier time understanding project scope 
and difficulties because of the frequent releases; they 
can quickly understand, when it becomes apparent 

something they asked for will not work as expected or 
is more problematic then it is functionally worth. This, 
in turn, changes the nature of the functionality to 

something more focused on what the client can use.
Progress is more visible even if not significantly 

greater than in previous projects; this greater visibility 

acts as a self-motivator in later releases.
Excessive documentation is avoided because 

documentation is driven by the development effort 
rather than being developed as a separate entity.
At least one of our current clients became involved 
with our project course because we were using an Agile 
approach and they wished to observe how well it 
supported our efforts.
7.Conclusions
Overall, the employ of an Agile/XP approach in the 
project course has been largely a positive experience for 

both the instructors and the students. The approach has 

been more productive in terms of producing useable 
functionality for the client. The client has been able to 
direct the production of the functionality, the result being 

that the functionality delivered in a release was what the 
client requested for that release.  
The approach has provided a better hands-on 
educational environment in which to learn and apply 
concepts. It has meshed neatly with other courses being 
delivered in parallel in that topics covered in other courses 
were timely and of immediate use by the students. This 
had the benefit of reinforcing the concepts and why they 

are important. 
The students believe the use of an Agile/XP approach 
has proven to be a positive aspect of the program leading 

to future employment in industry. Clients and potential 
employers have shown interest in the Agile/XP approach 
reinforcing this belief that they are learning useful current 

technology.We intend to continue to adapt and employ the 
Agile/XP approach in our project course in the future with 

expansion of the concepts and activities wherever 
appropriate. It is hoped that the experience we have had 
with this first attempt at using Agile/XP within our project 
course will allow us to present a new version of the course 
for the calendar and get the course formally renamed with 
a new set of outcomes more focused on Agile/XP. 
8. References 
1.Manifesto for Agile Development, 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org.
2.K. Beck, “Embracing Change with Extreme 
Programming,” Computer, IEEE, Vol.32, Issue No. 
10, 1999, pp. 70-77. 3.http://www.siast.sk.ca/siast/educationtraining/onca
mpusprograms/7266/5580/5850/index.shtml#cours
es.4.Schach, S.R., 
Object-Oriented and Classical 
Software Engineering, Fifth Edition
, McGraw-Hill, 2002.5.Ramakrishnan, R., and J. Gehrke, 
Database 
Management Systems, Second Edition
, McGraw-
Hill, 2000. 6.Fowler, M., 
UML Distilled Third Edition, A Brief 
Guide to the Standard 
Object Modeling Language,Pearson Education, Inc., 2004. 
7.The History of FoxPro, 
http://www.foxprohistory.org/people_began.htm.
8.Extreme Programming and 
Agile Methods – XP/Agile Universe 2004, 4th Conference on 
Extreme Programming and Agile Methods, 
Calgary, Canada, August 2004 Proceedings, 

Springer-Verlag, 2004. 
9.Iteration Planning, 
http://www.extremeprogramming.org/rules/iteratio
nplanning.html.
10.Astels, D., G. Miller, and M. Novak, 
A Practical 
Guide to eXtreme Programming
, Prentice Hall, 2002.11.Principles behind the Agile Manifesto, 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org/principles.html.
12.Room 239A, 
http://www.siast.sk.ca/programsites/kelsey/cst/labs/
239a.htm
, Room 239B, 
http://www.siast.sk.ca/programsites/kelsey/cst/labs/
239b.htm.
13.Beck, K., 
Test Driven Development by Example
,Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
14.G. Melnik and F. Maurer, “Perceptions of Agile 
Practices: A Student Survey,” Extreme 
Programming/Agile Universe, Chicago, IL, 2002. 
15.N. Katira, L.Williams and J. Osborne, “Towards 
Increasing the Compatibility of Student Pair 
Programmers,” 27th International Conference on 
Software Engineering, St. Louis, MO, 2005. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
