 Results of the 2nd International Workshop on the  
Impact of Agile Practices (ImpAct 2017) Philipp Diebold 
Fraunhofer IESE 
Kaiserslautern, Germany 
philipp.diebold@iese.
g.de Daniel Mendez 
Technical University of 
Munich Munich, Germany 
mendezfe@in.tum.de
 Stefan Wagner 
University of Stu
gart,  
Stu
gart, Germany 
stefan.wagner@informatik.
uni-stu
gart.de
 Darja Smite 
Blekinge Institute of 
Technology  
Karlskrona, Sweden 
darja.smite@bth.se
 ABSTRACT 
At present, agile development 
is a dominating development 
process in software engineering. Yet, due to different contexts, 
also agile methods require adaptations (e.g. Scrum-but). Since 

adaptation means adding, modifying or dropping some agile 

elements, it is important to know what the effects and importance 

of these elements are. Given the weak state of empirical evidence 
in this area, we initiated the workshop series on the Impact of 
Agile Practices (ImpAct). This paper provides a summary of the 
second workshop of this series, especially its lightning talks and 
discussions. The major outcomes 
include interesting observations 
such as negatively rated practi
ces and contradicting experiences 
as well as follow-up activities ordered in a roadmap. 
CCS CONCEPTS 
Ł Soware and its engineering
  Soware development 
methods;
 KEYWORDS 
Agile Development, Agile Practices, Impact, SPI. 
ACM Reference format: 
P. Diebold, D. Mendez, S. Wagner, and D. Smite. 2017. Results of the 2
nd International Workshop on Impact of Agile Practices. In 
Proceedings of 
International Conference on Agile De
velopment, Cologn
e, Germany, May 
2017 (XP™17)
, 3 pages. 
DOI: 10.1145/123 4 
1 INTRODUCTION & MOTIVATION 
Several common studies showed the importance and high usage 
of agile development approaches [1], such as Scrum. Nonetheless, 

the state of the art and practice in development processes showed 

that agile methods are often mixed 
with traditional processes [2], 
and it is often necessary to adapt agile methods to the 

particularities of specific organizational or project contexts [3]. 

Given the weak state of empirical evidence on the benefits and 
shortcomings of the plethora of agile practices at our disposal, we 
decided to concentrate the discussions on single agile practices 

(such as pair programming or using a product backlog) rather than 

on complete agile methods (such as Scrum).  
Within the first Impact-workshop in 2015 [4] we covered a 
broad range of related topics, from
 foundational aspects captured 
in a meta model, over contextual factors important to consider 

when choosing specific issues, up to elaborate discussions about 

concrete impacts of single agile practices. In between that first 

workshop and the second one, we initiated a lightweight data 

collection phase to collect experts™ perceptions on the impact of 

agile practices. To this end, we used interactive posters with sticky 
dots as introduced in [5]. Those posters were used in various 
venues where researchers and practitioners met and so we also 
employed them at this year™s XP Conference 2017 where the 

second ImpAct workshop was co-located.  
 Figure 1 Data collection via interactive posters. 
Figure 1 shows the poster as a means to collect impacts of agile 
practices on different quality attributes where conference 
attendees could add their own perc
eption via stickers underlying 
a color coding (from strongly negative impacts to strongly 
positive ones). As for the XP Conference, we collected in total 
more than 500 data points which we used as an input for the 
workshop we held the last day of the one-week event. Please note 

that the impacts collected via this and all other posters can also be 
found on our website http://i
mpact.iese.fhg.de/data.php.  











XP™17 Workshops
, May 22 - 26, 2017, Cologne, Germany. 
Copyright 2017 ACM 978-1-4503-5264-2/17/05–$15.00. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3120459.3120484 
 XP™17, May 2017, Cologne, Germany 
P. Dieb
old, D. Mendez, S. Wagner, and D. Smite 
 2 We structured our workshop as
 follows. We began with two 
short invited lightning talks related to the overall topic of the 
impact of agile practices (Section 2). This was followed by a Lean 
Coffee session where we collected topics of interest from the 
participants. We prioritized them which then resulted in the 

topics used for the discussion (Section 3). Beside the discussion, 

we outlined ideas and plans for follow-up work (Section 4). The 

remainder of this paper is structured according to the workshop 

structure.  
2 INVITED LIGHTNING TALKS 
For starting and fostering the discussion on the impact of agile 
practices, we invited two speakers
: Torgeir Dingsøyr from SINTEF 
who talked about the practice Scrum-of-Scrums [6] for scaling 
agile approaches (Section 2.1), and Martin Kropp from FHNW 

Windisch who presented an excerpt of the current Swiss Agile 

Survey [7] related to the impacts 
of agile practices (Section 2.2). 
Both talks are detailed in the following.  
2.1 Scrum-of-Scrums improves 
Communication 
The first invited talk on Scrum-of-Scrums started with a statement 

of importance of coordination 
due to the fact that the main 
intension of this practice is to
 foster the communication between 
teams. Kraut and Streeter argue that while there is no single cause 
of the software crisis, a major 
contribution is the problem of 
coordinating activities while deve
loping large software systems, 
which become much more difficult 
as project size and complexity 
increase [8]. After a short explanation of the practice in detail, the 
high usage and wide spread of the practice was shown by a 

common survey [1]. 
Furthermore, experiences were shared about whether Scrum-
of-Scrum as a practice really works or not: Paasivaara et al. [9] 

present that ﬁScrum-of-Scrum meetings involving representatives 

from all teams were severely challenged: the audience was too 

wide to keep everybody interested [...] often ending up not 

reporting anythingﬂ. Additionally
, [10] identified that ﬁinter-
group coordination becomes a major challenge when groups 

enjoy high levels of autonomyﬂ which is or at least should be the 
case in agile development.  
The presentation ended with a short discussion on different 
coordination modes [11], personal vs. impersonal and individual 
vs. group, all by giving different examples. One example for 
personal coordination is, of course, also the practice of Scrum-of-
Scrums itself as a scheduled meeting. 
2.2 Impact of Agile Practices in Switzerland 
Martin Kropp offered insights into the ongoing data analysis of 

the last run of their survey conducted in Switzerland in 2016 on 
the impact of agile practices. Simi
lar to [7] their results reported 
many companies using agile practices, but most of them used in 
fact not only agile practices 
but a combination with rather 
traditional approaches. This, again, strengthens our confidence in 
the existence of trends to use 
various practices for software 
development. Besides this, the authors also provided insights into 
the application of single agile and plan-driven practices and their 
usage frequency.  
Finally, and probably most important for us in the workshop, 
was a correlation analysis between the elicited practices and 
improvement goals, e.g. time to mark
et, project visibility, or team 

productivity. This scope was simi
lar to our poster results but 
emerged from a correlation analysis. The impacts are, thus, also 

to be seen bidirectional connectio
ns between practices and quality 
aspects.  
3 FOLLOW-UP DISCUSSION 
Directly following the two lightning talks, we began our 
discussion. We used the results of the poster-based data collection 
as a starting point. There, one major issue that raised our attention 

was that some cells either cont
ained contradicting experiences 
(e.g. strong negative as well as 
strong positives) or they were 
mainly deemed negative, such as BurnDown Charts.  
Next, we added further topics to be discussed in a Lean Coffee 
format including topics emerging from the interactive poster to 
methodological 
questions. After this, we prioritized these items 
based on dot voting (with three votes per participant). The 
resulting list including the votes is presented in the following:  
BurnDown Charts (3 votes) 
Scrum Meetings (1 vote) 
Product Quality (0 votes) 
Stress & Overtime (5 votes) 
Data Merging  (2 votes) 
Reasoning (Why) (3 votes) 
Transfer to practice (0 votes) 
As specified in the Lean Coffee concept, we started with the 
topic with the most votes and disc
ussed that. Due to the fact that 
the first topic was interesting too all participants and we wanted 

to conclude the workshop with 
some future work aspects, we 
could only detail the aspect of stress and overtime. We summarize 
the corresponding discussions next. 
3.1 Can Agile address Stress and Overtime and, 
if so, how? 
First, we clarified that we define stress and overtime as 
workload (not in hours). Initially, we identified that every 

organizational change is stressful. That is, the introduction of 
agile development increases stress independently whether it is an 

evolutionary or revolutionary approach.  
The first aspects that we discussed and identified covered 
specific agile practices that are supposed to support a better well-

being:  40 hour week (XP) 
Mindfulness [12] 
Continuous Integration / Deployment / Delivery  

(in normal working hours) 
Besides that, the second aspect deals with different context-
issues that influence the stress and overtime level: 
Number of years working in agile 
 Results of the 2
nd International Workshop on the  
Impact of Agile Practices (ImpAct 2017)
 ICSSP™17, July 2017, Paris, France 
  3Culture of the organization, project and/or team 
Work as well as tool environment 
Together with context aspects, the issue of happiness appeared 
in the discussion due to the fact that stress and happiness appear 
to be opposites. This can be combined with the knowledge that 
happy developers are more productive [13][14] and probably less 
stressed. 
Finally, we also discussed that 
stress can be positive. There is 
the concept of ﬁeustressﬂ which denotes stressors that are helping 

to succeed and create motivation
 and happiness. Only if the 
stressors become chronic, they can turn into negative effects. 

Agile practices such as sprints could support to have also regular 

stress relieve.  
4 FUTURE WORK 
Since our overall goal is to establish this workshop as a series, the 

discussion on future work is one of the major issues which we 

discussed and summarized at the end.  
We came to the following issues which will be included in our 
future work, starting with very 
generic issues and finally coming 
to very detailed concrete ones:  
Creating a Slack channel
 for communication within 
the team or interested persons on that topics to proceed 

with all the other future work issues. 
Summarizing the workshop
 to spread our ideas and 
work in a community which is further fostered by this 

summary.  
Writing a joint publication on challenges on 

collecting impacts
 as a follow-up work to 
Error! 
Reference source not found.
 to discuss some of the 
aspects that we identified
 and discussed during the 
workshop, such as collection of certain context 

characteristics.  
Establishing the workshop as a series
 given the 
positive resonance. We plan to organize this workshop 

at subsequent conferences such as PROFES
1, XP2, or ICSE3 due to their thematica
lly fitting focus.  
Establishing an online tool 
(connected with our 
poster-data website) or 
continuously running a 
survey to ask participants two aspects: (1) First, to get 
more impacts on specific practices and (2) second on 
reasons for this given experienced impacts, such as 
context information or even wrong usage.  
Developing hypotheses 
at different levels of 
abstraction 
from the existing poster data
 (not only 
XP-data). For instance, are some practices used in a 
wrong manner? How does progress-tracking in practice 

work? Are agile practices (progress tracing) actionable? 

Out of such a huge list of hypothesis or questions that 

we can raise from the collected data we might be able to 

spread them as new PhD-topics.  
                                                                 
1 http://profes-conferences.org/
  2 http://www.xp2018.org
  As already mentioned, besides the more strategic aspects on 
the future work, we identified some concrete actions that might 

be related to the previous strategic issue: 
Identification of white spots in the existing data and 

checking whether this is the case (a) due to a lack of 

experiences by the participants in those specific 

areas or (b) because there are no impacts. 
Identification of differences or contradictions within 

the data to see which combinations of agile practice 

and characteristics need to be investigated, e.g., by 

giving contextual information.  
Question agile practices that are rated almost 
completely negatively to most or all improvement 
goals, such as Burn Down Charts during the XP 
conference.  
Based on these different strategic and concrete items, which 
we derived during our intensive workshop discussions, we 
continue following the goal to fill the gap until we are going to 

conduct the next follow-up workshop on one of the mentioned 
conferences. 
REFERENCES 


The 9th Annual State of Agile
TM Survey Report














































































 3 http://www.icse2018.org
  