 Software Change in the So
lo Iterative Process:  
An Experience Report
 
Christopher Dorman 
Department of Computer Science 
Wayne State University 
Detroit, MI 48202 
dorman@wayne.edu 
Václav Rajlich 
Department of Computer Science 
Wayne State University 
Detroit, MI 48202 
rajlich@wayne.edu
 
Abstract
—This paper reports an experience of a solo 
programmer who added a new feature into an open source 
program called muCommander. The process is observed on 
two granularities: Granularity of software change (SC) and 
granularity of Solo Iterative Process (SIP). The experience 
confirms that both SC and SIP process models can be 
successfully enacted, are able to implement the described 
feature, and produced a high quality code in reasonable time. 
The lessons learned, particularly the exit criteria for SC 
phases, are discussed in more detail in the paper and may be 
applicable to team iterative processes, including agile 
processes. 
Keywords-agile process; software change; solo programmer; 
concept location; impact analysis; actualization; refactoring  
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
This paper is an experience report of the 
Solo Iterative 
Process (SIP)
 as defined in [1, 2]. SIP belongs to the family 
of iterative processes and it describes a process of a 
programmer working alone on a software project. It is 
applicable to the development 
of small applications that 
include smartphone applications, to the maintenance of 
stable products [3], to the development of open source, or as 
a stepping stone to the teaching of agile processes [2]. SIP 
shares many characteristics with agile processes that include 
repeated software change, baseline builds, and so forth. 
SIP contains repeated 
software change (SC)
 [4]. While 
many authors have addressed the individual phases of SC, an 
integrated model of SC needs additional exploration. Even 
though many experienced programmers are capable of 
executing SC intu
itively without the guidance of any model, 
we want to address less experienced programmers who 
would benefit from learning SC. We also want to use it to 
research tools that could aid the SC process. Once the SC 
process model is established, it can be improved as 
additional experience is accumulated.  
The SC process model consists of several phases and a 
specific SC enactment may contain all of them or just a 
subset. The purpose of this study was to explore and gain 
practical experience with SC 
within the framework of SIP. 
Since SC is an indispensable part of both SIP and agile 
processes, this exploration can provide insight into SC as it 
applies to agile processes.  
This paper presents an experience of using SIP on a 
medium sized open source program and describes an 
implementation of a new feature. The feature is implemented 
in an iteration that consists of nine SC, each adding new 
functionality or fixing a bug, and adds 40 new classes to the 
code that originally contained 1070 classes. This report 
shows that SIP, including SC
, was an effective iterative 
process, suitable for this software engineering task.  
Section II surveys previous work, including the SIP and 
SC process models. Section III describes the subject 
program, technologies involved, and the feature to be 
implemented. Section IV contains the description of the SIP 
enactment that implements this new feature, with a more 
detailed description of the first change. Section V contains 
the discussion of the lessons learned, section VI discusses 
threats to validity, and section VII contains the conclusions 
and future work.  
II.
 
P
REVIOUS 
W
ORK
 
An earlier example of a single programmer process is the 
Personal Software Process (PSP) [5]. It builds on a 
programmer’s preexisting capabilities and it is taught 
through a series of programming tasks, where students keep 
track of a battery of metrics [6]. They learn from their 
mistakes and that enables them to improve the quality and 
efficiency of their work. Studies have shown that PSP 
improves performance in both university and industrial 
settings [7]. While PSP emphasizes process measurements 
that are largely independent of the process model, SIP 
presents a specific process model. 
The rest of this section summarizes the two granularities 
of the process model: the granularity of SC [2, 4] and the 
granularity of SIP [1, 2].  
A.
 
Software Change 
SC is a task that is univers
al to all iterative processes. 
Researchers have paid a considerable attention to the 
individual SC phases, but they paid a much smaller attention 
to the integrated SC model.  
The phase of 
concept location
 finds the specific code 
snippet that needs to change [8]. Of the numerous concept 
location techniques and tools that are now available, we used 
the 
dependency search 
technique. Concept location by 
dependency search is guided by 
contracts
 between suppliers 
and clients in software [9]. Suppose class A has contracts 
with its clients that involves 
concept C. Then concept C is 
either located in class A, or is delegated to one of its 
suppliers. This fact can be used in a recursive search for 
concept C; the process starts at the 
main 
method
 
or entry 
point of the program that provides concept C to the user, and 
2012 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4804-3/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/Agile.2012.1321  
it recursively progresses through client-supplier relationship 
to the class or method where concept C can be found.  
SC often impacts several classes and 
impact analysis
 
determines the strategy and extent of the change. The process 
of impact analysis uses class interactions that are a superset 
of the program’s dependencies [4]. If a class A changes and 
it interacts with a class B, then class B may change also; the 
programmer must inspect it. If class B changes all classes 
interacting with it can change also and therefore should be 
inspected. Moreover some classes do not change but 
propagate the change to the classes interacting with them [4]. 
The 
estimated impact set 
is the set of all classes that the 
programmers predict will change while enacting SC.  
Actualization
 is the phase that actually implements the 
required new functionality by modifying old classes or 
creating new ones. The portion of actualization that finds and 
modifies all the classes that need to change is called 
change 
propagation
. The set of all modified classes is called the 
changed set
 and should be equal to the estimated impact set. 
 
Refactoring
 is a phase that changes the structure of 
software without changing its behavior. It is done either 
before actualization in preparation for it (prefactoring) or 
after actualization as a cleaning of the unwanted after effects 
(postfactoring). There are numerous refactoring 
transformations and each of them addresses a specific 
concern, sometimes called an anti-pattern or a bad smell. 
Refactoring is a well-researched part of SC [10]. There 
are a selection of refactorings to choose from; for example, 
extract class, move field, and others. An updated refactoring 
list [11] currently has over 90 examples. Mens and Tourwé 
[12] outline a process for successful refactoring. 
Verification
 assesses and improves the correctness of 
code updates. Harrold and Soffa looked at the issues of unit 
testing in evolving software [13]. Zhu, Hall, and May studied 
techniques to select test criteria [14]. Regression testing 
verifies whether the old functionality is still functioning after 
a change. Running the full set of regression tests in large 
software projects can be very time consuming, in some cases 
even taking a week or more; therefore much research has 
been devoted to determining the minimum set of regression 
tests after a change, such as [15] and [16]. 
Test-Driven Development (TDD) [17] is a SC process 
that is based on writing tests fi
rst, and then production code 
that passes the tests. Proponents argue that TDD produces 
superior code that is free of bloat, and the resulting 
comprehensive regression test suite encourages refactoring.  
B.
 
Team Iterative Processes 
SC is the fundamental task of the team iterative processes 
where repeated changes are grouped into iterations [2]. 
Among them, Scrum is an agile process that plans for short 
periods of time, known as sprints [18]. At the end of a sprint 
the current state of the project is assessed and serves as the 
basis for the planning of the next sprint. Extreme 
Programming (XP), has a set of twelve practices [19] that 
include planning for a short time, pair programming, and so 
forth. An experience with XP was reported in numerous 
publications, for example in  [20].  
Cockburn and Highsmith claim that the dominant factor 
in the success of agile processes is the quality of the people 
enacting the process [21]. They present the argument that, 
“’people trump process’” (p. 131).  
The Rational Unified Process (RUP) is an earlier iterative 
process oriented towards large projects
 
[22].  
C.
 
Solo Iterative Process (SIP) 
A SIP iteration is a simplified version of an iteration 
from the agile processes. During each iteration, the 
programmer elicits and analyzes the requirements, selects the 
requirements to be implemented during the iteration (called 
the 
iteration backlog
), then implements these requirements 
through repeated SC. At the end of the iteration, the 
programmer thoroughly tests the software and builds a new 
baseline that is the starting poin
t for the next iteration or for 
the release to the users [1, 2].  
III.
 
P
ROJECT 
C
HARACTERISTICS
 
The project reported in this paper is an exploratory case 
study whose purpose is to observe SC within the context of 
SIP and find the answers to the following questions: 
•
 
Are the SC and SIP models complete? Do they 
account for programmer’s activities and tasks? 
•
 
Is the SC model an effectiv
e process? Do data in the 
project indicate that SC supports reasonable 
productivity and quality? 
•
 
Do technologies support the programmer’s needs in 
SC and SIP tasks? 
•
 
Are tasks and phases defined sufficiently? Do they 
give the programmer all necessary guidance? 
As is common in exploratory case studies, additional data 
that may provide additional insights were also recorded. 
A.
 
The Object Sysytem 
In the project, we used the muCommander program; it is 
an open source, cross platform, advanced file manager 
program [23]. It expands an operating system’s native file 
manager with several features such as browsing file systems 
over a variety of connections. The code of muCommander 
has 76 KLOC and 1,070 classes. It is written entirely in Java. 
It has a JUnit [24] test suite that includes 441 tests covering 
18.1 percent of the statements. Its GUI components use the 
Swing Java Foundation Classes [25].  
B.
 
The Solo Programmer 
The solo programmer had university experience in 
programming, mostly in C++, limited experience in Java 
programming, limited experience with SIP, and was 
unfamiliar with the muCommander program. He was 
charged to implement a new muCommander feature that is 
described in the next section.  
C.
 
New Feature 
The new feature request can be found on the 
muCommander website among the Frequently Asked 
Questions (FAQ): 
“How can I search for a specific file?” The reply: “At the 
time of writing, you can't. This is an often requested feature, 
22  
one that we're thinking about and have a few ideas on how to 
implement, but it's not there yet.” [23] (pg. FAQ q. 5) 
D.
 
 Technologies Used in the Project 
Besides the technologies of the existing muCommander 
project, several technologies assisted the programmer in SIP 
and SC. The programmer used 
Subversion (SVN) 
as the 
project version control system [26]. For access to the SVN 
repository, the programmer used 
TortoiseSVN 
 [27], 
including its 
diff
 tool. 
 The 
Clover Java Code Coverage & Test Optimization
 
tool measures test coverage [28]. 
JRipples
 is an Eclipse 
plugin that supports concept location, impact analysis, and 
actualization [28]. 
The
 Mylyn
 task and application lifecycle management 
framework is included with Eclipse [29]; it assisted the 
programmer in managing and measuring the effort. To 
record and export timing data in the minute granularity 
required an additional plugin called 
Tasktop 
[30].. 
The original subject program had no functional tests. The 
programmer used the 
Abbot Java GUI Test Framework
 as a 
technology to build functional tests for the new code [31]. It 
is based on the JUnit test framework and the Java Virtual 
Machine automated robot classes. It has classes that help a 
programmer test many Swing GUI components. 
IV.
 
SIP
 
E
NACTMENT
:
 
A
DDING A 
N
EW 
F
EATURE
 
This section describes an enactment of SIP that 
implements the new feature. It contains the creation of the 
iteration backlog, a detailed explanation of the first change, 
and a description of build at the end of the iteration.  
A.
 
Iteration Backlog 
The feature request is vague and complex. In order to 
understand the feature request better, the programmer 
familiarized himself with the object program; he visited the 
website and then used the program as his file explorer for 
two days. This time was not recorded in the timing logs. 
 TABLE I. 
 
I
TERATION 
B
ACKLOG
 
#Title Change Request 
1
Basic Search 
Add a basic search function that searches in the current 
directory for all or part of the title of a folder or file. 
2
Recursive 
Search 
Add search inside all directories. 
3
Advanced 
Output 
Change the output to a window similar to the main 
muCommander window. 
4Date Search Add search by a date of file’s modification. 
5
Case Sensitive 
Search 
Add search by case sensitive search terms. 
6
Extension 
Search 
Add search for files with specific extensions. 
7
Properties 
Search 
Add search for files based on their properties. 
8
Directory 
Chooser Bug 
File chooser doesn't update the search directory. 
9
Date Bug 
DateOption
 is not removed when disabled. 
Based on this experience, the programmer divided the 
feature request into seven change requests of the product 
backlog in Table I. The last tw
o change requests in Table I 
address the bugs that the programmer found during the 
iteration and added them 
to the backlog later. 
B.
 
Change1: Basic Search 
This section describes details of change 1 and is an 
example of SC enactment. The change request is: “Add a 
basic search function that searches in the current directory 
for all or part of the title of a folder or file.” During the 
change request analysis, the programmer added the 
following further details: 
•
 
Activate the search in one of the following ways: the 
“Go” menu, the quick launch toolbar, and a virtual key. 
•
 
Create a search window where the user can enter 
search terms, start a search, and see the results. 
•
 
Write a search algorithm.
 
1)
 
Concept Location 
The programmer extracted the following significant 
concept: “activate the search”.
 He started concept location 
by dependency search by inspecting the 
Launcher 
class, 
which contains the program’s main method, see Figure 1. 
The concept is not located ther
e and JRipples identified 43 
suppliers. The programmer inspected 
AbstractFile
, 
AbstractNotifier
, and 
ActionKeymapIO
 and 
concluded that they did not contain the concept. The next 
class inspected, 
ActionManager
, contained a selection of 
program actions and the progra
mmer realized that this is 
where the bulk of search functionality would be added. In 
total, the programmer inspected 5 classes. 
2)
 
Impact Analysis 
JRipples identified 172 classes that interact with 
ActionManager
. The programmer visited 16 of these 
classes whose names indicated they might have 
responsibility for muCommander’s toolbar and “Go” menu. 
Of them, he marked 
MainMenuBar
, the class that is 
responsible for the “Go” menu, as Impacted, and the class 
ToolBar
 as Propagating. 
 
 
Figure 1. 
 
Classes inspected during concept location. 
The change propagated through the class 
ToolBar
 to 
ToolBarAttributes
 that defines the buttons that select 
various features and hence it has to change. 
ToolBar
 
23  
interacts with 24 additional classes and the programmer 
visited 
ToolBarAttributes
 first, because its static 
method 
getActions
 is used as a parameter for a method 
call in the 
ToolBar
 constructor. At this point the 
programmer was convinced that he understood the scope of 
the change because he accounted for all the functionality to 
be added and exited impact analysis. In total, the 
programmer inspected 16 classes with 2 classes marked 
Changed and the rest marked Unchanged, see Fig. 2. 
 
 
Figure 2. 
 
Classes inspected during impact analysis. 
3)
 
Actualization and Refactoring 
There was no prefactoring in this change. In 
actualization, the programmer added 2 classes. The first, 
SearchAction
 was created and then incorporated as a 
supplier of 
ActionManager
 through a factory method 
design pattern [32] that the existing code uses.  
The second class is 
SearchDialog
, which creates the 
search window and implements the search algorithm. It is a 
component of 
SearchAction
. To create the class, the 
programmer copied the code of the existing class 
RunDialog
 that the programmer visited during impact 
analysis; the code of this class was thoroughly edited to 
assume the new responsibility
. 
The original suppliers of 
RunDialog
 also became suppliers of 
SearchAction.
  
Once these two classes were incorporated, the 
programmer implemented the activation functionality in 
MainMenuBar
 and 
ToolBarAttributes
. 
 
 
Figure 3. 
 
 Classes visited during Actualization 
Two classes were added to the testing harness; one class 
for unit testing and one for functional testing. For easy 
reading, the testing harness is left out of Figs. 1, 2, and 3. 
During postfactoring, old comments were deleted and 
new comments added. The verification of actualization and 
postfactoring, found no bugs. 
C.
 
Remaining Changes and Build 
After change 1, the remaining changes of Table I 
followed. A detailed description can be found in [33]. The 
UML class diagram of the classes 
involved in the iteration is 
in Fig. 4. 
At the end of the iteration, the programmer thoroughly 
tested muCommander by running all the regression tests. 
All tests passed. The programmer then created a baseline 
without the harness for release to the users. This completed 
the SIP iteration. 
V.
 
O
BSERVATIONS
 
This section answers the questions that were posed as the 
goal of the cases study. 
A.
 
Are the SC and SIP models complete?  
SIP worked as defined during the whole iteration; one 
minor exception is explained in the rest of this section. 
In the process model, the refactoring and actualization 
phases are separated. However in postfactoring of change 3, 
the programmer extracted the responsibility of stopping the 
thread that iterates through the file system from the class 
SearchDialog
 into a new class 
SearchThread
. After 
that, he noticed a short delay of about a second when the 
“Stop” button is pressed. The programmer used the 
opportunity and improved the response time and also added 
a GUI notification that the search is stopped.  
According to prescribed 
practice, the programmer 
should open a new SC that deals with this new functionality. 
However the programmer justified this exception because it 
was small and added only 5 LOC of code. In spite of this 
experience, the separation of postfactoring that restructures 
the code and actualization that changes the functionality into 
two separate phases proved to be useful as it clarifies what 
activities the programmer should concentrate on.  
Exceptions like these are to 
be expected in all models 
where there is always tension between the model’s 
simplicity and accuracy. We concluded that the model 
presented in this paper is a us
eful guide to the programmer, 
but its enactment should allow minor occasional tailoring 
that corresponds to the project needs.  
B.
 
Is the SC model an effective process?  
Table II summarizes the numerical data for the phases of 
the changes 1 through 9. The rest of this section contains a 
discussion of these data. 
1)
 
Productivity 
The SIP iteration introduced 4,564 new lines of code in 
144 hours and 24 minutes of programmer’s time, which 
translates to a productivity of 31.6 LOC per hour. For 
comparison, a previous study followed two groups of PSP 
students and found the 25-to-75 percentile to produce 
between 12 and 42 LOC per hour [34]. The productivity of 
this SIP iteration is roughly in line with this study.  
24  
2)
 
Code Quality  
There were 11 known bugs introduced during the SIP 
iteration. Of these, 9 were fixed immediately and 2 were 
added as new change requests to the iteration backlog. No 
regression bugs were found in the preexisting code in any of 
the changes and all bugs were introduced in the code added 
during the iteration, see the data in Table II. 
3)
 
SC Size 
Most SCs took from 13 to 22 hours of work, see Table 
II. The smaller outliers, changes 8 and 9, turned out to be 
less productive; they produced 9.6 and 29.3 LOC per hour 
respectively, less than the project average. This happened in 
spite of the fact that the programmer did not spend any time 
performing concept location or impact analysis during these 
changes.  
On the other hand, change 
3 was the larger outlier and 
took almost a week of work. It dealt with GUI components, 
data structures, sorting algorithms and more. Although its 
productivity was in line with the average at 31.3 LOC per 
hour, the programmer struggled with actualization because 
of its complexity. In hindsight, this change should have 
been divided into several smaller changes either when 
creating the iteration backlog, 
or during impact analysis. 
During impact analysis, the programmer failed to foresee 
the full extent of the actualization complexity. In order to 
make actualization easier, the programmer concentrated on 
new functionality and sacrificed the structure of the code; he 
left numerous concepts in improper locations in order to 
limit change propagation. The programmer then corrected 
these bad smells during postfactoring, which became large.  
This controversial practice of simpler actualization at the 
expense of more complex postfactoring is available for 
similarly complex changes.  
4)
 
Amount of Rework 
The new feature has 4,564 new LOC. During the 
iteration, 1,452 LOC were deleted; these are the lines of 
either the original code, or the lines that were introduced in 
the previous changes and later deleted. To calculate rework, 
we divided the deleted LOC by the added LOC, which 
resulted in 31.8 percent rework. For comparison, Boehm 
and Basili found that rework caused purely by bug 
corrections accounted for 40 percent to 50 percent of a 
project [35]. This indicates that the amount of rework 
required in this SIP iteration is not unusual.  
C.
 
Do technologies support the programmer’s needs in all 
SC and SIP tasks? 
Several technologies were used in SIP and a brief 
overview of the experience with some of them is given here. 
1)
 
JRipples  
JRipples is an open source tool that supports concept 
location, impact analysis, and the change propagation 
portion of actualization. It wa
s especially useful during 
impact analysis, where certain classes of muCommander 
interact with hundreds of other classes and identifying them 
can be a tedious and time consuming task. For instance, 
during change 7, marking 
AbstractFile
 as impacted 
added 307 interacting classes to the inspection list. JRipples 
has heuristic tools that rank the interacting classes that are 
most likely to be impacted. However the programmer still 
had to use judgment to decide when a sufficient impact 
analysis has been completed. 
The programmer also made several specific change 
requests that would improve functioning of JRipples, and 
added them to the JRipples website. 
2)
 
Clover Java Code Coverage & Test Optimization 
The programmer used Clover [28] to collect the 
statement level test coverage. It computed totals and 
percentages and highlighted the statements already 
executed. Clover allows creating custom metrics and the 
programmer created a metrics specifically suitable for the 
project reports. There were however problems with Clover 
efficiency.  
3)
 
Mylyn & Tasktop 
The programmer used Mylyn and Tasktop to log timing 
data for different phases. The timer pauses when the Eclipse 
window is not the active; for example the programmer could 
respond to an email without having to manually pause the 
timer and without corrupting it; the programmer found that 
very useful. 
4)
 
Abbot Java GUI Test Framework 
The functional tests are written in Abbot in a style 
similar to JUnit tests. The built in robot test classes are easy 
to work with and there are specific classes for the Swing 
library classes. Overall Abbot worked well for the 
programmer, but he did run into a few issues. 
The first issue was that the functional tests run much 
slower than unit tests. It is in part because Abbot does not 
support a onetime setup method for an entire test suite; if 
numerous objects must be created, they must be created for 
each test in the suite. These issues lead to two change 
requests, one to do an optimization of Abbot and the second 
to add the capability for a onetime setup. 
A related issue was that the tests were inconsistent, 
which seemed to be caused by the excessive use of 
resources. When tests classes were run individually, they 
would pass without problem. When all the tests in the 
project were run, at times they would pass and other times 
they wouldn’t. The error message indicated that Abbot 
couldn’t find the GUI component. Rerunning the failed tests 
was one workaround. Another was to add a delay to the test, 
but this would slow the test even more. 
The last issue was that Abbot was not able to find some 
modified Swing components. An example of this is the 
ComponentTitledBorder
 class [36] that adds Swing 
components to a border. This class did not have a specific 
Abbot tester and the existing Abbot tester could not find the 
component in the border. The programmer created a 
workaround, based on the components coordinates, but they 
could fail on other computers. The programmer would like 
more documentation on how to write general custom testers. 
25  
5)
 
Subversion & TortoiseSVN 
Subversion and TortoiseSVN met all the version control 
needs of the programmer.  
6)
 
DiffStats 
The programmer found a variety of diff tools that could 
visually show the added, deleted and changed LOC in a 
single file. However, these tools didn’t provide LOC totals 
for the categories. Therefore the programmer created a tool 
called DiffStats that calculates added, moved and deleted 
LOC data. This tool DiffStats can be expanded and refined 
for future use [37]. 
D.
 
Concept Location  Experience 
The last question that was posed as a goal of this 
experience report asks whether the phases of SC are defined 
sufficiently. The programmer followed the recommendations 
for the individual phases of SC, and his experience is 
summarized in the remaining parts of this section V.D 
through V.I. This particular part deals with Concept Location 
experience. 
The complete process of co
ncept location was performed 
only during the first and third changes. The other changes 
used concepts closely related to the previous ones, and the 
programmer already knew where to find them; the data in 
Table II correspond to that. Although the time spent during 
the concept location is a small fraction of the total iteration 
time, it is the indispensable key that opens the path to the 
rest of SC and cannot be underestimated.  
1)
 
Exit criteria 
The exit criterion of concept location is well-defined: 
The concept location ends 
when the location of the 
significant concept extension has been found. 
E.
 
Impact Analysis Experience 
Table II shows the estimated impact sets that were 
produced by impact analysis and the changed sets. The 
experience indicates that a reasonable goal of impact 
analysis is to predict prefactoring and actualization only. 
The modifications during postfactoring are separate, 
because the postfactoring only loosely belongs to a specific 
SC and can often be postponed. Also the need for 
postfactoring becomes obvious only during and after the 
actualization.  
1)
 
Example of Overestimate: Change 3 
Change 3 included a super class extraction [11] from the 
class 
FileTable
, a large class with many clients and 6 
suppliers. The programmer added all of its 6 suppliers to the 
estimated impact set; however two of the suppliers were not 
impacted and that led to the overestimate.    
2)
 
Example of Underestimate:  Change 7 
In change 7, the programmer missed the impact to one 
production class. The programmer reported that clients and 
suppliers to the abstract class 
AbstractFile
 wouldn’t be 
impacted by the change; 
AbstractFile
 interacted with 
308 classes as identified by JRipples and the programmer 
did not inspect all of them, because he visited and used 
AbstractFile
 in previous changes and became 
confident that he understood the class and its interactions 
with other classes. However, during change 7 it became 
apparent that the code did not work as the programmer 
believed. 
The programmer was unfamiliar with the proxy design 
pattern [32]. The class 
ProxyFile
 is a subclass of 
AbstractFile
 within that pattern and overrides all the 
abstract methods of 
AbstractFile
 so that subclasses of 
ProxyFile
 can override only those methods that are 
necessary to meet their specific responsibilities. A 
programmer with knowledge of this design pattern would 
have visited 
ProxyFile
 and added it to the estimated 
impact set.  
3)
 
Harness Code Impact 
In total, the impact of a change on harness code was 
greater than the impact on production code and was more 
difficult to predict. The programmer found that harness 
classes have more class interactions than the classes that 
they test.  
4)
 
Exit criteria 
A textbook exit criterion would be to visit all classes that 
interact with the impacted and propagating classes. 
However in the context of classes that interacts with a large 
set of other classes, this can be burdensome and time 
consuming. The programmer accepted the following exit 
criteria: Whenever the programmer concluded that more 
than 60 percent of the impacted classes were inspected, he 
exited the impact analysis phase with the conviction that the 
scope of prefactoring and actualization is sufficiently well 
understood and the quality of the SC will not be negatively 
impacted.   An analogy is in testing which also often allows 
less than 100 percent coverage.  
However, change 3 is an example of the importance of 
understanding not only the extent but also the complexity of 
an impact. Although the programmer overestimated the 
impact set, he still underestimated the complexity of it, as 
already discussed in section V.B.3. The lesson here is that 
impact analysis must not only predict the impacted classes, 
but also the complexity and difficulty of their impact.  
F.
 
Prefactoring  
During change 1 the programmer skipped prefactoring. 
In hindsight, he should have extracted classes for the input 
and output panels that would have made the change 
actualization easier. That was later remedied by prefactoring 
during change 2, but at a higher cost because a larger 
amount of code had to be moved.  
In change 8, the programmer could have skipped 
prefactoring too, but he extr
acted a method [11] called 
directoryFieldUpdate
. He did this to prepare the 
code for actualization, which replaced one interface with 
another. The old interface invoked the method 
directoryFieldUpdate
 once, but the new interface 
needed to invoke it from 2 methods. If the programmer had 
26  
not done the extract method during prefactoring, he would 
have had to duplicate code during actualization and then 
delete it during postfactoring, resulting in more work. 
Overall, the programmer found that aggressive prefactoring 
often makes actualization su
bstantially easier.   
In some instances, prefactoring involved the introduction 
of patterns into software, for example a strategy pattern [32] 
during change 5. The programmer extracted 
SearchManager
 from 
SearchThread
 to create the 
pattern. This made actualizatio
n simpler and limited change 
propagation to one class. 
1)
 
Exit criteria 
The prefactoring was completed when the local structure 
of the code was suitable for actualization. In particular, all 
large significant concepts involved in actualization had a 
class of their own and for that, some classes were extracted 
from other classes if necessary. If the planned actualization 
used polymorphism that does not exist in the old code, a 
base class was introduced by refactoring. If the planned 
actualization used a pattern (composite), the pattern was 
fully prefactored before actualization started.  
G.
 
Actualization Experience  
During actualization, the programmer implemented the 
new functionality and incorpor
ated it into the old code, 
including all secondary changes in affected classes. 
1)
 
Exit criteria 
The exit criterion for actualization was based on the 
completeness and quality of implementation of the change 
request. The programmer determined that all tests (unit, 
functional and regression) pass. The programmer made sure 
that each part of the change request is tested, including both 
valid and invalid inputs, and that the statement coverage of 
new or modified code is close to 60 percent or more. 
H.
 
Postfactoring 
Postfactoring involved a clean-up of the consequences of 
one or several previous changes. For example, the class 
InputPanel
 was created in change 2 and it added 
responsibilities during changes 3, 4, and 5, making it large 
and difficult to understand. In postfactoring after change 5, 
the programmer solved this accumulated problem by 
extracting the class 
BasicOptionsPanels
 from 
InputPanel
. It contained the GUI components 
responsible for the search terms, including case sensitive 
and recursive search inputs. 
InputPanel
 was left with the 
responsibility to assemble the 
search input pa
nels. After the 
class extraction both of the classes were responsible for a 
single significant concept extension, making future changes 
easier. This gradual build-up of problems in the code after 
several SC was observed several times and resolved by 
postfactoring. This build-up belongs to the category of 
technical debt [38]. 
1)
 
Exit criteria 
Beck and Fowler used vaguely defined “bad smells” as 
the entry criterion for refactoring and quoted Grandma 
Beck, “If it stinks, change it.” [10] (p. 75). The programmer 
reversed this vague adage into: “When it no longer stinks, 
stop.” When each new code construct has an identifier that 
explains its responsibility, all new or modified methods deal 
with a single responsibility, and all new or modified classes 
implement a single significant concept, then the 
postfactoring is done. The programmer used the LOC metric 
as a guideline to identify suspect code constructs; methods 
longer than 10 LOC and classes longer than 100 LOC were 
scrutinized. However the postfactoring was limited to the 
new or modified code and the programmer did not attempt 
to refactor the rest of muCommander.   
I.
 
Frequency of commits 
The programmer committed the code to the repository 
not just at the conclusion of SC, but also after prefactoring 
and actualization. This is in line with the recommendation 
of frequent small commits [39].  
VI.
 
T
HREATS TO 
V
ALIDITY
 
This experience report offers a glimpse into a SC and 
SIP enactment, in the context of one specific programmer, 
one specific program, one specific feature added, and one 
specific combination of technologies. We drew some 
observations from this experience, but transferring them to 
other contexts should be done with caution.  
The program we used may have contributed to the 
success of this project. It was in an evolvable state  [40] and 
the programmer did not detect any  significant code decay 
that would hinder the evolution. 
This project used a variety of
 tools that also contributed 
to the success of the iteration. In particular, the tool JRipples 
contributed significantly to the phase of impact analysis. 
Identifying class interactions wo
uld have been significantly 
more difficult without it. The other tools were also integral 
to the success of the SIP iteration.  
Finally, the SIP iteration was done in a university setting 
with a professor and a peer student standing in for users. 
These users have different motivations than other users of 
software. While the iteration met the needs of these users, it 
is possible that it would not meet the needs of other users. 
VII.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS AND 
F
UTURE 
W
ORK
 
This paper reports a case study where the Solo Iterative 
Process (SIP) was successfully used by a programmer to 
add a substantial feature to a medium sized open source 
software. The core of SIP is the task of software change 
(SC). The case study proved that SIP and SC represent an 
operational model and based on this experience, it is 
possible to recommend this model for similar tasks. SC is an 
integral part of a variety of iterative software team 
processes, including the agile 
processes. We speculate that 
the presented model of SC is usable within these processes 
also; however further study of SC in the context of these 
team processes may shed additional light and is the next 
logical research step. 
27  
The reported experience deals with the individual phases 
of SC. We found that impact analysis played an important 
role in software change planning, and could predict the 
extent of prefactoring and actualization of SC. However it 
could not predict postfactoring th
at cleans the code after the 
change. Postfactoring was done reactively, based on the 
code properties immediately after actualization, and 
sometimes resolved gradual accumulation of the code 
problems that were left unresolved in several previous 
changes. The programmer made a decision whether to 
address these problems immediately, or whether to postpone 
them further, and that may explain why this phase was 
difficult to predict during impact analysis. We speculate that 
this is a common problem of iterative and agile processes. 
In this project, we required the programmer during 
impact analysis to inspect approximately 60 percent of the 
classes that were to be modified in SC and found that 
criterion to be sufficient for our specific productivity and 
quality goals. However more accurate exit criteria for 
impact analysis are a topic to be explored in the future; the 
heuristics available in the literature still need additional 
research before they will be 
ready for practical use [41]. 
Another important lesson learned is that the impact 
analysis phase needs to predict not only the set of impacted 
classes, but also the complexity of their impact. That 
complexity can play a role in determining the strategy of 
SC; if it exceeds a certain limit, it may be preferable to split 
the SC into several ones. One of the topics for future work 
is to quantify the impact on the classes. Currently, 
researchers and practitioners use a binary “impacted – not 
impacted” scale, but a wider range may more accurately 
predict the difficulty of the 
SC and help avoid surprises 
during the actualization phase. 
The programmer used several diverse technologies to 
support SC that significantly contributed to the success of 
the project. The strengths and weaknesses of these 
technologies were assessed in the case study, and it became 
clear that a lack of their integration was a hindrance. We 
speculate that technologies have a similar impact on SC 
within agile and iterative team processes. A unified and 
seamless software environment that would integrate them 
and support all SC needs is another topic for future work. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENTS
 
We would like to thank to Radu Vanciu for his help with 
this project. We would also like to thank Atlassian Pty Ltd 
and Tasktop Technologies who provided their proprietary 
tools, Clover Java Code Coverage & Test Optimization and 
Tasktop, free of charge for use in this project. This work 
was supported in part by grant from the National Science 
Foundation CCF-0820133. Any opinions, findings, 
conclusions, or recommendations expressed in this material 
are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the 
views of the NSF. 
 
 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1] N. Febbraro, Rajlich, V., "The Role of Incremental Change in Agile 
Software Processes," in 
Agile 
2007, pp. 92-103. 
[2] V. Rajlich, 
Software Engineering: The Contemporary Practice
. Boca 
Raton, FL: CRC Press, 2012. 
[3] A. J. Rostkowycz, V. Rajlich, and A. Marcus, "A case study on the 
long-term effects of software redocumentation," in 
IEEE 
International Conference on Software Maintenace
, 2004, pp. 92-101. 
[4] V. Rajlich and P. Gosavi, "Incremental change in object-oriented 
programming," 
Software, IEEE, 
vol. 21, pp. 62-69, July/August 2004. 
[5] W. Humphrey, 
Introduction to the personal software process
. 
Reading, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 1996. 
[6] W. S. Humphrey, "Using a defined and measured personal software 
process," 
Software, IEEE, 
vol. 13, pp. 77-88, May 1996. 
[7] P. Ferguson, W. S. Humphrey, S. Khajenoori, S. Macke, and A. 
Matvya, "Results of applying the personal software process," 
Computer, IEEE, 
vol. 30, pp. 24-31, May 1997. 
[8] B. Dit, M. Revelle, M. Gethers, and D. Poshyvanyk, "Feature location 
in source code: a taxonomy and survey," 
Journal of Software: 
Evolution and Process, 
p. to be published, 2012. 
[9] K. Chen and V. Rajlich, "Case study of feature location using 
dependence graph," in 
IEEE 8th International Workshop on Program 
Comprehension
, Limerick, Ireland, 2000, pp. 241-247. 
[10] M. Fowler, K. Beck, J. Brant, W. Opdyke, and D. R. Roberts, 
Improving the design of existing code
: Addison−Wesley, 1999. 
[11] M. Fowler. (2010, June 6, 2011). 
Refactoring
. Available: 
http://refactoring.com/
 
[12] T. Mens and T. Tourwé, "A survey of software refactoring," 
Software 
Engineering, IEEE Transactions on, 
vol. 30, pp. 126-139, Feb 2004. 
[13] M. J. Harrold and M. Souffa, "An incremental approach to unit 
testing during maintenance," in
 IEEE Conference on Software 
Maintenance
, 1988, pp. 362-367. 
[14] H. Zhu, P. A. V. Hall, and J. H. R. May, "Software unit test coverage 
and adequacy," 
ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR), 
vol. 29, pp. 366-
427, December 1997. 
[15] H. Agrawal, J. R. Horgan, E. W. Krauser, and S. A. London, 
"Incremental regression testing," in 
IEEE Conference on Software 
Maintenance
, 1993, pp. 348-357. 
[16] G. Rothermel, R. H. Untch, C. Chu, and M. J. Harrold, "Prioritizing 
test cases for regression testing," 
IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering, 
vol. 27, pp. 929-948, October 2001. 
[17] R. C. Martin, "Professionalism and test-driven development," 
IEEE 
Software, 
vol. 24, pp. 32-36, May/June 2007. 
[18] K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, 
Agile software development with Scrum 
Prentice Hall, 2002. 
[19] K. Beck, 
Extreme programming explained: embrace change
. Boston: 
Addison-Wesley Professional, 2000. 
[20] M. M. Müller and W. F. Tichy, "Case study: extreme programming in 
a university environment," in 
23rd International Conference on 
Software Engineering
, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, 2001, pp. 537-544. 
[21] A. Cockburn and J. Highsmith, "Agile software development, the 
people factor," 
Computer, IEEE, 
vol. 34, pp. 131-133, November 
2001. 
28  
[22] P. Krutchen, 
Rational Unified Process: an introduction
: Addison-
Wesley Professional, 2004. 
[23] M. Bernard, 
MuCommander
. Available: 
http://www.mucommander.com/
 (2011). 
[24] K. Beck, 
JUnit
. Available: 
http://JUnit.org
 (2011). 
[25] Oracle, 
Swing (Java Foundation Classes)
. Available: 
http://download.oracle.com/javase/6/docs/technotes/guides/swing/
 
(2011). 
[26] Apache Software Foundation, 
Subversion
. Available: 
http://subversion.apache.org/
 (2011). 
[27] The TortoiseSVN Team, 
TortoiseSVN
. Available: 
http://tortoisesvn.net/
 (2011). 
[28] Atlassian Pty Ltd., 
Clover Java Code Coverage & Test Optimization
. 
Available: 
http://www.atlassian.com/software/clover/
 (2011). 
[29] The Eclipse Foundation, 
Mylyn
. Available: 
http://www.eclipse.org/mylyn/
 (2011). 
[30] Tasktop Technologies, 
Tasktop
. Available: 
http://tasktop.com/
 
(2011). 
[31] T. Wall, 
Abbot Java GUI Test Framework
. Available: 
http://abbot.sourceforge.net/doc/overview.shtml
 (2008). 
[32] E. Gamma, R. Helm, R. Johnson, and J. Vlissides, 
Design patterns: 
elements of reusable object-oriented software
 vol. 206. Reading, MA: 
Addison-wesley 1995. 
[33] C. Dorman, "An Experience Report Of The Solo Iterative Process," 
M.S., Computer Science, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI, 2011. 
[34] L. Prechelt and B. Unger, "An experiment measuring the effects of 
personal software process (PSP) training," 
Software Engineering, 
IEEE Transactions on, 
vol. 27, pp. 465-472, May 2001. 
[35] B. Boehm and V. R. Basili, "Software defect reduction top 10 list," 
Computer, IEEE, 
vol. 34, pp. 135-137, January 2001. 
[36] S. Kumar, 
ComponentTitledBorder
. Available: 
http://www.jroller.com/santhosh/entry/component_titled_border
 
(2005). 
[37] C. Dorman. (2011, Apr. 4). 
DiffStats
. Available: 
http://sourceforge.net/projects/diffstats/
 
[38] N. Brown, Y. Cai, Y. Guo, R. Kazman, M. Kim, P. Kruchten, E. Lim, 
A. MacCormack, R. Nord, and I. Ozkaya, "Managing technical debt 
in software-reliant systems," in 
SE/SDP workshop on Future of 
software engineering research
, Santa Fe, New Mexico, USA, 2010, 
pp. 47-52. 
[39] P. M. Duval, 
Continuous integration
: Addison Wesley, 2007. 
[40] T. Tamai and Y. Torimitsu, "Software lifetime and its evolution 
process over generations," in 
IEEE Conference on  Software 
Maintenance
, 1992, pp. 63-69. 
[41] S. Hassaine, F. Boughanmi, Y. G. Guéhéneuc, S. Hamel, and G. 
Antoniol, "A Seismology-inspired Approach to Study Change 
Propagation," in 
IEEE International Conference on Software 
Maintenance 
2011, pp. 53 - 62. 
 
 TABLE II. 
 
 
SIP
 
D
ATA BY 
C
HANGE
 
Phase
123456789Total/AVG
Concept Location
0:220:000:330:000:000:000:000:000:000:55
Impact Analysis
2:082:283:231:261:020:550:380:000:0012:00
Prefactoring
0:001:222:111:419:323:060:000:070:0017:59
Prefactoring Testing
0:002:430:070:412:530:550:000:090:007:28
Actualization
5:343:414:084:421:362:202:570:160:2325:37
Actualization Testing
5:021:526:423:340:492:362:320:370:2224:06
Postfactoring
0:232:5715:494:462:353:183:540:000:0033:42
Postfactoring Testing
0:127:345:341:281:192:084:220:000:0022:37
Total (Hours:minutes)
13:4122:3738:2718:1819:4615:1814:231:090:45144:24
 
Classes
Estimated Impact Set – Production Code
311466631343
Changed Set - Production Code
31866341335
Changed in Postfactoring - Production Code
001100310015
New classes added - Production Code
249971*80040
Estimated Impact Set – Harness
027710542441
Changed Set – Harness
13369332333
Changed in Postfactoring - Harness
00401280015
New classes added - Harness
2571263*90044
Tests
Bugs in Changed Classes
03231200011
Bugs fixed when found
0322020009
Bugs Postponed
0001100002
New assertions added
1161125239799910737731
New statement coverage
67.7%77.5%59.7%90.8%94.5%96.0%84.8%98.2%96.7%74.0%
Change
 
29  
* Change 6 added 5 new production classes and deleted 4, and added 4 new harness classes and deleted 1 
 
Figure 4. 
 
Classes involved in  SIP iteration 
30