 Addressing the 4+1 Software Safety Assurance
 Principles
 within 
Scrum
 Osama Doss
 Department of Computer Science
 University of York
 York, United Kingdom
 Telephone: 
+44 1904 325464
 osad500@york.ac.uk
 Tim Kelly
 Department of Computer Science
 University of Y
ork
 York, United Kingdom
 Telephone: +44 1904 325477
 Tim.kelly@york.ac.uk
  ABSTRACT
 The 4+1 principles
 document common principles of software safety 
assurance that can be observed from software safety standards and best 
practice. These principles are const
ant across domains and across 
projects, and can be regarded as the immutable core of any software 
safety justification. The principles also help maintain understanding of 

the ‚big picture™ of software safety issues whilst examining and 
negotiating the deta
il of individual standards, and provide a reference 
model for cross
-sector certification. This document discusses the 
challenges posed when applying these principles to Scrum, and makes 
initial recommendations for how the principles can be accommodated 
wit
hin a Scrum development.
 Categories and Subject Descriptors
 D.3.3 [
Software Engineering]:
 Design 
Œ Methodologies
 General Terms
 Management, 
Theory,
 Documentation, Reliability, Verification.
 Keywords
 Keywords:
 Scrum. Safety. Assurance. Certification. Assuran
ce Case. 
Software Safety.4+1 principles 
  1. INTRODUCTION
  Douglass
 [6,8] highlighted some of the main challenges posed by the 
use of agile methods for safety critical systems:
 1. Agile de
-emphasizes documentation but safety standards 
require strong documentatio
n 2. Agile literature has no discussion of safety, reliability, or 
security
 3. Agile requirements are typically very lightweight with no 
traceability
 4. Agile testing is continuous but lightweight
 5. Use tooling to automatically generate documentation for 

certificatio
n approval
 6. Requirements must be specified, reviewed and mapped to 
design, tests and code
 7. Process steps must include d
ependability analysis and 

assessment
 8. Process must be documented, with standards (checklists) that 
can be verified by QA
  Agile development 
traditionally promotes the view that w
orking 
  software is 
the primary measure of progress [7].
 However, for safety 
critical systems development the definition of ‚working™ software needs 
to be safety 
assured
 software.  If the safety of the software isn™t 
assured, 
it cannot be considered working, because it cannot be used. 
 Therefore our primary measures of progress (for safety critical software) 
must take into account both the status of the software and the status of 
software safety assurance.
 Scrum is an agile development approach that u
ses an 
iterative, 
incremental process, and is based on a small set of core values, 

principles, and practices
 [1]
.  Scrum does
 not 
explicitly address
 software 
safety
 assurance. In this paper we discuss some of the most 
significant
 challenges 
posed by attempting to in
tegrate software safety 
assurance into Scrum.
 This paper is organised as follows: Section 2 presents the 4+1[5] 

Software Safety Assurance Principles used to describe the typical 
assurance requirements of software safety standards. Section 3 discusses 

the c
hallenges posed by addressing these principles within Scrum, and 

recommends possible ways forward for adapting Scrum to better 
address the principles. 
Section
 4 discusses
 the 
further work 
required to 
validate these proposals.  Section 5 presents conclusion
s.  2. 4+1 Fundamental Principles of Software Safety 
Assurance
  There are many standards that either directly or indirectly address 
software safety assurance (e.g. IEC 61508, ISO 26262, EN 50128, parts 
of UK Defence Standard 00
-56, and DO
-178B).   There are e
asily 
observed differences in the details of these standards.  For example, 

DO-178B uses the concept of 
Development Assurance Levels
 (DALs) to
 moderate the 
objectives
 of the standard according to the criticality of the
 software under development, whereas I
EC 61508 uses the concept of 
Safety Integrity Levels
 (SILs) to make recommendations as to suitable 
design and assurance techniques according to the criticality of the 
software under development.   The requirements and recommendations 
for SILs in IEC 61508 
are not the same as those for DALs in DO
-178B.  
However, underlying these
 differences there is
 a number of fundamental 
principles that can be observed in many of the current standards.  The 

following five 
assurance principles, 
previously presented in 
[2], 
can be 
identified:
    Principle 1:
 Software safety requirements shall be defined to 
address the software contribution to system hazards
  Principle 2:
 The intent of the software safety requirements 
shall be maintained throughout requirements decomposition 
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
 personal or 
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or 
distributed for profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and 
the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for c
omponents of this work owned by 
others than ACM must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy 

otherwise, or republish, to post o
n servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 
specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org.
 XP '16 Workshops, May 24 2016, Edinburgh, Scotland U
K © 2016 ACM. ISBN 978
-1-4503
-4134
-9/16/05–$15.00
 DOI: http://dx.doi.o
rg/10.1145/2962695.2962712
   Pr
inciple 3:
 Software safety requirements shall be satisfied 
  Principle 4:
 Hazardous behaviour of the software shall be 
identified and mitigated
  Principle 4+1 
The confidence established in addressing the 
software safety principles shall be commensurate to th
e contribution of the software to system risk
   3. Challenges and Recommendations for Scrum
  3.1 
Software Safety Assurance Principle 1:  Software safety 
requirements shall be defined to address the software 
contribution to system hazards
 Software by itself ca
nnot be safe or unsafe. It is only when placed in a 
system context that the ‚safety™ of software can be judged by 
considering the contribution that the software could make to system 
level hazards. For example, software can play a role as the initiator of a
 
causal chain of events leading to a system level hazard (and eventual 
accident). Software (e.g. when placed in the role of a protection system) 
can also play a role by failing to mitigate failures of other (non
-software) elements. The first challenge of s
oftware safety assurance is to 
identify all of the ways in which software can contribute to system level 
hazards and to capture the necessary behaviour of the software in 
relation to these contributions in terms of a clearly defined set of 

software safety 
requirements at the system software boundary. (Note 
these behavioural software safety requirements are distinct from the 
assurance requirements of software safety standards, e.g. to maintain 

traceability.)
  Challenges posed
  For assurance (e.g. certificatio
n), software safety requirements 
(and their treatment) must be easily identifiable from amongst 
the total set of requirements being addressed
  Safety requirements can be positive functional requirements 
in their own right, constraints to be satisfied (e.g. 
timing) 
when addressing other requirements, or negative requirements 
(i.e. behavior to not be exhibited)
  Safety requirements are therefore often associated and 
interrelated with core product requirements (i.e. requirements 

in the product backlog)
  Safety re
quirements should not be addressed as an ‚after 
thought™ following implementation of core product 
requirements
  Relevant (related) safety requirements need to be highlighted 

when addressing core requirements from the product backlog 
(so that they can be add
ressed as an integral part of the 
implementation of these
  Recommendations for Scrum
  A second product backlog 
Œ the safety backlog 
Œ should be 
maintained alongside the product backlog to
 explicitly store, 
manage and prioritise software safety requirements.
  The safety backlog should record traceability between safety 
requirements and system hazards
  The safety backlog should record traceability between safety 

requirements and ‚core™ product backlog
 requirements (e.g. 
between a safety constraint and the functi
on to which it 
relates)
  The safety backlog is initially populated as a result of 

(deductive, ‚top down™) system level safety analysis
 performed prior to the software development commencing 

(i.e. analysis that identifies potential software
 contributions to 
system level hazards).
  The safety backlog should also be populated through 
performing (inductive, ‚bottom up™) hazard analysis
 (e.g. 
functional failure analysis) on the core product backlog 

requirements.
  Both the system level safety analysis, and the softw
are hazard 
analysis should involve the following
 stakeholders: the 
system team (as ‚customer™ to the software team), the system 

customer (e.g. system
 operator), competent safety engineers 
capable of carrying out the analyses, the safety regulator (as 

safet
y ‚customer™) potentially supported by addition 
independent and internal safety reviewers (as proxies for the
 regulator).
  Maintenance of the safety backlog is the responsibility of a 

nominated safety team member from within the
 software 
team. This t
eam mem
ber must ensure that he or she
 fully 
understand the source and rationale behind
 each of the 
requirements in the safety backlog. (This may involve 
discussion with the stakeholders
 involved in the original 
safety and hazard analyses.)
  When product requiremen
ts are chosen for a given sprint, the 
related safety requirements from the safety
 product backlog 
should be identified, discussed and explained (by the 
nominated safety team member) at
 the beginning of the sprint
  3.2
 Software Safety Assurance Principle 2:
 The intent of the 
software safety requirements shall be maintained throughout 
requirements decomposition
 As the software development lifecycle progresses, the requirements and 
design are progressively developed and a more detailed software design 
is creat
ed. Having established complete and correct software safety 
requirements at the highest (most abstract) level of design, it must be 

possible to demonstrate that the intent of those requirements is 
maintained as the software safety requirements are develope
d, 

reinterpreted, allocated and decomposed.
  Challenges posed
  If software safety requirements are reinterpreted, allocated or 

decomposed during development, the new
 safety requirements
 that emerge should be documented
  If software safety requirements are re
interpreted, allocated or 

decomposed during development, traceability
 must be 
maintained between the original safety requirement and the 
new requirements or design that
 emerges.
  When new requirements or design emerge
s as a response to 
the original requireme
nt they must be reviewed
 to check 
whether they fully addresses the intent of the original safety 
requirement.
  Justification must be maintained as to how the new 

requirements and design addresses the original safety
 requirement.
  Recommendations for Scrum
  If software safety requirements are reinterpreted, allocated or 

decomposed during a sprint, the new safety
 requirements that 
emerge should be documented in the safety product backlog, 

with traceability to the
 original safety requirement
  As part of sprint re
view, those responsible for developing the 
original safety requirement must present the
 design (or refined 
requirements) solution proposed and the new safety 

requirements that have emerged.
  The s
print review should attempt to check whether the 
proposed sol
ution fully addresses the intent of the
 original 
safety requirement.
  Independent stakeholders are required as part of this review. 

It should involve the nominated safety team
 member and 
 potentially some or all of the following: the system team (as 
‚custome
r™ to the software team),
 the system customer (e.g. 
system operator), a suitable internal safety reviewer (as proxy 

for the regulator™s
 position).
  If it is determined that more time is required to assess the 

adequacy of the proposed solution (than the spri
nt review 
allows) then a more thorough review will need to be allocated 
as an activity to the following sprint.
 Whilst this activity is 
taking place, ideally further implementation of the solution 
should be avoided (i.e.
 other requirements from the backlog
s should be prioritized)
  The decomposition of the original safety requirement into the 

new safety requirements, and the justification
 as to the 
adequacy of this decomposition should be documented in the 
assurance case by the nominated
 safety team member. T
his 
should take place in the sprint immediately following the 
review and will be
 presented as during the following sprint 
review).
  3.3 Software Safety Assurance Principle 3: Software safety 
requirements shall be satisfied
 Ultimately, it is necessary to de
monstrate that any safety requirements 
allocated to software have been satisfied (i.e. present evidence to 
establish whether the required behaviour will occur in operation). It is 
important to present evidence that shows the satisfaction of safety 

requirem
ents under anticipated operating conditions. 
  Challenges posed
  Verification evidence must be presented to demonstrate the 
satisfaction of any safety requirements claimed
 to be 
implemented.
 Explicit traceability must be maintained 
between verification evid
ence and implemented safety
 requirements.
  Verification evidence generated must be reviewed to check 
whether it fully addresses the intent of the
 safety requirement.
  Justification must be maintained as to how the verification 

evidence demonstrates satisfact
ion of the safety
 requirement.
  Recommendations for Scrum
  Daily scrum meetings can be used to provide an early 

indicator for monitoring progress towards safety
 requirements 
satisfaction.
  As part of sprint review, those responsible for implementation 

of a s
afety requirement must present the
 solution and explain 
how the intent of the safety requirement is fully satisfied.
  Sprint review should attempt to check whether the 
implementation fully addresses the intent of the original
 safety requirement, and review 
the verification evidence 
presented.
  Independent stakeholders are required as part of this review. 

It should involve the nominated safety team
 member and 
potentially some or all of the following: the system team (as 

‚customer™ to the software team),
 the sy
stem customer (e.g. 
system operator), a suitable internal safety reviewer (as proxy 
for the regulator™s
 position).
  After initial inspection in the sprint review if it is determined 

that more verification evidence is required
 (e.g. to satisfy the 
verificati
on criteria of a safety standard) then further 
verification will need to be
 allocated as an activity to the 
following sprint. It may be necessary for this verification 

activity to be
 performed by independent team members or 
teams (according to Principle 4+
1).
  The traceability of safety requirements to the verification 
evidence, and the justification as to the adequacy
 of the 
evidence set should be documented in the assurance case
 [9]
 by the nominated safety team member. 
This should take
 place 
in the sprint 
immediately following the review and will 
be 

presented during the following sprint review.
  3.4 Software Safety Assurance Principle 4: Hazardous 
behaviour of the software has been identified and mitigated
 Whereas Principle 2 is concerned with maintaining t
he intent of safety 
requirements in the presence of increasing design commitment, 
Principle 4 is concerned with the potential undesirable and unintended 
consequences of design and implementation decisions. Principle 2 is 

concerned with whether lower levels
 of requirements and 
implementation do what is required (intended). Principle 4 is concerned 
with whether the design and implementation does anything else that is 
considered unsafe. These potentially emergent hazardous behaviours 

could firstly result from 
design decisions that have unintended 

hazardous side effects. Secondly, they can also result from 
implementation (process execution) errors during the software 
development process 
Œ e.g. modelling errors, coding errors, and tool
-use errors. It is necessary
 to ensure that assurance effort has been 
targeted at attempting to reveal.
  Challenges posed
  Unintended hazardous behaviour can emerge as a result of the 

design and implementation of both safety
 and core 
requirements and therefore has to be identified in 
both cases.
  Where new hazardous behaviour is identified
, new safety 
requirements (to manage this behaviour) must be
 defined.
  Identifying hazardous behaviour can require system
-level 
domain expertise from outside of the software
 development 
team.
  Recommend
ations for Scrum
  At the planning stage of
 a Scrum development the chosen 
modelling approach, implementation language,
 development 
environment and assessment tools should be documented. 

Hazard analysis should be
 conducted 
on the chosen 
languages, processes 
and tools to identify the potential for the 
introduction of
 implementation errors. Where the potential for 
error is identified
, it is necessary to provide evidence for
 non-introduction of error (e.g. tool qualification), controls for the 
minimization of er
ror introduction (e.g.
 process guides) or 
means of demonstrating the absence of introduced errors (e.g. 

static analysis tools).
 Justification of the chosen strategies 
must be documented in the assurance case.
  Daily scrum meetings can be used to provide an 
early 
opportunity to identify unintended side
-effects
 emerging from 
a chosen implementation approach.
  (Inductive, ‚bottom up™) Hazard analysis should be performed 
as part of sprint review in order to identify
 hazardous side 
effects from the design and impl
ementation activity 
undertaken during the sprint. This
 hazard analysis should 
include a check of the implementation of the chosen strategy 
for dealing with
 implementation error introduction. This 
analysis should be performed in the context of the existing
 identified system level
-hazards, but be open to the possibility 

of identifying new hazards.
  Independent stakeholders are required as part of this hazard 

analysis. It should involve the nominated
 safety team member 
and potentially some or all of the followi
ng: the system team 
(as ‚customer™ to the
 software team), the system customer 
(e.g. system operator), a suitable internal safety reviewer (as 
proxy for
 the regulator™s position).
  If it is determined that more time is required for the hazard 
 analysis (than 
the sprint review allows) then a
 more thorough 
review will need to be allocated as an activity to the following 
sprint. Whilst this activity is
 taking place, ideally further 
implementation of the solution should be avoided (i.e. other 
requirements from
 the
 backlogs should be prioritized)
  Where new hazardous behaviours (i.e. new software level 

contributions to system
-level hazards) are
 identified, new 
safety requirements (to manage these behaviours) must be 

added to the safety backlog.
  Where the sprint activ
ity and subsequent review relates to the 
implementation of safety requirements, the
 decomposition of 
the original safety requirement into the new safety 

requirements, and the justification of
 the identification and 
mitigation (through new safety requiremen
ts) of hazardous 
behavior should be
 documented in the assurance case by the 
nominated safety team member. This should take place in the
 sprint immediately following the review and will be presented 
as during the following sprint review).
  Where the sprint a
ctivity and subsequent review relates to the 
implementation of core (i.e. non
-safety
 specific) requirements, 
and new hazardous behavior is identified, and new safety 
requirements defined, the
 assurance case needs to be extended 
to include the new safety re
quirement.
  3.5 Software Safety Assurance Principle 4+1: The 
confidence established in addressing the software safety 
principles shall be commensurate to the contribution of the 
software to system risk
  This principle is expressed as ‚+1™, rather than prin
ciple number 5 
because it underlies the implementation of the first 4 principles. Perfect 
assurance of the other four principles is unachievable. For example, it is 

impossible to prove that all hazards have been identified, and that all 
the necessary corre
sponding safety requirements have been identified. 
Consequently, we have to consider how to much effort to expend in 

addressing the first four principles, and how much evidence to generate. 
We have to decide upon a sufficient level of evidence to present. 
This 
principle states that the level of evidence needs to be proportional to the 
level of risk associated with the software in question. For a highly 

critical software
-intensive system, the level of confidence in addressing 
the first four principles needs 
to  Challenges posed:
  To implement this principle it is necessary to be able to 

identify the criticality of any software safety
 requirement
  Implementing this principle will affect the amount of effort 
required, and the level of argument and
 evidence presen
ted in 
the assurance case, to provide assurance of the first four 
principles. This can affect
 the length of sprints, whether 
assurance activities take place alongside implementation 

activities within
 sprints, or need their own sprint cycles to 
complete. Th
is can also affect the type of stakeholder
 involvement required (e.g. whether independent verification 

or assessment is required, or when customer
 stakeholder 
involvement is sought). It will also influence the level of 
rigour in modelling and
 implementatio
n techniques, and the 
level of qualification required in tools used within the 
process.
  Different standards have different approaches to defining 
required levels of assurance: IEC61508 sets a
 Safety Integrity 
Level according to the probability delta in ris
k reduction; DO
-178C places more focus on
 severity; ISO 26262 incorporates 
the concept of controllability of the vehicle. In addition, there 
are many
 differences in the recommended techniques and 
processes at different levels of criticality. If conformance
 to 
these standards is sought, the specific requirements will need 

to be identified and a conformance
 argument established as 
part of the assurance case.
  Recommendations for Scrum
  The safety backlog should record the criticality associated 

with each safet
y requirement. This could be
 expressed using 
the language of a particular safety standards (e.g. Safety 

Integrity Levels 
Œ SILs) or
 through risk attributes (e.g. the 
severity of the hazard associated with a requirement, and the 
degree of
 contribution of th
e requirement to the hazard).
  Safety backlog item criticality can be used within sprint 

planning to help manage project risk. For
 example, 
satisfactory implementation of high criticality safety 
requirements may be considered a project
 risk that should not 
be left until late sprint releases.
  Before the Scrum development commences, it is necessary to 

decide how the assurance strategy will be
 moderated 
according to criticality. In particular, how the chosen 
approach to representing criticality will
 influence t
he 
following:
 o The amount and type of effort, stakeholder 

engagement, and assurance evidence required for 
the
 initial population of the safety backlog
 o Whether a dedicated safety team member is 
required within the software development team
 o The extent to whic
h (system, regulator) customers 
are expected to be involved in the activities
 described in the first four principles.
 o The amount and type of effort, stakeholder 
engagement, and assurance evidence required in
 reviewing safety requirements development during
 sprints (i.e. checking safety requirements
 validity)
 o The amount and type of effort, stakeholder 

engagement, and assurance evidence required in
 demonstrating satisfaction of safety requirements
 o The amount and type of effort, stakeholder 
engagement, and ass
urance evidence required in
 checking for implementation introduced errors and 
performing hazard analysis as part of the
 sprint 
cycles.
  The criticality of chosen 
requirements for the sprint (or 

requirements related to those chosen) should be
 highlighted at 
the beginning of the sprint. In particular, it should be 
highlighted where independence
 cannot be demonstrated 
between the implementation of requirements of differing 
criticality, the higher
 criticality should be used.
  5. Next Steps 
 Based on literature revi
ew and the results of our practitioner survey 
[3,4
] we developed the recommendations presented in the previous 
section.  However, these recommendations need to be further evaluated.
 We intend to conduct semi
-structured interview
s with both agile and 
safety
 practitioners to review the
 described 
challenges and 
recommendation
s.  Beyond these interviews, it is necessary to 
demonstrate how these recommendations can be applied through 

illustrative case study examples
, and 
further peer review of these 
worked examp
les
. The result
s of the first set of interviews will be 
published 
after interview
s have
 been co
nducted.
  6. Summary 
 Our proposed recommendation of 4+1 principles to Scrum process 

stems from
 the lack of a clear vision as to how to 
adapt agile methods to 
the d
emands of safety critical systems assurance.
  This 
paper
 has summarized the 4+1 principles of software safety 
assurance and, d
iscuss
ed 
the chall
enges posed when applying 4+1 
principles to Scrum, and makes initial recommendations for how the 
principles can b
e accommodation within a Scrum development.
 We believe
 that feedback from the proposed
 recommendation from
 safety and agile 
practitioners will help us to understand the effective use 

of 4+1 principles within Scrum
.  7. REFERENCES
 [1]
 Kenneth S. Rubin. 2012. Essen
tial Scrum: A Practical Guide to the 

Most Popular Agile Process (1st ed.). Addison
-Wesley 
Professional.
 [2]
 Kelly, Tim. "Software Certification: Where is Confidence Won 
and Lost?" Addressing Systems Safety Challenges, T. Anderson, 
C. Dale (Eds), Safety Critica
l Systems Club (2014).
 [3]
 Osama Doss, Tim Kelly "Assurance Case Integration with An 

Agile Development Method In: XP 2015, LNBIP 212, pp. 347
Œ349, 2015.
 [4]
 Osama Doss, and Tim Kelly. ﬁChallenges and Opportunities in
 
Agile Development in Safety Critical Systems 
Œ A Surveyﬂ. 
In: 
Agile
 methods applied to development and certification of safety
-critical software 
Workshop
, XP 2015, Helsinki, Finland, 2015.
 [5]
 Kelly, T.; Weaver, R.: The Goal Structuring Notation 
Œ A Safety 
Argument Notation. In: Proceedings of the Internat
ional 
Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks 
Œ Workshops 
on Assuranc
e Cases, Florence, Italy (2004)
 [6]
 Bruce 
Douglass
. "Real
-Time Agility" June 2009
 [7]
 Agile manifesto (2001). 
http://agilemanifesto.org
. [8]
 Bruce 
Dou
glass
.  "Agile Systems Engineering" 
Sept. 2015.
 [9]
 Hawkins, R., Habli, I., Kolovos
, D., Paige, R., and Kelly, T.: 
‚Weaving an Assurance 
Case from Design: A Model
-Based 
Approach™, in Editor (Ed.)^(Eds.): ‚Book Weaving an Assurance 

Case from Design: A Model
-Based Approach™ (2015, edn.), pp. 
110-117       