 Capitalizing on Empirical Evid
ence During Agile Adoption  
Hesam Chiniforooshan Esfahani 
Department of Computer Science,  
University of Toronto 
Toronto, ON, Canada 
Hesam@cs.toronto.edu 
Eric Yu  
Faculty of Information 
  University of Toronto 
Toronto, ON, Canada 
yu@ischool.utoronto.ca 
Maria Carmela Annosi   
Ericsson Software Research 
 Ericsson Telecomunicazioni S.p.a,  
Pagani, Italy 
mariacarmela.annosi@ericsson.com
Abstract
ŠDespite high expectations, agile methods have not 
always produced the desired results. The suitability of 
various agile practices depends on many situational factors, 
such as team size, project complexity, individuals 
competence, etc. As agile practices have become increasingly 
widespread, there is a growing body of literature that 
reports on empirical experiences, including factors that 
contribute to successful or problematic adoptions.  However, 
this considerable body of knowledge is hard for the busy 
practitioner to digest, synthesize, and put to practice for the 
specific context at hand. Our previous work [1] introduced a 
repository of agile methods that provides evidential 
knowledge about the needed conditions (requisites) and 
promised benefits (objectives) of various Agile Method 
Fragments (AMFs). The knowledge was gathered through 
systematic review of empirical studies which investigated the 
enactment of agile methods in various project situations. 
This paper reports the use of repository in a software 
process improvement initiative in one of the R&D units of 
Ericsson Company in Italy.  
Keywords
 Œ 
Agile Methods, Empirical Software 
Engineering, Method Engineering, Software Process 
Improvement  
I
NTRODUCTION
NE OF the primary concerns of project managers, 
who want to move to agile style of software 
development, is to figure out the extent that the promises 
of the new method can be attained in their particular 
organization setting. Trans
ition to agile software 
development, or in general to any new development 
method, is usually aligned with doubts and uncertainties. 
This cautious attitude is due to a number of reasons, 
including the inertia of organizations in keeping the 
current process; the failure experiences of other 
organizations in moving to agile; the lack of competence 
for implementing agile; or the suspicion of managers to 
the claims of agile methods.  
Upon the introduction of any new method, a number of 
advantages will be claimed for it, and certain conditions 
will be described to justify the feasibility of method for 
organizations or enhance its effectiveness. However, after 
the actual trial of that method in different software 
organizations, solid evidences will be proposed that had 
tested the attainability of the claimed benefits and 
necessity (or completeness) of referenced conditions. 
Some of the claimed advantages might turn to be highly 
dependent on the presence of certain preconditions; or 
even some new advantages, disadvantages, and 
preconditions might be introduced for the method. 
The widespread adoption of agile methods by software 
companies, has provided a suitable test bed for research 
community of software engineering, who are interested in 
empirical investigation of agile methods. Every year, a 
high volume of empirical studies on the deployment of 
agile methods in different organization settings will be 
published, mostly investigating the effects of those 
methods on the organizational goals, and the significant 
criteria for their success or failure. For instance, a simple 
title-based search in the IEEE Explorer for "Pair 
Programming" returns over 50 results, mostly reporting 
on empirical studies. 
Despite the considerable volume of published 
empirical studies on agile methods, there is no systematic 
approach for accessing this body of knowledge. In our 
previous work, we introduced a repository of Agile 
Method fragments (AMFs), which provides information 
about their objectives and requis
ites [1]. The definition of 
a 
method fragment
 follows [2, 3] explained as a piece of a 
development method, which can be classified as product, 
process, or producer fragments. For example, "Pair 
Programming" is a method fragment, which is a piece of 
XP development method [4]. The information stored in 
that repository is evidence-based, as they have been 
extracted through systematic literature review of 
published empirical studies on agile methods. For each 
AMF, the repository contains two datasets, the 
objectives 
dataset
 and the 
requisites dataset
. The objective dataset 
introduces the objectives that have been reported to be 
affected (in either positive or negative ways) by the 
enactment of an AMF; and the requisites dataset 
introduces the preconditions that have been reported to be 
needed for the successful enactment of an AMF in a 
software project.  
This paper reports one of our experiments of using this 
repository in an industrial project. The repository's 
knowledge of AMFs was used during a Software Process 
Improvement (SPI) initiative in one of the R&D units of 
Ericsson Company in Italy. One of the objectives of this 
initiative was to change the software development style 
with respect to agile principles, and integrate a number of 
AMFs into the current process of software development. 
We took advantage of this repository in order to gain a 
realistic view of the benefits and drawbacks of agile 
methods, and make informed decisions while selecting a 
set of AMFs for this organization. 
I.B
ACKGROUND
:T
HE 
R
EPOSITORY OF 
A
GILE 
M
ETHOD 
F
RAGMENTS
A.Data Collection 
The research method for populating the repository is the 
systematic review [5] of published empirical studies on 
agile methods. Our primary research goal is to identify 
the actual objectives and requisites of different AMFs. 
O
2010 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4125-9/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2010.721 We started the research by selecting 20 agile method 
fragments for consideration. For each method fragment 
we looked up published empirical studies that explained 
the enactment of that method fragment in a particular 
project/organization. We sear
ched the major collections 
of computer science publications, including IEEE 
Explorer, ScienceDirect, SpringerLink, and ACM Digital 
Library. We used search queries that contained the name 
of the method fragment, the name of the originating agile 
method, and some phrases for retrieving empirical 
studies, such as: Case study, Experiment Report, 
Ethnography, or Survey.  
In addition to published empirical studies in academic 
journals and conferences, we also considered articles 
from agile web-forums as complementary sources for our 
reviewed empirical studies.
 Every selected paper or 
article was then evaluated with respect to the following 
items: 1- reliability of reported data; 2- reproducibility of 
study; 3- relevance to the research questions; 4- quality of 
situation description (context for enacting AMF). Only 
publications that meet all of the above criteria are used as 
sources, and are listed as references. 
The extracted data from reviewed empirical studies 
were then analyzed and aggregated as units of knowledge 
for every method fragment. Data analysis was performed 
in order to:  
†
Clarify the contributions of method fragments to 
objectives. The contribution relations were represented 
qualitatively, using a five-value scale (--, -, ?, +, ++). 
Negative contributions represent the cases where a 
method fragment was reported to strongly deny (--) or 
somewhat deny (-) an objective; unknown 
contributions (?) represent cases where an study 
reported that an AMF does not have any significant 
contribution to a particular objective; and positive ones 
represent the cases where a method fragment was 
reported to strongly satisfy (++) or somewhat satisfy 
(+) a quality objective.  
†
Resolve the naming problems that were due to 
synonyms or homonyms. Empirical studies use 
different terms and taxonomies to describe process 
objectives. We analyzed the extracted data to 
harmonize the various terminologies of reviewed 
studies.  shows a subset of harmonized taxonomy of 
AMF objectives. 
†
Classify the method objectives and requisites into two-
level categories. The extracted objectives (or requisite) 
were classified either as major or minor categories. 
Minor categories are consider
ed as subcategories of 
major ones, and represent more delicate aspects of a 
major quality objective (or requisite). Although the 
objectives and requisites of a method fragment can be 
detailed with further levels of refinement, for the sake 
of simplicity, we consider only two levels for the 
current design of the repository.  and  show two 
examples of this categorization. 
The analyzed data were then aggregated with what had 
been collected previously. The knowledge of each 
method fragment was aggregated in two tables, one for its 
objectives and the other for its requisites. Data 
aggregation for AMF was either in the form of adding a 
new objective/requisites; or providing a new evidence for 
existing contribution relation. The final stage of data 
aggregation was to make generic snapshots, which are 
two dimensional tables that show the identified (and 
unidentified) relations of all method fragments to all 
objectives or requisites. Generic snapshots facilitate the 
comparison of method fragments, and provide insights for 
further empirical studies to uncover the potential relations 
between agile method fragments and process objectives 
or requisites.  shows a sample generic snapshot. 
B.Data Visualization 
An appropriate modeling paradigm for visualizing the 
collected data of this study should be capable of 
representing method objectives and requisites, also the 
contribution relations of AMFs to their objectives and 
their dependency relations to their requisites. These 
features have been well-addressed in Goal-Oriented 
Requirements Engineering (GORE), in which goal 
models are used to express the intentional elements of a 
modeling domain, and the contribution of domain objects, 
including activities and resources, to the domain goals 
[6]. In this research we used the 
i
* goal-oriented 
modeling framework for visualizing the collected 
knowledge of AMFs.  
Table 1 describes a subset of 
i
* modeling elements, 
which were used for visualizing the objectives and 
requisites of method fragments. Fig. 1 shows an example 
of AMF visualization. Fu
rther description of our 
approach in modeling method fragments, and their 
application in process engine
ering are presented in [7]. 
T
ABLE 
1.
T
HE USE OF I
*
 MODELING NOTATION FOR VISUALIZING METHOD 
FRAGMENTS
i
* Modeling 
Element 
Description 
Graphical 
Notation
Task Represents the enactment 
of an AMF, and places at 
the center of each model 
Softgoal Represents both AMF 
objectives and requisites 
Contributi
on 
Relation 
Visualizes the 
contribution relation of an 
AMF to its objectives 
Decompos
ition 
Relation 
Visualizes the 
dependency relation of an 
AMF to its requisites 
II.T
HE 
R
EPOSITORY IN 
P
RACTICE
We used the structured information of agile method 
fragments in a software process improvement project in 
one of the R&D unites if Ericsson company. Managers of 
the R&D unit had decided to improve the efficiency of 
their development process by moving to agile. However, 
they were hesitant on the suitability of the AMFs that 
were suggested to them, and were interested to know 
more details about AMFs' added benefits and needed 
conditions. This information was easily accessible 
through our repository of agile method fragments. 
Considering the candidate process that the R&D unit was 
about to adopt, which was mainly based on Scrum [8], we 
used the repository to extract the knowledge of the 
following method fragments: (1) Scrum Team Structure, 
22 (2) Sprint Planning, (3) Short Release, (4) Daily Scrum 
Meeting, (5) On-Site Customer.  
The information presented about the objectives and 
requisites of the candidate method fragments, along with 
the situational evidences that were provided as well, 
helped the managers to decide on the suitability of their 
candidate AMFs. In the following subsections as a sample 
AMF, we present the informa
tion that we collected for 
the AMF "On-Site Customer". The complete set of our 
tables are now published as a repository of method 
fragments, and publicly accessible at 
http://www.cs.toronto.edu/km/MFR/MF.htm
.  
A.On-Site Customer: Objectives 
 shows a subset of objectives of the agile method 
fragment " On-Site Customer". It presents different types 
of contributions that this AMF might make to its 
objectives, along with references to the empirical studies 
which have investigated these issues. Besides, it briefly 
T
ABLE 
2.
  
A
 SUBSET OF THE OBJECTIVES OF THE 
AMF,"O
N
-S
ITE 
C
USTOMER
",
 ALONG WITH SITUATIONAL EVIDENCES FOR ITS CONTRIBUTIONS 
Major 
Objective 
Minor Objective 
Contri
bution 
Study 
Situation 
++ 
 S39, S40 
In General 
Facilitated Communication with business people 
- 
 S36, S56 
large project - overloaded customer, who could not 
play the role of all stakeholders 
Enhanced 
Communication 
Better understanding of customer needs, also 
technical concerns of customer 
++ 
 S37, S39 
 In General 
Higher participation of user in planning 
+ 
 S39 
customers were trained to have a minimum required 
planning knowledge 
Enhanced 
Collaboration 
Higher participation of user in defining Test Cases
++ 
 S39 
customers were trained to have a minimum required 
technical knowledge 
++ 
 S56 
  
Reduced need for requirement models and 
documentation 
-- 
 S56 
Large complex systems - enterprise systems that 
need to ensure alignment with business goals 
Balancing potential conflicts between customer 
needs and developer's  
++ 
 S39 
 In General 
Improved 
Effectiveness 
Fast resolvent of requirement issues 
++ 
 S34, S36 
 In General 
describes the situations in which stated contributions had 
occurred. For instance, it shows that Pair Programming, 
in general cases (represented as Default), contributes 
strongly and positively to the objective "Reduced Defects 
in Code". It also provides evidence from a controlled 
experiment, which qualifies this contribution with more 
specific situational information (complex system with 
juniordevelopers).
The contributions of a method fragment to an objective 
can be classified in two categories. The first category is 
for objectives that a method fragment makes situation-
independent contributions to 
them, i.e. the change of 
context does not sharply change the contribution type of a 
method fragment to them. For example, in all of the 
reviewed empirical studies reported that Pair 
Programming makes positive contribution to the objective 
"Faster Problem Solving". But, there exist another 
category of objectives for which the contribution on AMF 
is situation-dependent, i.e. the change of context can alter 
the type of contribution. For instance, the default 
contribution of "Pair Programming" to the objective "Be 
on-time to market" is positive, but [9] reports that Pair 
Programming in the context of a large project with 
limited number of developers and high market pressure 
can adversely contributes to that objective.  
A.Agile Method Fragments: Requisites 
As an example of evidential knowledge about 
requisites,  shows a subset of major and minor requisites 
of the agile method fragment "Daily Scrum Meeting". For 
each requisite, it presents a number of empirical studies 
which had reported the impact of that requisite on the 
success or failure of daily scrum meetings. This table 
briefly describes the significant situational factors of the 
referenced studies, and mentions the achievement (or 
denial) status of requisites in those situations. The 
achievement status of requisites is specified either as: 
Denied (D), Partly Denied (PD), Partly Satisfied (PS), or 
Satisfied (S). 
B.Agile Method Fragments: Visualization 
Fig. 1 shows a sample visualization of an agile method 
fragments. It depicts some of the objectives that pair 
programming contributes to them. For instance, it shows 
that pair programming contributes positively to the 
objective "Better Time to Market". We used four types of 
contribution relations from the 
i
* modeling framework, in 
order to represent the contribution of an AMF to its 
objectives: "++" representing strong positive 
contributions; "+" representing normal positive 
contributions; "-" representing normal negative 
contributions; "--" representing strong negative 
contributions. Fig. 1 also shows the dependency of the 
AMF pair programming to some of its requisites, e.g. 
"Effective Collaboration of Pairs". 
III.D
ISCUSSION AND 
F
UTURE 
W
ORK
So far the repository has been populated with the 
knowledge of 20 agile method fragments. The website for 
this repository is being regularly updated to reflect the 
latest findings of empirical software engineering about 
agile method fragments. The plan is to expand the 
repository to non-agile method fragments.  Work has 
started to collect and analyze method fragments for 
requirements engineering, agile as well as non-agile. 
23 T
ABLE 
3.
AS
UBSET OF THE REQUISITES OF THE 
AMF,"O
N
-S
ITE 
C
USTOMER
",
 AND THEIR ACHIEVEMENT STATUS IN A NUMBER OF REFERENCED EMPIRICAL STUDIES 
Major 
Requisite 
Minor Requisite 
Achievem
ent 
Study 
Situation 
avoid under utilization of customer 
PD 
 S34 
from 100% availability of customer, only 20% was necessary 
Good 
Collaboration 
minimized technological gap between 
customer and developers 
PS 
 S39 
training the customer (as needed),  
commitment 
customer be available when needed 
D 
 S33 
lack of on-site customer 
minimum customer/company cultural conflict 
PD 
 S33 
  
D 
 S36, S37 
Large project (S6) - customer could not play the role of all 
stakeholders 
S 
 S39 
Team of Customers, rather than one customer were on-site 
customer can handle multiple tasks and roles 
S 
 S39 
Classical stakeholder analysis had been performed, before 
working with on-site customer 
Company does not over-influence the 
customer 
D 
 S38 
Development team could easily convince the customer, without 
actually implementing some of the user stories 
D 
 S38 
when customer noticed that he can influence the team, started to 
complain about anything and everything 
be effective 
Customer does not over-influence the team  
  
S 
 S39 
customer (team) was trained on how, and when to represent their 
idea, besides he was asked to think of "–so that..." in order to 
have a good reason for his demands 
The results of using this repository in an SPI initiative 
show that we are able to reuse the knowledge stored in 
this repository, in order to analyze the potential impacts 
of deploying a set of AMFs on the strategic goals of 
organization. Our aim is to develop a comprehensive SPI 
framework, drawing on the evidential knowledge of the 
repository. This framework includes a process evaluation 
technique, which makes use of the pre-constructed goal 
models to investigate the suitability of a set of AMFs for 
a particular project/organization [5].  
F
IG
.1.
V
ISUALIZATION OF THE AGILE METHOD FRAGMENT 
"
ON
-
SITE 
C
USTOMER
",
 FOR A SUBSET OF ITS OBJECTIVES AND REQUISITES 
IV.R
EFERENCES
1. H. Chiniforooshan Esfahani and E. Yu. 
A 
Repository of Agile Method Fragments
. In 
International Conference on Software Process. 
Germany: Springer-Verlag (2010) 
2. I.V.D. Weerd, S. Brinkkemper, J. Souer, and J. 
Versendaal, 
A situational implementation 
method for web-based content management 
system-applications: method engineering and 
validation in practice.
In Software Process: 
Improvement and Practice, 11(5) p. 521-538 
(2006) 
3. A. Qumer and B. Henderson-Sellers, 
A 
framework to support the evaluation, adoption 
and improvement of agile methods in practice.
In 
Journal of Systems and Software, 81(11) p. 
1899-1919 (2008) 
4. B. Kent and A. Cynthia, 
Extreme Programming 
Explained: Embrace 
Change (2nd Edition)
, 
Addison-Wesley Professional (2004) 
5. B. Kitchenham, Procedures for Performing 
Systematic Reviews, TR/SE-0401, Software 
Engineering Group, Department of Computer 
Science, Keele University, (2004) 
6. E.S.K. Yu. 
Towards modelling and reasoning 
support for early-phase requirements 
engineering
. In Proceedings of the Third IEEE 
International Symposium on Requirements 
Engineering: IEEE Computer Society (1997) 
7. H. Chiniforooshan Esfahani and E. Yu. 
Situational Evaluation of Method Fragments: an 
Evidence-Based Goal-Oriented Approach
. In 
22nd International Conference of Advances 
Information Systems Engineering (CAiSE'10). 
Tunisia (2010) 
8. K. Schwaber, 
Agile Project Management with 
Scrum
, Microsoft Press (2004) 
9. F. Padberg and M.M. Muller. 
Analyzing the cost 
and benefit of pair programming
. In Proceedings 
of Ninth International Software Metrics 
Symposium.: IEEE Press (2003) 
24