 Improving General Knowledge in Agile Software Organizations Experiences with job rotation in customer support 
Tor Erlend Fægri 
Department of Software Engineering, Safety and Security 
SINTEF ICT Trondheim, Norway 
Tor.E.Fegri@sintef.no 
 AbstractŠFor many organizations the transition to agile 
methods is problematic due to history of bureaucratization and 
subsequent extensive specia
lization of knowledge among 
people. Specialist knowledge inhibits self-organization and role 
interchangeability which a
re key elements of agile 
development. Knowing that 
bureaucracies are hard to 
counteract once established, how can development of general 
knowledge in software organ
izations be improved? Job 
rotation is a well-known practi
ce often used to improve general 
knowledge. The reported acti
on research evaluated job 
rotation among developers in customer support. The findings 
suggest that general knowledge is considered interesting and 
valuable among the participants. However, the findings also 
show that general knowledge acquisition can be found 
irrelevant and therefore counter-
efficient for day-to-day work 
among participants if the perceived applicability to own 
projects is too low. Therefore, 
using job rotation to improve 
general knowledge requires careful considerations. 
Implications for research a
nd practice are discussed. 
Keywords-Agile methods, adoption of agile methods, agile 
organizations, job rotation, organizational learning 
I. INTRODUCTION
 Agile Software Development (ASD) is based on self-
organizing teams for which general knowledge is important. 
Job rotation is one approach to build general knowledge. 
This action research study 
reports upon experiences from a 
trial of job rotation among developers in CS (Customer 

Support) at a Norwegian soft
ware organization henceforth 
called MapIT (a pseudonym). 
The MapIT software organi
zation employs roughly 30 
people (16 developers) and is a provider of electronic 
document management systems, geographical information 

systems and a set of related services such as consulting and 

service hosting. Development activities are predominantly 

allocated to projects with bud
get and time constraints. 
Developers can be grouped according to technology; those 
working primarily with Java (5 developers) and those 

working with .NET (11 developers). Document management 

applications are mostly based on .NET while graphical 

applications dealing with maps etc. are mainly written in 

Java. Over the last two years MapIT has been in the 
transition from plan-driven to 
agile software development, 
using Scrum. Both developer 
groups actively pursue agile 
development and both groups are located in the same office 
space. To support readability of 
quotes we use pseudonym 
names preceded with codes in parentheses for showing 

affiliation to different groups. 
Code ﬁJﬂ denote Java group, 
code ﬁNﬂ denote .NET group, code ﬁSﬂ denote permanent CS 

Œ i.e. 1
st line CS, and code ﬁMﬂ denote management group. 
For example, David (J) denotes a statement from David 

belonging to the Java group. Tracy (J & N) denotes 

statements from Tracy which has some experience from the 

.NET group but is now part of the Java group. 
Prior to the trial there was only one staff, Carl (S), 
working in CS. He acted mostly as a dispatcher of customer 
enquiries (1
st line CS). The organization™s product portfolio 
was large and diverse with clear potentials for improved 

technical alignment. Some products were developed by 

single developers. For the large
r products the responsible 
developers had frequently non-o
verlapping ownership of the 
products™ modules. Thus, when a CS enquiry arrived it was 
normally simply dispatched to 
the developer that had worked 
on the particular product or module associated with the 

enquiry. Naturally, this caused
 a lot of disruptions to the 
daily workflow of developers
. Dealing with CS enquiries 
was called ‚the quagmire™ to illu
strate their dismay of being 
personally responsible for this 
work on top of other duties. 
The symbolic name ‚quagmire™ also reflects the difficulty of 

developers to withdraw from personal customer 
responsibility. The paper is organized as follows: Section II elaborates 
on the action research appro
ach, our collaboration with 
MapIT and our motivation for using action research. Section 

III presents a summary of existing research regarding 
specialist knowledge and general knowledge in organizations 

with a particular attention to the importance of general 
knowledge in agile software development. Section IV gives a 
summary of the empirical findings. Subsequently, Section V 
discusses the contribution of
 the findings to existing 
research. Section VI contains our conclusions. 
II. RESEARCH APPROACH
 The research is based in action research [3, 8, 13] and 
organizational learning [2]. Before this particular 
2009 Agile Conference978-0-7695-3768-9/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2009.6949 investigation we had a histor
y of long-lasting collaboration 
with MapIT on the topics of software process improvement 

and adoption of agile methods. Thus, MapIT was in a good 

position to cooperate with the researchers in trying to deal 

with any problems. The epistemological basis of action 

research is that researchers and practitioners collaborate in 

order to improve current practice while also contributing to 

existing theory. Due to our 
history of collaboration with MapIT the researchers had collected extensive knowledge on 
many challenges at MapIT a
nd could more easily obtain a 
suitable position to engage in organizational change 
processes. However, our engagement during the action 

taking phase was facilitative [3
] rather than collaborative 
[13]. We did engage closely during diagnosing, planning, 
evaluation and specifying learning. Thus, as action research 

it is best classified as participant action research [29]. 
During the spring 2008 the researchers had four meetings 
with MapIT to diagnose the na
ture of the problem and to 
plan possible actions to corr
ect it. Trying to reduce the 
‚quagmire™ problem quickly became the focus of the research 
project. From these four meetings with MapIT we learned a 
great deal about how the probl
em was perceived. The MapIT 
general manager, Nick (M), referred to the quagmire as ﬁthe 
cause of disruptions in the machineﬂ implying that MapIT 
failed to live up bureaucratic ideals [33]. Peter (M), the 

current consultant manager, warned that MapIT was ﬁunable 

to learn from mistakesﬂ which suggested that organizational 

learning potentials were not exploited [2]. Mark (M), the 
current development manager, commented: ﬁWe are too 
comfortable living with our mistakes.ﬂ The latter statement 

suggested that there were orga
nizational conflicts hiding 
beneath the surface. It became clear that MapIT needed a 

different way to deal with CS enquiries. Furthermore, there 
were concerns of a very wide
 and poorly technically aligned 
product portfolio. We got no precise answers to questions on 
the number of products, but gue
sses fell within the 15-35 
range. A developer referred to an example where seemingly 
identical functionality for document scanning had been 
developed in two separate products. These issues suggested 

that MapIT did not exploit its
 learning potentials [2, 12]. 
After some time for reflection the idea of trying job 
rotation to CS came up. The researchers argued that if 

developers rotated to an offi
ce collocated with Carl (S) this 
could be a way of creating a ri
ch learning environment for 
improved general knowledge of MapIT™s range of products. 

It would also allow Carl (S) to learn more about developers™ 
way of solving problems. It would simultaneously give 
shielding for the other developers for CS enquiries. There 
were critical comments from some of MapIT managers to 
this approach however. Primarily, the concerns were related 

to the ability of a rotation system
 to ensure high quality CS to 
customers in case rotation introduced additional handovers 
between people. Therefore the trial period would be 
relatively short with formal 
evaluation in September 2008.  
From the action-science perspectiv
e the investigation can be viewed as an experiment in enabling double-loop 
learning; how can fundamental practices be altered to 

improve symptomatic challenges? In this specific case; 
developers were too busy work
ing on their separate products 
to learn about other products. 
Essentially, they focused on 
building specialist knowledge for a small set of products. 

Thus, it was often difficult to 
share the load of CS work 
among developers. Furthermore, a range of learning 
opportunities that could help 
improve the future technical 
alignment within the product portfolio was missed. 
The primary objective of the investigation was to 
understand more about the 
premises for organizational 
learning in software organi
zations through job rotation. 
These are inherently complex phenomena on their own [2, 

23, 24] and should subsequently be assumed to involve 

further complexities when 
investigated together. 
Furthermore, research on ASD is still in a nascent state [9] 

which motivate adaptive research methods suited for 

exploring and uncovering new phenomena, and new 

relationships between the phenomena [10]. Action research 

was therefore found to be a suitable research approach as it is 

inherently targeted at de
veloping understanding through 
collaboration and change. 
The specific research questions underpinning this 
investigation are: A) How can 
job rotation contribute to the 
building of general knowledge in an organization with a 

prevalence of specialist knowledge? B) What impact can the 
introduction of job rotation ha
ve on enabling double-loop 
learning in a software organiza
tion? C) Can the introduction 
of job rotation illuminate other challenges related to 

organizational learning in 
software organizations? 
The job rotation schedule and a dedicated CS room were 
ready early May 2008 which also marked the start of the 

actual trial. This room had four desks facing each other in a 
diamond shape and large windows to approximate the 
sensation of working in an open environment, but had a glass 
door that could be closed 
to reduce noise from the 
surroundings. Most of the time,
 we would find the door open 
though. The room was located at the opposite end of the 
office space, together with another set of offices, roughly 20 

meters from the main development area. The rotation 
schedule defined when developers should sit in the CS room 
and participate in the CS work as 2
nd line CS together with 
Carl (S). For the following 18 weeks MapIT maintained the 
job rotation practice. Initia
lly the rotation schedule had 
intervals of two weeks to coin
cide with the Scrum iterations. 
This was later reduced to one week to accommodate dismay 

of excessive project delays.
 Also, initially the rotation 
schedule included one developer from the Java group and 
one developer from the .NET group to participate in the CS 
function simultaneously. This was later changed to only one 

developer, picked from either the Java or .NET group. The 
reason, we learned during our ev
aluation, was to reduce cost. 
In the 5
th week of the trial we conducted a preliminary 
review meeting where all participants and management was 

invited. There were critical opi
nions towards the rotation; many developers felt they were wasting time trying to deal 
with problems related to proj
ects they hadn™t intimate 
knowledge about. However, they
 also noted that the Wiki 
had appeared as a useful knowledge sharing tool and that the 
time in CS gave opportunitie
s for contributing useful 
information to the Wiki. Besi
des, the rotation participants 
50 liked the idea of learning about
 the range of products in the 
portfolio. Management decided to 
continue the trial, and the 
meeting concluded with an agr
eed   schedule for concluding  
interviews and presentation of evaluation results for MapIT. 
The trial continued for 13 more weeks (i.e. 18 weeks in 

total). At the end 10 
people, including 1
st line CS, had been 
participating in the trial. All 10 were interviewed using semi-

structured interviews to gather
 opinions on job rotation, CS 
work and the subjects™ own reflections on development of 
general knowledge through 
rotation. In addition we 
conducted 6 other semi-structured interviews of people more 
peripherally involved (one non-
participating developer, and 
five people with management 
roles.) These 6 interviews were 
based on a reduced version of
 the participants™ interview 
guide.  Action research embraces both qualitative and 
quantitative analysis Œ or a mix. The 16 interviews 
mentioned, totaling more than 7 hours, and 77 A4 pages of 

transcribed text, constitute the main source of data. The 

second source of data is logs from CS work. The logs were 

filled in by all involved in CS
 work and captured information 
on individual CS enquiries 
such as involved persons, 
enquiries resolved by different roles (1
st, 2nd and 3
rd line). 
The third data source is notes from the review meeting. 
Analysis of the interviews, meeting notes, and CS logs were 
supported by tools for qualitative data analysis and 
spreadsheets. Interviews and meeting notes were immediate 

transcribed and carefully analyzed
 to support reliability. Only 
log data captured during th
e trial were available. 
Furthermore, as the duration of the trial was short, the 

complexity of the measured phenomenon is high and 
involves learning which is 
inherently dependent on 
experience and accumulation of knowledge the log data are 

used to support only the argument regarding shielding. A few weeks after our concluding interviews early 
September 2008, job rotation wa
s abandoned and one of the 
trial participants was appointed permanent 2
nd line CS. III.
 THEORETICAL BACKGROUND
 Efficiency through bureaucratization has been a 
fundamental basis of western 
management and organization 
discourse since the successes of 
Taylor in the 1910s and the 
Ford mass production practices in the 1920s [6]. It has also 

greatly influenced software engineering practice [21]. An 
important aspect of bureaucratiza
tion is to reduce variability 
in performance by limiting human judgment and rather 

transfer power to governing syst
ems seeking to plan the work 
through procedures and normative rules [33]. It can be 
difficult to argue against this approach to improve efficiency. 

The bureaucratic organization of work represents 
optimalization by enco
ding knowledge and 
prior experience 
into a stable, fair and predictable machine-like structure. 

Besides, the efficiency perspective of bureaucracy is based 

on rational conduct which is both logical and sensible as well 

as reasonable and adherent to scientific ideals [6]. 
Furthermore, once established bureaucracy is inherently 
difficult to reduce [33] as it require changes in mindset and 

culture [21]. The bureaucratic organization assigns people to specific 
roles or functional areas to
 attain high specialized role 
performance and pursue partic
ular careers [15]. While 
benefitting peoples™ individuality it gives rise to specialist 
knowledge because people focus on a certain range of tasks 
and these tasks constitute th
eir fundamental learning 
environment [6]. Specialist know
ledge is knowledge that is 
concentrated among a few individuals [25]. Increasing 
complexity of software systems may easily lead people to 
focus their attention to partic
ular modules, technologies or 
aspects of the software system being developed, primarily 

due to cognitive limitations of 
the brain [12, 24]. Contrary to 
specialist knowledge, general 
knowledge is knowledge that 
covers and somehow integrates multiple knowledge domains 

[25]. General knowledge is also called common knowledge 

[5] or breadth knowledge [12, 34]; implying that the 

knowledge is wide and at an overall level. The aspect of 

general knowledge that it somehow connects, or integrates 

multiple fields of understanding 
is explained by Kolb [15]. In 
his view, integrative knowledge is the third stage of a 
knowledge pyramid, above acquisition and specialization 
(p.140). He suggests th
at the integrative type of knowledge is 
the pinnacle of human learning and helps us to deal with ﬁthe 
interface between social knowledge and the ever-novel 
predicaments and dilemmas we find ourselves in.ﬂ (p.225). 
A fundamental premise for achieving efficiency through 
bureaucracy is a relatively slow rate of change in the 
organization™s environment. Th
is is often not the case for 
software organizations [20] for which the benefits of 

extensive planning and bureaucratization are reduced [17]. 
Since the 1970s evolutionary 
development approaches have 
been promoted to constitute an
 alternative to former plan-
driven, bureaucratic software engineering practices [16]. 
During the recent years, ASD (Agile Software Development) 
has become a widely accepted method that builds on ideas 

from evolutionary development.
 The efficiency perspective 
in ASD is different from that
 of plan-driven development. 
For example, ASD promotes flexibility instead of rigidity, 
for example through self-organizing teams and role 
interchangeability [21]. Self-organizing teams take more 
responsibility for their own 
work and reduce the need for 
bureaucratic, hierarchical 
management [4]. Also, ASD 
emphasize work-coordination through tacit knowledge 

sharing rather than written documents which also restrict 
management insight to the team [21]. A pre-requisite for 
efficiency in teams is general knowledge, such as common 

understanding of goals and p
roblem-solving strategies [27, 
34]. General knowledge, in the form of common knowledge 
[6] or shared domain knowledge 
[18] functions as an enabler 
for effective communication. Gene
ral knowledge is held to 
be the pre-requisite for backup behavior in teams [27]. 

Specialist knowledge, on its own, does not constitute 
competitive advantage before
 it is somehow integrated or 
shared [12] and thus made available to benefit the activities 

of the organization. 
Numerous challenges to the successful adoption of agile 
methods have been identified 
in literature [4, 21]. One is 
existing prevalence of specialist knowledge among the team 

members that can inhibit self-organization [19]. For many 
51 organizations, it can be difficu
lt to alter fundamental forces 
that stimulate development of specialist knowledge. 

Considering cognitive limitations promoting specialization 
[12], people™s desire for achieving proficiency and high 

performance in their job situation [15], bureaucracy as a 

traditional form of efficiency [21] and that through 

increasing experience the specialist easily becomes the 

preferred person to deal with a certain type of tasks, a natural 
tendency would appear to favor development of specialist 
knowledge. ASD include recommended practices that are intended to 
increase the level of general knowledge at the team level. 
Examples are group-based estimation, collective code 
ownership and pair programming. Job rotation is another 

well-known practice to build 
general knowledge beyond the 
team level. Job rotation is normally used to denote an 
organization of work by which 
people specialize in different 
roles according to some schedule [7]. Although job rotation 
represents formalism it is one which seeks to break up 
fallacies of traditional bureaucracy. Ortega suggests that job 

rotation and specialization denote the two extremes of a job 

policy dichotomy [23].  Besides, organizational routines can 

be effective mechanisms fo
r knowledge sharing [12]. 
Literature discusses several benefits of job rotation. It is a 
characteristic of learning organizations that may contribute to 

higher innovative performance [17], and be beneficial to tacit 

knowledge sharing [30] and knowledge creation [28] through 

development of knowledge redundancy and ‚requisite 

variety™ [22] which is critical for knowledge intensive work 

such as software development. Job rotation can improve 

team efficiency [14], problem
-solving skills [1] and can 
enable people to understand larger aspects of an 
organization™s processes [7]. Subsequently it can benefit 

exploration of new knowledge 
[31]. Job rotation, through its 
ability to create individual cross-functional experience, can 

also be superior to e.g. cros
s-functional teams in order to 
build general knowledge because people tend to prefer to talk 
about already shared knowle
dge [11]. But most of the 
identified research has focused 
on productivity effects rather 
than adoption challenges and peoples™ experience. Un [31] 
proposes that job rotation incr
eased psychological safety 
among participants. Empirical evidence is scant however 
[23]. Within the field of soft
ware engineering, job rotation 
has simply been encouraged [26]. Within agile software 

development there is barely anything [9]; Wang [32] 
suggests that job rotation to CS
 can contribute to developer 
motivation while providing a valuable source of customer 
requirements (pp.155, 165). 
Improved understanding of job rotation participants™ 
experiences can be valuable in determining useful strategies 

for building general knowledge 
and sustaining organizational 
learning in agile software orga
nizations.  Subsequently, such 
understanding can improve or
ganizations™ adoption of ASD. 
IV. FINDINGS
 At the review meeting condu
cted 5 weeks into the trial 
the developers considered 
the job rotation as mainly 
problematic. Most of the deve
lopers participating in the 
meeting did not see value in rotation to CS. One reason was 
that the amount of ‚personal ownership™ of code among the 

different products. One develope
r noted that the .NET group 
and the Java group had their 
‚individual ways™ to solve 
problems which created trouble when trying to support 

products from the other technol
ogical camp. Also, a couple 
of the developers allocated for CS shifts had been able to 
‚slip away™ without doing the shift and thereby causing 
concerns for lack of fair shar
ing. Another reason was poor 
tools that did not allow for ef
ficient tracking of bugs among 
multiple customers. However, there were also a few 

developers that noted that the 
trial should be allowed to run 
for a while before formal evaluation. One noted that such 
learning initiatives take a long ti
me before giving visible 
effects. The researchers didn™t interve
ne for the following 13 
weeks. At this point we con
ducted the formal interviews. 
Now, Karen (M) had just recently replaced Anthony (M) as 

development manager. Prior to 
this, Anthony (M) had acted 
as temporary development manager while MapIT was 

looking for a replacement 
for Mark (M). Only a couple of 
weeks earlier Ken (M) had replaced Peter (M) as consultant 
manager.  
A. Attitude to job rotation 
The interviews revealed that only a minority of the 
participating developers in the job rotation trial (3 out of 9) 
was willing to continue with the current practice of job 

rotation into CS. 4 out of 9 were
 strongly against. However, 
the remaining 2 participant would accept job rotation if 2
nd line CS was permanently staffed,
 and thus result in rotation 
to a 3
rd line CS function within the 
room. In fact, all of the 9 
participating developers would prefer a permanent 2
nd line 
CS staff. There was a strong correlation between developer 
group and attitude towards rotati
on; the 4 against rotation 
belonged to the Java group. Carl (S), permanent 1
st line CS 
staff, was also in favor of a permanent 2
nd line CS and 
expressed uncertainty about an
y kind of job rotation. These 
results caused MapIT manage
ment to appoint one of the 
participating developers to become a permanent 2
nd line CS 
staff, sitting together with Carl (S). Job rotation was 

abandoned. 
The interviews with mana
gement suggested a more 
neutral attitude to rotation as 
such. But it was noted that the 
developers had different motivations for support work. 
Anthony (M), filling the role of development manager during 
the trial, explained: ﬁIt depends a lot on the person. Some 
people are very conscientious 
and don™t want to abandon 
their commitment to customers in the middle of a Scrum 

project. While others are more w
illing to do just that.ﬂ Then 
there were concerns that fewer people on rotation might be 
better for maintaining focus and efficiency. Ken (M), the 
current consultant manager,
 was strongly against rotation 
though. He had prior 
experience from managing a CS unit in 
another organization and believed that job rotation could 

never provide sufficiently professional handling of CS work. 
52 B. On support work Several important criticisms were revealed in the 
interviews. Some suggested that
 the job rotation practice was 
a cheap management trick introd
uced to avoid the cost of a 
permanent 2
nd line CS staff. Besides, we learned that CS 
work had a lower status than development work Œ in 

particular among the less tenured developers which 

complained that CS work ﬁwas not part of the contractﬂ and 

involves ﬁthe dealing with 
problems you didn™t create 
yourself.ﬂ Helen (N), a developer with more than 10 years of 
tenure painted a more nuanced picture: ﬁSome think CS work 
is degrading, more akin to ‚fixing things™ and getting your 

hands dirty while development is more similar to the creative 
role of the architect. But in reality we as developers also get 
our hands dirty, for example when there are a lot of users 
involved that interfere with th
e way you originally conceived the solution.ﬂ We learned that mostly .NET applications were 

in use by end-users. So far, Java projects had developed 

technical infrastructure for use 
by other applications although 
end-user Web-applications were underway. This is likely an 

important factor for explaining the low motivation for job 

rotation to CS among Java developers. CS work was also 

associated with stress. Said Tracy (J & N): ﬁI perceived it as 

a stressful situation to be in Œ I was sitting there and the 

customer expected me to already know the answer.ﬂ 
Interviews with management 
strengthened the impression 
that support work was associated 
with lower status. Nick 
(M), MapIT manager, suggested 
that ﬁsupport work was not 
considered part of the carrier path of highly educated 
people.ﬂ C. Rotation fairness 
We expect also the lower status of CS work to be 
important in explaining the pro
blem with implementing 
rotation at MapIT Œ the rotati
on was not implemented in a 
fair manner among the developers. However, mixing firm 
schedules with project-based work was also problematic. 
Said Stuart (J): ﬁA project deadline forced me to withdraw 

from my shift at CS.ﬂ Chris (N) commented: ﬁOccasionally 
we™ve had so much work on the projects that the person 
believed to be least loaded 
was put on the CS shift.ﬂ 
Additionally, there were opini
ons that responsibility of CS 
should go beyond developers. Noted Andrew (J): ﬁCS is just 

as much the consultants™ respon
sibility.ﬂ Many participants 
expressed that they would be more positive towards rotation 

if the schedule was implemented fairly. 
Interviews with management confirmed the difficulty of 
fairness. All of them raised th
e issue of implementing a fair 
rotation schedule in a project-based organization. 
D. Learning from rotation 
CS work was also associated with useful learning. Helen 
(N) said: ﬁWorking with CS gives insight into the real 

problematic issues for the custom
er.ﬂ Prior to the trial some 
developers complained that products were developed with 

frequent shortcuts that made m
aintenance difficult. Said 
Chris (N): ﬁAfter a few more rounds with rotation I™m sure 
that the appreciation of developing more maintainable 
products will increase.ﬂ But Chris (N) added: ﬁI™m not sure, 
but it would have been easier to improve the understanding 

of the importance of building ma
intainable products if there 
were permanent people in CS. Developers are developers– 

they don™t express concerns for maintainability.ﬂ Being 

asked specifically about this, 
he did not believe that the 
problem of poor maintainability was a result of ASD but 

simply a consequence of MapIT not recognizing or awarding 
maintainability. E. Cost of building general knowledge 
Rotation, with these short cycles, received mixed 
appraisal. First, people warned about the overhead in just 

getting up to speed. Said Stuart 
(J): ﬁThe short term memory 
is easily lost. When you re-e
nter CS you have to learn 
everything anew.ﬂ Some of MapIT™s projects are rather 
small, and the absence of one developer for the support cycle 

could be damaging to the prog
ress of the project. David (J) 
commented: ﬁBeing away for two weeks causes the person to 

loose track of the progress of the project and it may be 
difficult to regain the comprehension of the software when 
once returned.ﬂ Tracy (J & N) complained: ﬁIt takes an 
awfully long time to sit there to 
get the overview over things. 
During the [shift] week you get the job done Œ alright Œ but it 

takes a long time. And the next time you're on shift... let's say 

half a year... you don't rememb
er how you solved the same 
enquiry the last time... and you have to start all over. It's this 

thing about not mastering what
 you do, it takes a lot of 
resources.ﬂ Subsequently the efforts needed to get back to 

speed in the project. Andrew (J
) said: ﬁIt is similar to having 
been on vacation Œ you need some time to get into things 
again.ﬂ Some developers identified
 strongly with MapIT™s 
economical situation an
d claimed that job rotation to CS was 
damaging to MapIT. Said Tracy (J & N): ﬁEconomically it is 
directly unprofitable. We coul
d be much more effective on 
the tasks we need to do, the tasks that are already behind 

schedule. Instead of sitting there [in the CS room] wasting 

time.ﬂ F. Value of general knowledge 
An important goal with the trial was to evaluate how 
people reacted to learning about the breadth of products in 
MapIT™s product portfolio. All pa
rticipants were asked about 
whether they perceived spec
ialist knowledge or general 
knowledge to be most recogni
zed by MapIT. None saw any 
difference in the recognition of these two knowledge types. 
Arguably, the organization is
 struggling with too many 
diverging product offerings a
nd two technological platforms. 
But also the more fundamental aspect of learning about 
something not directly relevant fo
r the projects in which they 
participated was received differently. 
Prior to the trial MapIT had not implemented any 
initiatives to develop gene
ral knowledge of the product 
portfolio. Many said that the tr
ial was useful in achieving 
this. Eric (N), for example, noted: ﬁWorking there was very 

informative with re
spect to our range of products.ﬂ Andrew 
(J) said: ﬁI don™t want to specialize too much – I see a vast 
53 range of opportunities in my fu
ture career.ﬂ But the same 
developers felt that this time sp
ent on learning was a waste of 
resources. Teresa (J) said: ﬁThe right person would solve this 

problem much quicker and I di
dn™t feel useful.ﬂ Some found 
general knowledge to be irre
levant. David (J) claimed: 
ﬁPeople from the two camps [Java and .NET] don™t want or 

need knowledge from the other camp to solve their daily 
tasks.ﬂ The need for specialist knowledge in order to solve 
CS enquiries were also noted. Said Chris (N): ﬁWith the 
current state of things it is still necessary with the in-depth 

knowledge on specific topics to 
feel efficient in there [the CS 
room]. And it™s not enough to write a few lines of 
documentation. You are largely 
dependent on having been a 
part of the project from the be
ginning to really understand 
the system and how to resolve problems.ﬂ 
A somewhat surprising cont
radiction was brought 
forward by Teresa (J): ﬁIn the R&D department there is no 

need for specialists in any area. But I've observed specialists 

associated with one-man projects Œ then there is only this 

person who knows the project. If this person quits there is 

no-one to replace him or her. [...] But it isn't so that a person 

has a specific competence which MapIT depends upon. I 
don't think that. So if a person is away for a week or so, I 
think it is fully realistic that someone else can step in.ﬂ But 
specialization, by definition, is identified by people having 

problems replacing each other on task work. Thus, there 

appears to be a lack of reflection upon the level of specialist 

knowledge already manifested 
by the wide product portfolio. 
The increasing awareness of the breadth of the portfolio 
and the two technological platforms, attributed to the rotation 
in support work, resulted in 
reflection upon the challenge of 
sharing knowledge about the 
products, the Java and .NET 
technologies. A very interesti
ng thing happened during the 
first week of Andrew™s (J) shif
t in support. He built a Wiki-
based support tool to capture 
frequently used techniques to 
resolve CS enquiries. All pa
rticipants contributed and 
benefitted from the support-wiki. Additionally, Carl (S) 
claimed that the Wiki ﬁcreated a common platform for 
dealing with product issues.ﬂ However, the interviews did not
 reveal increased insight 
into potentials for improved technical alignment between 
products from job rotation. 
Interviews with management confirmed the challenge 
with a large and diverse produc
t portfolio. Nick (M), general 
manager, said: ﬁWe have engaged in an increasing number of 

projects aiming to build
 integrated solutions
. It™s not easy to 
stay in control Œ there are 
many product variants and many 
different actors involved. [–] However, we hope that Web 
Service technology will alleviate this challenge somewhat as 
both Java and .NET based software can constitute equally 
valuable service components.ﬂ Ken (M), consultant manager, 

commented: ﬁI think this is a huge challenge for MapIT. We 
need to focus and better align 
our products otherwise we™ll 
not be able to compete.ﬂ We asked him if he believed that 

job rotation could improve the general awareness of 

importance of technological alignment. He confirmed this, 

but added that the awareness had to reach the general 

manager and marketing department somehow. 
G. Effects on ‚quagmire™ 
Several said that institution
alization, from the explicit 2
nd line CS role and the CS room, resulted in a more professional 

CS function which also resulted in better shielding. Andrew 

(J) said: ﬁNow CS work is planned with resources allocated Œ 

it™s not something that comes on top of everything else. And, 

it is very satisfying to see that many CS enquiries are 

resolved within this room.ﬂ An
alysis of CS logs gave support 
for this claim. A total of 132 CS
 enquiries were resolved by 
2nd line CS and 130 enquiries were resolved by 3
rd line CS 
respectively during the trial. Many said that the volume of 

CS work became more visible and thus received better 

recognition by management. Ho
wever, the decision to reduce 
staffing from 2 to 1 developer per shift was perceived 
negatively. Karen (M), just recently appointed development 
manager, commented that the decision was made based on 
internal reviews of initial logs
 which showed that there 
wasn™t enough CS work to justify 2 developers on each shift. 
Also, the CS manager commented that he did not perceive 
CS work as income-generating (income-generating work was 
attributed developers). 
H. Bureaucracy 
As mentioned in subsection IV.A, all developers wanted 
more formalism through a permanent 2
nd line CS staff. They 
believed this would give stronger ownership and 

commitment to the 
function. This, it wa
s claimed, would 
result in benefits such as more strongly expressed quality 

requirements, further improved shielding and more efficient 

CS. Interviews with management confirmed the willingness 
to increase bureaucracy with respect to CS. Although it was 
expressed using more neutral language. Nick (M), general 

manager, explained: ﬁIt is impor
tant to ‚hit the mark™ with 
CS staffing so that we don™t waste resources in there [in CS]. 

It would probably be more efficient from a competence 
perspective to rather have one or two permanent staff on CS 
that would get up to speed quicker.ﬂ 
V. DISCUSSION Action research has its epistemological basis in a 
preference to knowing how over knowing that. This is 
reflected in AR™s central positi
on ﬁthe best understanding of 
a phenomenon is obtained when trying to change it.ﬂ [13] 
But organizational change takes time. The trial reported here 
lasted only 18 weeks so we cannot expect that the full 

potentials or all disadvantages of job rotation are revealed. 

The findings suggest that int
roducing job rotation may bring 
benefits [26] but it should be done very carefully. It is worth 
noting that the shielding effect 
was significant. Although the 
measurements and duration of logging didn™t allow for deep 
analysis, the logs showed that more CS enquiries were 
resolved by the 2
nd line CS person on shift than those 
resolved by developers outside
 the shift for the duration of 
the trial. (132 versus 130.) This implies that the number of 

‚quagmire™ requests to the remaining developers was reduced 
by roughly 50 % 
by the rotation. 54 We now address each of the three research questions 
raised in Section II. A. How can job rotation contribute to the building of 
general knowledge in an organization with a prevalence 
of specialist knowledge? Job rotation has been held to represent learning 
organizations and contribute to
 innovative performance [7, 
17]. In this case, the Wiki re
sulted from the n
eed to quickly 
retrieve and accumulate ‚problem-solving tricks™ for the 
whole product portfolio. The Wiki helped share useful 
knowledge for all [12]. Furthermore, the need to improve 

maintainability of the products 
has become more visible and 
the importance of CS has improved Œ thus improving 
appreciation for other organizational concerns [7]. 
But the findings from this 
research shows that only a 
minority of the participants wa
nted to continue with the 
rotation schedule. In fact, all participants were in favor of a 

more bureaucratic CS organiza
tion. Thus, job rotation should probably be implemented differently in order to accomplish 

the sustained building of gene
ral knowledge. One suggestion 
could be to use a scheme that is based on voluntary 

participation. Implementing job ro
tation with short cycles in 
a fair manner in a project-based organization is difficult. 
B. What impact can the introduction of job rotation have 
on enabling double-loop learning in a software 

organization? Enabling double-loop learning is
 hard, involves change to 
fundamental thinking and may 
take considerable time. For 
these, and other reasons, efforts often fail [2]. It would be 
unreasonably harsh to say that this trial of job rotation failed 
to enable double-loop learning.
 In fact, as we noted in 
Subsection V.A above, initial phases of double-loop learning 

can be traced to the trial. The increased appreciation of 
building more maintainable products and the support-wiki 
can be interpreted as a fundamental change in norms and 

strategies used to deal with occurring problems [2]. 
However, with the termination 
of job rotation this source 
of feedback disappears and doubl
e-loop learning must be 
accomplished by other means. The failure to sustain double-

loop learning in this case can
 be partly attributed the 
difficulty of appreciating the ef
fect of changes that initially 
seem to only incur extra cost
s for the individual and the 
organization.  
Besides, CS work was considered more stressful and this 
can contribute to less time for re
flection upon issues such as 
exploration of new ideas [20] and improved technology 
alignment between products. Th
e decision made by MapIT 
only 4 weeks into the trial to 
reduce staffing from 2 to 1 
developer on shift implied th
at Java programmers would 
have to resolve enquiries relati
ng to products developed in 
.NET, and vice versa. This n
aturally decreased the potential 
of the support room to function as
 the arena for rich learning 
opportunities we first envisaged.
 It also increased the feeling 
of stress for those on the shift. Besides, participants objected 

strongly to this, mostly because Java applications represented 

a low fraction of the CS enquiries but also because the 
technological gap was considered 
too large. It should also be 
considered whether it is actually desirable to aim for this 

level of general knowledge across such a dispersed product 

portfolio. Additionally, it was both done and perceived as a 

cost-saving decision and likely contributed to the view of CS 

as merely a cost for MapIT rather than a source for useful 

knowledge of customer concerns [32]. 
C. Can the introduction of jo
b rotation illuminate other 
challenges related to organizational learning in software 

organizations?  ASD establish its efficiency ideal in flexibility, 
responsiveness, lightweight 
documentation and effective 
teams communicating informally
 [9, 20]. Existing theory 
shows that this efficiency idea
l is better maintained with a 
significant degree of general knowledge. The empirical 

results from this investigation 
showed that all participants 
wanted a more bureaucratic organization of CS than one 
based on job rotation. In fact, the desire to be efficient at 

given roles was strongly expressed among the participants in 
this trial and contributed to th
e abandonment of job rotation 
as a vehicle for building general knowledge. Despite the fact 

that general knowledge was fo
und interesting and valuable 
among most participants it 
was not enough to motivate 
continued rotation. This supp
orts existing management and 
learning theory, namely that 
specialization supports peoples™ 
need for task proficiency [12]
 and efficiency [15]. At the 
organizational level, effici
ency through bureaucracy was 
implied as a goal by management™s use of the machine 
metaphor to describe an ideal state. Furthermore, in this case, 

all of the interviewed people wa
nted more bureaucratic 
organization of the CS function to further improve 
efficiency, predictability and abili
ty to deliver ‚professional™ 
CS. The findings suggest that us
ing job rotation to CS for the 
building of general knowledge in order to ease adoption of 
ASD can be very challenging. Even more so if the software 

organization has a wide product portfolio like MapIT. 
Furthermore, it proved difficult to implement even these 
relatively short shifts in the pr
oject-based organization [30]. 
Although the length of the shift 
had been adjusted to the 
duration of the Scrum iteration, 
the lack of long-term plans in 
Scrum made the rotation more difficult Œ it was close to 
impossible to predict when impor
tant stages in
 the projects 
would occur and the schedule had to be changed. If CS work 

is considered less interesting, implementing the schedule in a 

fair manner becomes more important. 
Thus, even for organizations
 relatively proficient with 
ASD the efficiency ideals of former bureaucratic work 

organization may be prevalent. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS
 Generalization from single-case investigations like this 
one should be done with the utmost care. What seems 

reasonable to claim based from this investigation is that it 
does take time to build a learning organization culture and 
gain benefits from general kn
owledge. Attempts to build 
general knowledge through job rot
ation should be done with 
consideration to peoples™ inhere
nt desire to complete their 
55 tasks efficiently. Job rotation to CS does bring increased 
appreciation for CS issues such as maintainability and certain 

customer usage scenarios. It appears as if the efficiency 

ideals of former bureaucratic practices for organization of 

work are not easily 
altered. Further research is necessary to 
strengthen the empirical evid
ence. Continued research 
focusing on different adoption 
models of job rotation would 
also be useful in order to explore correlations between 
voluntary participation schemes a
nd their sustainability in the 
agile software organization. 
Although some benefits such
 as clearer understanding of 
customers™ requirements, main
tainability as an important 
product quality and inventions
 in tools etc. may appear 
quickly, deeper appreciations of opportunities for 

technological alignment and futur
e products may take longer 
time. Thus, management must be willing to accept the cost of 
building general knowledge. 
Individual differences may 
justify schemes based on volunt
ary participation, but this 
should be weighted against the potential challenge of having 
to adjust the status of rotation work. ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 The work in this paper was supported by the Research 
Council of Norway through the project EVidence based 

Improvement of SOFTware engineering (EVISOFT). I am 

grateful to the involved people at MapIT and fellow 

researcher Torgeir Dingsøyr at SINTEF ICT for kind 

cooperation. 
REFERENCES
 [1] J.M. Allwood and W.L. Lee, "The impact of job rotation on problem 
solving skills"
, International Journal of Production Research
, 2004. 
42(5): pp. 865-881. 
[2] C. Argyris and D.A. Schön, 
Organizational learning II: Theory, 
method, and practice
. 1996, Reading, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley. 
305. 
[3] R. Baskerville and T.A. Wood-Harper, "Diversity in information 
systems action research"
, European Journal of Information Systems
, 1998. 
[4] B. Boehm and R. Turner, "Management challenges to implementing 
agile processes in traditional development organizations"
, IEEE 
Software, 2005. 
22(5): pp. 30-39. 
[5] P.R. Carlile, "Transferring, translating, and transforming: An integrative 
framework for managing knowledge across boundaries"
, Organization 
Science, 2004. 
15(5): pp. 555-568. 
[6] S.R. Clegg, D. Courpasson and N. Phillips, 
Power and organizations
. Foundations for organizational science. 2006, London: SAGE 
Publications. 457. [7] M.M. Cosgel and T.J. Miceli, "Job rotation: Cost, benefits and stylized 
facts", Journal of Institutional and Theoretical Economics
, 1999. 
155(2): pp. 301-320. 
[8] R.M. Davison, M.G. Martinsons 
and N. Kock, "Principles of canonical 
action research"
, Information Systems Journal
, 2004. 
14(1): pp. 65-86. 
[9] T. Dybå and T. Dingsøyr, "Empirical studies of agile software 
development: a systematic review"
, Information and Software Technology, 2008. 
50(9-10): pp. 833-859. 
[10] A.C. Edmondson and S.E. McManus, "Methodological fit in 
management field research"
, The Academy of Management Review
, 2007. 
32(4): pp. 1155-1179. 
[11] D. Gebert, S. Boerner and E. Kearney, "Cross-functionality and 
innovation in new product development teams: A dilemmatic structure 
and its consequences for the management of diversity"
, European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychology
, 2006. 
15(4): pp. 431 
- 458. 
[12] R.M. Grant, "Prospering in dynamically competitive environments: 
organizational capability as knowledge integration"
, Organization Science, 1996. 
7(4): pp. 375-387. 
[13] D.J. Greenwood 
and M. Levin, 
Introduction to action research: Social 
research for social change
. 2nd Edition ed. 2007: SAGE Publications. 
274 pp. 
[14] O. Hauptman and K.K. Hirji, "Managing integration and coordination 
in cross-functional teams: an international study of Concurrent 
Engineering product development"
, R & D Management
, 1999. 
29(2): 
pp. 179-191. 
[15] D.A. Kolb, 
Experiential learning: Experience as the source of 
learning and development. 1984, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. 
[16] C. Larman and V. Basili, "Iterative and incremental development: A 
brief history"
, IEEE Computer
, 2003. 
36(6): pp. 47-56. 
[17] B.-Å. Lundvall and P. Nielsen, "Knowledge management and 
innovative performance"
, International Journal of Manpower
, 2007. 
28(3-4): pp. 207-223. 
[18] G. Melnik and F. Maurer. 
Direct verbal communication as a catalyst 
of agile knowledge sharing
. in Agile Development Conference 
(ADC'04) 2004
. 2004. Salt Lake City, Utah. 
[19] N.B. Moe, T. Dingsøyr and T. Dybå. 
Understanding self-organizing 
teams in agile software development
. in In proceedings of 19th 
Australian Conference on Software Engineering
. 2008: IEEE 
Computer Society. 
[20] S. Nerur and V. Balijepally, "Theoretical reflections on agile 
development methodologies: The traditional goal of optimization and 
control is making way for learning and innovation"
, Communications 
of the ACM, 2007. 
50(3): pp. 79-83. 
[21] S. Nerur, R. Mahapatra and G. Mangalaraj, "Challenges of migrating 
to agile methodologies"
, Communications of the ACM
, 2005. 
48(5): pp. 
72-78. 
[22] I. Nonaka and H. Takeuchi, 
The knowledge-creating company: How 
Japanese companies create the dynamics of innovation
. 1995, New 
York: Oxford University Press. 284. 
[23] J. Ortega, "Job rotation as a learning mechanism"
, Management Science, 2001. 
47(10): pp. 1361-1370. 
[24] P.N. Robillard, "The role of knowledge in software development"
, Communications of the ACM
, 1999. 
42(1): pp. 87-92. 
[25] D.L. Rulke and J. Galaskiewic
z, "Distribution of knowledge, group 
network structure, and group performance"
, Management Science
, 2000. 
46(5): pp. 612-625. 
[26] I. Rus and M. Lindvall, "Knowledge management in software 
engineering", IEEE Software
, 2002. 
19(3): pp. 26-38. 
[27] E. Salas, D.E. Sims and C.S. Burke, "Is there a "big five" in 
teamwork?" 
Small Group Research, 2005. 
36(5): pp. 555-599. 
[28] M. Song, H. van der Bij and M. Weggeman, "Factors for improving 
the level of knowledge generation in new product development"
, R & 
D Management, 2006. 
36(2): pp. 173-187. 
[29] G.I. Susman and R.D. Evered, "An assessment of the scientific merits 
of action research"
, Administrative Science Quarterly
, 1978. 
23: pp. 
582-603. 
[30] K.E. Söderquist, "Organizing knowledge management and 
dissemination in new product development: Lessons from 12 global 
corporations", Long Range Planning, 2006. 
39(5): pp. 497-523. 
[31] C.A. Un, "Managing the innovators for exploration and exploitation"
, Journal of Technology Management and Innovation
, 2007. 
2(3): pp. 4-
20. 
[32] X. Wang, 
Organizing to be adaptive: a complex adaptive systems 
based framework for software engineering processes
, PhD thesis, 
School of management, University of Bath, 2007. 
[33] M. Weber, 
Makt og byråkrati
. 2000, Trondheim: Gyldendal. 
[34] H.D. Yang, H.R. Ka
ng and R.M. Mason, "An exploratory study on 
meta skills in software development teams: antecedent cooperation 
skills and personality for shared mental models"
, European Journal of 
Information Systems
, 2008. 
17(1): pp. 47-61. 
  56