 The Role of Incremental Change in Agile Software Processes 
 
 
Neal Febbraro, Václav Rajlich 
Department of Computer Science, Wayn
e State University, Detroit, MI 48202 
nfebbrar@ford.com, rajlich@wayne.edu 
 
 
Abstract 
 
This paper presents a model of incremental change 
that consists of concept location, impact analysis, 
actualization, change propagation, supporting 
refactorings, and testing. Repeated incremental change 
is the foundation of an agile process called Concept-
based Incremental Development (CID). A case study of 
a Point of Sale system illustrates the usefulness of CID. 
The paper argues that CID complements those agile 
processes that concentrate on team and management 
issues, and therefore can be combined with them. 
  
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
Agile processes build software starting with a greatly 
simplified but functioning first version, and iteratively 
adding new features to it. Incremental Change (IC) is 
the process of adding new functionality to existing 
code, and it is a basic component of all agile processes. 
In most of the current literature, IC is mentioned 
only briefly, and it is assumed that it is a well-known 
process that does not need any extensive explanation. 
This contrasts sharply with the other technical 
component of agile processes, refactoring, that has 
received considerable attention from both researchers 
and practitioners. In this paper, we aim to address this 
imbalance and present a detailed model of the IC 
process. This can be considered as a step towards the 
creation of a body of knowledge for IC that is similar 
in scope and detail to the body of knowledge that 
refactoring already has.  
In order to demonstrate the usefulness of our model 
of IC, we define an agile process for developing 
software that consists of repeated IC; we call it 
ﬁConcept-based Incremental Developmentﬂ (CID).  
This process builds software in functional increments, 
and we show that it promotes the values of agile 
software development. Since it focuses only on the 
details of IC, it can be combined with those agile 
processes that focus on managerial or team issues.  
Section 2 of the paper contains an overview of the 
related work.  Our model of IC and the description of 
CID are presented in section 3.  Section 4 presents a 
case study in which CID is used to develop a Point of 
Sale system.  Section 5 presents conclusions and future 
work.  The appendices present details of two steps of 
CID in the Point of Sale case study. 
 
 
2. Previous Work 
 
Much of the research regarding incremental change 
has been done in the context of software maintenance.  
An early model of IC during software maintenance is 
presented in [1]. 
More recently, the IC process is explored by Rajlich 
and Gosavi in [2].  Their case study adds a new feature 
into the open source software framework 
Drawlets. 
The paper focuses on the IC activities of concept 
location, change propagation, and refactoring.  A 
follow-up case study by Skoglund and Runeson [3] 
presents testing for each of the three change strategies 
implemented in the original case study.  It also 
describes the testware and techniques that keep the 
regression tests up to date. 
Individual activities of IC have been a subject of 
numerous research papers. Concept location finds 
where a domain-specific concept is implemented in 
code, which can be a difficult issue in a large, 
unfamiliar application.  Static techniques for concept 
location, which include pattern matching using 
grep
, 
class dependency search, and information retrieval 
approach, are detailed in [4].  JRipples is an Eclipse 
plug-in that assists in concept location using static 
class dependency search [5]. A dynamic approach 
called software reconnaissance is explored in [6]; it 
analyzes execution traces in order to locate feature 
implementation in the code. 
Impact analysis determines the potential impact that 
a change might have on the software system.  It detects 
 the classes that will most likely be affected by a 
change, and helps to determine a strategy for IC 
implementation.  A classification of impact analysis 
approaches is given in [7].  The JRipples tool described 
in [5] assists the programmer in performing impact 
analysis by building a class dependency graph and 
marking classes that are potentially impacted by the 
change.  The programmer then visits these classes and 
determines whether they will actually change. 
 
Refactoring is defined as a ﬁchange made to the 
internal structure of the software to make it easier to 
understand and cheaper to modify without changing 
observable behaviorﬂ [8].  Refactoring can be done to 
shorten the change propagation in software, as was 
done in [2].  A review of the recent state of the art in 
refactoring processes is given in [9].
 
This review also 
points out criteria that need to be taken into account 
when building tool support for refactoring.  Using 
refactoring tools lessens the chance that a refactoring is 
done incorrectly and introduces an error.  An extensive 
list of refactoring tools is given in [10].
 
Unit testing determines whether a refactoring has 
been done correctly, or if a given change has 
introduced new bugs in the system.  It involves 
keeping a suite of unit tests that can be run 
automatically.  The JUnit framework is an example of 
a unit testing utility for Java programs that will 
automate the unit testing process [11].  The Abbot 
framework automates testing of a user interface using 
scripts [12].  The case study done by Skoglund and 
Runeson in [3] used both of these tools to automate the 
unit and functional tests for 
Drawlets
. 
 
Test-driven development [13] creates unit tests 
before the actual code is written.  This assists the 
programmer in writing simple code that produces only 
the functionality that is expressed in the test cases.  As 
an important side-product, this technique creates an up-
to-date suite of unit tests that can be used in future 
regression testing. The code is then refactored to 
improve the architecture. 
The Agile Manifesto [14] characterizes agile 
processes and states that programmers should 
ﬁ–welcome changing requirements, even late in 
development.  Agile processes harness change for the 
customer™s competitive advantage.ﬂ  According to a 
review of agile processes in [15], ﬁAgile proponents – 
concentrate only on the functions needed immediately, 
delivering them fast, collecting feedback, and reacting 
rapidly to business and technology changes.ﬂ 
 
Scrum [16]
 
is an example of an agile software 
process that is motivated by changing requirements in 
a volatile environment.  Development is done in 
increments called sprints, and the program architecture 
evolves based on this incremental development rather 
than an upfront design.  Daily meetings between 
members of a sprint team help address emerging issues 
quickly.  Larger meetings held after each sprint 
amongst all sprint teams help share knowledge and 
experience among the entire group, and also help to 
identify any issues that could potentially impede future 
progress. 
Extreme Programming [17] is one of the most 
widely known agile processes.  It focuses on the core 
values of simplicity, communication, feedback, 
courage, and respect.  Extreme programming advocates 
believe that changes in requirements and environment 
are an inevitable part of software development; 
developers should embrace the change, and adapt to 
the requirements change rather than trying to predict it.  
Twelve specific practices are defined, and they 
promote the five core values. 
 
 
3. Incremental Change
 and Concept-based 
Incremental Development 
 
Incremental change is the foundation of software 
maintenance, evolution, and agile processes.  In this 
section we present a model of IC that is the result of 
our experience and is based on case studies performed 
in [2] and [3]. It was also successfully used in 
undergraduate and graduate software engineering 
course projects [18].  IC process is presented as a set of 
activities where each activity plays a specific role. 
3.1. Activities of Incremental Change 
 
The following are the activities of an IC
: 
•
 
Initiation
: Analyze the user story or change 
request and extract relevant concepts. 
•
 
Concept Location
: Locate the concepts in the 
code.  
•
 
Impact Analysis
: Identify a complete set of 
classes likely to be affected by this 
incremental change. 
•
 
Prefactoring
: Refactor to make the change 
easier. 
•
 
Actualization
:  Implement the concepts by 
writing new code, and then incorporate this 
new code into the existing system. 
•
 
Change Propagation
: Propagate the change 
through the system and correct 
inconsistencies. 
 •
 
Postfactoring
: Refactor to eliminate any 
design flaws (ﬁbad smellsﬂ) introduced during 
the change. 
•
 
New Baseline: 
Commit the new code to the 
code repository, update the software 
documentation, and release the new version to 
the customers. 
Testing
 is done throughout the IC process.  
Regression testing is used after both prefactoring and 
postfactoring to ensure that these activities have not 
introduced errors into the system.  Test cases are 
created as part of the actualization activity in order to 
test the new functionality and to update the test suite. 
Note that the process is a guideline and some 
activities may not be needed or may be trivial for some 
IC™s.  For example, impact analysis is trivial in a very 
small system early in development.  A programmer 
who is familiar with a software system will not need to 
spend much time performing concept location.  In 
circumstances such as these, some activities
 
can be 
done quickly or skipped altogether. 
The activities are described in more detail in the rest 
of this section. 
 
3.2. Initiation 
 
An IC is initiated by a request to add new 
functionality to the software system.  This functionality 
can be found in user stories, change requests, or 
requirements documents.  These sources are often 
written in natural language and use the terminology of 
the problem domain.  The programmer analyzes these 
written sources and extracts the relevant concepts. 
3.3. Concept Location 
 
The concepts extracted during IC initiation are used 
as a starting point of concept location.  We identify two 
types of concepts: 
explicit
 and 
implicit
. 
Explicit concepts are directly represented in the code 
as fields, methods, code snippets, and/or classes.  For 
example, the document page count of a word 
processing program is explicitly present in the code as 
an integer.  Since this concept is present in the code, it 
can be found by the programmer. 
Implicit concepts, on the other hand, are implied by 
the code, but not expressed.  Using the same word 
processor example, an implicit concept would be 
authorization to open files.  It is implied by the 
software that any user is authorized to access any word 
processor file. Implicit concepts cannot be directly 
located since they are not implemented as code; the 
programmer must find similar concepts that point to 
the correct place where the new concept will be 
implemented. 
Several techniques have been researched to aid the 
programmer in this task, including both static and 
dynamic program analysis [4, 6].   
 
3.4. Impact Analysis 
 
Impact analysis is a process by which the 
programmer analyzes the software system to determine 
what software components will be affected by an IC.  
The class or classes produced by concept location are 
called the 
initial impact set
.  Classes that are neighbors 
to the classes in the initial impact set are inspected in 
order to determine if they will also need to change due 
to the ripple effect.  If a class will need to change, it is 
added to the set.  The process is then repeated for this 
class, until it is determined that a change will not 
propagate any further.  The final set of impacted 
classes is called the 
impact set
.   
While the common avenue of performing impact 
analysis is to look at direct dependencies between 
classes, there are certain types of dependencies that are 
not as obvious.  Called 
hidden dependencies
, they 
represent data flows between classes that are not 
directly associated with each other.  An example of 
hidden dependencies is given in [19].  
The information gained from impact analysis can 
help programmers to plan how they are going to 
implement an IC, and allow them to explore various 
options.    
 
3.5. Prefactoring 
 
Prefactoring is an opportunistic refactoring that helps 
to localize IC.  If the impact set becomes large, a 
prefactoring may limit its size and hence shorten 
change propagation.  An example of refactoring used 
to limit the impact of a change in a software system is 
shown in [2]. 
Also, if an explicit concept does not have its own 
class, it can be localized by the 
extract class
  
refactoring [8] that gathers relevant fields, methods, 
and/or code snippets into a new class.  The 
programmer then expands this class to include new 
functionalities outlined in the change request.  
 
 
 
 
 3.6. Actualization 
 
Actualization implements the new aspects of the 
concept. If the concept is implicit, then actualization 
creates a new class containing the new code of the 
concept. The new class is then plugged into the rest of 
the code by creating instances of this new class in the 
places indicated by concept location. This creates 
program dependencies between the new class and the 
rest of the system.   
For an explicit concept, there is already code 
containing the concept that may have been extracted 
into a specific class during the prefactoring. That class 
has to be modified based on the change request. It is 
already connected to the rest of the program through 
already existing program dependencies, but additional 
class dependencies may be needed. 
 
3.7. Change Propagation 
 
If a class changes, other classes that are associated 
with it may also need to change.  The change 
propagation activity ensures that a change made in one 
class is propagated properly throughout the entire 
system.  This ensures that the code remains consistent 
with respect to changes made during actualization of 
the concept.   
Starting with the changed class, the programmer 
follows the class dependencies and visits all neighbor 
classes to see if they need to be changed.  If a class 
does change, its set of neighbors will now have to be 
visited as well.  This process continues until the change 
has been fully propagated through the system. 
Depending on circumstances, change propagation 
can be simple or complex.  Changes to a class™s public 
interface will obviously propagate to any other class 
that uses this interface.  Other changes are more subtle; 
for example, a method that returns the total cost for a 
set of items is changed so that it also includes tax in the 
final price.  The type of output and interface of the 
method has not changed, but the semantics have 
changed and will need to be taken into account.  
Because of this, all classes interacting with a changed 
class should be inspected during change propagation 
[2]. 
 
3.8. Postfactoring 
 
During postfactoring, the programmer examines the 
code and determines if any anti-patterns have been 
introduced as a result of the IC.  These anti-patterns 
have been called "bad smells"; they make the software 
more difficult to comprehend and harder to change in 
the future [8].  Postfactoring eliminates these bad 
smells and the resulting improved software architecture 
makes future incremental changes easier. 
 
3.9. New Baseline 
 
After the completion of an IC, the code can be 
checked into the version control system.  This produces 
a new baseline to work from for future IC.  It may take 
several rounds of IC before a user story or a 
requirement is fully implemented.  In this case, the IC 
process is repeated until the feature is completed in 
full.  After the feature is implemented, a new version 
can be released to the customers.   
This is the time when the programmer can use 
knowledge gained from working with the software and 
update the software documentation.  This would 
include code-level comments, external code 
documentation, user manuals, and so forth.  Research 
has shown that external documentation updates can be 
done relatively inexpensively with the appropriate tool 
support, and can have a positive impact on project 
economics [20].  
 
3.10. Testing and IC 
 
Testing is done as part of prefactoring, actualization, 
and postfactoring.  Fowler states that an essential 
precondition for refactoring is having a suite of solid, 
automated unit tests [8].  
The 
extract class
 prefactoring does not break 
existing testware [21] and therefore the existing 
regression test suite can be used.  However, some 
methods may have been moved from the old class to 
the extracted class and the test cases associated with 
these methods should also be moved from the old test 
class to the new one. 
The test suite is also important in the postfactoring 
activity, but some of these refactorings may invalidate 
unit tests; techniques have been proposed to solve this 
issue [21]. 
As part of the actualization activity, a new test class 
is created that will contain test cases for the new 
functionality. A programmer can choose, for example, 
a test-first approach and build the test cases before 
creating new methods. 
Functional tests for the new functionality are created 
during actualization.  For software that includes a 
graphical user interface, a tool such as Abbot [12] can 
help automate the tests.  These functional tests ensure 
that the new feature is implemented correctly.
  
  
3.11. Concept-based Incremental Development  
 
In order to illustrate the usefulness of our IC model, 
we defined a development process called ﬁConcept-
based Incremental Developmentﬂ (CID) that is based 
on repeated IC. It begins with a very simple 
implementation that includes a small subset of core 
functionality.  
Features that come from various sources such as user 
stories or requirements documents are broken into 
well-defined functional increments based on relevant 
domain concepts, and each of the increments is 
implemented by a specific IC.  The functionality is 
added only on an as-needed basis, and CID does not try 
to predict future additions or changes. Each IC is called 
an 
iteration
 or 
step
 of CID.  
CID concentrates on the technical issues of how to 
incrementally add additional functionality to existing 
code.  Other agile processes, such as Scrum [16], focus 
on organizational issues of software development.  
CID presents a complementary view, and processes 
such as Scrum can be combined with it to provide a 
more complete agile solution.
  
 
4. Case Study 
 
The goal of the case study is to illustrate CID on a 
well-understood example, and to compare the results 
with another method, Object-Oriented Design [22]. 
The application is written in Java and the JUnit 
framework is used for the automated unit testing. 
 
4.1. The Point of Sale Application 
 
We developed a Point of Sale application and 
studied the resulting structure of the software.  The 
following requirements are used to develop the 
application: 
1.
 
The system keeps track of an inventory of items 
by UPC, item name, price, tax, and current 
quantity available. 
2.
 
Allow cashiers to log in, and keep track of sales 
made during a cashier session.  A session 
involves the time between the cashier logging 
in and out, and records of sales made during 
this time. 
3.
 
Sale prices can also be included that will 
always override a regular price. 
4.
 
Support a customer r
eceipt containing one or 
more items, as well as data such as date of sale 
and processing cashier. 
5.
 
Acceptable payments include cash, credit, and 
check. 
6.
 
Keep track of total store cash balance. 
 
The initial very simple version keeps track of the 
price, tax, and quantity of a single item, keeps track of 
the store cash balance, and allows the cash-only sale of 
items.  This is implemented as a single class 
Store
.
  
During each additional iteration, a new feature is 
added to the system using the IC process of section 3. 
The sequence of functional increments is: 
 
1)
 
Initial version. 
2)
 
Expand inventory to support multiple items. 
3)
 
Support multiple prices with effective dates. 
4)
 
Implement promotional prices. 
5)
 
Support the log- in of a single cashier. 
6)
 
Support multiple cashiers. 
7)
 
Add cashier session. 
8)
 
Keep detailed sale records such as item sold 
and date/time of sale. 
9)
 
Support multiple items per transaction. 
10)
 
Expand concept of cash payment to include 
cash tendered, change, and keep track of these 
values with regards to a specific sale. 
11)
 
Implement credit card payment. 
12)
 
Implement check payment. 
 
We present steps 5 and 7 in greater detail in 
appendix A and B, as they illustrate adding an implicit 
concept to the code and expanding an explicit concept, 
respectively.  Figure 1 depicts the final architecture of 
the Point of Sale application at the end of the case 
study.  
 
 
4.2. Results and Discussion 
 
We made several observations during the case study. 
Actualizing an implicit concept always created a new 
class where all code implementing that functionality 
resides.  Explicit concepts were extracted into a new 
class from primitive code snippets already in the code.  
 
One of the resulting anti-patterns we observed in the 
case study is 
data class
. This is a situation where a 
class contains nothing but fields and get or set methods 
for them.  If other classes are performing operations on 
these fields, the 
extract method 
and 
move method
 
 refactorings [8] move these methods to the data class in 
order to reduce coupling.  This was done with the 
Sale
 
class in step 8.   This class has fields containing the 
sale subtotal and total; the two values were originally 
calculated in class 
Store
 and the refactoring moved the 
respective methods into the 
Sale
 class. 
 
 
Figure 1. Point of sale system produced by 
concept-based incremental development 
 
Another bad smell that came up several times is
 long 
method
.  Adding features sometimes caused methods 
to expand beyond acceptable li
mits.  An example of 
this was when new functionality of cashier 
performance needed several new nested loops that 
printed individual cashier session data.  We solved that 
using 
extract method
 refactoring. 
Another bad smell that can arise is 
middle man
 
defined by Fowler [8].  A class is considered to be a 
middle man when it is doing a lot of simple delegation.  
This can happen when a class is stripped of its 
functionality as a consequence of 
extract class
 
prefactoring; if a class is repeatedly extracted from, it 
can end up doing nothing other than transferring 
information between other classes.  Fowler describes 
the 
remove middle man
 refactoring [8] to deal with this 
situation.  However the optimal amount of delegation 
is debatable, because some situations may require more 
and others less of it.  In this case study, we deliberated 
and decided to leave all delegations in place in order to 
hide implementation details between classes. 
Table 1 shows the growth of the suite of unit tests 
after each step.  Each IC adds at least one test class to 
the system.  Some IC™s, such as step 6 (multiple 
cashiers), do not add many assertions because much of 
the functionality of class 
Cashier
 was extracted into 
class 
CashierRecord,
 and therefore the associated test 
cases were moved from 
Cashier
™s test class to 
CashierRecord
™s test class. 
 
Table 1. Size of test suite during concept-
based incremental development 
 
Step Test Classes Assertions 
1 1 12 
2 3 34 
3 4 37 
4 5 40 
5 6 53 
6 7 55 
7 8 65 
8 9 68 
9 10 71 
10 11 77 
11 13 89 
12 14 98 
 
 
Figure 2 represents the Point of Sale design 
produced by Object-Oriented Design methods and 
published in chapter 1 of [22].  When comparing figure 
1 and figure 2, there are significant similarities and 
differences.  Both CID and Object-Oriented Design 
identified the same important concepts and 
encapsulated them as classes: item, sale, payment, 
price, promotional price, cashier, session, and store. 
However the differences reflect the different 
philosophy of the two methodologies.  Several classes 
in figure 2 are created in anticipation of future changes 
and additions; an example of this is the 
UPC 
class.  
This class is a wrapper for the value of an item™s UPC 
code.  In [22], it is explained that it is good to add 
classes such as this to the system even if they contain a 
single attribute so that future changes to UPC 
functionality would be done in this class.   Under CID, 
the UPC concept will not be encapsulated as a separate 
 class until the programmers need to expand the 
functionality of the explicit concept UPC, and then it 
will be extracted.  This keeps the design simpler 
because extra classes are not added to the system until 
the time when they are actually needed. 
 
Figure 2. Point of sale system design based 
on object-oriented design  
 
The question may arise whether CID belongs to the 
category of agile software developments. The case 
study demonstrated the following values of the Agile 
Manifesto [14]: 
 
•
 
Continuous delivery of working software 
•
 
Welcome changing requirements 
•
 
Deliver software frequently on a short 
timescale 
•
 
Simplicity 
 
The remaining values of Agile Manifesto deal with 
the organizational and team issues and the case study 
did not deal with those. However we are convinced 
that CID can be combined with other agile processes 
where the focus is on these issues.  
 
5. Conclusions and Future Work 
 
In this paper, we presented a model of Incremental 
Change (IC) and a development process that consists 
of repeated IC. We showed an example of a program 
developed in this way, and observed its properties.  
This process complements many other agile processes 
because it concentrates on incremental change, while 
other agile processes focus on organizational aspects of 
the software development.  
The activities of IC include concept location, impact 
analysis, and change propagation. These activities can 
be facilitated by specialized software tools; at least one 
such tool is currently being developed. 
Several specific refactorings (
extract class, remove 
middle man
) play a prominent role in IC. Because of 
this prominence, specialized refactoring tools are being 
developed specifically for these refactorings.    
Additional case studies, where IC is used in 
combination with other agile processes, are planned for 
the future. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
This research was supported in part by grants from 
the National Science Foundation (CCF-0438970), the 
National Institute for Health (NHGRI 
1R01HG003491), and 2005 and 2006 IBM Faculty 
Award.  
 
References 
 
[1]
 
Yau, S., Nicholl, R., Tsai, J., Liu, S.., "An Integrated 
Life-Cycle Model for Software Maintenance", 
IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering
, Aug. 1988, vol. 14, 
issue 8, pp. 1128 - 1144. 
[2]
 
Rajlich, V. and Gosavi, P., "A Case Study of 
Unanticipated Incremental Change," 
Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Software Maintenance 
(ICSM'02)
, Oct. 3-6 2002, pp. 442-451. 
[3]
 
Skoglund, M., Runeson, P. ﬁA Case Study on 
Regression Test Suite Maintenance,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 20
th
 
International Conferenc. on Software Maintenance
, Sept. 11-
14 2004. pp. 438-442. 
 
 [4]
 
Marcus, A., Rajlich, V., Buchta, J., Petrenko, M., 
Sergeyev, A., "Static Techniques for Concept Location in 
Object-Oriented Code," 
Proceedings of the 13
th
 International 
Workshop on Program Comprehension
., May 15-16 2005, 
pp. 33-42. 
[5]
 
Buckner, J., Buchta, J., Petrenko, M, Rajlich, V., 
"JRipples: A Tool for Program Comprehension During 
Incremental Change," 
Proceedings of the 13
th
 International 
Workshop on Program Comprehension
, May 15-16 2005, pp. 
149-152. 
[6]
 
Wilde, N., Scully, M. C., "Software Reconnaissance: 
Mapping Program Features to Code",  
Journal of Software 
Maintenance
, vol. 7, issue 1, 1995, pp. 49-62. 
[7]
 
Arnold, R.S., Bohner, S.A., "Impact Analysis - 
Towards a Framework for Comparison," 
Proceedings of the 
Conference on Software Maintenance 1993 (CSM-93)
., Sept. 
27-30 1993, pp. 292-301. 
[8]
 
Fowler, M.., Refactoring: Improving the Design of 
Existing Code. Addison-Wesley, 1999. 
[9]
 
Mens, T., Tourwe, T., ﬁA Survey of Software 
Refactoring," 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
, 
vol. 30, issue 2, Feb. 2004, pp. 126-139. 
[10]
 
Fowler, M., Refactoring homepage 
http://www.refactoring.com/tools.html 
[11]
 
Gamma, E., Beck, K. JUnit framework for automating 
unit tests- http://www.junit.org/ 
[12]
 
Wall, T. Abbot framework for automated functional 
testing.  http://abbot.sourceforge.net/ 
[13]
 
Janzen, D., Saiedian, H., "Test-driven Development 
Concepts, Taxonomy, and Future Direction." 
Computer
. vol. 
38, issue 9, Sept. 2005.  pp. 43-50. 
[14]
 
The Agile Manifesto. http://agilemanifesto.org/ 
[15]
 
Abrahamsson, P., Warsta, J., Siponen, M.T., 
Ronkainen, J., "New Directions on Agile Methods: A 
Comparative Analysis,"  
Proceedings of the 25
th
 
International Conference on Software Engineering
, May 3-
10 2003, pp. 244-254. 
[16]
 
Schwaber, K., Beedle, M., 
Agile Software Development 
with Scrum
. Prentice Hall, 2002. 
[17]
 
K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained
. Addison-
Wesley, 1999. 
[18]
 
Buchta, J., Petrenko, M., Poshyvanyk, D., Rajlich, V.,  
"Teaching Evolution of Open-Source Projects in Software 
Engineering Courses," 
IEEE 22
nd
 International Conference 
on Software Maintenance (ICSM ™06)
, Sept. 2006, pp. 136 Œ 
144. 
[19]
 
Zhifeng, Yu., Rajlich V., "Hidden Dependencies in 
Program Comprehension and Change Propagation,"  
Proeeding of the. 9
th
 International Workshop on Program 
Comprehension
, May 12-13 2001, pp. 293-299. 
[20]
 
Rostkowycz, A. J., Rajlich, V., "A Case Study on 
Long-Term Effects of Software Redocumentation.", 
Proceedings of the 20
th
 IEEE International Conference on 
Software Maintenance
. 11-14 Sept. 2004. pp. 92-101. 
[21]
 
Van Deursen, A.,  "Video Store Revisited: Thoughts on 
Refactoring and Testing," 
XP 2002
., May 2002. 
[22]
 
Coad, P., North, D., Mayfield, M. 
Object Models: 
Strategies, Patterns, and Applications
. Prentice Hall, 1996. 
 
Appendix A: Cashier Login 
 
This step of Concept-based Incremental 
Development (CID) illustrates Incremental Change 
(IC) for an implicit concept. 
 
A.1. Initiation 
 
This IC is initiated by the following user story: 
Allow cashiers to log in, and keep track of sales 
made during a cashier session.  A session involves the 
time between the cashier login and logout, and records 
sales made during this time. 
Analyzing this user story, the concepts present are 
cashier 
and 
login
.  Currently there is not any code that 
represents the concepts of cashier or login; the system 
assumes that anyone who runs the software is an 
authorized cashier.  Therefore, the first activity is to 
take the implicit concept of 
cashier
 and locate it in the 
code. 
 
 
Figure 3. Concept location for cashier
 
  
 
A.2. Concept Location  
 
Since the concept of 
cashier
 is not expressed as 
code, we located areas of the code that are somehow 
related to the cashier.  The 
Store
 class is a likely 
candidate because it has fields for the store balance and 
contains an instance of Inventory, therefore it is a 
logical location to store cashier information as well. 
The situation is presented in figure 3.  
 
A.3. Impact Analysis 
 
Since the 
Store
 class will be changed, this is the 
starting point of impact analysis.  Class Inventory is 
visited next, and determined that it will also need to 
change.  After this, its neighbor class Item is visited, 
but will not change and does not propagate the change 
further.  The impact set is shown in figure 4. Since the 
concept of cashier is implicit, there is no prefactoring 
in this IC. 
 
 
Figure 4. Impact set for addition of cashier  
A.4. Actualization 
 
During the actualization activity, a new class 
Cashier
 is created. The class includes fields for the 
name, cashier ID, password, and so forth.  This new 
class is incorporated into the system by creating 
instance of the new class in class 
Store
, as determined 
during concept location.  This creates structural 
dependencies between the new class and the rest of the 
software in figure 5.  
 
 
Figure 5. System after actualizing the 
Cashier
 
class
 
A.5. Change Propagation 
 
This step propagates the changes through the rest of 
the system.  We begin in the class 
Store
 and visit all 
neighbors to see if they need to be changed due to our 
incremental change.  The change needed to be 
propagated to class 
Inventory
, see Figure 6. 
In this step, no bad smells are created and hence no 
postfactoring is needed. 
 
A.6. New baseline 
 
After the completion of the IC, the new code is 
committed to the version control system.  This creates 
a new baseline of the code base that future incremental 
changes will use. 
 
A.7. Testing 
 
A new test class for 
Cashier
 is created during the 
actualization activity, and assertions are created to test 
the functionality of the new methods.  Since 
extract 
class
 was not used to create 
Cashier
, test cases from 
other classes did not need to be moved.  13 new 
assertions are made to test 
Cashier
. 
 
  
 
Figure 6. Visited classes during change 
propagation  
 
Appendix B. Cashier sessions 
 
This step of CID illustrates IC for explicit concept. 
 
B.1. Initiation 
 
This IC is initiated by the following user story: 
Allow cashiers to log in, and keep track of sales 
made during a cashier session.  A session involves the 
time between the cashier logging in and out, and 
records of sales made during this time. 
The concept extracted from this user story is the 
concept 
session
. 
 
B.2. Concept Location 
 
 Using concept location, the explicit concept is 
located in class 
CashierRecord
 as indicated in Figure 
7. This class contains snippets of cashier information 
such as name, id, and password.  It also stores login 
dates and times for the cashier. 
 
Figure 7. Location of session concept 
 
B.3. Impact Analysis 
 
Impact analysis reveals several classes that will be 
affected by this change, as indicated by the classes 
highlighted in figure 8.  These were identified by 
studying the class dependency diagram, and 
determining how far a change in 
CashierRecord
 would 
propagate. 
 
 
Figure 8. The impact set identified during 
impact analysis 
 
 
  
B.4. Prefactoring 
 
Extract class
 refactoring of relevant fields and code 
snippets in class 
CashierRecord
 yields a new class 
Session
, see Figure 9.   
 
 
Figure 9. Extracting class 
Session
 from 
CashierRecord
 during prefactoring 
 
B.5. Actualization 
 
Actualization expands on the explicit concept by 
adding new code which represents the full concept.  
Several new fields are added: 
Calendar 
logOutTime
, 
double
 
sessionCash, 
and
 int 
transactions
. 
 
B.6. Change Propagation 
 
After the actualization of the feature, the change was 
propagated through the system, which is shown in 
figure 10.  For example, the 
Cashier
 class was changed 
because the methods 
login()
 and 
logout()
 were 
updated to create a new session when logging in, and 
then to store
 
the session data when logging out. 
 
B.7. Postfactoring 
 
At this point, class 
CashierRecord
 acts as a middle-
man between 
Cashier 
and 
Session
.  This means that 
Cashier
 calls methods in 
CashierRecord 
that delegate 
responsibility to the 
Session
 class.  At this point, there 
are only two methods delegating responsibility in this 
way; it is determined that it is better to hide the 
functionality of 
Session
 from 
Cashier
 through 
delegation. 
 
 
Figure 10. Classes visited during change 
propagation 
 
B.8. New Baseline 
 
Again, after the IC is completed, the code is 
committed into the version control system and is 
considered the new baseline that future IC™s will be 
built onto.  At this point, the user story is implemented 
in full and can be reviewed by the customer.  This will 
ensure that the feature is implemented exactly as the 
customer was envisioning. 
 
B.9. Testing 
 
Class 
Session
 was created using the extract class 
refactoring on fields and methods in the CashierRecord 
class.  Because of this, two assertions associated with 
methods moved from CashierRecord to Session are 
moved to Session™s test class. We also created 10 new 
assertions.   
 
 
 
