 MyBoeingFleet and Agil
e Software Development 
  Joe Fecarotta 
The Boeing Company 
Joseph.l.fecarotta@boeing.com 
  Abstract 
 This paper describes my experience in helping 
MyBoeingFleet.com moved to
 Agile over the last 24 
months. The paper describes the existing environment, 
how CMMI became a potential hurdle, and how the 
Process group within Boeing became my surprise ally 

and an enabling factor of Agile at MyBoeingFleet and 

beyond.   

 1. Introduction  MyBoeingFleet.com is the leading extranet website 
used by The Boeing Company to provide customers of 

Boeing with access to technical documents, 

engineering drawings, parts, and numerous other 

information resources.  It receives over 23 million hits 
a month.  
 2. A Brief History of IT Development 
 In 1996, when I joined Boeing, the official process 
for developing software was called P+, which 

leverages a software development lifecycle now called 
Macroscope.  The Macroscope process tracks 
significant milestones by providing templates, typically 

in a Word document, for workers to fill in with details. 

The documents were part of a process where they 

would feed other documents further down the software 

development lifecycle.  For example, a requirements 
document had to be completed prior to moving into the 
analysis series of documents. Because of the 

complexity of the process, a coach would typically 

accompany a team through the phases of development: 

Opportunity Evaluation, Preliminary Analysis, 
Architecture, Design and Construction, and 
Implementation. In 2005 this became Boeing™s 

Application Development and Sustaining (AD&S) 

Process, which combined these phases with the 

Macroscope documentation process.  At the end of 

each phase, there is checkpoint, or gate, where 
stakeholders would approve the documentation set, 
review the project process, and approve the team to 
move onto the next phase of the project.   
This process met resistance, both active and 
passive, but also had adherents, who appreciated the 
rigor of the document structure and the formality of the 
process 
 3. Working Under the Radar 
 After a brief tour as an Electrical Engineer in 747 
Landing Gear, I transferred into a group doing Java 
Development in 1998.  In my first project as a software 
developer, I did not find value in the documents that I 

was supposed to use to guide my development.  I was 

anxious to write code, and with Java moving into the 

forefront of languages I was flush with books and 
articles on the Internet. Many of my co-workers were 
senior developers, who did not feel that they required 

the guidance that the documents were providing, nor 

the associated process.  
I cut my teeth in Java development for two years at 
that organization, learning mostly by experience and 
from expert mentors.    
 4. Get Rich Attempt 
 In 1999 the .com revolution was moving into high 
gear, and I attempted to participate in it  by leaving 

Boeing and joining WRQ, a Seattle-based integrator 
made famous by the software that connects UNIX 
systems to PCs. This was the beginning of my 

education in Agile and iterative software development.  

Many of my co-workers were familiar with the 

Rational Unified Process and iterative development 
techniques. I was impressed at how rapidly this much 
smaller company moved and how important it was to 

them to change and adapt constantly.  At WRQ I felt 

the competitive pressures from the marketplace make 

their way into my work statement and priorities.   Very 

often developers were not held to any process but 
Design-Code-Test, which I will refer to as the No-
Process option.   
Agile 2008 Conference978-0-7695-3321-6/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEEDOI 10.1109/Agile.2008.72135 I was keenly aware of the Agile movement. It 
seemed to me that it provided the right amount of 

structure to the work. With the No-Process option, I 
observed that systems were difficult to maintain and 
extend.  With the speed of development, systems were  

not refactored, and best practices were not followed. 

There were often either poor or non-existing 

architectures as systems grew organically. As the .com 

bubble was bursting, several senior folk left WRQ, 
either voluntarily or through layoffs.  This meant doing 
more with less, and I inherited several systems created 

by the No-Process option. When I first joined WRQ, it 

was liberating to be free of heavy documentation and 

process.  By the time of my exit from WRQ, it was 

clear that The No Process or what is now known as 
ﬁCowboy Codingﬂ was not the right answer for 
delivering quality software, regardless of the talent and 

dedication of the people involved.   
As I continued my career, I followed the 
development of Agile processes for seven years and 

eventually found that the closer the companies 
followed these processes and practices the more mature 
their code was.  I saw the power of continuous 

integration, automated testing, iterative development, 

and a well-prioritized backlog.    
Then, in 2006, I returned to The Boeing Company, 
this time as a Project Manager.  
 5. Back to the Past 
 Upon re-entering the Boeing workforce, I found that 
not much had changed with respect to their process.  

Waterfall still prevailed. Agile was not officially 
recognized or supported by Information Technology, 
and the word ﬁAgileﬂ seemed loaded with connotations 

of risk and Cowboy Coding.    There were some efforts 

under different names, such as Rapid Prototyping or 

Accelerated Development.  MyBoeingFleet.com was 

getting ready for a CMMI validation soon after my 
arrival in 2006.  
Capability Maturity Model Integration (CMMI) is a 
process improvement approach that provides 

organizations with the essential elements of effective 

processes, and can provide a point of reference for 
appraising current processes. 
MyBoeingFleet™s upcoming assessment meant that I 
was not able to do Agile.  If I were to do a different 

process than the approved one, the assessor could 

potentially find issue with not following processes.  I 

was informed that to pass this appraisal, 
MyBoeingFleet needed to institutionalize the existing 
Waterfall process by following it for a minimum of six 

months.   
In hindsight, with more knowledge of CMMI and 
Macroscope, it is clear to me that many of my peers 

and management within Boeing misunderstood these 
tools in fundamental ways that are difficult to correct. 
The rigor of the AD&S process was often misapplied   

in a rigid and dogmatic fashion, rather than in a the 

more  flexible  way its creators designed.  

 6.  Bringing Agility 
 I was disappointed by the lack of official Agile 
processes at Boeing.  I knew that MyBoeingFleet.com, 

a smaller team that does web application programming, 

met the profile for Agile.   I had to discover a way to 

quickly change the process prior to the upcoming 

CMMI validation. Fortunately there was a way to 
change the process. I was directed to submit a change 
request against the existing Waterfall process. I did so, 

but the change request languished in the queue of the 

process improvement team, who were less than excited 

about Agile. This process improvement team ﬁownedﬂ 
the process, and as such was dedicated to the existing 
process.  
.I found what I considered a loophole in 
Macroscope 4.5 Œ a delivery path called ﬁAccelerated,ﬂ   

which allowed iterative development after 

requirements were created.  While not perfect, this 
gave me the cover to iterate, which was a step in the 
right direction.   
I was able to score a few quick releases with my 
projects using this path. Unfortunately, the Accelerated 

project delivery path was mandated for smaller 

projects, less than 400 total hours.  Since mine were 
much longer than, I was out of compliance. With the 
date of the CMMI evaluation approaching, the process 

improvement team pressed me to stop using 

unapproved processes. It was time for me to push for a 

management decision.  I had to defend the change 

request and fight for Agile at MyBoeingFleet.  
 7. Showdown 
 In a series of rather intense meetings, those who 
appreciated the existing process presented their side, 

while I described by hoped-for change. With large 
printouts on the walls of a crowded conference room, 
most people sat silent as the debate raged on.  Prior to 

this meeting, I had worked closely with first-level 

development managers for whom I had completed a 

few projects, and to their credit, they saw the value of 

Agile and had assisted me in its creation and during 
this debate.  My approach was simple; I did not intend 
to tell anyone how to run projects. If there were Project 

Managers who were adamantly in favor of Waterfall, I 
136 was not there to tell them to stop. I simply wanted 
permission to use Agile on my projects, and give 

others that option as well.    
The process I was fighting for was essentially 
Scrum, which I thought had enough structure to 

succeed at Boeing.  I also created a flowchart that 

showed the existing process with  Agile, demonstrating 

an attempt at peaceful co-existence.   This compromise 

was unfortunately rejected by the advocates of the 
Waterfall process.  Despite the lack of concurrence, the 
change request was approved. Agile had obtained the 

go-ahead from first-line management and was sent to 

senior management for final approval.  

 
 8. Help From an Unexpected Ally 
 Obviously and thankfully, I am not the only Agile 
practitioner in Boeing IT.  While I may have been 

more vocal than some, I was not alone. In a chance 

meeting, I was introduced to Ryan Kleps, who was one 
of the process people from our Software Quality and 
Compliance group.  Ryan™s group was responsible for 

creating the AD&S process, performing the CMMI 

audits (including the upcoming MyBoeingFleet audit), 

and other common processes improvements at Boeing. 

If Ryan or another assessor were to assess a group at a 
lower maturity level, say CMMI Level 2 when the 
group was attempting Level 3, it would mean a 

revamping of the development processes, and 

potentially a blot on everyone™s end-of-year evaluation. 

Boeing takes process improvement 
very seriously.     
It should be clear then why I was surprised to see 
Ryan as an Agile collaborator. Ryan and I attended 
Agile 2007 together and forged a friendship and a great 

working relationship that endures today.    
The genesis of that working relationship was a 
workshop in November of 2006.   The process group 

having created the AD&S, was aware of its 
shortcomings and sought to create an Agile alternative.   
Seeing my interest and experience, they involved me in 

its creation. 
   
Ultimately, the Agile process changes 
sent to senior management were approved, in part, due 

to the forward thinking and courageous work of Ryan 
and his organization.  In December 2007 
MyBoeingFleet was assessed at CMMI Level 3, 

including the Agile Process.  After numerous 

conversations with Ryan and other CMMI personnel, it 

was apparent to me that there was much 

misunderstanding about the nature of CMMI.  The core 
of CMMI, the Key Process Areas or KPAs, were 
achievable with a host of different methodologies.  

CMMI and the associated audits were not forcing a 

particular methodology, but attempting to help the 
group follow best practices by asking penetrating 
questions.   Is your process documented?  Is it 

repeatable? Do people know about your process and 
follow it?  Are you following software development 
and project management best practices?
  9. Enterprise, Beam Me Up 
 With Agile AD&S now defined  for all of Boeing 
IT, the Process group kicked off a pilot of about seven 

projects across Boeing, two of which were in  my 
group.  The pilot went for approximately four months 
and was completed with positive results almost across 

the board. Shortly afterwards, Agile AD&S was 

approved by executive management to roll out 

company-wide.  I could now say the word  ﬁAgileﬂ at 

Boeing.  
It has been about six months since this approval.  
Ryan™s team has created the Agile AD&S website 

using a wiki, which encourages participation, and 

emphasizes the openness and collaborative nature of 

the effort.  There is a weekly Agile Support Group 
meeting that is well attended  across the country. The 
goal of the support group is to enable  the viral spread 

of Agile AD&S through collaboration. I have been 

active in Agile as well, giving presentations to groups 

both within my management structure and without. My 

personal strategy for continuing the momentum of 
Agile within Boeing is to focus on management.  In a 
large company like Boeing, no single voice or 

individual approval can ensure an initiative™s success.  

The Agile community in Boeing must show their 

respective layers of management the advantages in the 

appropriate use of Agile. The tough work is still ahead 
for the Boeing Agile community.  There are several 
issues that we face:  
• Few product owners and no access to 
customers. 
• Small population of Agile practitioners.  
• Matrixed organization Œ most knowledge 
workers I™m aware of are assigned to 

multiple projects, even across departments. 

Boeing has numerous centralized functions 

such as database administration, server 

administration, architecture boards, and 
project management.  
• Few teams are fully co-located. 
• Limited ability to customize workspace. 
• Culture resistance is still fairly strong.  
Boeing in my view is generally risk-averse 
and values moving carefully above moving 
quickly. Boeing enjoys terrific employee 

retention rates, which means software 

practitioners are usually very experienced.  
137 Bringing change to an expert community 
of seasoned employees is especially 

challenging.  
• Lack of consistent sponsorship of Agile. 
• Difficult to get good estimates.  
• Difficult to obtain a useful velocity. 
 10. Lessons Learned  So, what lessons did I learn?  What would I do 
differently? 
• Training.
  I do not believe I would have been 
successful without having attended Scrum 

training prior to my adventure. While I had 

traditional project management training, and 
significant experience with Agile, it 
strengthened my resolve to have my Scrum 

Master Certification. Additionally, role-based 

training would have helped assist team 

members: Emergent Design classes for 

architects, test-driven development for 
developers, and product owner training for 
business analysts and product owners. This 

training would have aided the transition to 

Agile from a process that some did not want to 

leave by showing them the value proposition 

from a voice of experience. 
• Get A Tool
. Tools for Agile Project 
Management make it easier for new teams to 

see how the process is working.  
• Product Ownership. 
Attempt to do projects 
with more active product owners in them.  It is 
very difficult to perform Scrum-master/PM 
type of work and also be the produce owner. 

With a strong business perspective on your 

team, it makes it easier to resolve priorities on 

stories and craft a product strategy that the P.O. 

can own and evangelize.   
• Stick to the process.
  I have started teams with 
what I call the three pillars of Agile:  the Daily 

Standup, the Fixed-Duration Iteration with 

demonstrations of working code at the end, and 

a prioritized backlog as 
the primary vehicle for 
requirements and scope management.   Do not 
discard Agile at the first sign of trouble.  
Chances are it is not the process that is causing 

it.  • Maintain the current rep
orting structure, 
and then go beyond it.
  Avoid irritating 
management by not doing things they ask you 
to do.  If the need is to report Earned Value, do 

it, and then add the burndowns.  That way you 

do not appear lazy or recalcitrant. Doing this 

also provides the opportunity to demonstrate 
why a certain metric may communicate what 
the management needs better than the current 

methods.  
• Demonstrate.
 Show working code. 
Demonstrations are usually fun, invite 

involvement from management, and show the 

rapid response of Agile. 
• Documentation.
  Show your teams that Agile 
allows documentation. Give your teams a lean 
way to communicate, such as a wiki.  Many of 
the current tools come with built in wikis that 

make this easy.  By using an online tool like a 

wiki, I attempted to break the paradigm of the 

document-based project process.  
• Understand people.
  Most people just want to 
do a good job.  They have pride in their work 
and believe that they are good at what they do.  

Bring Agile to the team in a way that helps 

them understand why changes are needed, and 

highlight what they™re doing right.  Involve 
them in the change, but know that not everyone 
will be on board. Consensus is not always 

possible. 
 11. Conclusion 
 When you want to change people™s minds and 
hearts, it™s best to take the long view. The Boeing 
Company is over 150,000 people strong and has a long 

tradition of excellence.  It is simply a matter of time 

before the value and power of Agile is understood and 

appreciated at the highest levels.  

     Having fun and letting your teammates and 
management 
see 
your passion will give them the 
confidence to follow you down this exciting, but often 

unnerving path towards greater Agility. 

 12. Acknowledgements 
 I™d like to thank Ryan Kleps and Herb Bowie from 
what I™ve been calling the Process Group, which is 

actually a fine organization called Software Quality 

and Compliance (SQ&C). They™re dedication to Lean 

and Agile has made it a viable alternative within the 

enterprise.  
My management chain and the MyBoeingFleet 
team who were very supportive and open-minded. It 

took a leap of faith for them to try this new process, 

and I appreciate their Find-A-Way attitude. Their 

willingness to learn with me is my primary source of 

inspiration.  
Finally I™d like to thank Linda Rising who provided 
excellent guidance and editing work for this paper and 
138 its accompanying presentation. Her good nature has 
been evident throughout my experience.  

   139