        Introducing Agile Development (XP) into a Corporate Webmaster       Environment — An Experience Report Matt Ganis and David Leip International Business Machines 17 Skyline Drive Hawthorne, NY  10532 ganis@us.ibm.com, leip@us.ibm.com 
Fred Grossman and Joe Bergin 
School of Computer Science and 
Information Systems, Pace University 
1 Martine Avenue White Plains, NY  10606 
grossman@pace.edu, berginf@pace.edu 
AbstractIn this paper we examine the challenges of 
moving a large, traditionally waterfall-driven 

organization toward an agile development 

methodology.  In particular we address the 

problems/successes we encountered in our 

attempts to adhere to the 12 practices of Extreme 

Programming given: 1) this was a first attempt 

with Agile techniques and in particular extreme 
programming and 2) an organization that while 

supportive, is still driven by its own set of 

governance processes which seem to be in 
contradiction to extreme programming. We 

discuss how we prepared our development and 

customer teams in order to achieve an agile 

mindset along with the issues we encountered in 

our attempts to mesh IBM’s internal processes 
with our implementation of Extreme 
Programming.  Finally we address some of the 

lessons learned as revealed by our final project 

retrospective and out future plans using agile 

techniques 1. Introduction The IBM corporate web portal 
(http://www.ibm.com) was officially launched in 

May of 1994.  Since that time, all application 
development has been performed using a typical 
waterfall methodology.   As with any 

development organization, we are asked to cope 

with changing or inaccurate customer 

requirements coupled with frequent changes in 
direction and scope – all with the expectation of 
delivering a completed product within a 
predetermined (by the customer/stakeholder) 
timeframe. 
Our decision to move to an agile methodology 
was driven mainly by our desire to cope with the 

difficulty we faced in preparing well formed and 
complete requirements in a time frame that our 
customer required.  Often there was enough 
knowledge of what was needed to allow us to 

move forward with some design and development 

without having to wait for a complete picture to 

be fully understood.  A similar issue arose with 

projects involving multiple stakeholders. In some 
cases we had situations where the stakeholders 
could agree on the top five requirements, but 

there was lengthy discussion needed to obtain an 

agreement on the complete set of requirements. 

The result was that nothing was being built and 
no value was being delivered.  Agile 

methodologies appeared to be a good solution to 

these issues.  Budgets, planning and funding are 

always a challenge, thus the concept of having 

working code at the end of short release cycles 

was appealing not only to us as a development 

organization, but to our customer as well. 
Our webmaster team is multinational, 
spanning several continents; however in order to 
simplify the introduction of agile development 
and to minimize the risk, the XP team for the 
project was limited to co-located team members.  
While we have a webmaster staff of over 20 

professionals, they perform a variety of roles -- 

developer, XML technologist, 
standards/compliance and project management.  

The XP team consisted of 6 (of our 8) developers 
with varying ranges of skill and experience.  For 
the purposes of the Planning Games, estimation 

and pairing our XP team worked as two separate 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 development skill groups, (Java and XML/XSL) 
because the skills were quite different.  None of 

the developers possessed both skills, and it was 

unlikely we were going to turn XSL/DTD 

developers into Java developers and vice-versa.  

So each story had separate estimates one for Java 

and one for XML.  Some of the Customer stories 

fell neatly into just one of these two functional 

categories, so one of the two sizing would be 

zero, but others spanned both Java and 

XML/XSL.  The Java and XML/XSL developers 
operated as a whole team and participated 

together in the daily standup meetings and 

worked in the same XP team room.    We feel that 

there might be a need to also include other skill 
groups, like web graphic designers for example, 
as part of the XP team to drive better end-to-end 

agility in the future The average experience level on our agile 
team ranged from 3 to 5 years of professional 

experience (with one developer having over 10 

years of professional development experience) 

and all had no prior experience with extreme 
programming. 
All application development is performed by 
the Corporate Webmaster team.  Functional 
strategy and direction is provided by our 
customer, an internal IBM organization (reporting 

to a different vice-president from the webmaster 

team).  Our faculty partners from Pace University 

(Grossman and Bergin) served as XP coaches and 

facilitators – an extension of the development 

team.  This paper is an experience report as 
written from the perspective of the development 
team and our coaches. 
2. Importance of www.ibm.com 
IBM’s presence on the World Wide Web is 
supported in a highly distributed manner.  
Organizations within IBM traditionally have had 

their own web sites and have operated them in an 

autonomous manner.  While the corporate 

webmasters staff is responsible for the 

enforcement of site standards, the operation of 

these satellite sites was left to the individual 

organizations.   The IBM corporate portal is 

essentially the root of a large web presence that 

directs (or links) users to more and more specific 

sites within IBM.   While the corporate portal has a number of 
components running within it, the main function 
is to provide a landing page and links to the 
greater IBM. As main entry point for all traffic to 
IBM’s websites, we see a significant volume of 
traffic, typically ranging from 40,000 to 50,000 
hits per minute and peaking at about 60,000 hits 
per minute on an average week. 
As a root node, the uptime and availability of 
the corporate portal is of paramount concern to us   

As a result, we are cautious with any new 
application the portal.  For availability, we run 
our website across three geographically dispersed 

locations to ensure availability and response 

time[5].  This means that our applications and site 

are triply redundant which is driven not only by 

availability, but by capacity demands as well. The 

result is an availability record of 100.000% 
uptime for the last 4 years. 
Our customer’s goal was to have us develop a 
set of modules for our homepage to support a 

concept called “task based navigation”.  In short, 

the links on our pages were to be derived by 

querying a search engine and then displayed as 
part of the site navigation.  As development 
proceeded, the scope shifted (or expanded) to 

include a new system we call Query Manager that 
would enable the customer to manage and fine-

tune their queries before moving them into a 

production environment.  All of this was to be 

supported for four countries, each with its own set 

of localized/translated pages and individual 
queries.  At the same time, the complete look-

and-feel of the IBM web presence was changing 

for nine countries (later expanded to the 84 

countries we support) encompassing roughly 

300,000 files (including html, css, graphics, etc). 
As was stated previously, our corporate web 
portal is distributed over three major complexes, 
but we also support a test/qualification site as well 
that we refer to as our staging environment.  The 

Query Manager functionality runs within the 
staging environment to validate queries and 
functionality, and when all data is correct, we 
publish the data from staging into our production 

environment (in this case essentially we replicate 
the staging database) to three redundant databases within our production environment. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 3. Introduction to Agile As we stated earlier, our desire to look at 
agile methodologies was driven primarily by our 
need to better deal with incomplete or highly 

volatile requirements.  We initially met once a 

week in a study group, to discuss a different 

aspect of Extreme Programming and share what 

we learned with each other.  While there were 

some pockets of agile activity inside IBM, we 

were unsuccessful at locating a coach from within 

the company (there has since been a surge in 

interest within IBM and several large, informal 
agile interest groups formed).  In hindsight, the 
choice of Extreme Programming was probably 

driven more by the fact that there is a wealth of 
information about it rather than a fact based 
decision that it was the best fit of the agile 

methodologies for our organization. 
Not having any formal experience with agile 
techniques, we approached the Dean of the 

School of Computer Science at Pace University 

(http://www.csis.pace.edu) through IBM’s 

Centers for Advanced Studiesi looking for 
experienced practitioners.  Working with Dr. Fred 

Grossman and Dr. Joe Bergin as coaches, our 

development team and extended customer team 

underwent a series of training exercises using, 
among other things, a technique called “Extreme 
Construction” developed by Bergin and 

Grossman [2].   
3.1. Extreme Construction Extreme Construction works as a way to both 
introduce the agile values, principles and the 
practices of Extreme Programming and the 

consequences of not performing those practices. It 

is fun, educational, and is also a great way to start 
to build a team spirit in an industrial project. In 

fact, exercises like this are a very effective way to 

bring a team into a cohesive whole in a short time 

at the beginning of a project, as the interactions 

are both fun and personal. Extreme Construction tries to teach the agile 
values and principles and the basics of XP in a 
full day. All of the XP practices are included in at 

least skeletal form. The goal is not to perform the 

practices perfectly, but to try to do so while the 

process is monitored with an eye to determining 
what goes wrong and how non-compliance with 

the practices leads to problems with the result.  
The instructor/coach divides the participants 
into teams of about ten individuals. Two are 

selected to play the customer role, two the tracker 

role and the rest are developer/builders. A large 

quantity of arts and crafts materials of the kind 
used in kindergarten are available. The customers 

specify some artifact that they would like built by 

describing features of it on 3 by 5 inch cards. 

Small, independent features are best. The overall 
project is chosen with some instructor guidance 

so that there is enough complexity to ensure that 

some problems are likely to occur, but simple 

enough that the project is feasible.  Story cards are written continuously 
throughout the process by the customers and 
submitted to the developers to estimate (in ideal 

minutes). Estimates are written on the cards, and 

the cards are given back to the customers.  
Iterations in the game last a fixed amount of 
time from 20 to 40 minutes. The team gives the 
customer a number, called the velocity, which is 

what the team thinks it can do in the current 

iteration in story points, where a story point in 

this game is equivalent to an ideal estimation 

minute. In the first iteration a wise team will give 
a small fraction (say one third) of the total 
available developer minutes. In 30 minute 

iteration with four developers, you have two 
developer-hours (real time) available, but it would 
be unwise to promise that much work. Estimates 

are just estimates, of course, and things happen. 
No team works at 100 percent efficiency over 

even short periods. And what were thought to be 
independent stories turn out not to be. Later 
stories will also require re-work, even destruction 
of carefully crafted artifacts built earlier. Such is 
the reality of development in the modern era. If 

stories are too big or complex, they are split into 

smaller stories or reduced in scope. The customer 
chooses the highest value stories available whose 
sum of estimates doesn't exceed the velocity. This 

becomes the basis of the iteration.  
During the construction phase, developers work in pairs to build each story, integrating it 

into the whole as they go. The instructor (and 

trackers) should make sure that a pair doesn't 

divide the work up equally, but really works on it 

together. The only individual work is prototyping 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 (called spiking in XP) used to learn how to 
estimate or build something, but such spikes are 

not integrated into the build. At every moment 

everyone tries to "do the simplest thing that could 

possibly work" to build the story at hand.  The trackers keep track of whether the stories 
in the current iteration can all be completed, and 
at the earliest point that it is known not to be the 

case, the trackers inform the customer who then 

reduces the work in the iteration by pulling stories 

for later development. On the other hand, if work 
will complete early, the team goes to the customer 
for additional work. Customers accept or reject 
the work as it is completed, and somewhat more 
formally at the end of an iteration. 
During an iteration, the customers respond to 
questions from the developers on what is wanted. 
We normally require that the developers provide a 

quick sketch of the feature before they begin 

construction (test first), and these are validated 
with the customer and then used after 

construction to verify that what was built 
conformed to what the customer said was wanted. 
We (Bergin and Grossman) consider this a weak 

(yet effective) form of test first development and 

are looking for a stronger alternative.  The major rule, however, is that the customers 
don't build or estimate and the developers don't 

specify or choose what to build. Both the 
instructor/coaches and trackers watch out for this. 

We are also strict about preventing coercion from 

either the customers or the developers. A common 

form of coercion here and in the real world is the 

customer demanding lower estimates or larger 

velocity.  Each iteration ends at a certain time whether 
the stories are completed or not. We value some 

stories not started with the others completed over 

many started and many not completed. Only then 

can you say for sure how much you can do in an 

iteration. The velocity for the next iteration is the 

same as you actually completed in the last 

(yesterday's weather) unless team size changes or 

the elapsed time is different. In these cases you 

just take a simple ratio. After a few iterations the 

estimates can lose their relation to actual time 

altogether and become abstract story points. As 

long as estimation is consistent, even if not 

accurate, you get a good sense about the rate 

(hence cost) of development that business 
stakeholder can use to determine whether they are 

getting good value for the effort.  Note that what we have been describing here 
has been the construction game. However most of 

it also fairly applies to the XP process itself. The 

major difference is that the normal XP team 

creates software, not physical models, and of 

course, the elapsed time is much greater.  
Any exercise of this type requires a period of 
reflection and discussion of the outcome. The 
time required for this is at least one sixth of the 

total time, and more if possible. In a classroom 

situation this discussion can continue later as the 
course delves deeper into the ideas and practices. 
However, the instructor must be in a position to 

know which deviations from practice caused 
which problems. In one of our sessions, planning 

the build became a bottleneck when a person who 

normally serves as a manager tried to over-

manage the process top down. Moreover, he sat in 

a corner when this occurred, making it impossible 

for those on the outer edges of the quarter circle 
to participate. As a consequence, too little parallel 

work occurred, and the team ran out of time in the 

iteration. One team also tried to do an all in one 
design that was then later invalidated by a story 
they had not yet seen, causing much wasted work 

and a lot of rework. A very common problem is 

the developers thinking that they understand a 

story from a few words on the card and then 

making a lot of invalid assumptions about 
customer "needs" that they don't validate, even 
though the customer is only a few feet from them.  
In the Extreme Construction game that we 
used to begin the training at IBM, the teams 

constructed a castle (complete with a moat and 

dragon) and a school playground.  What we have 

observed is that the extreme construction game 

participants consistently behave in much the same 

manner as real software development XP teams. 

They want to do the best job that they can for the 

customer. In the early stages of the construction 

game (the first iteration) they will add “bells and 

whistles” that they believe will make the product 

better without asking the customer if she wants to 

pay for these at this time. They will design for 

expected additions and extensions without any 

supporting stories. They will design on the fly, 

sometimes alone, other times as a group. All of 

this in spite of proper coaching and customer on 

site.Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 They will start to pair, but quickly split off to 
work alone. Even worse, they will form larger ad 
hoc design groups (sometimes including all of the 

developers), and then some subset will build the 

design. This often does not involve interaction 

with the customer who is always on site. They 

will start out with test-first development, but 

quickly abandon this in order to get all the stories 

built before the iteration cycle deadline. They 

typically will integrate the built stories at the very 

end of the iteration so that the customer does not 

have time to properly test and accept them. The 

purpose of the exercise, of course, is not to 

perform perfectly the first time, but to provide a 

vehicle for examining the relationship between 
the process and the outcomes.  
We have found that in the 4 to 6 hours of the 
construction game, the players continue to mimic 
much of the behavior of a development team in 

their first XP project. Most of the practices were 

sporadically followed, usually only after prodding 
by the coaches. However, at the end of the 

exercise, the majority of the participants 
understood the synergistic value of following all 
the practices, and expressed a commitment to do 

better on the next project. We have observed 

similar attitudes during the retrospectives of 

“real” XP development projects. Our 

observations, albeit limited, also have shown that 

teams that have played the game will follow more 

of the XP practices in their first XP project and 

will better understand their synergistic value than 

teams that have not.  When we have both trained 

the teams using the Extreme Construction game 
and coached them in their first XP project, 
references to the game construction project 

frequently were used to make points and remind 
the team member of the XP practices and values. 
An important aspect of this training was that 
we involved not only our development team, but 

our customer and several members of upstream 

providers of information to our project.  This 

turned out to be critical later in the project, not 

because these providers were participating in our 

project, but because they could now understand 

our new mode of operating.  This made 

communicating with these organizations easier 

and facilitated changes when our customer 

provided stories that caused a change to our data 

providers.  Once we trained the staff, it was time to start 
our project.  We didn’t feel we were ready since 

practices such as test driven development were 

foreign to us and we weren’t familiar enough with 

the available tools.  We made a conscious 

decision to attempt to master tools such as JUnit 
and HTMLUnit during the development process 
by setting our velocities low in the beginning to 

accommodate the learning curve.   This is 

discussed further in [4]. Since this was our first 

attempt at an agile project, we also decided to 

attempt XP by the book.  This meant we would 

not eliminate any of the practices but strive to 

implement them all.   
4. Project and Observations An important aspect of this training was that 
we involved not only our development team, but 
our customer and several members of upstream 

providers of information to our project.  This 
turned out to be critical later in the project, not 
because these providers were participating in our 

project, but because they could now understand 

our new mode of operating.  This made 

communicating with these organizations easier 

and facilitated changes when our customer 

provided stories that caused a change to our data 

providers.  Once we trained the staff, it was time to start 
our project.  We didn’t feel we were ready since 

practices such as test driven development were 

foreign to us and we weren’t familiar enough with 

the software.  We made a conscious decision to 

attempt to learn things like JUnit and HTMLunit 

during the development process by setting our 

velocities low in the beginning to allow for the 
learning curve.   Since this was our first attempt at 
an agile project, we also decided to attempt XP by 

the book.  This meant we would not eliminate any 
of the practices[1] but strive to implement them 

all.  To explain our experiences with the basic 
practices of XP, we’ve broken the various 
practices down into three categories: Customer 

related Teaming/Teamwork and 
Design/Development. 
On November 4, 2004 we officially launched 
our code into our public production site.  This 
new application allows pages within our corporate 
portal to be dynamically generated by fine tuning 

a series of search engine queries that allow an 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 end-user to quickly and efficiently find the 
information they are looking for.  There is also an 

internal component of this system for managing 

those queries that is used by our site architecture 

team that was part of this code deploy.  All of this 

needed to be implemented within a new site wide 

redesign that involved the changing/updating of 

over 300,000 pages, graphics and layouts in nine 

languages.   . 4.1. Customer related Observations Being able to work in an environment of rapid 
feedback is fundamental to success with extreme 

programming or any agile technique.  In our case, 

having involved our customer team early in our 
training sessions, they became acutely aware of 
the need for rapid feedback to questions during a 

development cycle. We were able to convince 

them to physically move their offices into our 

location to better facilitate communication with 
the development team.  This proved to be an 
enormous benefit to the project, but a non-trivial 

cost to the customer organization.  Having our 

customer on site meant that we were able to 

include them in all discussions related to the 

development, including our daily stand-up 

meetings.  Unfortunately, one issue we ran into 

was our customer slipping back into business-as-

usual and attempting to manage not just the 
stories for the project, but the resource as well.  
Our daily standup meetings turned from a 

development status/concern meeting to one in 
which the developers were reporting and 
justifying time spent on various aspects of the 
project.  This led us back down a confrontational path between developer and customer.  As a 
consequence, the developers stopped reporting 

issues/problems for fear of having the customer 
get upset.   This was mainly a problem with one 
of the customer representatives. During the 
planning games when all the customer 

representatives were present, this was not as 

obvious. In fact, the “chief” customer met with 

the coaches and expressed concern that the 

developers were not following the XP practices. 
He wanted to know what he could do to help. The coaches told him to tell the developers that it was 
important to the customer that the XP practices be 

followed because he believed that this would 

enhance the quality of the process and the 

product.  He did that and it was successful in 

changing the way the team functioned. XP 

practices improved. 
Planning games were scheduled at the start of 
each of our two week iterations.  Clearly the 

customer was comfortable with an iterative 

approach to planning the project.  Several times 

during the project they changed directions, once 
dramatically, and reprioritized stories to focus on 
their critical needs.  One issue we had with our planning games in the beginning was that we had 
too many people involved.  The customer, along 

with their staffs and the development team and 

their management made for quite large planning 

meetings.  While the open/honest communication 

with healthy, they would tend to get off track and 
at times, management/team leaders would get 
involved in sizing stories with the development 
staff, leading to incorrect estimates.  Once the 
team understood this was a problem, estimates 

became more accurate as the developers became 
more comfortable with producing their own 
timelines and the customer came to understand 

the concept of a developer’s velocity. 4.2. Team related Observations   Early on during the inception of our project, 
when we were assembling the development team 
for this effort, we underestimated the number of 

Java developers we would need for this project.  

As a result we borrowed two former developers 

from our customer’s organization and had them 

temporarily join us as part of this newly forming 

team.   In hindsight, we believe this disruption to 

the team caused some tensions, particularly with 

pairing and perhaps with collective code 
ownership.  As the project progressed, and the 

team began to gel, these issues became less-and-
less of a problem.  As development team began to 

trust one another, and to acknowledge the 

strengths and weaknesses of its members, the 

team achieved a very strong cohesive nature.  One 

thing we didn’t have time to come to a full 
agreement on was coding standards for the team.  
This was difficult to accomplish in the “heat of 

battle”, so while there were rudimentary standards 
in place, more work is needed in this area. 
4.3. Design/Development Observations Our team was able to easily adjust to creating 
small releases based on simple designs.  
Obviously this involved the principle of 

continuous integration.  Our code is developed 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 using IBM’s Web Sphere Application 
Development tool (WSAD) which is based on the 

eclipse framework.  Doing frequent builds was 

somewhat of a problem for the team for two 

reasons: lack of experience with code 

management and lack of a clear understanding of 

a build process.  We attempted to solve the latter 

problem with a set of automated build scripts, but 

like the test driven development, the developers 

never really had the time to get comfortable with 

this.  As development progressed, the code 

management problem became less of an issue, but 

even during the last iteration, builds were being 

scheduled and delivered at predetermined times as 

opposed to nightly (or more frequently). 
Working with our customer, we came to 
agreement that would produce builds on a set 
schedule or as stories were completed.  To help 
make this easier, we dedicated two servers to our 

effort: an Integration Server and a “production 

Server”.  The Integration server was used by the 
developers to produce our regularly scheduled 

builds.  The basic premise was that this server, 
while functional, was always under construction.  
At the end of each iteration, we installed a golden 

release of code that was properly integrated onto 

the production server, which was assumed to have 

the latest, fully functional build on it.  This 

allowed our customers to demo our work to their 

peers, while not being hindered by development 

recycles or testing. In the spirit of adhering to the XP practices, we 
attempted to implement a test first framework for 
the project.  As we mentioned earlier, we knew 
our team wasn’t prepared for some aspects of 

agile programming, and not having skills in 
automated unit testing software like JUnit, Cactus 

and HtmlUnit was a big (unprepared) area for us.  

We spent several weeks, while in development, 

attempting to get Test Driven Development to 

work for us with limited success. A testing 

fixture, HtmlFixture[4], now public, was 

developed by one of the authors to ease this 

problem, but it was little used.  This is not a 

condemnation of the process, but an artifact of 

our schedule coupled with the lack of experience 
with the tools.   We believe the code launch was 

successful and relatively bug free due to the fact 

that we also implement part of IBM’s 

development process and went through 1to 2 

months of Function, Application Integration and 
User acceptance testing before the product went 
live. One important point that needs to be 
articulated is the use of a system metaphor.  
During our development cycle the team really 
never had a metaphor for the project, nor could 
we find a use for it.  However, during the projects 

final retrospective it was clear that the 

development team lacked a clear understanding of 

the end-to-end product that we were being asked 

to deliver.  It became clear that one of the things 

we lacked was an architecture that the group 

agreed upon and worked toward.  In hindsight, we 
believe a proper use of a system metaphor could 
have helped tremendously in this area. 
Finally, in the same vein as the system 
metaphor, a key role that seemed to be missing 

from our team was a system architect that 

understood how all of the pieces need to fit 

together, i.e., someone with high-level knowledge 

of external components we needed to interface 

with.One other issue that was a concern to us was 
the deployment of this new application.  Unlike 
shrink-wrapped application development, we are 

not done when the application development and 

testing are complete.   We have no solution until 

we deploy into our large production environment, 

which means having the entire infrastructure in 
place, and operation teams in a position to support 
it.  Working in an agile mode meant we didn’t 

have the same sort of advance notice to interlock 
deployment dates (and capacity sizings) for the 

new application with our operations team until 

closer to our planned deployment date.  This put 

an enormous strain on our operations team and 

clearly this an area we need to work on in the 
future, to better integrate development and 

deployment together into an agile approach. 
5. Conclusions Overall we report a highly successful experience with extreme programming. The 
success of any project can be measured in many 

ways: the number of defects, the timeliness, and 
the usefulness and of course the customer 

satisfaction.  Through our use of extreme 
programming, we were able to achieve all of these 

goals.  We believe this was due to several factors.  
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 Early customer involvement was absolutely 
critical to our success, not from a pure 

requirements perspective, but having the customer 

understand and be part of the development 

process.Early education was also a key factor to our 
success.  It was clear that educating not only the 
team and the customer was important, but 

educating those groups that are outside the 

immediate team was critical as well.  Again, it all 

came down to communications and awareness 
within the other groups.  We also found that 
having highly knowledgeable coaches proved to 
be invaluable to our success.  They not only help 
the team keep true to the methodology, but were 
valuable as arbiters between the old methodology 

mindset and the new methodology mindset. 
We needed to create a better 
vision/architecture that would be constantly 

reviewed and updated by both the development 

team and the customer.  This lack of a true vision 

almost caused us to not deliver our project.  
Certain architectural assumptions were made 
during one of our iterations that were later 

discovered to be inaccurate as we approached our 

launch date.  A clearer architectural model that 

could be shared with our counterparts would have 

eliminated this problem (or brought it to light 

sooner).6. Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank our IBM development 
team which consisted of: Govind Nishar, Tom 
Hawkins, Joe Lopatka, Katie Dang, Chris Wong, 

Lisa Intervino and Kapil Gupta.  Special thanks to 
our IBM customer Mike Moran and his team for 

agreeing to try something new and bearing with 

us through this learning process as well as 
executive management, Darryl Turner, Susan 

Watson, Lee Dierdorff and John Rosato for 

giving us the latitude and support, to explore XP.  

Finally, special thanks  to Robert Biddle our 

“shepherd” for this paper for providing valuable 

advice and suggestions. 7. References [1] K. Beck, Extreme programming explained: embrace change. 1999, Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing 

Co., Inc. [2] J.Bergin, "eXtreme Contruction-An XP 
Game". 2005: 

http://csis.pace.edu/~bergin/extremecons
truction/index.html
.[3] J. Bergin, "HTMLFixture", 2005: http://fitnesse.org/FitNesse.HtmlFixture 
[4] F. Grossman, et al. "One XP experience: 
introducing agile (XP) software development into a culture that is willing 

but not ready". in Conference of the Centre For Advanced Studies on 
Collaborative Research. 2004. Markham, Ontario, Canada: IBM Press. 
[5] N. Yan, N., K. Gupta, and D. Leip, "The Use of Open-source software in the IBM 
Corporate Portal". IBM Systems Journal, 
2005.44(2): p. 419-425.                                                           
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
