 Reactive Variability Management  
In Agile Software Development 
 
Yaser Ghanam, Darren Andreychuk, and Frank Maurer 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Calgary 
Calgary, AB, Canada 
{yghanam, djandrey, fmaurer}@ucalgary.ca 
 
 
Abstract 
— Agile organizations focus on developing software 
systems that satisfy their current customer base, without 
worrying about best practices to handle variations of 
requirements in the system. Scaling agile methods up to adopt 
variability management practices in their traditional form is 
challenging. In this paper, we discuss the challenges and we 
contribute a lightweight, iterative approach that enables agile 
organizations to manage variability on demand in a reactive 
manner. The approach relies on agile practices like iterative 
development, refactoring, and continuous integration and testing. 
We present a case study to show how the approach was used to 
handle variability arising from technical and usability issues, and 
we provide a discussion of the advantages and limitations of the 
approach.  
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
A.
 
Variability Management 
Variability management plays an important role in defining 
and handling the parts of the system that may vary. This is 
often needed when a number of similar – yet not identical – 
systems are to be derived from a common platform to satisfy 
different needs. This software paradigm is called Software 
Product Line (SPL) engineering [5]. Companies consistently 
report that SPLs yield significant improvements. Some 
reported reductions in the number of defects in their products 
and cuts in costs and time-to-mark
et by a factor of 10 or more 
[15]. Commonality between systems is what makes SPLs 
economically effective; whereas variability is what makes mass 
customization possible. SPLs deal with similar systems as a 
family of products sharing a library of core assets. But since 
customer requirements are rar
ely exactly the same, shared 
assets have to accommodate a certain degree of variability. For 
instance, the customer of an in
telligent home system should be 
able to choose a subset of components that fulfills his wants. It 
should also be possible for customers to tailor certain aspects of 
these components to meet their specific needs. A security 
module, for example, offers different techniques to secure 
access control such as PIN protected locks, access by magnet 
cards and finger print authentication. When choosing to have a 
security system component, customers may select one or more 
of these options. 
B.
 
Problem Statement 
Traditionally in SPL engineering, variability analysis is 
conducted upfront during a phase called domain engineering. A 
comprehensive analysis is conducted to specify the 
commonalities and variations in the prospective SPL. 
Commonality and variability an
alysis is concerned with 
determining the requirements of the members of the software 
family, and defining how these 
requirements may vary. This 
includes determining all sources of variation (i.e. variation 
points) as well as the allowed values (i.e. variants). After the 
domain engineering phase comes the application engineering 
phase. As a starting point, application engineers use the 
reference architecture, the reusable artifacts, and the variability 
profile – that were all defined in the domain engineering phase. 
Based on the specific requirements of a certain product, 
application engineers make decisions on what variants should 
be selected for each variation point. The outcome of this phase 
is an instance of the system that represents a specific product. 
Ideally, application engineers should provide feedback to 
domain engineers pertaining to 
problems and limitations of the 
current architecture or variability definition. 
For agile organizations, the focus has been to develop 
software systems that satisfy their current customer base, 
without worrying about best practices to handle variations of 
requirements in the system.
 
Recently, the agile community has 
been investigating ways to scale agile up to the enterprise level 
rather than the team level like in [12] and [16]. This will 
eventually require that agile organizations find a way to adopt 
SPL practices to manage variability in customer requirements 
in a more effective way. However, adopting SPL practices in 
their traditional form is challenging. For one, agile 
organizations foster a culture of minimalism in upfront 
investment and process overhe
ad including documentation. 
This is in direct conflict with traditional approaches to SPL 
engineering where a whole phase, namely domain engineering, 
is dedicated for domain and requirement analysis upfront. 
Moreover, especially during domain engineering, 
documentation is deemed essen
tial to communicate knowledge 
to application engineers. Secondly, agile organizations depend 
heavily on fast delivery as a mechanism for quick customer 
satisfaction and feedback, which 
is too difficult to achieve 
when a domain engineering phase 
is to occur before delivering 
any products. Thirdly, the flexibility to accommodate changes 
2010 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4125-9/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2010.627 in requirements and new customer requests is an important 
characteristic of agile teams.
 This characteristic will be 
compromised if two separate processes – namely domain 
engineering and application engineering – are introduced, 
because it may slow down the feedback loops between teams.  
C.
 
Goal and Contribution  
Our goal is to reconcile conflicts between traditional SPL 
engineering and agile software development. We argue that for 
agile organizations to adopt a SPL approach, a reactive – as 
opposed to proactive – framework is more befitting. This paper 
contributes a framework that shall allow agile organizations to 
incrementally and reactively construct variability profiles for 
existing and new systems. The framework leverages common 
agile practices such as iterative software development, 
refactoring, continuous integ
ration and testing to introduce 
variability into systems only
 when it is needed.  
The rest of this paper will be structure as follows. First we 
review the literature around the topic of this paper in Section II. 
Section III describes the proposed approach. In Section IV we 
evaluate our approach using a case study of a real experience. 
Finally, Section V discusses the 
advantages and limitations of 
our approach.  
II.
 
 
L
ITERATURE 
R
EVIEW
 
A.
 
Incremental and Reactive 
Variability Management 
In our research we stress that for an approach to fit well 
with agile principles and practices, being incremental and 
reactive is key. By “incremental”, we exclude big-bang 
transitional approaches. And by “reactive”, we exclude 
proactive approaches in which a great amount of upfront 
speculation is required. The quest for an incremental and 
reactive approach to establishing and managing product lines is 
a relatively new phenomenon. For one, organizations did not 
want to throw away their investments in legacy systems and 
start all over again. Also, for many organizations the transition 
to systematically managed variability in their systems was too 
big a change if they were to follow the strict domain-then-
application engineering model.  
Kruger [11] contributed ideas and commercialized a tool to 
ease the transition to software mass customization. The main 
idea is that domain engineeri
ng and application engineering 
should not be separate. Their tool utilizes the concept of 
separation of concerns to realize variability in software 
systems. The tool is closed source and not available for 
academic evaluation. Reactive approaches, with the support of 
tools like the one in [11] has been reported to require orders of 
magnitude less effort compared to proactive approaches [2]. 
Clegg et al. [4] proposed a method to incrementally build a 
SPL architecture in an objec
t-orientated environment. The 
method provides useful insight 
into realizing variability in an 
incremental manner, but does not discuss how to communicate 
variability from the requirement engineering phase to the 
realization phase. The aim of our work is somewhat similar to 
the abovementioned efforts. However, we differ in that we are 
not only concerned with realizing variability in a system. 
Rather, we are interested in the process of managing variability 
as it evolves in an agile cont
ext, as will be detailed later. 
B.
 
Agile Product Line Engineering 
Agility in product lines is a fairly new area of research. In 
2006, the 1st workshop on agile product line engineering was 
held as part of the 10th international SPL conference [6]. The 
workshop aimed at bringing practitioners from the agile 
community and the SPL community to discuss commonalities 
and points of variation between the two practices. The theme of 
the discussions in that workshop was around how feasible it is 
to integrate the two approaches. One of the presented efforts 
was the iterative approach proposed by Carbon et al. [3]. This 
approach is based on PuLSE-I 
[1] which is a reuse-centric 
application engineering process. The proposed approach gives 
agile methods the role of tailoring a product for a specific 
customer during the application engineering process. The 
approach does not discuss the 
role of agile methods in the 
domain engineering phase. In a different venue, Hanssen et al. 
[9] described how SPL techniques can be used at the strategic 
level of the organization, while ag
ile software development can 
be used at the medium-term project level.  Also, Paige et al. 
[14] proposed building SPLs using Feature Driven 
Development. They assert the method worked well when 
giving special considerations for the product line architectural 
and component design. While these efforts are interesting 
attempts to combine concepts from agile software development 
and SPL engineering, their goal is different from that of our 
research. While their goal is to find ways to introduce or 
enhance agility in existing SPLs, 
our goal is to enable agile 
organizations to incrementally and reactively build and manage 
SPLs by adopting frameworks that align well with agile 
principles and practices. Our goal goes hand in hand with the 
recommendations of McGregor [13] who presented an 
interesting theoretical attempt to reconstruct a hybrid method. 
He concluded that competing philosophies of the two software 
paradigms make their integration difficult. But he asserts that 
the two can be tailored under the condition that both should 
retain their basic characteristics. In our research, we try to tailor 
variability management to fit with
in an agile context such that 
the advantageous characteristics of SPL practices are attained 
and the agility of software dev
elopment is not deteriorated.  
III.
 
T
HE 
P
ROPOSED 
A
PPROACH
 
This section will present the proposed approach to manage 
variability in a reactive manner using agile practices. The 
recommended process involves a number of steps, namely: 
eliciting new requirements, conducting a variability analysis, 
updating the variability profile, refactoring the architecture, 
running the tests, realizing the 
new requirements, and finally 
running the tests once
 again. This is an 
iterative process that 
repeats whenever new requirements
 are available. Each one of 
the steps is discussed in detail in the following subsections.  
A.
 
Eliciting New Requirements 
This is the first natural step in any software development 
process. Traditionally – and especially in the case of SPL 
engineering – this is a fairly heavyweight process, because it 
involves domain analyses to predict what requirements may be 
28 needed in the future. In agile software development, it is 
sufficient to get only the available set of requirements and 
divide them into work items that can be achieved in 2- to 4-
week iterations. Speculation is to be avoided as much as 
possible. In our approach, 
we adopt the agile way of 
requirement elicitation. We also use a customer-driven 
elicitation process. This means that unless something is 
actually requested (or needed) by a known customer, we do not 
invest into incorporating it in the development process.  
B.
 
Variability Analysis 
Variability analysis is traditionally conducted upfront in the 
domain engineering phase. Elicited requirements are analyzed 
in terms of what they share in common, and in what aspects 
they may vary. Sources of variations are determined, and they 
are called variation points. The allowed values for these 
variation points are also determined, and they are called 
variants. In our approach, we avoid a one-shot upfront 
variability analysis, simply because it does not fit within the 
iterative nature of requirement elicitation in agile methods. 
Rather, we conduct a variability analysis every iteration 
between the current requirements
 in the system and the newly 
elicited requirements.  
During variability analysis, we use lightweight techniques 
to determine the commonalities and variations between the new 
requirements and the existing ones. Although we do not specify 
a certain technique to conduct this analysis, we recommend the 
use of a simple issue-implication table that lists all the issues 
that may cause variability in the system, and their implications 
in terms of variability. In each iteration, the expected outcome 
of this step is a list of chang
es to the variability profile. This 
includes new variation points, 
new variants for existing 
variation points, and new abstraction of common aspects.  In 
Section IV, we use a case study to illustrate in detail how this is 
done in a real setting. 
C.
 
Updating the Variability Profile 
By variability profile we refer to the list of all variation 
points in the system and their variants. They are usually 
expressed in a formal representation or using a feature model 
[10]. In this paper, we use this simple notation to illustrate the 
idea: 
Variation Point X = {Variant A, Variant B} 
Variant A
 = [feature1,feature2, feature3] 
Variant B
 = [feature1`,feature2`,feature3`] 
Where: {} implies OR grouping; [] implies AND grouping. 
After the variability analysis step in each iteration, we 
update the variability profile with any new variation points or 
variants arising due to the ne
w requirements (in cases where 
there are no changes to the variability in the system, we may 
not need to do that). It is important to keep a variability profile 
for the system to ensure that all aspects of variability are 
traceable to code artifacts and that they are communicated well 
to all stakeholders through and after the development process. 
Variability profiles are also used to explicate any dependencies 
and constraints between variatio
n points and variants. In [8], 
we explain in great detail ho
w to maintain variability profiles 
using feature models and executable acceptance tests.  
D.
 
Refactoring the Architecture 
Using the refactoring techniques described in [13], the 
architecture has to be refactored in order to accommodate the 
new variability. For example, new architecture layers can be 
introduced to abstract common aspects, and other layers can be 
specialized to handle variable aspects. It is important to note 
that the goal of this step is to refactor the architecture to be 
ready to accommodate the new version of the variability 
profile, and not to realize this variability. The actual realization 
of that variability happens at a later step. For example, suppose 
a feature x existed in the system
 before the current iteration. If 
feature y in the new requirements is just another variation of 
feature x, then a new variation 
point is defined. Although we 
have two different variants x and y, at this point we only 
consider the existing, not the new, variant. Thus, the 
architecture is refactored to accommodate a variation point 
with the variant x.  This is im
portant because we would like to 
separate the side effects of refactoring from those of adding 
new functionality. 
E.
 
Running the Tests 
To make sure the refactoring process in the previous step 
did not have any side effects, we run all the tests in the system. 
This includes executing autom
ated unit tests and acceptance 
tests as well as running all manu
al regression tests (usually 
used to test user interfaces and hardware related functionality). 
If a test fails, this means the refactoring process needs to be 
fixed, undone or redone to make
 this test pass again. We should 
not proceed to the next step until all tests are in a passing state.  
F.
 
Realizing the New Requirements 
Having refactored the architecture to be able to realize the 
new variability (if any), in this step developers implement the 
new functionality. The developers should produce test artifacts 
either before (using test-driven development) or after writing 
the production code. 
G.
 
Running the Tests (again) 
This step is similar to step E. All tests for the new 
functionalities as well as the older ones have to be run in order 
to make sure the new changes are actually verified and 
validated, and that the old functionality is not impacted by 
these changes. When all tests pass, a new iteration of the 
process can take place when needed.  
IV.
 
A
 
C
ASE 
S
TUDY
 
A.
 
Experience Context 
System Overview: 
The application we will discuss throughout this paper is 
called eHome. It is a software system to monitor and control 
smart homes. Generally, the interface of the application 
consists of a floor plan representing the smart environment to 
be controlled, a number of items that can be dragged and 
dropped on the floor plan, and a set of graphical user interface 
(GUI) controls. A screenshot is shown in Figure 1. 
 
29  
 
Figure 1. eHome application 
 
Interacting with eHome occurs in two modes, namely:  
(a) user mode which allows the dwellers to obtain information 
about climate variables in the home such as temperature, 
humidity, CO
2
 levels and other sensory information, check the 
current status of certain devices in the home such as lights 
being on or off, change the s
tatus of devices such as turning 
lights on and off, keep track of items in containers such as a 
fridge or a medicine cabinet using RFID.  
(b) designer mode which allows th
e users to add devices to be 
monitored and controlled, drop an
 icon of the device onto the 
floor plan and attach it to the ac
tual device, add sensors to get 
climate information, add containers (e.g. medicine cabinet) 
and add items to the contain
ers (e.g. pill bottles).  
Initial Development: 
The abovementioned features 
were all requested by an 
industrial partner we have been working with for the past year. 
The initial request was to deploy eHome on an HP TouchSmart 
PC
1
 which has a single-touch vertical display. However, actual 
development of eHome was done on normal PCs with different 
screen dimensions and no touch capabilities. When we 
deployed eHome on the HP machine (which happened 
frequently because we had a testing HP PC onsite), we often 
needed to adjust certain scaling factors to fit the HP wide 
screen. We also realized that some decisions that had been 
made during development on the normal PCs needed to be 
revisited. Examples are: 
-
 
The size and design of some GUI elements made it 
challenging to interact with eHome using a finger touch 
because the latter is much thicker and less accurate than a 
mouse pointer. 
-
 
One event in eHome was trigge
red by a right-click which, 
on a touch-screen, did not make sense. 
New Technologies: 
As we went along, we wanted to deploy eHome on a large-
scale SMART DViT Table
2
 with an older version of the 
SMART SDK. A later request from our partner was to deploy 
                                                          
 
1
 
HP TouchSmart IQ770 PC datasheet, available at: 
http://www.hp.com/hpinfo/newsroom/press_kits/2007/ces/ds_pc_touchsmart.p
df, last accessed June 18, 2009.
 
2
 
DViT Technology, available at: http://smarttech.com/DViT, last accessed 
June 18, 2009.
 
eHome on a digital tabletop they had recently purchased. 
Specifically, it was the New SMART Table
3
  which supported 
multi-touch input and had a newer version of the SMART 
SDK. Later on, we obtained a Microsoft Surface and we 
decided to include it within the hardware platforms that we 
should support. As more platforms were supported, more 
decisions were revisited and the software design underwent 
drastic yet incremental changes. 
These changes were mainly 
driven by the two factors we mentioned in Section 1: technical 
issues and usability issues.  Ex
amples of such issues include: 
-
 
Three different SDKs that dealt with touch point input, one 
for each hardware platform. 
-
 
Conventional GUI elements like menus and tabs assumed a 
single orientation (vertical). 
Sources of Variability in eHome: 
The technical and usability issues were not the only sources 
of variability in eHome. In fact, the first source of variability 
was business-driven. Smart homes vary widely with regards to 
what smart devices exist in the home, and what kind of 
monitoring and controlling is requested by a given customer. 
This variation in requirements often results in delivering a 
different application for each smart home. However, in spite of 
the differences between these applications, they share a lot of 
underlying functionality and business logic. Therefore, it is 
better to think of these applications as a family of systems that 
are somewhat similar yet not identical – which is the general 
understanding of what a Software Product Line (SPL) is. In this 
paper, we will not discuss SPLs in terms of business-driven 
variability – but we will focus on technical- and usability-
driven variability due to the utilization of vertical and 
horizontal displays. 
B.
 
Using the Approach 
When dealing with a new and fast-changing technology like 
digital tabletops, uncertainty about the future can be too high. 
This in turn might render useless any efforts to speculate these 
needs. In the development of eHome, we avoided huge 
investments in upfront work. Instead, we followed a bottom-up, 
evolutionary approach to develop and maintain the SPL. We 
incrementally embraced new variations as needed, and allowed 
our common platform to evolve gradually. The following 
sections will discuss this matter in more detail.  
In the discussion to follow, each section talks about one 
variability aspect. For each aspect, we analyze the issues we 
encountered and their implications on our system, and then we 
describe our approach to contain them. Although the examples 
we provide are specific to our system, this does not deteriorate 
the generality of the analysis or the proposed approach – 
because we believe that researchers and practitioners in this 
field will encounter similar issues and implications that can 
generally be resolved using the same approach. 
                                                          
 
3
 
SMART Table datasheet, available at: www2.smarttech.com/st/en-
US/Products/SMART+Table, last accessed June 12, 2009.
 
30 Variability within 
Vertical Displays: 
By vertical displays, we refer to the normal PCs that were 
used by developers to develop eHome as well as the HP 
TouchSmart PC on which eHome was initially deployed. The 
differences between these two groups were issues related to the 
mouse-versus-touch input. Table 1 describes these issues and 
their implications. 
T
ABLE 
1.
 VARIABILITY BETWEEN A NORMAL 
PC
 AND AN 
HP
 
T
OUCH
S
MART 
PC 
Issue 
Implication 
Right-click events do not make 
sense on a touch screen.
 
An alternate way (provided by the HP 
machine) to capture the right
-
click event 
on the touch screen was ‘press
-&-
hold’. 
The tip of the mouse cursor is 
tiny and accurate compared to 
the tip of a finger. 
 
All GUI objects have to be larger to 
accommodate the finger touch more 
precisely. 
 
When applying a touch on the 
vertical surface, the body of the 
finger covers some content on 
the screen (Figure 2a). 
A vertical slider that was used to control 
the intensity of a light was changed into 
a horizontal slider (Figure 2b). 
 
 
(a) 
     (b) 
 
Figure 2. (a) part of the vertical slider is blocked by the body of the finger.  
(b) the horizontal slider solves this issue. 
As mentioned earlier, the de
velopment for normal PCs and 
HP TouchSmart PCs was the initial stage in the evolution of 
eHome. At that stage, the archi
tecture of eHome looked like the 
one in Figure 3a. The Presentation layer included all the view-
related elements, whereas the UI Controller managed the 
communication between the Presentation layer and the Data 
Object Model. The Hardware Controller was responsible for 
communication between the actual hardware devices with the 
Model or the UI Controller. External Resources included the 
hardware devices, XML configuration files, and web services.  
(a)
  (b)
 
Figure 3. eHome architecture (a) before and (b) after considering variability at 
the Input Manager layer. 
 
At first when we only considered the first issue (right-click 
vs. press-&-hold) as a source of variability, a conceptual layer 
was added to reflect this variability as shown in Figure 3b 
(previously, input was managed within the Presentation layer). 
The common platform included everything but the Input 
Manager where variability occurred. One variation point was 
defined as “input mechanism” with the two variants “mouse” 
and “touch.” Later, when the other two issues were to be 
managed, variability penetrated down to the Presentation layer 
as shown in Figure 4. That is, the variability profile we had so 
far could be described as: 
Input Mechanism = {mouse, touch} 
Mouse = [scale factor x, vertical slider, right-click] 
Touch = [scale factor y, horizontal slider, press-&-hold] 
 
Variability between Vertica
l & Horizontal Displays
 
To migrate eHome from a vertical surface to a horizontal 
one, we initially deployed eHome on a horizontal display 
without any modification to understand the differences. After a 
number of usability observations and going back and forth 
between the vertical and horizontal settings, we realized a raft 
of issues. Table 2 (on page 7) lists these issues and their 
implications on the migration process. In this paper, we do not 
argue that these implications improved usability as this is yet to 
be appraised. The point, however, is that usability issues 
introduced new sources of variability. At this stage, we realized 
new variability occurring at the same two layers of the 
architecture. Not only did we have
 to go back and modify the 
variability we had previously defined in the Input Manager, but 
we also needed to explicate more variability in the Presentation 
layer. All the other layers were left intact. The updated 
variability profile included the following: 
Input mechanism = {mouse, single touch, multi-touch} 
Mouse = [right-click], Single-touch = [press-&-hold],  
Multi-touch = [press-&-hold, two-touch-zooming, gesture support] 
Layout = {normal PC, TouchSmart PC, digital tabletop} 
Normal PC = [scale factor x, vertical slider, conventional GUI 
controls, textual feedback] 
TouchSmart PC = [scale factor y, horizontal slider, conventional 
GUI controls, textual feedback] 
Digital tabletop = [scale factor z,
 circular slider, redundant GUI 
controls, text-less feedback] 
 
Figure 4.  Architecture after considering variability at the Presentation layer. 
Variability within Ho
rizontal Displays 
In the previous sections, we discussed variability due to 
differences between vertical displays. We then discussed 
variability due to the migration of eHome from a vertical 
display into a horizontal one. This section will discuss 
variability that was due to differences between horizontal 
displays. By horizontal displays, we namely refer to three 
hardware platforms: SMART DViT Table, New SMART 
Table, and Microsoft Surface. As illustrated in Table 3 (on 
page 7), we dealt with three different SDKs, two of which were 
different versions from the same
 vendor. The first tabletop on 
which eHome was deployed was the SMART DViT Table. We 
utilized the dual-touch capability of this table by adding a 
feature that allowed the user to place two touch points on the 
floor plan to zoom in and out. This kind of interaction required 
the hardware platform to support at least two simultaneous 
touches, which made the interaction irrelevant to the previous 
hardware platforms. For this reason, we chose not to include 
31 this interaction with the rest of the interactions in eHome that 
were common to all platforms. 
Rather, a specialized controller was introduced in the UI 
Controller layer to manage all communication between eHome 
and the touch handlers in the SMART SDK, as shown in 
Figure 7 – A. By this separation, it was easier to plug this 
feature in and out. The new controller was responsible for 
managing three events, namely: TouchDown, TouchUp and 
TouchMove. In case the touch events were part of a zooming 
interaction, the specialized controller will handle the zooming. 
Otherwise, the touch events were rerouted to mouse events we 
had previously defined in the UI Controller for the previous 
platforms in order to maximize code reuse and avoid code 
redundancy. 
 
Figure 5. eHome on a horizontal display has redundant GUI elements to 
support multiple orientations. 
        
 
Figure 6. Circular slider to control light intensity 
 
Figure 7. The evolution of variability due to differences in the SDKs 
The second step was deploying eHome on the New 
SMART Table. The New SMART Table came with its own 
SDK, and the technology was different from the older table. 
Therefore, a new specialized hardware controller was also 
created to manage communication between eHome and the 
touch handlers in the new SMART SDK. At this stage, we had 
two different controllers one for each table. These controllers, 
however, shared common aspects such as the main triggering 
events and the zooming interaction. These common aspects 
were abstracted in a new layer we called “Multi-Touch 
Library” as shown in Figure 7 – B. The new layer was 
abstracted in a way so that it was completely agnostic to the 
target hardware platform – all specificities were kept in the 
specialized controllers. 
Later on, this abstraction served well in accommodating the 
new digital tabletop – MS Surface. That is, it only took about 
one day worth of work to deploy eHome on MS Surface, 
because all we needed to do was create a new specialized 
controller to communicate with the Surface SDK, while all 
other aspects were managed by the Multi-Touch Library. 
Figure 7 – C shows the final organization. As was done before, 
variability was evolved to include a new layer, namely the UI 
Controller layer. The following variation point was added to 
the variability profile: 
Multi-Touch SDK = {SMART DViT Table, New SMART Table, MS 
Surface} 
SMART DViT Table = [old SMART SDK], New SMART Table = [new 
SMART SDK], MS Surface = [Surface SDK] 
V.
 
D
ISCUSSION
 
In the previous sections, we discussed an approach to 
reactively manage variability in systems using agile practices. 
We also reported a case study where we used the approach to 
manage variability in an applicatio
n that was to be deployed on 
a number of different hardware platforms. In this section, we 
discuss the advantages and limitations of our approach as 
learned from the case study.  
A.
 
Opportunistic Reuse of Code and Test Artifacts 
In the case of eHome, about 60% of the code (production 
and testing) is reused amongst all platforms. This figure could 
even be higher for systems that have a thinner presentation 
layer than the one in eHome. Maximizing reuse is desirable 
because it lessens the time and effort to produce new products 
and maintain existing ones. For instance, if the underlying 
technology for a certain feature (e.g. item tracking) changes, 
we need to make the proper modification in the common 
platform only once. Then we re-instantiate different products 
for the five different platforms we support. Also, say a vendor 
produced a new digital tabletop technology. All the work we 
need to do is at the UI Controller layer. The common platform 
can be used as is without any ch
anges. However, this flexibility 
to change, adapt and reuse is achieved through a good 
understanding of the variability profile of the product line – 
which makes explicating and ma
naging variability essential. 
B.
 
Explicating and Managing Variability 
Adopting a SPL practice provides a systematic approach to 
think about and handle variations in the family. That is, before 
deciding to support a new digital tabletop platform, we need to 
know what is different about the new platform that cannot be 
supported by the existing product line. If there is any 
difference, then decisions need 
to be taken on where in the 
architecture this variation sh
ould be accommodated and what 
impact it will have on other platforms in the family. Without 
having an explicit variability profile of the SPL, taking such 
decisions becomes more difficult and is accompanied with 
higher risks. More importantly, with the variability profile the 
instantiation process of differen
t products can be formalized by 
looking at each product in the product line as a function of the 
variation points. That is, any product P in the family is 
formalized as: 
32 P = f (vp
a
,vp
b
,…) = f ({v
1a
,v
2a
,…}, {v
1b
,v
2b
,…}, … ) 
Where  vp: variation point, v: variant, {}: OR operator 
 
For instance, let’s consider the variability profile of eHome. 
To produce a product that is specific to the HP TouchSmart 
PC, we need to specify the variants as: 
Input mechanism > Single-
touch = 
[press-&-hold] 
Layout > TouchSmart PC = 
[scale factor y, horizontal slider, 
conventional GUI controls, textual feedback]
 
 
T
ABLE 
2.
 
I
SSUES LEADING TO VARIABILITY BETWEEN VERTICAL AND HORIZONTAL DISPLAYS
 
 
Issue 
Implications 
Horizontal displays are, typically, physically larger than vertical ones. 
A new scaling adjustment factor is defined for UI objects to make them bigger, 
and hence easier to interact with, on larger dis
plays. 
Horizontal displays deal with multiple touch points not only single touch points 
or mouse clicks.
 
This new input mechanism needs to be incorporated into the Input Manager 
layer as a new variant.
 
Conventional GUI elements like buttons, menus and tabs were oriented in a 
top
-
down fashion, which for a horizontal surface did not seem natural because 
people sit on different sides of the table.
 
The conventional GUI elements were replaced by panels available on each of 
the four sides of the tabletop, as sh
own in Figure 5.  
Instead of one Exit button on the top left corner of the screen, an Exit button 
was added on each corner of the tabletop. 
 
The “change mode” button (user/designer) was removed. Instead, the change of 
mode on the digital tabletop happens a
utomatically. 
Feedback to the user was provided using a status bar at the bottom of the 
screen, which was not suitable for a multi
-
oriented surface (i.e. horizontal 
display). 
Alternative ways to provide feedback were used. For example, when a certain 
operation executes successfully, the corresponding icon on the surface glows.  
When using a slider control, vertical and horizontal sliders seemed 
counterintuitive if there were people sitting around the table (e.g. if you go up 
in a vertical slider, it seems
 
as if you are going down for a person sitting 
opposite to you). 
 
A circular slider was used with clearly flagged ON/OFF positions, as shown in 
Figure 6. Regardless of where you sit around the table, if the handle of the 
slider is moving towards the ON button, then the intensity is increasing and 
vice versa. 
 
Some features were not readily easy to use for everybody around the table 
because the UI controls were closer to a certain part of the screen.
 
For deleting an object, instead of a single trash can on the bottom right corner 
of the screen, if the user touches an object while in the designer mode, the user 
has the option to drag it to any of the trash cans distributed on the corners of the 
screen.
 
Readability of text on the horizontal display was limited because of the 
presumed top
-down orientation.  
The horizontal interface includes far less text than the vertical one. Descriptive 
icons and UI controls, animations, as well as visual cues like pulsation or 
glowing are used to replace text.
 
With multi-touch capabilities, horizontal displays provided new interactions 
that were not possible on vertical displays (This was specific to our case 
– 
new 
versions of the HP TouchSmart PCs support dual-touch interactions). 
On horizontal displays, it was made possible to zoom in and out of the floor 
plan using two finger touches.  
On a big scale tabletop, drag-and-drop became difficult due to the physical 
limitations on the reach of an arm. 
 
Gestures were made available as additional (not substitutional) ways of 
executing certain features. For example, to delete an object, one can use a 
scratch gesture.
 
 
T
ABLE 
3.
 
D
IFFERENCES BETWEEN THE 
SMAR
 
DV
I
T
 
T
ABLE
,
 
N
EW 
SMART
 
T
ABLE
,
 AND 
MS
 
S
URFACE
 
 
 
Picture 
Issues 
Implications 
Dimensions 
L x W cm 
Touch  
Points 
SDK 
SMART 
DViT 
Table 
 
240 x 100  
2 
SMART 
SDK
 
old version 
-
 
The aspect ratio of the SMART DViT Table is 2.4 
(compared to 1.33 for the New SMART Table and 1.56 for 
MS Surface). This introduced challenges in treating all four 
sides of the table equ
ally. For example, instead of four 
panels, we only put two panels, one on each long side of 
the SMART DViT Table, because the floor plan could not 
rotate with its full size except for a full 180
 
degrees. 
-
 
An abstraction layer was introduced to embrace the 
different ways the SDKs deal with touch points.   
-
 
Although we did not encounter this problem, we 
anticipated that when we add features that should support 
collaborative work, the limitation of 2 touch points might 
be a source of variability. 
New 
SMART 
Tabl
e 
 
55.9 x 41.9 
40 
SMART 
SDK
 
new 
version 
MS  
Surface 
 
108 x 69.0 
Large 
number - 
exact 
number 
unknown 
Surface 
SDK
 
33 Or: 
P
TouchSmart PC 
= f (input mechanism, layout) 
                                             =      f (single-touch, TouchSmart PC) 
This formal representation is then fed to the SPL through a 
configuration file or any other mechanism in order to start the 
instantiation of a specific product.  
C.
 
The Ability to Form
 Combinations  
One more advantage of th
e systematic treatment of 
variability is the ability to comb
ine different variants to come 
up with diverse products. For example, suppose we want to 
support the new HP TouchSmart PC that enables two 
simultaneous touches. We can come up with a new 
combination of variants to add the zooming behavior: 
Input mechanism > Multi-touch = 
[press-&-hold, two-touch-zooming, 
gesture support]
 
Layout > TouchSmart PC = 
[scale factor y, horizontal slider, 
conventional GUI controls, textual feedback] 
Or: 
P
New TouchSmart PC 
= f (multi-touch, TouchSmart PC) 
 
That is, by choosing a different variant for a given variation 
point, we ended up with a different product for the new 
platform. Constraints are usually defined to filter out invalid 
combinations. 
We understand that some of these advantages are inherited 
from the SPL practice itself. However, it is imperative to point 
out that using our iterative approach allows organizations to 
realize the same advantages in a way that is more cost effective 
(because it is lightweight) and less risky (because it minimizes 
speculation), and with a faster return on investment (because 
systems are continuously delivered as opposed to waiting until 
the application engineering phase). 
D.
 
Limitations 
The main limitation of our approach is that there is no clear 
definition of the roles needed in the different steps. For 
example, who in a typical agile organization should conduct the 
variability analysis? Can develope
rs assume the responsibility 
of updating the variability profile? This is vital because 
variability analysis and profiling require a wide knowledge of 
existing requirements in the system. Therefore, a developer 
who only worked on a certain aspect of the system may not be 
qualified for this role. A second concern we had about the 
proposed approach is the amount of discipline needed to 
implement the approach successfully. For example, the 
approach relies on the premise that tests are written for all 
features in the system and that sufficient test coverage is 
available. In our case, eHome had an automated testing 
coverage as high as 90% of the model code. We also defined a 
suite of regression tests to be conducted manually to test UI 
and hardware related issues. We are not sure what the 
consequences are if good testing pr
actices are not pr
esent in the 
organization. We intend to conduct a more systematic 
evaluation in the fall of 2010 in order to draw more reliable 
conclusions on the advantages 
of our approach as well as its 
limitations. 
VI.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
The general goal of our research is to reconcile conflicts 
between traditional SPL engineering and agile software 
development. This paper contributes a framework that allows 
agile organizations to reactively construct variability profiles 
for existing and new systems. The framework leverages 
common agile practices such as iterative software 
development, refactoring, continuous integration and testing to 
introduce variability into systems only when it is needed. We 
showed, by example, how to use the proposed approach, and 
we discussed the advantages that can be realized, and the 
limitations that may hinder successful adoption of the 
approach. Future work includes evaluating the approach in an 
agile organization to form a better understanding of the 
practicality and feasibility of the approach. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
Bayer, J., Gacek, C., Muthig, D., and Widen, T., “PuLSE-I: Deriving 
Instances from a Product Line Infrastructure”, Proceedings of the 7th 
IEEE International Conference and Workshop on the Engineering of 
Computer-Based Systems, 2000, pp. 237 - 245. 
[2]
 
Buhrdorf, R., Churchett, D., and Krueger, C., Salion’s Experience with 
a Reactive Software Product Line Approach, Revised Papers of the 5th 
International Workshop, PFE 2003, Siena, Italy, November 4-6, 2003. 
[3]
 
Carbon, R., Lindvall, M., Muthig, D., and Costa, P., Integrating PLE and 
agile methods: flexible design up-front vs. incremental design”, The 1st 
International Workshop on APLE, 2006 - SPLC. 
[4]
 
Clegg, K., Kelly, T., McDermid, J., Incremental Product-Line 
Development, International Workshop on PLE, Seattle, 2002. 
[5]
 
Clements, P., and Northrop, L., 
Software Product Lines: Practice and 
Patterns
, Addison-Wesley, 2001. 
[6]
 
Cooper, K., and Franch, X., "APLE 1st International Workshop on Agile 
Product Line Engineering", SPLC, 2006
.
 
[7]
 
Fowler, M., Beck, K., Brant, J., Opdyke, W., and Roberts D.,  
Refactoring: improving the design of existing code. Addison-Wesley, 
1990. 
[8]
 
Ghanam, Y., and Maurer, F., Linking Feature Models to Code Artifacts 
using Executable Acceptance Tests, to appear in the proceedings of the 
14
th
 International Software Product Line Conference (SPLC 2010), 
South Korea, September 2010.
 
[9]
 
Hanssen, G., and Fægri, T., Process Fusion: An Industrial Case Study on 
Agile Software Product Line Engineering, special Issue of Journal of 
Systems and Software (JSS), 2008. 
[10]
 
Kang, K., Cohen, S., Hess, J., Novak, W., and Peterson, A., FODA 
Feasibility Study, SEI Technical Report, 1990. 
[11]
 
Kruger, C., Easing the Transition to Software Mass Customization, in 
Proceedings of the 4th International Workshop on Product Family 
Engineering, Germany, 2002. 
[12]
 
Leffingwell, D., Scaling Software Agility: Best Practices for Large 
Enterprises, Addison-Wesley Professional, 1
st
 edition, 2007. 
[13]
 
McGregor, J. Agile Software Product Lines, Deconstructed, 
Journal of 
Object Technology,
 7(
8
), 2008 
[14]
 
Paige, R., Xiaochen, W., Stephenson, Z., and Phillip J., Towards an 
Agile Process for Building Software Product Lines, XP 2006, 198 – 199. 
[15]
 
Schmid, K., and Verlage, M., The Economic Impact of Product Line 
Adoption and Evolution, 
IEEE Software
, 19 (
4
), pp. 50-57, 2002. 
[16]
 
Shalloway, A., Beaver, G., and Trott, J., Lean-Agile Software 
Development: Achieving Enterprise Agility, Addison-Wesley 
Professional, 1
st
 edition, 2009. 
 
34