 
 
 
 
 
 
Octopus : Agile software development facing our imperfect world 
 
 
 
 
Eric Groise & Nicolas Mangin  
Octopus Micro Finance Suite - OCTO Technology  
eric@octopusnetwork.org, nicolas@octopusnetwork.org
 
 
 
Abstract 
Agile practices offer very successful improvements for 
building software. Despite these great enrichments, we 
are trying to reduce the unknown part in software 
projects: the so-called ‚human factor™. We are still in the 
pursuit of the magic potion - that will help us solve issues 
like initial requirements specifications, parallel 
evolutions and change management. For Octopus we had 
to change people™s practices remotely in poor countries 
like Tajikistan and Afghanistan. Here is the true story of 
an agile project that had to adapt its practices drastically 
to meet real life conditions. 
 
 
Oxus Afghanistan &Octopus teams 
 
1. Octopus™s birth 
 
When we started Octopus in November 2005, agile 
practices were already spreading at OCTO Technology. 
We had just successfully achieved the first official XP 
coaching mission for a bank. The arrival of these unusual 
ﬁXP Guysﬂ in the company accelerated the diffusion of 
this great agile attitude. 
At the same time, OCTO decided to participate in the 
creation of Oxus Development Network, ACTED
1
™s 
subsidiary specializing in Micro Finance projects in 
Central Asia. As their technical partner, OCTO  
 
                                               
 
1
 
Agency for Technical Cooperation and Development
 
 
 
Technology has undertaken the task of defining Oxus IT 
systems. The Octopus project was born.
 
 
In the middle of 2006, this expert partnership gave birth 
to the first release of Octopus Micro Finance Suite 
(OMFS). To make sure that most people can benefit 
from our work, we have chosen the Open Source 
(LGPL) license. Then the real story began: using agile 
practices to manage a piece of software used in three 
distant countries by loan officers without any technical 
skills. 
 
2. The Micro Finance ‚bank touch™ 
 
As usual, the first step of our project was to understand 
the functional environment. Micro Finance is mostly 
based on simple banking and community concepts that 
most people already know or can easily understand. And 
this sounds great! Because banking activities are 
something we master quite well here at Octo. We have 
already successfully completed many projects for the 
major French banks. So let™s do this project the way 
we™re used to doing it: healthy classic practices with a 
‚bit™ of agility. But in fact just having a build factory and 
Unit Testing will not be enough. 
 
It™s amazing to see how the real world complicates 
simple ideas. When you borrow money from a bank, 
things are quite simple: you know who will pay, how 
much money will be involved and when exactly you 
have to pay it back. But when you loan money in a small 
village in the middle of a poor country things are more 
complex. First you must manage ﬁsolidarity groupsﬂ, 
where each one™s behavior has consequences on all 
others. Also the borrower can pay later or sooner 
because walking three days from his village can involve 
 overcoming obstacles. He can also pay less than 
expected or sometimes more depending on what 
happened to him on his way to the bank. When you 
gather all these small user stories, your initial 
Microfinance vision becomes something much more 
complex. The fact is that lending 100$ in developing 
countries is much more complicated than lending 1M$ in 
our developed countries, a true paradox. 
 
So we realized very quickly that if we want to master all 
this unexpected complexity, just a piece of ag
ility would 
not be enough at all. We must go much further than just 
having the technical team using some XP practices (Unit 
Testing, refactoring and Build Factory). This time we 
must take it to the next level: Building Octopus in a fully 
iterative approach by including the business team in the 
agile process. So the first great decision we made was to 
switch to a truly agile project.  
 
Nice decision! But what does it mean concretely? It 
means not only ﬁusingﬂ agile tools for Octopus, but 
integrating these tools into an ﬁagile processﬂ. For 
example, before, our issue tracking tool (Jira) was a 
simple bug tracker (as very often in projects we cross). 
Now we fully based all development activities on it. Like 
this, Jira became the backbone of the project 
management, and the major means of communication 
between technical and business. Our natural tendency 
has been to take first what we easily get, rarely making 
the additional effort to get extra benefits from these agile 
practices. In this case, we used a simple tool and got 
extra benefit by integrating it with our agile process. 
 
 
Octopus issue tracker (Jira) 
 
Another big change was the authors of these issues. 
Before, issues were mainly created by the technical team 
or the project leader. Today, the majority of these issues 
are created directly by the final users. These issues are 
now raising fundamental functional questions, resulting 
in rich discussions and clarifications between technical 
and functional people, whereas they were just 
enumerating the functionalities to implement before.  
This is now the actual heart & soul of Octopus: using an 
agile process to directly involve the final user in all 
project steps. 
 
3. The power of Patterns 
 
Due to Microcredit real world constraints, what looked 
initially as a simple piece of loaning software quickly 
became something much more ambitious. Microfinance 
software documentation is more often a book with 
hundreds of pages than few commented application 
screenshots, but we were determined not to follow the 
classic bank application specification path. We found a 
more agile way for capturing initial specifications. 
After many talks in Paris with the Oxus team experts, we 
realized how the ﬁOn site customerﬂ practice is 
important. We started by building the initial software 
specifications quickly and efficiently. But after a few 
months our progress became slower and slower. Even if 
our local meetings were rich and productive, something 
was still missing in our mind. We concluded that we 
absolutely needed to oversee the project first hand in 
order to continue making progress. ﬁOn site customerﬂ 
does not mean just being able to talk with your customer; 
it really means to meet physically the people in order to 
acquire the knowledge of the actual environment. You 
can™t make the good decisions if you are not able to 
imagine accurately the loan officer activity. 
 
But a bigger difficulty was raised by this distance 
between us and our future users: communication. 
Sharing tons of Word documents is not efficient enough. 
Agile experts know this. But writing plenty of entries in 
an issue tracker system is not actually better. Validations 
take too much time, and having too much detail tends to 
hide essential ideas. We decided to use a practice we 
 already use at Octo, but for IT architectures: Patterns. 
One of the strengths of using these metaphors is to keep 
the focus on the key aspects of the problem. Instead of 
wasting lots of energy trying to agree precisely on each 
detail of a subject, we try to agree on generic functional 
designs that are then applied to several subjects. 
 
The second power of patterns is its clarity. We try to use 
a simple vocabulary and graphical figures if needed in 
order to have the most understandable pattern 
description. Our goal is to be sure that everybody is 
talking about and understanding the same thing. 
 
Figure 1: Multi-level pattern 
 
So we took the plane in order to see the environment 
onsite and understand the day-to-day work of a 
Microcredit loan officer (One of us spent one week 
meeting the people working at Oxus in Tajikistan). And 
instead of writing tons of documents or fighting around 
Jira issues, we focused on understanding the key patterns 
of this particular world. We name each one of these 
patterns and we then base all functional discussions 
around these patterns. 
 
Without this pattern approach, we wouldn™t be able to 
avoid the big 500 pages specification book. It™s the 
supremacy of abstract design against concrete 
description. Of course, we had to land sooner or later on 
all the abundant real elements, but these patterns allowed 
us to delay this step, and keep focusing on the key 
aspects of the application functional design. 
Understanding is much more important than just 
describing.
 
 
4. Unit testing is great, but not enough  
 
The solution we found for transforming these patterns 
into real/material specifications is inspired, and we are 
quite proud of it. 
We all know that Unit Testing is a big idea, and a need 
for this testing is clear. The 1168 Unit Tests we run each 
time someone releases a new pi
ece of code into 
Octopus™s repository are crucial. It™s a lot, but still 
insufficient because we are still missing some important 
areas. Today, we can™t imagine developing without using 
this very efficient ﬁsoftware insuranceﬂ.  This technique 
is now used for all Octo projects. 
But these tests still fail on one crucial point: providing 
direct accessibility to the functional expert. Of course he 
can view the test results reports which provide useful 
information about project progression and quality level. 
But he is just a spectator. To become a Unit Testing 
actor, he needs a key: master programming language. 
And for now, this key is not available to everyone. 
On the other hand, there is an application that was 
originally considered a ‚nerd tool™ that completely 
succeeded in providing great results to non-technical 
people: Wiki. A Wiki is a website that allows visitors to 
add, remove and edit its content. Every time we used a 
Wiki tool on a project for building documentation or 
sharing work results it has been a great success. 
Everybody can participate as an actor, from the 
developer to the project manager. 
 
  
 Some clever guys had the great idea to mix Unit Testing 
tools and practices with the power of wiki. That™s why 
Fitness exists!
 
 
Developers still need to write some source code like in 
classic unit testing, but what makes the difference is that 
these tests are ‚configured™ by a Wiki, more specifically 
by simple tables that everybody can edit and understand.  
In these tables, the functional experts describe their 
business scenarios using real user data, and also provide 
the expected results. For example, they describe the 
loan™s characteristics, the expected loan schedule and the 
final expected accounts balance (see figure 2). What is 
great is that they can be expressed in many scenarios 
without requiring a developer, and they can see the result 
immediately by just clicking the ﬁTestﬂ button. 
 
 
Figure 2: A Fitness test description 
 
Of course, in order to make it fully helpful, each 
Microfinance feature contained in Octopus has to be 
demonstrated by story, a real life story described in the 
Fitness wiki. 
 
We have been using this practice for more than one year, 
and the results are positive. The functional leader defines 
his functional requirements in the Fitness Wiki, and then 
the developer™s job is to make them work. Many critical 
debates between us and the Oxus officers have been 
solved by agreeing on a Fitness story. This tool is very 
helpful in ensuring that your application is working 
properly. We now have more than 65 business scenarios 
that make more than 12500 checks (assertions). 
Octopus™s fitness practice has now become the right path 
to follow for all projects at OCTO Technology. 
 
5. The ﬁPhantom softwareﬂ fear factor 
 
I personally love the moment when your application that 
you build over the course of several months using agile 
practices becomes something really alive: the famous 
Beta 1. It™s the magic pill that helps you get over the 
months of hard work. But unfortunately for the business 
users, this pill does not have the same taste.  
Being a developer is in fact an opportunity. When you 
are writing the software source code, you are directly 
using the raw materials to build the software. You can 
see it growing incrementally every day. But 
unfortunately your future user does not! Of course, as 
agile practices recommend, you tried to share the 
visibility of this progression with the stakeholders. But 
you were suffering from the lack of tangible results. 
There™s still work to be done in this area by building 
better business reports or business dashboards. So the 
view your future users have in mind is much more 
ﬁPhantom softwareﬂ than something real, something they 
can™t touch with their fingers.   
 
In order to stop this increasing fear, we decided to build 
what we call a ﬁghost buster prototype.ﬂ What was 
unusual was that its goal was not to validate functional 
choices as usual prototype does. Its goal was just to 
show actually what Octopus was, and more accurately 
will be. We built this prototype while the real application 
had already been released several times! More than 10 
iterations where already completed.  Then we went 
onsite to physically show this Octopus prototype. It did 
And check final balance, the principal has been moved from 
rescheduled loans (2032) to bad loans (2911). 
Note that 2971 liab
ility account stores both interests and fees (44), 
whereas P&L accounts stores respectively interests (30 on 7028) 
and fees (14 on 7029). 
– 
chartOfAccounts 
order 
accou
nt 
type 
balance 
1 
  
  
  
2 
  
  
  
3 
2032 
RESCHEDULED_LOANS 
0 
4 
2911 
BAD_LOANS 
1000 
5 
  
  
  
6 
2971 
IPOPDL 
44 
7 
2991 
LOAN_LOSS_RESERVE 
144 
8 
  
  
  
9 
6712 
PROVISION_ON_BAD_LOANS 
144 
10 
  
  
  
11 
  
  
  
12 
  
  
  
13 
7027 
PENALTIES_ON_PAST_DUE_LO
ANS 
14 
14 
7028 
INTERESTS_ON_BAD_LOANS 
30 
15 
  
  
  
 not helped directly to validate any functional choice, but 
it helped to significantly decrease the fear factor.  
We also returned onsite to show Octopus 1.0, the first 
release considered usable by the loan officers. We went 
there to make sure that everyone had the full vision of all 
Octopus could do. They understood where all this long 
time was spent. The ghost was definitely gone. 
 
6. The unbreakable release manager 
 
While we were finally solving this ﬁphantom softwareﬂ 
factor, another tricky issue was rising: the remoteness. 
Agile practices always recommend a very close 
relationship between the tech guys and the business 
guys. The best is to share the same offices, but also the 
Internet can help to reduce the distance drastically.   
 
But the fact is that Microcredit specifically targets 
countries generally far from Octopus™s mother ship 
(Paris), and countries with very poor infrastructures. In 
Afghanistan for example, downloading a new release of 
Octopus (5 MB) means an hour of download. But 
downloading a new release of Microsoft SQL Express 
2005 means hours or days. Also, the loan officers using 
Octopus are local employees, with very poor knowledge 
about information technologies. 
 
So having a local ﬁrelease managerﬂ quickly became 
mandatory. His primary responsibilities are to validate 
the new release, distribute it to the local users, and 
centralize all users™ requests. But these responsibilities 
have many indirect duties.  
First of all they are the local Octopus contact, not like us 
sitting comfortably in our air conditioned offices, 
admiring the wonderful Eiffel tower through the window 

. That means that when we release a dirty application 
(and it happens), he gets the sharp end of the stick, not 
us. Then he quickly forwards the amplified 
dissatisfaction to us. So believe me: this man needs to be 
rock-solid, or he will quickly refuse all your releases. 
You really have to find a ﬁcourageousﬂ person that fully 
trusts your project. And luckily we did! Some XP 
Programming experts consider that bravery is the most 
important value for achieving successfully projects and 
we tend to agree based on our experience. If all the 
people you work with are not brave enough, their fear 
will quickly break the fragile trust relationship, and the 
project will break down. 
 
Another quality required by a release manager is an open 
mind - he must get the real user™s feedback. When you 
ask one man to centralize these needs before forwarding 
them to you, instead of getting real user™s ideas, you will 
get your release manager™s vision. To avoid this problem 
you need someone who is able to understand user™s 
requirements, and who is able to accurately explain the 
requests even when they do not match his own ideas.  
 
7. From Excel to Octopus: a very difficult 
move 
 
We also faced the change management problem. Before 
our entrance, the loan officers were using ubiquitous 
software: Excel. The spreadsheet concept is a very 
powerful tool. It is one of these very simple ideas (just 
cells with numbers or formulas) that answer a very large 
variety of problems.  
 
Of course, using Excel was becoming more and more 
unmanageable due to the increasing complexity of their 
activities, the increasing need for quality and the need 
for data consolidation. Octopus™s primary goal was to 
make their job easier, and they acknowledged it. But 
these spreadsheet where theirs, and delegating all this to 
some guys in Paris was not easy for them. Also, when a 
problem arose, they could solve it immediately in their 
spreadsheet, while they would now have to wait for the 
next Octopus release (every 2 or 3 weeks). 
 
So the switch took time, a lot of time. Furthermore, 
whereas our goal was to reduce their work load, some of 
them decided to enter all the loans information twice 
(Octopus and the excel spreadsheet). It was quite a 
surprise when we learned it, and quite upsetting because 
we first interpreted it as a failure. But in fact that was a 
flawed analysis, because changing people is a really 
difficult task, and thinking they will switch in an instant 
was unrealistic.  
 In an agile project, transparency between all project 
actors is really imperative, and it really happened for 
Octopus. The required trust relationship between each 
actor is greatly founded on the visibility each one has on 
the other. So when we learned this ﬁbad newsﬂ, it 
showed us that this transparency was working. With no 
trust between people, thinks can look superficially nice 
while real problems are creeping up. To make good 
decisions, it was important for us to have transparency to 
understand exactly what was happening there. 
 
To enable the trust needed to get this transparency, we 
needed to focus on application quality. The most 
destructive trust killer is functional regression. While a 
user can accept that new software often brings new bugs, 
they do not accept new software that brings back a bug 
that was already fixed. Non regression is the minimal 
guaranty you must bring to your user. It means that 
writing Unit Test and Fitness stories for each bug your 
users find is a necessary effort. It™s a practice we are still 
working on today, because it™s really hard work when 
you are a small team. But we know we will have to fully 
apply this vital rule, sooner or later. 
 
7. Conclusions 
 
This great adventure taught us a lot and is still doing so. 
If we had to keep the five most important lessons, they 
would be: 
 
- Very often, we hesitate to fully involve the business 
guys in the agile process. It™s so much easier to convince 
technical guys to apply XP practices! But making the 
effort to go further is really worth it. 
 
- Reading many agile practice books and sharing 
experience with people is required before starting an 
agile project. But agile is also about innovation! Do not 
limit yourself to what you already know. And do not 
hesitate to adapt strongly agile practices to your needs or 
better: create new practices! Of course share it to the 
community.  An agile guy must keep his mind wide 
open. 
 
- Do not overestimate the power of agile process in 
delivering a first release of software. While you feel 
fully involved in the incremental process, your user is 
awaiting your application in the dark! It™s a very hard for 
him: don™t let him spend too much time there, or give 
him some light. 
  
- Choose a multi-skilled release manager who is able to 
seek user ideas without passing judgment. 
 
- Quality is vital, simply because lack of quality can 
quickly kill your project. 
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We wish to thank the OXUS team, and more particularly 
Pierre Baraud and Alexis Lebel who had to trust us for 
months without seeing any real application. They where 
our ﬁGuinea pigsﬂ who had to support our incomplete 
application releases for a while; and those who gave us 
so much help in making Octopus become the application 
we are so proud of today. 
 
References 
 
Octopus Web Site: 
http://www.octopusnetwork.org
  
Octopus Fitness Tests: 
http://octopusfit.octo.com
  
Octopus Jira: 
http://forge.octo.com/jira/browse/OMFS
  
 
Oxus: 
http://www.oxusnetwork.org
  
Octo Technology: 
http://www.octo.com
  
