 1Clashes between Culture and Software Development Methods:  
The Case of the Israeli Hi-Tech Industry and Extreme Programming 
Orit Hazzan Department of Education 
in Technology & Science 
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology 
oritha@tx.technion.ac.il
Yael Dubinsky 
Department of Computer Science 
Technion – Israel Institute of Technology
yael@cs.technion.ac.il
Abstract 
This paper discusses connections between a national 
culture and the culture inspired by software development 
methods (SDMs). Specifically, based on our research on 
cultural issues related to software development teams, we 
propose a model that can help predict whether a specific 
SDM fits a specific national culture. This model first 
defines the terms 'tightness of an SDM' and 'tightness of a 
national culture'. With respect to an SDM, this term 
articulates the idea that the tighter an SDM is, the more 
ordered the software development process and 
environment it inspires will be; with respect to a national 
culture, the term 'tightness' reflects the degree to which a 
culture accepts and adopts ordered, planned and 
procedural work habits. The model then goes on to outline 
means that can help in the mapping of a given SDM, as 
well as a given national culture, along the following five 
dimensions: Project plan, procedures and standards, 
responsibility, time estimation, and individual need 
satisfaction. Finally, based on these mappings, the fitness 
of a given SDM and a national culture is examined. It is 
proposed that this fitness can serve as a tool for predicting 
the degree to which a given SDM will be accepted by a 
specific national culture in general, and by a specific team 
that is part of that culture, in particular. The model is 
illustrated using the Israeli hi-tech industry as an example 
of a national culture and Extreme Programming (XP) as 
an example of an SDM.  
1. Introduction
Consider the two following data, referring to the year 
2001: 
"Silicon Valley contains over 7,000 established 
high-tech firms and a significant number of start-ups 
in a given year".
1Israel's population is about 7 million. In 2001, there 
were about 3,000 start-up companies in Israel
2 – the 
second highest number of start-ups after the US (in 

absolute, not relative, terms).  
If we compare Israel's population with the USA's 
population, these numbers seem quite unreasonable.    
1  Source:  
    http://sites.state.pa.us/PA_Exec/DCED/tech21/be-
silicon.htm 
2 Source:     http://www.ite.poly.edu/htmls/role_israel0110.htm 
Our purpose in this article is to present a model that 
explains these apparently contradicting facts. The model 
also explains the extraordinary success of the Israeli hi-
tech industry in the dot.com era. This, however, is not the 

only objective of the proposed model. The model also 
serves as a means to estimate the degree to which a given 
software development method (SDM) will be accepted by 

a specific software development culture.  
The model is based on the concept of 
tightness
. Both 
an SDM and a culture are said to be tight if they inspire 
strict and ordered habits. More specifically, with respect 
to an SDM, the term tightness reflects the degree to which 
an SDM advocates an ordered software development 
process; with respect to a national culture, the term 
tightness reflects the degree to which work is performed 
according to given procedures that characterize this 
culture. We would clarify that when we talk about 
national cultures, we, in fact, refer to hi-tech cultures 

within
 a national context.   
The tightness level of cultures and SDMs is ranked 
along five dimensions, each of which specifies a 
dimension related to software project management: 
project plan, procedures and standards, responsibility, 
time estimation, and individual need satisfaction.  
 Based on this model, we suggest an analysis of 
national cultures and SDMs and an examination of 

potential clashes when a gap exists between their 
tightness levels. It is suggested that the wider the gap 
between the tightness levels of these two entities, the 
harder it is to implement the SDM in that culture. We 
illustrate our model using the Israeli hi-tech software 
industry as an example of a culture, and Extreme 
Programming (XP) as an example of an SDM, and further 
discuss the fitness of XP to the culture of the Israeli 

software industry.  
The connection between the two objectives of our 
model (i.e. to explain the success of the Israeli hi-tech 

industry and to estimate the degree to which a given SDM 
will be accepted by a specific software development 
culture) is explained by the fact that, on the one hand, 

Israel succeeded during the hi-tech peak due to its low 
tightness, while, on the other hand, it is the low tightness 
of the Israeli hi-tech culture that, according to our 

experience, at present resists the acceptance of tight 
SDMs. We emphasize that the tightness scale does not 
indicate neither any ‘rightness’ scale nor any 'quality' 

scale. It does aim, however, at providing additional 
perspective at software development processes.   
The motivation for this study arose from our 
observation, based on close interaction with many Israeli 

software developers and on the use of several research 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 2tools, that XP has not been embraced by the Israeli 
software industry. Indeed, the proposed model explains 
this phenomenon. According to our model, XP ranks high 
on the tightness scale. This is mainly because XP outlines 

specific practices that are implemented on a daily basis. 
At the same time, our model suggests that the Israeli hi-
tech culture ranks low on the tightness scale. This is 

mainly expressed by Israeli developers' tendency to 
improvise during software development processes. Based 
on these two rankings we explain the potential clashes 

between the Israeli software industry and XP that can 
explain why XP is not adopted naturally by Israeli 
software teams.  
Connections between SDMs and cultural issues have 
been discussed previously (Yourdon, 1997; Sawyer and 

Guinan, 1998; Abrahmsson 
et al., 2002). We propose to 
expand the discussion on the connections between SDMs 
and culture-related issues on the national level. 
Furthermore, although organizational culture is a topic 
that is discussed among the XP community in general, 

and data on resistance to the adoption of XP is already 
available in particular (Auer and Miller, 2001A), we feel 
that in the case of the Israeli software industry we are 
witness to more than merely an organizational resistance, 
and that this evident resistance can be explained on a 
more global, that is, national, level.  
Our analysis suggests that this combination (the Israeli 
culture and XP) yields results that can increase awareness 
to problems that might arise due to clashes between an 
SDM and a 
national
 hi-tech culture, within which an 
attempt is made to implement the SDM. Based on this 
exploration, we aim to present a partial answer to the 
question of whether a specific SDM fits a specific 
national culture.  
Section 2 of the paper presents the theoretical 
background of our research, addressing culture-related 

issues connected to SDMs, the Israel hi-tech industry and 
XP. In Section 3 we present our model and in Section 4 
we illustrate the model using the example of the Israeli 
software industry and XP. In Section 5 we discuss our 
model and suggest future research directions.  
2. Theoretical Background 
2.1. Culture in software organizations   
As mentioned above, this paper deals with possible 
connections between cultural characteristics and the 

willingness of software teams to adopt a given SDM. The 
first question that comes to mind is: why, in the first 
place, should such relations be explored?
33 We would like to emphasize that we are not addressing 
problems that may arise when developers from different 
cultures work together (as described, for example, in 
Walenta, 2004). Rather, we focus on problems that 

originate in gaps between a national hi-tech culture and 
the culture that is inspired by a given SDM.  
In what follows, we will try to answer this question. As 
it is well known, software development entails many 

problems (Brooks, 1987; Mullet, 1999), including clashes 
in customer-developer communication, bugged software, 

difficulties in program comprehension, and mis-
understandings among team members.  
The fact that so many problems exist in the software 
industry can be explained by the fact that software 

development is a contradiction-ridden process. For 
example, 
creativity
 is needed to find solutions in short 
time-to-market industries whereas 
discipline
 is needed for 
the production of high-quality 
software products (just 
think about the discipline required for testing!); or the 
contradiction between the 
cooperation
 needed among 
team members for the success of software projects as 
opposed to the 
competition
 exhibited by many software 
developers in this competitive environment. We propose 
that finding the right balance between such extremities is 
one of the secrets to successful software projects. This 
paper attempts to examine this balance from a national-

cultural perspective.  
As mentioned previously, culture in general and 
organizational culture in particular are discussed in the 

literature with respect to SDMs. Usually, these 
discussions focus on the organizational level. For 
example, Highsmith (2002) says that "More methodology 

implementations flounder from failing to adequately 
account for an organization's cultural factors than for any 
other reason. A particular culture is not necessarily 
change tolerant or change resistant—but it may resist 
certain types of changes and embrace others. … Many 
methodology failures are caused by a problem definition 
followed by a solution design, with little analysis of 
whether or not the solution design 
fits the company or the 
project team's culture."  
Another theory, which focuses on the organizational 
culture, corresponds the software development paradigm 
(SDP) to the maturity of the developed product and the 
culture within which it is developed. According to Moore 
(2000), there are four basic organizational cultures: 
cultivation, competence, collaboration, and control, to 
which he matches one of three methodology categories: 
rigorous (RM), agile (AM), or ad hoc or no methodology 
(NM). A cultivation culture is motivated by self-
realizationand can be illustrated by Silicon Valley start-
up companies, which fit the NM category. A competence 
culture is driven by the need for achievement; 
collaboration cultures are driven by a need for affiliation, 
and control cultures are motivated by the need for power 
and security. While the agile approach fits the 
competence and the collaboration cultures, the RM fits 
the control culture.  
Further, Highsmith (2002) associates each 
methodology to a specific market phase. According to 
Highsmith, while the NM approach fits the initial phases 
of software product development, at later stages, when 
close interaction with customers is required, the AM 
approach fits better. During the Main Street market phase, 
the RM approach fits in the best. This perspective is 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 3referred to towards the end of the next section, which 
describes the Israeli hi-tech industry.  
Naturally, general theories about national cultures may 
be used for the analysis of clashes between SDM and 

national culture. One of these theories, which explores 
how values in the workplace are influenced by culture is 
Geert Hofstede Cultural Dimensions
 Theory
4. Based on 
the analysis of a large data base of employee values 
scores, Hofstede developed a model that identifies four 
primary dimensions which may assist in differentiating 

cultures: Power Distance, Individualism, Masculinity, and 
Uncertainty Avoidance. A fifth Dimension - Long-Term 
Orientation - was added after conducting an additional 
international study with Chinese employees and 
managers. We further elaborate on this theory in Section 3 
when we present our model.  
2.2. The Israeli hi-tech industry
5Israel is a very small country with a population of 
about 7 million people. Still, at its hi-tech economic peak, 
Israel was one of the world's leading centers for 
technology start-ups and innovations. As mentioned 
before, despite its small population, Israel had, at that 
time, about 3,000 start-ups
6, and came in third (after the 
USA and Canada) on the list of countries with the highest 

number of companies listed on NASDAQ.  
This blossoming is explained by two main factors. The 
first factor is the national security and military needs that 

led to the development of cutting-edge technologies. 
Since its establishment in 1948, Israel has had to invest 
huge budgets and efforts to maintain its military 
advantage in order to survive. In particular, designated 
army units exist that specialize in technological 
innovations. As it turns out, many of Israeli’s hi-tech 
entrepreneurs started their careers in the Israeli army
.The second factor is the massive immigration wave of 
Russian engineers from the former Soviet Union during 
the 1990-2000 decade. This addition of engineers to the 
Israeli population led Israel to have the highest number of 
engineers per capita in the world
7.The peak of this period was in the year 2000. Foreign 
investors poured billions of US dollars into Israeli start-
ups and venture capital funds. In that year, hi-tech exports 
reached record highs and comprised 57% of the entire 
export from Israel. Many companies that were founded in 
Israel during that period moved their headquarters to the 
U.S., where the lion's share of their customer base was 
located, but often left their research and development 
operations in Israel.  
4 Source: http://www.geert-hofstede.com/.  
5 This description is based largely on Tomayko and 
Hazzan (2004).  
6 Source: 
  http://www.ite.poly.edu/htmls/role_israel0110.htm. 
7 Source:  
http://www.smartcodecorp.com/about_us/israel_profile.
asp.Some of these companies were purchased by American 
companies. For example, Mirabilis (the inventor of ICQ - 
I Seek You) was purchased in June 1998 by AOL for 
$287 million
8; in May 2000, Chromatis (which developed 
optical networking) was purchased by Lucent 
Technologies for about $4.5 billion (and was shut down 
by Lucent in August 2001)
9.The strength of the Israeli software firms was, and still 
is, in their innovative and daring R&D. Not surprisingly, 

to this day, IBM, Intel and Microsoft operate research and 

development centers in Israel. 
It seems that during the hi-tech peak, the Israeli hi-tech 
industry was in its early market phase and the cultivation 
culture was dominant. As was explained in Section 2.1, 
no methodology fits this combination. Indeed, this was 
the accepted situation in software development teams. As 
will be illustrated later on, this fact is still reflected today 
by the low tightness that characterizes the Israeli software 
culture. We propose that since the market conditions have 
changed in the past five years, and since the Israeli 

software industry is not a start-up based industry any 
more, the Israeli software industry should change its 
perception with respect to the need to work according to 
software development methods.   
2.3 Extreme Programming  
In this section we describe the unique features of XP 
and discuss the resistance that it sometimes arouses. 
XP is one of the agile software development methods. 
It consists of values, (primary and corollary)
practices and 
principles that bridges between the values and practices 
and guide how to put the values into action (Beck with 

Andres, 2005).  
The XP practices relate to all aspects of software 
development. Unlike other (mainly heavyweight) 
software development methods that are described in terms 
of development stages or phases, XP defines work 
procedures and outlines daily work activities related to 
software project management, code development, time 

management and relationships with customers. We 
propose that the way XP is described in the first edition of 
Beck's book (Beck, 2000) is more characterized by this 
trait.  
As it turns out, the agile approach in general, and XP 
in particular, raise some resistance
10. Indeed, XP is a new 
paradigm in the software development world. In light of 
Kuhn's perspective on the acceptance of new paradigms in 
the scientific world (Kuhn, 1962), the fact that a new 

paradigm is not easily accepted by the relevant 
community comes as no surprise.   
8 Source: 
http://www.ccta.ca/english/publications/submissions/199
9-98/1998-10-01.htm 
9 Source: 
http://www.lucent.com/press/0500/000531.coa.html 
10 See for example:     
http://christiansepulveda.com/blog/archives/000018.html   
http://homepage.mac.com/keithray/blog/2003/07/03/ 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 4Following are three pieces of evidence of this 
resistance, as is reflected with respect to XP. The first is 
taken from an interview with Kent Beck, who said
11: "On the technical side, a lot of programmers sort of like being 
able to go into their little caves and not have much 
accountability. They have a big problem with weekly 
planning, very visible estimation, programming with other 

people, testing and integration, and being a continuous 
part of the process. There may be some resistance there." 
The second is taken from Ken Auer and Roy Miller's 

book 
Extreme Programming Applied: Playing to Win
(Auer and Miller, 2001B). They say that "XP forces 

people out of their comfort zones. They will resist. This 
resistance comes from fear a
nd pride. Overcome this by 
focusing on using XP as a strategy to increase their 
chances of winning." The third is from Joshua Kerievsky, 
who describes his experience teaching XP as follows: "If 
you teach XP, you will encounter resistance. Experienced 
software people often have the strongest objections to XP 
before they come to understand it. Knowing how best to 

handle the various forms of resistance is essential to 
effectively teach XP."
123. A Five Dimensional Model: Relationship 
between Culture and Acceptance of an SDM  
In this section, we present a model, according to which 
the suitability of an SDM to a particular national culture 
can be analyzed by measuring the tightness level of these 
two elements. According to our model, the tightness 
levels of an SDM and of a culture are measured along the 
following five dimensions:  
Project plan  
Procedures and standards 
Responsibility and accountability 
Time estimation 
Individual need satisfaction (Hazzan and 
Dubinsky, 2003). 
We now specify for each component, i.e. the SDM 
and the culture, those factors that determine the 
tightness level with respect to each dimension. In both 
cases, unless specified otherwise, the higher the values 
of these factors, the tighter the SDM or the culture.     
Tightness level of an SDM:
Project plan dimension: number of releases and 
feedback milestones, level of emphasis put on 
planning, number of days for which 
specific
planning is made.  
Procedures and standards dimension: level of detail 
that describes the SDM.  
11 Look at:  
    http://www.cutter.com/research/2002/edge020903.html
12 Source: Extreme Educational Symposium at the 4
thInternational Conference, XP 2003, Genova, Italy, 
http://www.xp2003.org/EduSymCfP.html. 
Responsibility and accountability dimension: the 
frequently at which team members are required to 
report on their progress. 
Time estimation dimension: the importance given 
to time estimation in general, and the resolution 
level of the time estimation (hours, days, months) 
in particular (the smaller the time units, the higher 
is the resolution, and the higher is the value of this 
dimension).  
Individual need satisfaction dimension: the mutual 
dependency of team members, level of planning 

that inspires the message of "invest now for the 
future".  
Tightness level of a culture:
     
Project plan dimension: the cultural tendency to 
plan ahead.  
Procedures and standards dimension: the cultural 
tendency to follow the plan (without improvising 
and taking shortcuts).  
Responsibility and accountability dimension: the 
tendency to avoid taking unnecessary risks. 
Time estimation dimension: the tendency and 
commitment to development time estimation and to 

retrospective evaluation of these estimations.  
Individual need satisfaction dimension: the level to 
which a culture imparts the importance of the 
investment of time in the present in order to gain 
long-term benefits, the degree to which people in 
the culture agree to maintain a degree of mutual 
dependency. 
Similar to other theories that score cultures along 
several dimensions, the above presented 5 dimensional 
model of tightness of a culture should not necessarily act 
in a coordinated fashion along the tightness spectrum. 
Some cultures may be "tight" according to some 

dimensions but not along others.  
While an SDM can be analyzed theoretically using our 
model, we have developed a questionnaire for the analysis 
of the tightness level of a culture (see Appendix 1). The 
questionnaire was constructed based on data gathered 
using several research tools that enabled us to learn about 
software developers' perceptions with respect to the five 
aforementioned dimensions. 
Table 1 shows four possible pairs of SDMs and 
cultures according to their tightness level. In the next 

section (Section 4), focus is placed on the Hard 

Implementation quarter in which an SDM with a high 
level of tightness is implemented in a culture 
characterized by low tightness. This situation is illustrated 

by the Israeli software teams' resistance to adopt XP. In 
this case, the Israeli culture is an example of a culture 
with a low level of tightness and XP is an example of an 
SDM with a high tightness level. As Table 1 suggests, in 
such a situation it may be difficult to implement the SDM 
in the culture. The other three cells of Table 1 are not 
labeled and can be the subject for another research.  
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 5Table 1: Tightness matrix of SDMs and cultures
SDM Tightness 
Low High Low Hard Implementation 
Culture 
Tightness 
High 
4. The Israeli Hi-Tech Industry and XP 
This section first explains why the Israeli culture is 
ranked low on the tightness scale (Section 4.1) while XP 
is ranked high on the same scale (Section 4.2). Then, 

based on these explanations, we suggest possible clashes 
between the Israeli software culture and XP (Section 4.3). 
4.1. Tightness of the Israeli hi-tech culture 
In this section we present data that indicates the low 
ranking on the tightness scale of the Israeli software 
culture. This analysis is preliminary and further data 
collection and analysis are on-going.   
As it turns out, creativity and improvisation are 
accepted as the most characteristic features of the Israeli 
software industry. Accordingly, careful planning and 
working according to an ordered procedure are not a 
common occurrence in the Israeli software development 

culture. Unless referring to a software company in which 
a CMM (Capability Maturity Model) procedure is 
enforced, or an American company that maintains a site in 

Israel, our acquaintance with Israeli software 
development teams tells us that working according to a 
detailed and defined procedure is actually quite rare 
among Israeli software teams. Following are two data that 
illustrate this observation.   
Data 1:
 At the 
IEEE International Conference on 
Software – Science, Technology & Engineering
, which was held in Herzelia, Israel in November 2003, we 

distributed the questionnaire presented in Appendix 2. 

One of the questions was:  
If you are familiar with an Israeli software team, 

please indicate what main characteristic of the 
Israeli software industry led, in your opinion, to the 
success of the Israeli software industry in the 1990s?   
Out of 27 forms completed, 15 participants answered 
this question. Several answers listed more than one 

characteristic. As can be seen in Table 2 factors are 
mentioned that indicate low tightness along the project 
plan, procedures and standards and individual need 

satisfaction dimensions of our model. 
Table 2: Some results of the questionnaire presented 
in Appendix 2
Factor Number of answers  
Creativity, originality, 
inventive skills 
8Improvisation 4 
Intensive work, speed, 
agility (quickness)  
4Data 2: 
The questionnaire presented in Appendix 1 was 
responded to by 43 software engineering students, most of 
them worked in the Israeli hi-tech while studding. Table 3 

presents several illustrative results.  
Table 3: Some results of the questionnaire presented 
in Appendix 1 
Statement AgreeTend 
toagree
Tend 
todis-agree
Dis-
agree
N/AIt is preferable to 
minimize, as much as 
possible, the dependency 
level among software 
team members.  
2311612
It is preferable to work in 
small teams in order to 

foster decision-making 

processes as much as 
possible. 
825811
When I chose a 
profession, I took into 
consideration that I would 
have to devote many hours 
everyday at work and give 
up my personal life. 
620134
Intuition and 
improvisation are 
important in software 

development processes.  
172141
As can be observed, the majority of the students prefer 
to work in small teams in order to foster software 
development processes and they appreciate the role of 
improvisation in such processes. Specifically, the two first 
items illustrate low tightness of the individual need 
satisfaction dimension. That is, in order to satisfy the 
individual's need to advance the development process, 

students tend to forego other factors that might be 
important in software development processes. The third 
item indicates low tightness with respect to the project 

plan dimension: Since we spend such long hours at work 
and so much time is available, we have no need to plan 
our work. The fourth item clearly illustrates low tightness 

along the procedures and standards dimension.  
4.2. The Tightness of Extreme Programming    
In this section we first rank the XP practices, as they 
were represented originally in Beck (2000), on a tightness 

scale of 1 to 4 (Table 4). Specifically, the higher the rank 

of a specific practice on the tightness scale, the more 
detailed the work habits and procedures outlined by the 
practice are and the more precise is the actual manner in 

which the practice is applied in practice. As can be seen, 
most of the XP practices are either tight or very tight.  
Table 4: XP practices according to tightness level
Tightness scale XP practices 
1 - loose Metaphor 
2 - reasonable Planning game, Small releases, Simple 
design 
3 - tight Refactoring, Sustainable pace, Customer 
on-site  
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 64 - very tight Test-driven development, Continuous 
integration, Coding standards, Pair 
programming, Collective ownership    
Second, in order to gain a more detailed analysis, we 
examined the contribution of the XP practices to the 
tightness level of XP along the five dimensions of our 
model (see Table 5). With respect to each XP practice 
outlined in Table 5, we mention only those dimensions 
whose tightness level is impacted significantly and 
directly by the practice.  
Table 5: Contribution of the XP practices to the 
tightness level of XP along the five dimensions of the 
proposed model
Practice Dimensions to whose tightness level the 
practice contributes 
Test-driven 
development 
Procedures and standards  
Responsibility and accountability 
Individualneed satisfaction 
Refactoring  
Procedures and standards  
Individualneed satisfaction 
On-sitecustomer 
Project plan  
Procedures and standards  
Individualneed satisfaction 
Metaphor   
Individualneed satisfaction 
Pair programming 
Procedures and standards  
Responsibility and accountability 
Individualneed satisfaction 
Continuous 
integration 
Procedures and standards  
Individualneed satisfaction 
Sustainable 
pace 
Procedures and standards 
Time estimation 
Individualneed satisfaction 
Simple design 
Procedures and standards 
Individualneed satisfaction 
Planning 
game 
Project plan  
Procedures and standards 
Time estimation 
Codingstandards 
Procedures and standards  
Individualneed satisfaction 
Short releases 
Project plan  
Collectiveownership 
Individualneed satisfaction 
Unfortunately, due to space limitations we will not be 
able to explain the scores presented in Table 4 and 5. 
4.3. XP and the Israeli hi-tech culture 
Based on Sections 4.1 and 4.2, this section examines 
the fitness of XP to the culture of the Israeli software 
industry.  
In the introduction we explained our choice of the pair 
XP–Israeli Culture. We will now elaborate some more on 

our choice of this pair. During the past two years, in 
which we maintained close interaction with many 
software development teams who invited us to present XP 
to them, we received ambiguous messages. On the one 
hand, people express a lot of interest in hearing about XP, 
how it can improve their software development processes, 
how it can help them solve basic problems that they 

encounter on a daily basis, etc. On the other hand, we feel 
a strong resistance towards 
XP, expressed at different 
levels of the organizational hierarchy. This observation 
led us to develop the above-described model based on 
which we will now attempt to explain this phenomenon. 
Specifically, we will first explain how XP 
values
 fit 
the tightness level of the Israeli culture in general, and the 

culture of Israeli software organizations in particular 
(hence do not raise any resistance). Then, we will explain 

why XP 
practices
, which are in fact those that contribute 
to the high ranking of XP on the tightness scale (Section 

4.2), cause Israeli software teams to express resistance 
towards XP as soon as they hear the details of the XP 
practices.  The Israeli culture is open to XP values:
 In general, 
Israelis naturally accept the XP values of 
communication, courage and feedback, mainly due to 
their military background
13. Israeli software teams, for 
example, have no problem applying the cooperation 
that is required by agile methods. Thus, not 
surprisingly, the majority of those who answered the 
following question (see Ap
pendix 2) agreed with it: 
"Teamwork is one ingredient of software development 
methods". Feedback and the ability to adjust to changes 
also pose no problem for Israeli software teams. Thus, 
for example, in one of the interviews, a software 
developer described his perspective towards software 
development strategy using the metaphor of war, 

saying: "If the target is moved, the weapon is changed".  
The fact that the Israeli culture is open to the XP 
values can also partially explain the fact that the CMM 
model is, to some degree, accepted in Israel. In these two 

cases, the XP values and the CMM model, general 
guidelines are outlined and a high degree of freedom with 
respect to their implementation is given.  
The Israeli culture resists acceptance of XP practices:
It seems like the Israeli software culture does not tend to 
adopt the XP practices. We explain this fact using our 
model. Since the Israeli software culture is ranked low on 
the tightness scale, outlining the twelve XP practices, 
which lead to the high ranking of XP on the tightness 
scale, gives Israeli software te
ams a feeling of a highly 
ordered process that requires on-going examination of 

one's actions and may prevent them from progressing at 
the speed at which they wish to progress. Furthermore, it 
should be noted, for example, that some of the XP 
practices (e.g., refactoring and test-driven development) 
contradict the improvisational nature of the Israeli 
software industry mentioned above.   
In what follows, we present two examples of data 
that illustrate clashes between XP and the Israeli 

culture.  
Data 3:
 Clashes between XP and the Israeli software 
culture are well illustrated by the resistance raised 
13  Army service is mandatory in Israel.  
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 7towards the pair programming practice due to the 
limited freedom it allows.  
In our presentation of XP to software engineers in the 
Israeli hi-tech industry, we use a game (see Appendix 3) 

in which we rank participants' questions, and answer the 
questions according to the scores they receive. Following 
are several questions that were ranked highest by 

practitioners in our presentations.  
-How do we handle constraints that one of the pair 
members has during the workday (meetings, studies)? 
-How do we handle situations in which one of the 
developers, or both, has other commitments to 

perform during the day? 
-In this method, isn't too much time spent on nice-to-
have things, like having two programmers work on a 

single computer?   
We speculate that these questions result from 
thoughts such as: "Pair programming may have 

benefits, and it a really nice thing to have in an ideal 
world. In practice, it is not productive and we can 
progress faster without it". Deeper analysis might 
reveal some resistance to the fact that the developer's 
behavior is limited by the pair mate at his or her side.  

Data 4:
 At the final reflection session of the 2003 
Summer Semester, after spending the semester 

developing a project using XP, the students were asked 

to indicate the most significant advantage, as well as  
main disadvantage of XP, as they perceive them to be. 
Table 6 presents a summary of 41 student reflections, 

some of which mention more than one item. As can be 
seen, while issues related to teamwork coordination and 
to time management are considered to be advantages of 

XP, in students' responses they are presented equally, 
both as advantages and disadvantages of XP. 
Table 6: Advantages and disadvantages of XP 
according to undergraduate software engineering 
students
Topics raised 
related to 
Mentioned 
as greatest 
advantage 
Mentioned as 
greatest 
disadvantage 
Teamwork, 
coordination among 
team members and 
work sharing  
3634
Time management, 
waste of time, 
investment in 
planning  
13 14
We end this section by explaining the data presented in 
the Introduction, regarding the high number of start-ups 
that were established in Israel during the dot.com era. 
Indeed, in light of what has been described in this article, 
this fact is not surprising: Low tightness is appropriate for 
start-ups. In other words, the culture of the Israeli hi-tech 
industry is suitable for start-ups. At the same time, as 
Moore indicates (2000), XP is not appropriate for start-

ups (cf. Section 2.1). However, since the dot.com era 
passed, we suggest that in order to survive in this post 
dot.com era, the Israeli hi-tech culture must change its 
software development culture.   
This, however, is not a simple process. As it turns out, 
the Israelis acknowledge the problematic nature of 

introducing an SDM into Israeli organizations and are 
aware of the fact that assimilation of an SDM into their 

teams is not an easy process. For example, Question 5 of 
the questionnaire presented in Appendix 2 requests the 
respondent to indicate YES or NO, according to his or her 

agreement with several statements. Following are two 
statements that are relevant to our discussion along with 
the responses we received (the setting is the same as in 
Data 1).  -"It is easy to assimilate a software development 
method in my organization": 74% replied "No", 4% 

replied "Yes", 22% did not answer;  
-"It is easy to assimilate a software development 
method in an Israeli software team": 67% replied 
"No", 11% replied "Yes", 22% did not answer.   
5.Discussion
Our article examined the connections between the 
national culture and the nature of software development 
methods. Specifically, we addressed connections between 

the tightness of the Israeli culture and the tightness of XP. 
Focus was placed on Israel, a 
country with a significant 
influence on the goings-on in the software industry 
worldwide.  
As mentioned before, one theory which is highly 
related to our model is 
Geert Hofstede Cultural 
Dimensions
 theory, which analyzes cultures along the 
following 5 dimensions: Powe
r Distance, Individualism, 
Masculinity, Uncertainty Avoidance and Long-Term 
Orientation. Our attempts to use this theory for our study 

revealed that while some of its elements can be used for 
our data analysis, it can not be adopted as a whole for the 
purpose of our study. First, our study discusses software 

development culture within a culture, while Geert 
Hofstede's model addresses the country culture. 
Accordingly, the dimensions of the two models focus on 
different factors. Specifically, our suggested dimensions 
refer directly to elements of project development in 
general and software development projects in particular. 
Second, the averages of a country, which are 
characterized by Geert Hofstede's model, do not 
necessarily relate to all individuals of that country
14. Since 
we talk about a very specific group – the group of 
software developers – its scores may be different from 
that of the general population. The software development-

oriented dimensions suggested by our model may provide 
a more focused characteristic of this group.   
14 Source: 
http://www.clearlycultural.com/geert-hofstede-
cultural-dimensions/ 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 8Future research, which will be conducted in 
collaboration with colleagues from other cultures, will 
explore the other three qua
rters of Table 1. In other 
words, we suggest expanding our work to the examination 
of the fitness of XP to different national cultures. In what 
follows, we present two examples that illustrate some 
connections between national-cultural issues and software 

culture.  
oRussia: Edward Yourdon's book entitled "Death 

march: the complete software developer's guide to 

surviving 'mission impossible' " was translated to 
Russian as "The Kamikaze Way". 
oItaly: Francesco Cirillo, one of the leading 
proponents of the Italian XP community, said in a 

discussion of the current situation in Italy: 
"Education of an Extreme Programmer: […] cultural 
resistance, difficulties in terms of approach, and 
future prospects." 
We end the paper by asking how suitability between 
cultures and SDMs is reflected in countries like India and 
China, which have entered the software industry only 
fairly recently. It might not come as a surprise, however, 

that the first company to attain the highest CMM level (5) 
was an Indian company.  
Acknowledgement 
This research was supported by a Technion V.P.R. 
Fund – the New York Metropolitan Research Fund. 
6. References Abrahamsson, P., Salo, O., Ronkainen, S. and Warsta, 
J. (2002). Agile Software Development Methods, Review 
and Analysis, 
ESPOO 2002
,http://www.inf.vtt.fi/pdf/
publications/2002/P478.pdf
Auer, K and Miller, R. (2001A). 
Extreme 
Programming: Taming the Resistance
, Addison-Wesley. 
Auer, K. and Miller, R. (2001B). 
Extreme 
Programming
 Applied: Playing to Win
, Addison-Wesley. 
Beck, K. (2000). 
Extreme Programming Explained
:Embrace Change, Addison-Wesley, 2000. 
Beck, K. (with Andres, C., 2005, second edition). 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change. 
Addison-Wesley. 
Brooks, F. P. (April 1987). No silver bullet: Essence 
and accidents of software engineering, 
Computer20(4), 
pp. 10-19. 
Hazzan O. (2002). The reflective practitioner 
perspective in Software Engineering education
,TheJournal of Systems and Software
 63(3),pp. 161-171.
Hazzan, O. and Dubinsky, Y. (2003). Bridging 
cognitive and social chasms 
in software development 
using Extreme Programming, 
Proceedings of the Fourth 
International Conference on eXtreme 
Programming
 and 
Agile Processes in Software Engineering
, pp. 47-53. 
Highsmith, J. (2002). 
Agile Software developments 
Ecosystems
, Addison-Wesley. 
Kuhn, S. (1998). The software design studio: An 
exploration, 
IEEE software
 15(2), pp. 65-71. Kuhn, S
. T. (1962). 
The Structure of Scientific 
Revolutions
, University of Chicago Press. 
Moore, G. A. (2000). 
Living on the Fault Line: 
Managing for Shareholder Value in the Age of the 
Internet
. New York: HarperBusiness, 2000. 
Mullet, D. (July, 1999). The Software Crisis, 
Benchmarks Online - a monthly publication of 
Academic Computing Services
2(7). 
Sawyer S. and Guinan, P.J. (1998).Software 
development:  Processes and performance, 
IBM Systems 
Journal37(4), 
http://www.research.ibm
.com/journal/sj/374/sawyer.html
        Tomayko J. E. (1996). Carnegie-Mellon’s 
software development Studio: A five-year retrospective, 
SEI Conf.  on Software Engineering Education
.Tomayko. J. and Hazzan, O. (2004). 
Human Aspects of 
Software Engineering
, Charles River Media.  
Walenta, T. (2004). Managing cross-cultural issues 
inbglobal software outsouircing, 
Communications of the 
ACM
47(4), pp. 62-66.  
Yourdon, E. (1997). 
Death March: The complete 
software
 developer's guide to surviving "mission 
impossible" projects
 ,  N.J.: Prentice Hall PTR. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 9Appendix 1 - Software Development Questionnaire 
For each of the following statements, please mark + in the appropriate column according to your 
agreement with the statement:  
Statement AgreeTend to 
agree 
Tend to 
disagree 
Dis - agree
It is important to me that development tasks are allocated equally among 
team members.  
    
It is preferable to develop software by planning at the design level, not at the 
development task level.    
    
It is accepted in the software industry that developers who frequently go 
home at 5 PM do not invest enough effort at work.  
    
It is preferable to minimize, as much as possible, the dependency level 
among software team members.  
    
Customers expect that software development will not be completed on time, 
thus, it is reasonable to commit to an unreasonable timetable.  
    
The Israeli hi-tech industry is characterized by unplanned software 
development.  
    
It is preferable to work in small teams in order to foster decision-making 
processes as much as possible. 
    
Single-release software development is preferable over a gradual 
development process consisting of several releases.   
    
It is important to enable software developers to work flexible hours ("come 
when you want, leave when you want").  
    
If a software project does not proceed as planned, the team must work nights 
and weekends to catch up.   
    
No one in my team cares about how the software is written as long as it 
works.  
    
A team should extend the development period if it ensures improvement of 
software quality.  
    
When I chose a profession, I took 
into consideration that I would have to 
devote many hours everyday to work and give up my personal life. 
    
It is better not to estimate development periods a-priori since software 
development is characterized by unexpected problems.  
    
During software development, it is preferable to invest in code readability in 
order to help future developers whose job will be to maintain the software. 
    
If software development does not proceed according to the planned schedule, 
the schedule should be re-planned.  
    
Intuition and improvisation are important in software development processes.  
    
It is not important to integrate a reflective process (analysis of the past and 
learning of lessons) into the software development process.  
    
When it is difficult to check software, it is OK to move forward and not to 
insist on testing.   
    
There is a tendency in my team not to take personal responsibility.  
    
My team tends to adhere to the timetable.  
    
Even if I see an opportunity to shorten the development period by skipping 
tests, I will not take it.  
    
My team tends to build tight timetables (sometimes by compromising the 
software quality).  
    
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 10Appendix 2 - SwSTE '03
(IEEE International Conference on software – Science
,Technology & Engineering)
Questionnaire, Herzelia, Israel, November 2003 
Hello, 
The following anonymous questionnaire aims to help us with our research on the teaching of 
software development methods. Your cooperation is appreciated. 
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~
1. In your opinion, what is the major problem of the software industry?
2. Did you learn any software development methods during your undergraduate computer science 
or software engineering education? 
Yes, the following method(s): 
__________________________________
No3. What software development methods have you used so far in your professional career?   
4. If you are familiar with an Israeli software team, please indicate what main characteristic of the 
Israeli software industry led, in your opinion, to the success of the Israeli software industry in the 
1990s?  
______________________________________ 
5. Please indicate YES or NO, according to your agreement with the following statements.   
YES NO 
Teamwork is one ingredient of software development methods   
Developers should be involved in the definition of requirements     
Customers should define all of their software requirements a-priori   
Testing should be begun only after the development is completed    
It is important to study testing in undergraduate study programs    
Developers should not perform testing    
It is easy to assimilate a software development method in my organization   
It is easy to assimilate a software devel
opment method in an Israeli software team    
In case you wish to further contribute to our research from your experience, please attach a 
business card or complete: 
Name: _________________________          Email: _________________________ 
Appendix 3 - Musical Cards 
This method was introduced to us at the XP/Agile 
Universe 2003 conference in Reno by Grigori 
Melnik. Mr. Melnik used this game in order to 
reveal the most interesting questions on the topic of 
testing among an audience of about 70 people. The 
game took place at the end of a presentation and 
consisted of the following stages: 
1.The participants each received a card (like those 
used in the planning game) and were asked to 

write down the question that was most interesting 
to them. 
2.Then the participants were asked to leave their 
chairs and start walking around. 
3.The participants circulated for about thirty 
seconds, switching cards with whomever they 
encountered. During these thirty seconds about 
10 switches took place. At the end of the thirty 
seconds, each participant had a card with a 
question on it, written by someone else. 
4.The participants were asked to rank (on the back 
side of the card) the question that appeared on 

the card they were holding, according to their 
interest in the specific question. The ranking 
ranged from 5 to 10. This stage took about 20 
seconds.  5.Stages 3 & 4 were repeated three times.  
6.At this stage, each participant held a card with 
one question on one side and three ranks on the 
other side. Each participant was asked to add up 
the three scores.  
7.The session organizer now started to answer the 
questions in descending order, starting with the 

questions that received the highest score, 30 
points.   

In this way, the most interesting questions for at 
least three of the participants were posed. In the 

traditional way, questions are posed by people who 

dare to ask. In addition, the question is formulated 
in a concise manner, without the accompanying 
"lecture" that some people tend to add to their 

questions. Furthermore, this little game also serves 
as a short, 5-minutes break.  
We use this game as a research tool to raise the 
participants' most important questions. Analysis of 

these questions can reveal the issues that most 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 11bother or interest a specific audience, and shed 
light on cultural issues in general
.Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
