 Agile Testing: Past, Present, and Future 
Charting a Systematic Map of Testing
 in Agile Software Development 
 
Theodore D. Hellmann, Abhishek Sharma, Jennifer Ferreira, Frank Maurer 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Calgary 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
{tdhellma, absharma, jen.ferreira, frank.maurer}@ucalgary.ca 
 
 
Abstract
—Testing has been a cornerstone of agile software 
development methodologies since early in the history of the 
field. However, the terminology used to describe the field – as 
well as the evidence in existing literature – is largely 
inconsistent. In order to better structure our understanding of 
the field and to guide future work, we conducted a systematic 
mapping of agile testing. We investigated five research 
questions: which authors are most active in agile testing; what 
is agile testing used for; what types of paper tend to be 
published in this field; how do practitioners and academics 
contribute to research in this field; and what tools are used to 
conduct agile testing? Of particular interest is our investigation 
into the source of these public
ations, which in
dicates that 
academics and practitioners focus on different types of 
publication and, disturbingly, that the number of practitioner 
papers in the sources we searched is strongly down since 2010. 
Keywords-agile software development, software testing, 
systematic mapping, empirical, test-driven development, testing 
tools. 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION 
 
Systematic mapping studies have been gaining popularity 
recently in the fields of computer science and software 
engineering [1]. These studies set out to structure a field in 
order to gain deeper understanding of what has already been 
done and identify gaps in the existing literature where further 
research is needed. Because of this, these studies are useful 
for quickly orienting oneself to a field of study. 
Testing is one of the corn
erstones of agile software 
development and has received attention since early in the 
history of agile software engineering. Many agile practices 
rely on effective software testing [2]. This means that, 
beyond implications for the quality of the code and the effort 
that will be required to fix bugs post-release, the 
effectiveness of testing in an agile context can determine the 
outcome of an agile soft
ware development effort. 
We chose to perform a systematic mapping of the field of 
agile testing given that meta-analyses of agile testing 
practices, like test-driven development, found that evidence 
for the effectiveness of these practices is conflicting and 
varies widely [3,4]. The goal of this paper, then, is to 
structure the body of literature on agile testing practices in 
order to better inform future work in this field. Specifically, 
we hope that this paper will enhance the focus and relevance 
of future studies in the area of agile testing such that future 
work will be better able to investigate the benefits and 
drawbacks of various agile testing practices.  
The terminology used to describe this field is 
inconsistent. For instance, some terms have grown so closely 
associated with agile testing that they are taken for granted. 
Many papers do not specify that their agile testing is 
automated or that their test suites are used to detect 
regression errors because this already seems to be implied by 
the tests that are acceptable within an agile software 
development context. Because of this, we focus on terms that 
are not yet synonymous with agile testing.   
In order to address our research questions, we extracted 
keywords describing research into agile testing such as the 
purposes that these tests serve, 
the type of evidence used to 
support assertions about agile testing, details about authors 
and year of publication, cont
exts in which agile testing is 
performed, and the tools used to conduct agile testing.  
Of particular interest are the findings presented in 
subsection D of our Results section. These findings 
underscore low levels of publications by practitioners in 
academic venues – particularly beyond the context of 
experience reports. We believe that
 this is due in large part to 
the reality that practitioners tend to publish in other venues – 
in blog posts, in forums, in white papers, in books. This 
creates the possibility of a disconnect between the 
understanding of agile testing in academic and industrial 
contexts. In that section, we po
int out where gaps in existing 
literature already exist so that future work can focus on 
addressing the disconnect. 
Section II orients our study to existing meta-analyses of 
agile testing and to systematic studies in software 
engineering. We then describe the strategy we used to 
conduct this study in Section III. Before presenting our 
results in Section V, we provide an overview in Section IV. 
The limitations of our study are discussed in Section VI. 
Promising directions for future work are presented in Section 
VII before our concluding remarks in Section VIII. 
II.
 
B
ACKGROUND
 
Meta-analyses, such as systematic literature reviews and 
systematic mappings, have been carried out to investigate the 
state of the art for agile software development and related 
fields, such as test-driven development (TDD). Dybå and 
Dingsøyr [5] present a systematic review of empirical studies 
of agile software development and present implications for 
2012 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4804-3/12 $26.00 © 2012 IEEEDOI 10.1109/Agile.2012.855 research as well as industry. Their review indicated a need 
for more empirical studies that focus on methods other than 
eXtreme Programming (XP). However, their review 
explicitly did not fo
cus on agile testing. 
In the meta-analysis by Shull et al. [4], the effectiveness 
of TDD is examined in terms of delivered quality, internal 
code quality, and productivity. However, the results reported 
in these meta-analyses are mixed. Reviewing the evidence 
for adoption of TDD, Causevic et al. [6] found the variation 
in reported results problematic for comparing between 
studies. This was also a found by Dybå and Dingsøyr [5], 
who identified large variation in how empirical studies were 
conducted and reported. Jeffries and Melnik [3] conducted a 
review of selected empirical studies on the effect of TDD on 
quality and effort. They found that TDD largely resulted in 
an increase in quality, but one study they identified showed 
instead that TDD resulted in a strong negative impact on 
quality. Additionally, while they showed that TDD could 
reduce the amount of effort required by up to 27%, most 
studies found an increase in effort of up to 100%. 
A major consideration with meta-analyses, such as the 
ones referenced above, are issues of repeatability. 
Kitchenham et al. [7] carried out a case study to investigate 
the extent to which systematic literature reviews are 
repeatable. They found that the experience level of 
researchers impacted whether comparable sets of studies are 
selected for review, which subsequently impacted 
conclusions drawn by the researchers. For these reasons, it 
becomes imperative that methods used in systematic 
literature reviews and systematic mapping studies are clearly 
and transparently presented [7]. 
Following the advice by Kitchenham et al. [7], we 
closely followed the methods by Petersen et al. [8] and Dybå 
and Dingsøyr [5] in order to 
maintain transparency in our 
methods. 
 
III.
 
M
ETHODOLOGY
 
This study is based on the guidelines provided by 
Petersen et al. [8]. As such, this section provides details on 
how we conducted each step of their process. Each step in 
our approach involved at least two, and usually three, of the 
authors. This was so that disagreements could be resolved 
through discussion.  
A.
 
Define Research Questions 
The first step in this systematic mapping was to select a 
set of research questions to answer. These questions are used 
to define the focus and restrict the scope of the investigation. 
The research questions that drove this research were: 
 
1.
 
Which authors have been most active in publishing 
research on agile testing? 
2.
 
What has agile testing been used for? 
3.
 
What types of papers on agile testing have been 
published? 
4.
 
Has research into agile testing been driven by 
industry, academia, or collaborations between the 
two groups? 
5.
 
What tools have been used for agile testing? 
B.
 
Conduct Search 
The second step in our research was to conduct a search 
for publications relevant to our research questions. To do 
this, we created a search string to use on popular research 
databases. We searched for the terms “agile” and “test” in 
the titles, keywords, and abstracts of papers and limited our 
search results to the domains of Computer Science and 
Engineering. While this search string is quite general, we felt 
that it was more important to make sure that as many 
relevant papers as possible were included than it was to try to 
restrict our result set to a reasonable number. We did not 
search for specific development methodologies (like XP) or 
practices (like TDD), so it is possible that we missed papers 
that were in fact agile, but did not use that word. 
Additionally, it is possible that publications to agile 
conferences did not use that word in their descriptions given 
that it was in the venue name. Because of this, future studies 
could extend this mapping into subfields of agile, include 
testing practices that are implicitly agile as search terms, and 
could manually search agile conference proceedings. 
We executed this search string on the popular databases 
SciVerse Scopus
1
 and IEEE Xplore
2
. Xplore was a natural 
choice in that the IEEE hosts many conferences related to 
computer science and software engineering. Scopus, on the 
other hand, is an important so
urce because it indexes the 
results of other research data
bases (for example, the ACM 
Digital Library and Springerlink)
3
. As such, Scopus searches 
over 46 million entries
4
 (compare with 3.1 million for 
Xplore
5
, which is not indexed by Scopus). The results of this 
initial search are presented in Figure 1. 
                                                           
1
 www.scopus.com 
2
 ieeexplore.ieee.org 
3
 http://www.info.sciverse.com/documents/files/scopus-
training/resourcelibrary
/xls/Publisherlist.xls 
4
 http://www.info.sciverse.com/scopus/scopus-in-detail/facts 
5
 http://ieeexplore.ieee.org 
 
 
Figure 1: 
Papers remaining after each screening step.
 
56 C.
 
Screening Papers 
    After collecting a set of relevant papers, the next step 
was to screen out those publicat
ions not directly relevant to 
our research questions. This task was performed iteratively 
as the depth at which we looked at each paper increased. In 
the first phase, we excluded papers based only on their title 
while in the second pass we excluded papers based on a 
reading of their abstracts. The third pass occurred during the 
keywording process. The results of this process are shown in 
Figure 1, and the final paperset is available online at 
www.ase.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/~tdhellma.  
It is worth noting that we ended up excluding a large 
number of papers in the domains of engineering test 
equipment, agile manufacturing techniques, or agile 
management styles. In the future, it may be worth 
specifically excluding papers 
including the following terms 
in our search strings: manufacturing, airplane, wavelet, 
waveform, spaceship, radar, sensor, missile, laser. It would 
also have helped to auto
matically exclude any paper 
published before the establishment of agile as a software 
development methodology (which we took to mean before 
1997), although our final result set contained results from 
between 2003 and 2011 anyway. 
D.
 
Keywording Using Abstracts 
After we finished reading each paper’s title and then 
abstract to exclude unrelated papers, we performed 
keywording on each remaining paper’s abstract in order to 
develop a framework for understanding the field of agile 
testing. Keywording is analogous to the process of open 
coding used in grounded theory [9] in that it is used to build 
a classification schema out of a large amount of freeform text 
data. In our context, keywording was performed identifying 
the key words in abstracts that describe the paper in terms of 
our research questions. 
We used an open coding process to answer our second, 
fifth, and, to an extent, our third research questions. In open 
coding, key terms are drawn out of the source material in an 
emergent fashion. Open coding is good for gaining an 
understanding of data when it is unclear what to expect. On 
the other hand, we used closed coding to answer our fourth, 
fifth, and, to an extent, our third research questions. In closed 
coding, a list of key terms is determined beforehand and then 
assigned to papers. Closed coding is good for quickly coding 
a dataset when the possible codes are well-understood – as 
was the case with these fields. 
The codes we used to describe papers for the fourth 
question were: industry, academia, and both. Papers were 
coded as “industry” when all authors were affiliated with 
companies at the time of publication; similarly, papers were 
coded as “academia” when all auth
ors were affiliated with 
universities at the time of publication. When papers were 
written by a mix of industry 
and academic authors or when 
the authors were affiliated with a group in the grey area 
between academic and industry (for example, a government 
research institution), the paper was coded as “both.”  
We keyworded the third research question by performing 
both closed and open coding. Open coding was used to 
describe the type of 
study
 conducted in academic 
publications whereas closed coding was used to describe the 
type of 
paper
. We used the paper types identified in [10]. 
Even though these categories were originally envisioned for 
product lines, they fit well for the types of paper identified in 
this study. 
E.
 
Data Extraction and Mapping 
We used Endnote (www.endnote.com) for the actual 
keywording of our paperset because it makes grouping of 
keywords and analysis of the resulting categories easier. This 
allowed us to collect the hard numbers needed for creating 
the visualizations used in this paper. We then generated these 
visualizations using Excel (office.microsoft.com/excel).  
IV.
 
O
VERVIEW OF 
R
ESULTS
 
From a very high level, our results allow understanding 
of the number of publications per year and the important 
terms associated with this field, as shown in Figures 2 and 3. 
The number of papers published by each source 
 
Figure 2 : 
Number of publications by source by publication year.
 
 
 
Figure 3: 
Frequency of type of testing. 
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
Academic
Industry
Both
78 
30 
29 
23 
20 
17
 
9 
8 
6 
5 5 
5 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
57 (industry, academia, both) for each year in our paperset is 
shown in Figure 2. From this chart, we can see that, overall, 
academics have published roughly twice as many papers as 
have industry practitioners and that these practitioners have 
published twice as many papers
 as have been published 
through academia-industry collaborations. However, twice – 
once in 2006 and again in 2008 – practitioners published 
more work on agile testing than did academics. More 
recently, in 2010 and 2011, practitioners published very few 
papers. So, the question is: what caused practitioners to stop 
publishing papers on agile testing? 
One possible reason is that the databases we searched 
primarily index peer-reviewed work. Peer-reviewed venues 
favour rigorous studies – usually the domain of academics. 
Practitioner publications tend to focus on sharing insights in 
a readable manner over rigorous study design. Given that 
there are few incentives for practitioners to invest such a 
high amount of effort in publications, it makes sense that our 
study returned fewer practiti
oner papers. From this 
perspective, it is possible that an increase in the rigor of the 
peer review process in the past two years is responsible for 
the near-absence of practitioner publications.  
At a high level, it is also possible to get an overview of 
the important terms associated with the field of agile testing. 
Figure 3 shows the frequency of the occurrence of keywords 
relating to the type or purpose of testing identified in our 
final paperset. From this chart, we can clearly see that the 
majority of attention in agile testing has focused on test-
driven development. Use of tests as specification or formal 
specification, for unit or acceptance testing, or to test web 
applications was also common. Much less common, 
however, was use of tests as part of continuous integration, 
acceptance test-driven development, database or GUI testing, 
or performance testing. Keywords with fewer than 5 
occurrences are not shown.
  
V.
 
R
ESULTS
 
As a result of our keywording process we were able to 
generate visualizations to answer our research questions. 
These results are presented in this section and are organized 
according to the research questions outlines earlier. 
A.
 
Which authors have been most active in publishing 
research on agile testing? 
From the final paperset we were able to find the six 
authors with the highest number of author credits in the field 
of agile testing. The top six were picked based on the number 
of papers that each author in the field had produced, as 
shown in Figure 5. Given their prominence in the field, we 
felt that it was important to gain a deeper understanding of 
these persons. Table 1 shows additional details about each 
major author: the years in which they have published papers; 
the types of testing in which they have been interested; and a 
link to their homepage. We hope that this will foster further 
contact and collaboration in this field. 
  Also, we created Figure 4 to compare the level of 
activity of the major authors we identified against the level 
of activity of the rest of the authors by showing the fraction 
of publications each year that can be attributed to them. This 
was done to understand if the field as a whole is the domain 
of a few or if the major authors are simply more active than 
others. Figure 4 helped us to identify two particularly 
interesting years: 2005 and 2007. In 2005, the field really 
was driven by the major authors – out of 15 total 
publications, 7 (nearly half) were from this small set of 
authors. 2007, on the other hand, saw the most publications 
total out of any year (33), yet very few of these came from 
major authors (2). Based on this, it would seem that the 
major authors can have a strong influence on the field as a 
whole, but that this influence varies widely and is not linked 
as strongly to the number of publications in a given year as 
might be imagined. 
B.
 
What has agile testing been used for? 
Figure 6 was created in order to understand how agile 
testing has been used over time. Interest in TDD has 
consistently been high, which indicates its central role in 
agile testing. However, this interest is by no means 
overwhelming – there is no year in which TDD was the 
focus of a majority of publications. In contrast to this 
stability, interest in some other uses of agile testing shows 
distinct spikes. For example, there are gaps in the publication 
record for database, GUI, performance, and acceptance 
Figure 4:
 Publications per year by major/other authors.
 
 
Figure 5: 
Number of authors with the giv
en number of publications. 
Note: No authors had 6 publications. 
291 
26 
4 
2 
1 
1 
1 
1 
10 
1 Publication
2 Publications
3 Publications
4 Publications
5 Publications
7 Publications
8 Publications
9 Publications
58 testing. This could indicate that subfields within the greater 
field of agile testing are at least somewhat disjoint. This is 
reinforced by the fact that an increase in the overall number 
of publications – for example, 2007 – does not result in an 
increase in all subfields. Interest in various subfields seems 
to rise and fall over time. For example, GUI testing was 
absent from 2006 to 2009 while interest in database testing 
was only shown during that same period. This is interesting 
in that it could demonstrate a switching of interest between 
subfields, though there are too few data points to draw strong 
conclusions in that regard. 
C.
 
What types of papers on agile testing have been 
published? 
In [10], five basic types of paper are identified:  
 

 
Solution – a novel solution is proposed, but only a 
proof of concept is offered 

 
Validation – further investigates a solution, but is not 
evaluated in practice 

 
Philosophical – provides a new framework for 
understanding a field 

 
Opinion – presents the author’s personal opinions 

 
Experience – describes the author’s experience on a 
project 

 
Evaluation – investigation of a problem in practice 
 
We used these same paper types to determine what type 
of publications regarding agile testing have been produced. 
Figure 7 is a visualization of what type of publications have 
been produced in the investigation of agile testing along with 
the year in which they were published. In this field, it’s very 
important to note that opinion and experience papers have all 
but disappeared in the last two years and only one 
philosophical paper was published last year. This correlates 
strongly with the drop in industry participation in this field 
and is an unhealthy development. These types of 
publications should be encouraged: philosophical and 
opinion papers provide new directions for research, while 
experience papers are im
portant to evaluating how 
techniques are working in practice. However, there was an 
increase in the number of solution papers in 2011. Since 
solution papers are important as a starting point to research 
into novel techniques, these papers could represent the first 
wave of research into new agile testing practices. It’s worth 
noting that this spike in solution papers follows a spike in 
philosophical papers in 2010.  
D.
 
Has research into agile testing 
been driven by industry, 
academia, or collaborations between the two groups? 
From Figure 2, we can see that, for most years, 
academics have contributed the largest portion of 
publications as indexed by the databases we used. As noted 
earlier, in 2006 and 2008 practitioners contributed more 
publications, but practitioner papers have been absent in the 
past two years. Additionally, publications by collaborations 
between industrial and academic authors have never made up 
the majority of publications in this field. Based on this, we 
feel that one major way of further developing this field in the 
future would be to find ways of encouraging more academic-
practitioner collaborations in which the practitioner-authors 
are actively involved in both research and paper-writing.  
In order to gain further understanding of the source of 
publications in the field of agile testing, we also investigated 
the type of publication with respect to its source. The results 
are shown in Figure . While this visualization is strongly 
influenced by the overall number of papers published in the 
field, we can still understand useful information from it. For 
example, we can see that practitioners have published 
virtually no evaluation or validation papers. This is 
somewhat counterintuitive since practitioners are in the best 
position to conduct this sort of research. However, rather 
than conducting formal studies, practitioners tend to publish 
experience papers as 
evidenced by the fact that a very strong 
majority of experience reports are from industry. Based on 
this, another way of enriching this field would be to 
encourage more practitioner involvement in evaluation 
research as well as more collaborations across the board.
TABLE
 
1.
 
MAJOR
 
AUTHORS
 
IDENTIFIED
 
BY
 
THIS
 
STUDY. 
Author 
Active Years 
Interests 
Link 
Geras, A.
 
2004, 2005, 2008
 
Manual Testing, Acceptance Testing, Non-Functional 
Testing, TDD
 
http://ca.linkedin.com/pub/adam-geras/5/7a9/3b5
 
Janzen, D.
 
2003, 2005, 
2006, 2009
 
TDD
 
http://works.bepress.com/djanzen/
 
Williams, L.
 
2003, 2004, 
2006, 2007, 2008
 
Performance Testing, TDD
 
http://collaboration.csc.ncsu.edu/laurie/index.html
 
Smith, M.
 
2004, 2005, 
2008, 2009, 2010
 
Acceptance Testing, TDD, Non-Functional Testing, 
Unit Testing
 
http://www.enel.ucalgary.ca/People/Smith/
 
Miller, J.
 
2004, 2005, 
2008, 2009, 2010
 
Acceptance Testing, TDD, Non-Functional Testing, 
Formal Specification, Unit Testing
 
http://www.steam.ualberta.ca/
 
Maurer, F.
 
2004, 2005, 
2007, 2008, 
2009, 2010, 2011
 
TDD, Acceptance Testing, Performance Testing, 
Acceptance Test
-
Driven Development, Specification, 
GUI,  Formal Specification
 
http://ase.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/ase/Frank.Maurer.php
 
59      Figure 6: 
Use of testing over time.
 951010149
9842236346441257253253133331324124321311631233221111122121111211121120022003200420052006200720082009201020112012
TDD
TestingSpecification
PerformanceTesting
ContinuousIntegration
GUITesting
FormalSpecification
FunctionalTesting
Testingof Web-Based Systems
DatabaseTesting
AcceptanceTesting
UnitTesting
AcceptanceTDD
 Figure 7 : 
Type of paper by year of publication.
 342495775425778511142623112224161312241427121462432200120022003200420052006200720082009201020112012
Evaluation
ExperienceOpinion
PhilosophicalSolution
Validation
60 E.
 
What tools have been used for agile testing? 
A wide variety of tools were used for a variety of 
purposes in our paperset, and these tools are shown in Figure 
. Many of these tools focus on enabling unit and acceptance 
testing in various circumstances. For example, many of the 
tools reported are versions of xUnit for different 
programming languages. Relatively few tools provide 
support for advanced testing techniques in an agile 
environment and instead focus on providing support for 
basic testing techniques. For example, only Jumble provides 
support for mutation testing and it only works with Java. 
This indicates a substantial blind spot in the agile testing 
literature. It is important that future work look into why this 
is the case, but we speculate that this slow uptake could be 
due to the heavyweight nature of many advanced testing 
tools. Perhaps formal testing tools are not suitable for an 
agile software development environment. If this is the case, 
it is very important that future work find ways to make these 
tools more compatible with agile development practices.  
VI.
 
L
IMITATIONS
 
As with any meta-analysis, the first limitation of this 
study is the risk that we failed to identify all relevant peer-
reviewed publications on agile testing. We took steps to 
minimize this risk – for example, we used a high-level search 
string that returned 728
 
results that would eventually be 
eliminated. This approach meant that we ended up manually 
excluding a large number of papers in subsequent steps. 
However, it also increased the likelihood of identifying 
relevant papers in the first place. One way of increasing the 
number of publications included in this study could be to 
follow citation chains of papers in order to create a larger 
web of related literature. However, this represents a very 
significant amount of work and has been left for future work. 
This would not increase the amount of practitioner literature 
included in this study, though. Because of the sources we 
chose to search for relevant 
literature, a large amount of 
practitioner literature was overlooked. Practitioner 
experiences are seldom ca
ptured in peer-reviewed 
publications, but are often expressed through books, 
technical papers, blog posts, and the like. In future work, this 
second body of knowledge should be systematically explored 
to further increase our knowledge of how agile testing is 
used in practice. 
The second limitation of this study is that we explicitly 
made the assumption that the abstract of a paper will contain 
precise information concerning 
its contents. This assumption 
allows us to extract the information we present in this paper 
in a timely manner. However, the abstracts we encountered 
were not always sufficiently specific or detailed enough to 
allow us to find all of the information in which we were 
interested. In cases where sufficient information relevant to 
our research questions was not available through an abstract, 
we additionally scanned the paper’s introduction and 
conclusion. This step introduces an imbalance in the amount 
 
Figure 8: 
Types of paper by source of paper. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
0
Academic
Industry
Both
 
Figure 9: 
Tools mentioned in abstracts in our paperset.
 
61 of information considered for each paper and could in fact 
have led to papers with lower-quality abstracts receiving 
higher focus in our evaluation. In order to restore this 
balance, we would need to perform a full systematic 
literature review. However, this is left for future work.  
Third, we noted during our search process that many 
abstracts use the term “agile” to describe a software 
development environment or practice. In order to accurately 
understand the context of agile testing, it is important that 
authors take care to precisely describe what practices an 
agile team is using, or what about the way in which a 
practice is used makes it specif
ically agile. This is important 
given the rising popularity of meta-analyses like the present 
study in that it is difficult fo
r us to talk about agile testing 
when we cannot be more specific with respect to what we 
mean when we discuss an ag
ile environment or practice. 
VII.
 
F
UTURE 
W
ORK
 
Through the process of conducting this systematic 
mapping, we identified a variety of strong opportunities for 
future work. We identified 
these opportunities through both 
our keywording process and the maps we generated.  
The first opportunity for future work is the investigation 
of problems that agile testing practices are expected to 
address. Related to this, a mapping could also be created 
showing the expected benefits of different  types of agile 
testing. However, it was not possible for us to investigate this 
relationship in our systematic mapping due to the large 
number of abstracts that do not provide this information. To 
investigate the problems addressed by and benefits 
associated with agile testing, it would be necessary in future 
work to conduct a systematic literature review. 
Certain questions cannot be answered through a 
systematic mapping. For example, we cannot make 
suggestions about the best way to perform agile testing. In 
order to better understand these sorts of questions, it would 
be necessary to use systematic literature reviews. 
Research questions related to where the centers of agile 
testing research are located could also be addressed in future 
work. This study does not seek to identify which countries, 
universities, or companies are more actively involved in 
agile testing research and this could be addressed in future 
systematic mappings. 
In this study, we investigated the tools used in agile 
testing. However, this represents only a subset of the tools 
that could be relevant for this purpose. A survey of testing 
tools based on Internet searches, searches of open-source 
software repositories like CodePlex and SourceForge could 
be combined with an analysis of their applicability to agile 
testing situations would help increase our understanding or 
available tool support and areas where more tool support is 
needed.  
VIII.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
In this paper we present the results of a systematic 
mapping study of the field of agile testing. The purpose of 
this study was to provide guidance for future work in this 
field. We used five research questions as our axis of 
investigation into this topic. 
1.
 
Which authors have been most active in publishing 
research on agile testing? 
In order to answer this question, we provide created 
Figure 4 and Figure 5. Table 1 provides the top 6 authors in 
this field as well as the years in which they published papers 
and keywords describing their research interests. Further, 
this table also provides a link to the home page of these 
authors. It is our hope that this will make it easier for readers 
interested in performing future 
research to orient themselves 
to the relevant literature. 
2.
 
What has agile testing been used for? 
In order to answer this question, we provide a Figure 3 
and Figure 6, which provide the top 10 keywords and tracks 
the top 10 keywords over time, respectively. This was done 
to provide an orientation to the field’s major concepts and 
also an indication of which top
ics have been important both 
historically and recently.   
3.
 
What types of papers on agile testing have been 
published? 
This research question was designed to provide insight 
into which types of testing ev
aluation methods have been 
used to investigate the field of agile testing. Figure 7 and 
Figure  address this question by mapping the types of paper 
published both in each individual year and by each source. 
Figure  in particular highlights the difference in the type of 
papers published by academics and practitioners. In the 
future, ways of encouraging further participation by 
industrial authors in the publication of types of paper other 
than experience reports must be found.  
4.
 
Has research into agile testing been driven by industry, 
academia, or collaborations between the two groups? 
The purpose of this question was to investigate how 
academics and practitioners have contributed to the 
development of the research field of agile testing. While 
there have been years when industrial authors have 
contributed more publications in this subject area than their 
academic counterparts, academics have tended to contribute 
Figure 8: 
Publications by year by major / other author.
 
62 more publications in most years and overall. However, what 
is most striking is the low number of collaborative 
publications involving authors from both academic and 
industrial settings. It is our opinion that the number of these 
collaborations must be increased in the future to advance our 
knowledge of agile testing.  
5.
 
What tools have been used for agile testing? 
Unsurprisingly, our analysis of the tools used for agile 
testing showed a focus towards unit and acceptance testing 
tools. In the future, research should be done to see if the 
techniques proposed within the testing community in general 
can be successfully applied to agile software development 
efforts. In general, understanding of what makes a tool 
suitable for use in agile environments would greatly enhance 
our ability to take advantage of developments in other fields 
of software engineering. 
Finally, particularly in subsection D of the Results 
section, we have tried to highlight areas in which differences 
between practitioner and academic literature were apparent. 
As a result, we can see from Figure  that academics tend to 
focus on evaluation papers where practitioners tend to 
produce experience reports. However, in the past two years, 
practitioner participation in this field has been very low. This 
could be an artifact of our search process, but it could also be 
due to changes in the types of 
papers that are being accepted 
for publication. It is crucial to the future of this field that a 
strong dialog be established between academics and 
practitioners researching agile testing. 
IX.
 
W
ORKS 
C
ITED
[1] 
S. MacDonnel, M. Shepperd, 
B. Kitchenham, and E. Mendes, 
"How Reliable Are Systematic Reviews in Empirial Software 
Engineering?," 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
, 
vol. 36,
 no. 5, pp. 676-687, Sep. - Oct. 2010. 
 
 
 
 
[2] 
Glenn Vanderburg, "A Simple Model of Agile Software 
Practices 
- or - Extreme Programming Annealed," in 
Object-
Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and 
Applications
, New York, 2005, pp. 539-545. 
[3] 
Ron Jeffries and Grigori Melnik, "Guest Editors' Introduction: 
TDD 
- The Art of Fearless Programming," 
IEEE Software
, 
vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 24-30, May-June 2007. 
[4] 
F. Shull et al., "What Do We Know about Test-Driven 
Development?," 
IEEE Software
, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 16-
19, 
Nov. - Dec. 2010. 
[5] 
Tore Dybå and Torgeir Dingsøyr, "Empirical Studies of Agile 
Software Development: A Systematic Review," 
Information 
and Software Technology
, vol. 50, no. 9-10, pp. 833-
859 , 
January 2008. 
[6] 
Adnan Causevic, Daniel Sundmark, and Sasikumar 
Punnekkat, "Factors Limiting Industrial Adoption of Test 
Driven Development: A Systematic Review," in 
International 
Conference on Software Testing,
 Verification, and Validation
, 
Berlin, 2011, pp. 337-346. 
[7] 
Barbara Kitchenham, Pearl Brereton, Li Zhi, David Budgen, 
and Andrew Burn, "Repeatabilit
y of Systematic Literature 
Reviews," in 
Evaluation & Assessment in Software 
Engineering
, Durham, UK, 2011, pp. 46-55. 
[8] 
Kai Petersen, Robert Feldt, Shahid Mujtaba, and Michael 
Mattsson, "Systematic Mappi
ng Studies in Software 
Engineering," in 
12th International Conference on Evaluation 
and Assessment in Software Engineering
, Bari, Italy, 2008, 
pp. 71-80. 
[9] 
Barney G. Glaser and Anselm L. Strauss, 
The Discovery of 
Gr
ounded Theory
. Chicago, United States of America: 
Aldine, 1967. 
[10] 
Roel Wieringa, Neil Maiden, Nancy Mead, and Colette 
Rolland, "Requirements Engineering Paper Classification and 
Evaluation Criteria: A Proposal and a Discussion," 
Journal of 
Requirements Engineering
, vol. 1, no. 11, pp. 102-107, 2005. 
 
 
63