 Agile Testing: A Systematic Mapping Across Three Conferences 
Understanding Agile Testing in the XP/Agile Universe, Agile, and XP Conferences  
 
Theodore D. Hellmann, Apoorve Chokshi, Zahra Shakeri 
Hossein Abad, Sydney Pratte, Frank Maurer 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Calgary 
Calgary, Alberta, Canada 
{tdhellma, apoorve.chokshi, zshakeri, sapratte, frank.maurer}@ucalgary.ca 
 
 
Abstract
— Unit and acceptance testing are central to agile 
software development, but is that 
all there is to agile testing? We 
build on previous work to provide a systematic mapping of agile 
testing publications at major agile conferences. The analysis 
presented in this paper allows us to answer research questions 
like: what is agile testing used for; what types of studies on agile 
testing have been published; what problems do people have 
when performing agile testing; and what benefits do these 
publications offer? We additionally explore topics such as: who 
are the major authors in this field; in which countries do these 
authors work; what tools are mentioned; and is the field driven 
by academics, practitioners, or collaborations? This paper 
presents our analysis of these topics in order to better structure 
future work in the field of agile testing and to provide a better 
understanding of what this field actually entails.  
Keywords-agile software development, software testing, 
systematic mapping, empirical, test-driven development, testing 
tools. 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION 
 
Effective software testing is one of the cornerstones of 
agile software development. In fa
ct, most other agile practices 
rely on some form of testing [1]. In that citation, testing in an 
agile context means one of two things: unit testing or 
acceptance testing. But is this really all there is to testing 
within agile? In order to find out more about what testing 
means within agile, we decided to perform a systematic 
mapping study of agile testing.  
Systematic mapping studies take a large number of papers 
as input and categorize them based on their titles and abstracts. 
The result of such a study is a framework for understanding a 
field of research at a high level – in other words, to find out 
what topics a given field encompasses. These studies are 
gaining popularity within software engineering research, but 
must be approached with caution  [2] due to concerns about 
their repeatability. Last year, we performed a systematic 
mapping to determine what the term “agile testing” meant 
within the field of software engineering as a whole [3] using a 
primarily automated search for papers. While the results were 
insightful, we feel that it is 
important to approach this topic 
again from a slightly different angle. Where last year we 
searched all software engineering publications for papers to 
include, this year we restricted our initial search for papers to 
major agile conferences: the (now defunct) XP/Agile 
Universe, Agile, and XP conferences.  Additionally, while the 
automated approach we used last year turned up 166 related 
papers, we felt that it could have missed important papers. 
Using a manual approach for this year’s study, we came up 
with a new set of 110 papers for analysis - only 17 of which 
were present in last year’s paperset. This makes our analysis 
for this year’s study very relevant over and above last year’s 
analysis, as our approach identified a significant number of 
new papers. However, it also identifies serious issues with the 
validity and reliability of systematic mappings and reviews. 
These are addressed in Section VI.B. 
Our goal with this paper is to present a summary of what 
the field of agile testing is about. We accomplish this by 
asking research questions including: what has agile testing 
been used for; what types of re
search have been published; 
what problems are associated with agile testing; and what 
benefits do publications claim to offer? As a secondary 
analysis, we also answer several additional research 
questions: which authors lead the field; which countries 
produce the most research on this topic; which tools are most 
frequently mentioned; and do academics or practitioners (or 
collaborations) contribute more publications to the field?  
II.
 
B
ACKGROUND
 
Meta-analyses, such as systematic literature reviews and 
systematic mappings, have been carried out to investigate the 
state of the art for agile software development and related 
fields, such as test-driven development (TDD). Dybå and 
Dingsøyr [4] present a systematic review of empirical studies 
of agile software development and present implications for 
research as well as industry. Their review indicated a need for 
more empirical studies that focus on methods other than 
eXtreme Programming (XP). However, their review explicitly 
did not focus on agile testing. 
In the meta-analysis by Shull et al. [5], the effectiveness of 
TDD is examined in terms of delivered quality, internal code 
quality, and productivity. However, the results reported in 
these meta-analyses are mixed. Reviewing the evidence for 
adoption of TDD, Causevic et al. [6] found the variation in 
reported results problematic for comparing between studies. 
This was also a found by Dybå and Dingsøyr [4], who 
identified large variation in how empirical studies were 
conducted and reported. Jeffries and Melnik [7] conducted a 
review of selected empirical studies on the effect of TDD on 
quality and effort. They found that TDD largely resulted in an 
increase in quality, but one study they identified showed 
2013 Agile Conference978-0-7695-5076-3/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2013.10322013 Agile Conference978-0-7695-5076-3/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2013.1032 instead that TDD resulted in a strong negative impact on 
quality. Additionally, while they showed that TDD could 
reduce the amount of effort required by up to 27%, most 
studies found an increase in effort of up to 100%. 
A major consideration with meta-analyses, such as the 
ones referenced above, are issues of repeatability. Kitchenham 
et al. [8] carried out a case study to investigate the extent to 
which systematic literature reviews are repeatable. They 
found that the experience level of researchers impacted 
whether comparable sets of studies are selected for review, 
which subsequently impacted conclusions drawn by the 
researchers. For these reasons, it becomes imperative that 
methods used in systematic literature reviews and systematic 
mapping studies are clearly and transparently presented [8]. 
Following the advice by Kitchenham et al. [8], we 
followed the methods by Peter
sen et al. [9] and Dybå and 
Dingsøyr [4] in order to maintain
 transparency in our methods. 
However, we modified these approaches to use a manual 
search for papers. This allowed us to use a much more detailed 
search strategy than the one employed in last year’s study. 
III.
 
M
ETHODOLOGY
 
This study extends 
and builds upon previous work [3] 
which was in turn based on the guidelines provided by 
Petersen et al. [9]. This section provides details on how we 
conducted each step of the present systematic mapping. At 
least two of the authors participated in each step of the analysis 
of publications in order to allow us to immediately resolve 
disagreements as to how publications should be keyworded 
through discussion. 
A.
 
Define Research Questions 
Specific research questions are important for constraining 
the scope of a systematic mapping study. For this study, we 
wished to investigate what agile testing means with respect to 
research papers publishe
d at major agile software 
development conferences. We defined four primary research 
questions to guide this investigation: 
 
PRQ1.
 
What has agile testing been used for? 
PRQ2.
 
What types of papers on agile testing have been 
published? 
PRQ3.
 
What problems with agile testing do publications 
mention? 
PRQ4.
 
What benefits do publications propose their 
research will produce? 
 
We also chose to investigate several secondary research 
questions. These questions are no less important than our 
primary research questions, but the analysis required to 
answer them is more cursory. These questions are:  
 
SRQ1.
 
Which authors lead the field of agile testing? 
SRQ2.
 
In which countries do the leading authors work? 
SRQ3.
 
What tools have been used for agile testing? 
SRQ4.
 
Is the field led by practitioners, academics, or 
collaborations? 
B.
 
Conduct Search 
After defining these research questions, the next step in 
our research was to conduct a search for publications relevant 
to our research questions. In last year’s study, we chose to do 
this automatically by performing
 an automated search of the 
major paper repositories IEEE Xplore and SciVerse Scopus. 
However, this search did not turn up as many papers from 
leading conferences on agile 
development methodologies as 
could have been expected. Based on this, we decided to 
conduct the search for this study by manually searching 
through the XP/Agile Universe, Agile, and XP conference 
proceedings to identify papers on the topic of software testing.  
The total number of papers in these conferences between 
the years 2002 and 2012 was 993 – almost exactly 100 papers 
more than the 894 initially discovered for last year’s set. The 
breakdown of these papers by conference can be seen in 
Figure 1.  
C.
 
Screening Papers 
After collecting this initial set of 993 papers, the next step 
was to screen out those publications not relevant to our 
research questions. This was done in two passes. During the 
first pass, papers were eliminated on the basis of their titles. 
135
432
426
17
36
57
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
XP/AgileAgileXP
Initial
Final
Figure 2: 
Initial and final paperset by conference.
 
Figure 1: 
Breakdown of initial paperset by conference.
 
3333 For inclusion, papers titles needed to make reference to testing 
or to an implicitly testing-centric process (like continuous 
integration). Papers could also be excluded if they did not 
relate to testing within the context of software development. 
After this step, our paperset included 139 papers. For the 
second step, papers were eliminated on the basis of their type. 
Where it was unclear whether a paper should be included, the 
abstract was also consulted. Because we wished to focus on 
research, we excluded workshop proposals, tutorials, demos, 
and other non-research papers. During this pass, a further 29 
papers were eliminated to leave us with our final set of 110 
(compare to the 166 from last year; only 17 papers are 
duplicated between these sets).  The breakdown of these final 
papers by conference can be seen in Figure 2.  
D.
 
Keywording Using Abstracts 
After we finished screening papers by title, we keyworded 
each paper based on its title and abstract in order to develop a 
framework for understanding the field of agile testing. This 
keywording was done using both open and closed coding – as 
in grounded theory [10]. In open coding, the keywords used 
to describe a paper are drawn out of the source material itself. 
This approach was used for PRQs 1, 3, and 4. In closed 
coding, the list of keywords is pre-defined and keywords are 
simply picked from the list (see Section IV.B) to apply to 
papers. This approach was used for PRQ2. These keywords 
were then used as the basis for the rest of our analysis.  
E.
 
Data Extraction and Mapping 
We used EndNote
 
(www.endnote.com) to manage 
citations and keep track of the keywords applied to our 
paperset. EndNote makes grouping of keywords easier, but is 
not ideal for analysis. The analysis and visualization 
preparation was done in Excel
 
(office.microsoft.com/excel).  
IV.
 
P
RIMARY 
R
ESULTS
 
A.
 
What has agile testing been used for? 
During the course of keywording our paperset, we 
identified 51 different keywords relating to the uses to which 
testing was put. Due to space limitations, we limit the present 
discussion to the top 10 most frequently-occurring keywords. 
The frequency of these keywords across the three conferences 
can be seen in Figure 2.  
 Unsurprisingly, nearly half (52) of our 110 papers 
discussed test-driven development. Over a third discussed 
automated testing or acceptance testing (32 and 31, 
respectively). These topics are incredibly important to agile 
testing to the point where, when speaking of tests in an agile 
context, it’s often unnecessary to specify that 
the tests are 
automated (outside the special case of GUI testing). 
Surprisingly, however, only 16 papers specifically mentioned 
unit testing. This may be because, as with automated testing, 
tests are assumed to be at the unit level unless otherwise 
32
14
17
9
5
7
2
6
8
4
13
14
9
1
5
7
3
4
7
4
5
6
1
3
1
1
1
1
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
XP-Agile (30)
Agile (56)
XP (104)
Figure 3: 
Breakdown of topics by conference.
 
Figure 4: 
Breakdown of uses of testing by year.
 
3434 specified. Similarly, regression testing was mentioned only 11 
times, yet this is the use to which tests are normally put in an 
agile context. Using tests for refactoring specifically, using 
tests to specify features for future development, and writing 
tests for web systems tied with 10 occurrences each, while 
acceptance test driven development (ATDD) and GUI testing 
close out the top 10 with 9 occurrences each. Keywords from 
these top 10 occurred 190 times, while all other keywords for 
PRQ1 only occurred 92 times together.  
A breakdown of these results by conference can be seen in 
Figure 3, while a breakdown of these topics by year can be 
seen in Figure 4. Figure 3 shows us how focus on topics varies 
between conferences. For example, papers from XP are more 
likely to focus on the topic of TDD, while papers on ATDD 
and use of tests for refactoring have not been presented at 
Agile. Figure 4, on the other hand, shows us that interest in all 
topics has dropped sharply after 2010. Interest in unit testing 
spiked in 2004, but has been almost completely absent since 
that time. Similarly, while interest in acceptance testing was 
high in 2004 and 2005, it has been far less prominent recently. 
Interest in GUI testing has been consistently low – only three 
publications in the past six years – despite GUI testing 
remaining a difficult, expensive process.  
There are some similarities between the results from the 
previous and current study. In that study, the top 10 terms (in 
order of decreasing frequency) were: TDD, specification, unit 
testing, acceptance testing, web testing, formal specification, 
continuous integration, functional testing, ATDD, and a three-
way tie for 10
th
 between database, GUI, and performance 
testing. Since 7 of these topics are also highly important in this 
study, this reinforces the validity
 of the results in both papers. 
However, the remaining results do not appear in the top 10 for 
this paper, which shows that there is some variability between 
the papers published to these agile conferences and the field 
as a whole.  
B.
 
What types of papers on agile testing have been 
published? 
In [11], five basic types of paper are identified that we 
reuse for the present study:  

 
Solution – a novel solution is proposed, but only a 
proof of concept (if any) is offered 

 
Validation – further investigates a solution, but is not 
evaluated in practice or rigorously 

 
Philosophical – provides a new framework for 
understanding a field 

 
Opinion – presents the author’s personal opinions 
without much evidence to back up claims 

 
Experience – describes the 
author’s experience on a 
project in industry 

 
Evaluation – investigation of a problem in practice 
with a large, rigorous study 
We applied these paper types as keywords to each publication 
in our paperset in order to find out what kinds of research were 
used most frequently in this field. The results are broken down 
by conference in Figure 5 and by year in Figure 6.  
From Figure 5, we can see that almost all publications 
accepted to XP fall into the Solution category; almost all 
papers at Agile fall into the Experience category. XP/Agile 
Universe was an even mix of
 those two types. Given the 
distinct separation between the types of papers Agile and XP 
attract, it would be in the interest of the field of agile testing 
30
9
6
4
8
4
6
4
1
23
3
6
1
1
7
1
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
XP-Agile
Agile
XP
Figure 5: 
Breakdown of topics by conference.
 
Figure 6: 
Beakdown of research type by year.
 
3535 as a whole to foster more crossover between these two 
conferences, as used to be the case with XP/Agile Universe.  
Figure 6, on the other hand, shows that, while Experience 
reports have traditionally been common in research 
publications in the past, they have not been popular in recent 
years. This could be a result of the Agile conference’s recent 
introduction of different presentation formats – not all of 
which require a paper submission – resulting in fewer of these 
publications. Additionally, the number of Solution papers 
spiked in 2004 and 2005, but declined markedly recently. 
Similarly, the number of Evaluation papers is quite low, and 
none were in our paperset from 2011 onwards. This is 
worrying on two fronts, given that Solution papers pave the 
way for further exploration of new topics and Evaluation 
papers provide proper evidence for the effectiveness of a 
given technique. As these papers indicate both new and 
proven testing techniques, it’s 
important to the future of the 
field of agile testing to encourage more of these publications. 
When comparing these results against the results from last 
year, we can again see some distinct differences between these 
conferences and the field as a whole. The biggest difference is 
that there were far more Evaluation papers in last year’s 
paperset – 46, making it the most frequent papertype. 
Experience and Solution papers, on the other hand, occurred 
at a comparable frequency in both conferences. This is 
disturbing as it shows that, within these conferences, there is 
a lack of Evaluation papers. Since Evaluation papers present 
rigorously-evaluated results, we should, in the future, find 
ways of encouraging this kind 
of publication at the Agile and 
XP conferences.  
C.
 
What problems with agile testing do publications 
mention? 
It’s natural to assume that ev
ery publication will address a 
specific problem; however, this is not always the case. In the 
110 publications we considered in this study, only 45 
problems with testing were identified – even given that it was 
possible for a single paper to list more than one problem. In 
the future, it is extremely important that publications identify 
the problem they are addressing in their abstracts or titles in 
order to make it easier for both researchers and practitioners 
to understand if a given paper is relevant. Because of the 
relatively low number of keywords for this research question, 
we address it only by conference, not by year.  
All of the keywords identified for this question are shown 
broken down by conference in 
Figure 7. From this figure, we 
can see that the most commonly-discussed problems at Agile 
are how to adopt agile testing followed by the difficulty of 
understanding tests. At XP, however, the main issues are 
repeatability of tests (as in, if I run the same test multiple 
times, the same result should occur every time) and test 
maintenance. Again, this seems to indicate that more cross-
pollination between these two conferences should occur.  
D.
 
What benefits do publications propose their research 
will produce? 
The same issue as in the previous section was discovered 
in this section: the titles and ab
stracts of publications often did 
not list the benefits of their work. Out of the 110 papers 
included in our set, only 28 benefits were listed. The 7 
keywords relating to benefits are broken down by conference 
in Figure 8. Even given the low number of keywords listed, 
we can infer some differences between the various 
conferences. For example, the initial XP/Agile conference 
focused mostly on productivity increases from testing and 
TDD. XP, on the other hand, focuses on topics like defect 
localization, test clarity, and the catch-all of quality. Agile also 
focused on quality to the exclusion of all else. This is 
disturbing because saying that a given technique or tool 
increases quality is very ambiguous. These publications could 
be discussing many different aspects of quality, but this will 
not be obvious from their abstracts.  
This lack of discussion of what benefits are being offered 
by different research is especially confusing from the point of 
view of someone with a problem searching for a solution in 
research publications. Given that someone wanted to know, 
1
2
4
5
2
11
2
7
4
1
1
1
3
2
11
2
1
2
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
XP/Agile (4)
Agile (22)
XP (19)
Figure 7: 
Breakdown of problems encountered with testing by 
conference.
 
4
3
1
4
2
1
4
1
1
1
1
4
1
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
XP/Agile (7)
Agile (6)
XP (15)
Figure 8: 
Breakdown of benefits offered by publications by 
conference.
 
3636 for example, how testing can be used to help with project 
planning in an agile context, a search through the proceedings 
of these conferences would turn up a paltry two results. This 
is extremely concerning given that these papers were written 
in order to share ideas on how to solve problems. To address 
this, future publications should be extremely clear on what 
they can offer to people who would invest the time in reading 
them.  
V.
 
S
ECONDARY 
R
ESEARCH 
Q
UESTIONS
 
Given the issues mentioned above with titles and abstracts 
not adequately describing research, we also felt it would be 
strongly beneficial to provide an overview of topics that may 
help people new to the field to get oriented more quickly: who 
are the leading authors; which countries produce the most 
research; which tools come up most frequently; and is the 
research coming from industry or academia? This section 
investigates each of these topics in turn and, where possible, 
compares them against last year’s study.  
A.
 
Which authors lead the field of agile testing? 
In order to make it easier to find information on the topic 
of agile testing, we compiled a list of the authors who 
published most frequently in our paperset. The hope is that, 
for example, a new student trying to get oriented to this field 
would have a list of authors to contact for guidance.  
Figure 9 presents an overview of the number of authors 
with a given number of publications (note: there are no authors 
in this set with 6-15 publications). In our analysis, we found 
that 199 distinct authors contributed publications to these 
conferences between 1 and 16 times. However, the vast 
majority of authors (172) were involved in precisely one 
paper. This is specifically worrying given that most papers in 
our set were either Solution or Experience. What this means 
is that, statistically, authors present either a novel (but not 
well-evaluated) idea or a summary of an experience in 
industry, but never return to publish more rigorous results. 
This is disturbing because it implies that there are a large 
number of techniques in the literature that have never been 
rigorously evaluated. (or, if they have been evaluated, have 
not been reported to the community).   
Table 1 shows the top 9 authors in the paperset, as well as 
any of the top 10 uses for agile testing (from PRQ1) associated 
with any of their publications. It is provided in the hope that it 
will help newcomers to this field get in touch with the leading 
authors in this field. Of the 
9 authors mentioned this year, 4 
(out of a possible 6) were also included in last year’s paper. 
However, the remaining two were not identified in the present 
study – their publications were submitted to different 
conferences entirely. While it’s 
an encouraging sign that we 
identified so many of the most important authors, it’s 
somewhat discouraging that some of the leaders in the field do 
not choose to publish at Agile or XP.  
B.
 
In which countries do th
e leading authors work? 
In addition to each author’s name, we also kept track of 
each author’s location at time of publication. This is based on 
the institution with which the author was associated at time of 
publication. In future work, it might be worthwhile to track 
the authors’ affiliation at the time the study was conducted; 
however, this has not been done for the current paperset. A 
country was counted once per author of a paper for each paper 
in the set.  
The authors included in our paperset published from 30 
different nations; however, the top 10 countries published the 
vast majority of the papers, 
and, of these, two stand out 
extremely strongly: Canada and the United States. Figure 10 
gives more details on where authors have published from over 
time. Out of 263 author instances, 83 came from Canada and 
55 came from the United States. For comparison, all other 
non-top-10 countries combined came to 50 instances. Clearly, 
more needs to be done to encourage agile testers from other 
Table 1: 
Top Authors in Agile Testing
 
Author 
Publications 
Keywords 
F. Maurer 
16 
TDD, Automated Testing, Acceptance Testing, ATDD, Specification, Refactoring,  GUI 
Testing, Automated Testing, Regression Testing 
M. Smith 
5 
TDD, Automated Testing, Refactoring, Web Testing,  
G. Melnik 
5 
TDD, Acceptance Testing, ATDD, Automated Testing, Specification,  
J. Miller 
5 
TDD, Automated Testing, Refactoring, Web Testing,  
A. Geras 
5 
TDD, Acceptance Testing, Automated Testing, Web Testing,  
S. Park 
4 
TDD, Acceptance Testing, ATDD, Regression Testing, Automated Testing 
J. Andrea 
4 
Acceptance Testing, Web Testing, Regression Testing, Automated Testing, Refactoring 
Y. Ghanam 
4 
TDD, Refactoring, Acceptance Testing, Specification, ATDD, Regression Testing,  
R. Mugridge 
4 
TDD, Automated Testing, Acceptance Testing, Web Testing 
172
14
444
1
12345
16
Figure 9: 
Number of authors with the given number of 
publications.
 
3737 countries to contribute to the Agile and XP conferences in 
order to keep the topic from being entirely dominated by 
voices from Canada and the United States.  
For the field of agile testing as a whole, though, it’s worth 
noting that regional conferences (for example Agile Brazil) 
are becoming more prominent. It’s possible that much of the 
work that would traditionally have been submitted to Agile or 
XP is being directed towards these conferences instead. A 
useful extension of this paper 
would be to extend the paperset 
to include those conferences and workshops; however, this is 
left as future work.  
It’s interesting to note that, while the United States was 
pretty dominant in previous years, its influence over the field 
of agile testing has decreased somewhat since 2009. In 2010, 
this may have contributed to a general increase in the presence 
of other countries, but, since then, it may just be contributing 
to the general decrease in the number of publications in this 
field. The United States isn’t unique in this regard; other 
countries, such as the United Kingdom, were major 
contributors in years past, but have had little or no presence in 
this field in recent years.  
C.
 
What tools have been used for agile testing? 
Not every paper mentions a tool, but we did keep track of 
the tools that authors have made use of or have created where 
these tools were mentioned in the titles and abstracts of 
papers. Overall, tools were mentioned 47 times over 28 unique 
tools. Figure 11 shows a tag cloud wherein the color and size 
of tool names indicate how often those tools occurred in our 
paperset.  
Out of these, Fit and jUnit were mentioned most 
frequently. This fits with the rest of the study given that 
acceptance testing, unit testing,
 TDD, ATDD, and automated 
testing are all keywords identified
 during PRQ1 and that these 
tools can be used in support of that style of testing. Web 
testing tools like Selenium were also fairly common. Again, 
this makes sense given that web and GUI testing were 
identified as keywords in PRQ1. When compared against the 
tools from last year’s study, however, it’s apparent that the 
tools from this study were less diverse. Last year’s set 
included tools for advanced testing techniques – such as 
mutation testing – that are comp
letely absent fro
m this year’s 
study. It seems as though it might be prudent to encourage 
some exploratory use of these kind of tools within the agile 
community as a first step towards broadening the types of 
testing that are discussed at the Agile and XP conferences.  
D.
 
Is the field led by pra
ctitioners, academics, or 
collaborations? 
As with last year’s study, we also sought to find out 
whether this year’s publications were coming from academic 
groups, industry groups, or collaborations. In order to do this, 
we coded the author institutions of papers as one of: industry, 
academic, or both. This was done based on author affiliations 
at time of publication. The “both” keyword was used for 
papers with at least one author from each type of institution. 
We feel that this is an important distinction as collaborations 
have the potential to combine the rigor of academic 
evaluations with the practicality of industry concerns. The 
distribution of papers across these three keywords can be seen 
in Figure 12.  
Figure 12 provides an interesting look at the composition 
of each conference. It seems that the original XP/Agile 
Universe conference was slanted 
towards industry authors, the 
XP conference is slanted towards academic authors, and the 
Agile conference has a roughly even mix of both groups. XP 
seems to have the strongest showing for collaborations 
between academics and practitioners even though it is 
somewhat weak in industry authors. While the Agile 
conference is strong in both academic and industry 
contributions, it should strive in the future to find ways of 
encouraging collaborative submissions.  
Compared to the findings of last year’s study, however, 
the Agile and XP/Agile Universe publications are quite 
diverse. The distribution for the field of agile testing as 
sampled last year is closer to the distribution for XP: heavily 
slanted towards academic publications. While the Agile 
conference should strive to encourage collaborations, XP 
Figure 10: 
Location of authors in our paperset at time of publication.
 
3838 needs to find ways of encouraging more industry authors and 
collaborations to investigate the topic of agile testing.  
VI.
 
L
IMITATIONS
 
In the process of performing this systematic mapping, we 
encountered a variety of issues that are worth mentioning. 
Some are important given that this is a follow-up study; some 
are important given that they impact not only this study, but 
can apply to systematic mappings and systematic literature 
reviews generally. 
A.
 
Issues with This Study 
Out of 9 authors, only 2 participated in both studies 
(Hellmann and Maurer). This means that the way keywords 
were applied to papers might not have been consistent across 
years. In order to minimize this risk, one of the authors 
(Hellmann) collaborated on each step of the analysis with at 
least one other author. This was done in order to increase the 
consistency of our results across years. However, this 
solution, in turn, could also have biased the analysis towards 
his opinions. A different way of approaching this problem 
would have been to measure inter-rater reliability using a 
statistical method such as kappa statistics. This could be 
measured by, for example, a pi
lot evaluation in which authors 
from the current year’s study re-keyword papers from the 
previous year. This method 
would have the advantage of 
allowing us to specify a confidence value for the level of 
agreement that could be expecte
d of different researchers in 
different studies. This method 
would be promising for future 
work, but was not used in this study.  
Second, there is a risk that, by restricting our sources to 
three specific, hand-picked conferences, we are unreasonably 
biasing our results towards the idiosyncrasies of those 
conferences. We attempt to minimize this limitation by 
comparing our results to the results from last year’s study 
where possible. This also allows us to compare the general set 
of papers from last year with the restricted set of papers from 
this year – especially given that the overlap between the two 
sets was so small.  
B.
 
Issues with Systematic 
Mappings Generally 
The fact that the overlap between this year’s and last year’s 
papersets is small is another limitation of this study. However, 
given that most systematic studies collect their initial 
papersets by querying online databases, this is by no means a 
limitation specific to this study. There seem to be two 
fundamental issues with systematic studies: keywording 
papers reliably given that different people will view papers in 
different ways (or even that diff
erent authors will use different 
terms or use terms in different ways); and finding a consistent 
initial paper set. If we search for papers manually, as in this 
study, the validity of our initial paperset suffers; however, if 
we search for papers using an automated system, we run a 
strong risk of missing relevant papers (as the difference 
between this year’s study and last year’s study strongly 
shows). Additionally, when performing a manual search on 
specific conferences, there is an additional problem: how do 
researchers know which proceedings to search? This is a 
serious issue given that automated searches seem to be prone 
to missing relevant work.  
Even ignoring the issues in the previous paragraph, a 
systematic mapping study is still less reliable than a 
systematic review. Our results could be different if we were 
considering the full text of each paper rather than the abstracts 
and titles alone. However, from the perspective of a person 
new to the field, a systematic mapping is still a realistic 
approach given that people will make the decision to read a 
paper or not based on its title and abstract.  
Unfortunately, it’s again worth noting that abstracts of 
papers frequently did not include information crucial to 
understanding what the work was about. As was made clear 
in PRQ3 and PRQ4, basic information about the problem a 
publication addresses and the bene
fits it offers is frequently 
missing. This makes it difficult to perform systematic 
mapping studies in general.  
VII.
 
F
UTURE 
W
ORK
 
Again, an obvious direction for future work would be to 
extend this paper into a full systematic review. This would 
enable us to look into each source in more depth to make sure 
4
38
15
3
8
2
10
11
19
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
XP/AgileXPAgile
Industry
Both
Academic
Figure 12: 
Distribution of papers between industry, academic, 
and collaborative sources.
 
Figure 11: 
Tools used for agile testing.
 
3939 that we have gathered all appropriate keywords for each paper. 
However, the obvious problem with this is that we will still be 
selecting papers for the review based on their title and abstract 
and would still run into issues with the initial paperset we 
select.  
One way of getting around the paper selection issue would 
be to follow the same approach used for this study in reverse: 
manually sort through the proceedings of leading testing 
conferences in search of papers relating to agile. This would 
allow us to extend the set of 
papers we consider while still 
constraining the set of papers we need to manually read 
through such that the study would be feasible. This would 
allow us to approach this topic again from a new angle while 
still gathering results in such a way that we would be able to 
compare that study to the results of this study and of last year’s 
study.  
Again, as we mentioned last ye
ar, it would be interesting 
to perform a survey of existing testing tools in order to better 
understand what options are available to developers. This 
could be done both through both search engines and through 
searching open-source repositories (like CodePlex and 
SourceForge). Given the limitations we mentioned above, this 
has the potential to miss relevant tools, but it would still be 
useful for understanding what sort of tools exist that might be 
able to address some of the issues identified through this 
study.  
Finally, it would be worthwhile to look into the top authors 
in greater depth – to provide details about the kind of work 
they are involved in outside of a strictly agile testing context, 
for example. This would allow us to get a clearer picture of 
how their work in agile testing fits into the greater context of 
their research as a whole. However, this is left for future work. 
VIII.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
In this paper we present the findings of a systematic 
mapping of the field of agile testing wherein we manually 
searched the proceedings of the XP, Agile, and XP/Agile 
Universe conferences for relevant papers. This allowed us to 
address a variety of research questions and provide insight 
into the distribution of topics, authors, etc. within this field. 
We were also able, in many cases, to compare this data with 
the data collected in the previous iteration of this study, 
providing insight into the reliability of both studies and, to an 
extent, allowing us to compare the results of a mapping study 
constrained to just a few conferences to the results of a 
mapping study which searched through millions of papers.  
What has agile testing been used for?
 We found an 
emphasis on types of testing that are already closely 
associated with agile, including acceptance testing, automated 
testing, TDD, and ATDD. However, we also found that few 
publications address difficult questions in the field of testing 
that are important in agile contexts, such as how to perform 
GUI testing.  
What types of papers on agile testing have been 
published?
 Contrary to last year’s study, we found that this 
year’s paperset tended to focus on Solution and Experience 
papers. These papers tend to introduce new ideas, but the 
paper types that would indicate in-depth, follow-up work (like 
Evaluation papers) are much lower 
in this paperset than in last 
year’s. In a way this is troubling. While the conferences 
considered in this study appear to be good at fostering new 
ideas, more effort should be placed on encouraging the 
publication of follow-up studies.  
What problems with agile testing do publications 
mention?
 The analysis of this question showed a marked 
difference between the conferences considered in this study. 
While the Agile conference focuses on issues like adopting 
and teaching agile testing, XP focuses on more research-
oriented topics such as the repeatability and maintainability of 
tests.  
What benefits do publications propose their research will 
produce?
 As with the previous question, this analysis showed 
an interesting distinction between the two ongoing major agile 
conferences: Agile papers focused almost exclusively on 
“quality” but did not provide much additional detail while XP 
focused on quality, clarity, and defect localization. However 
the main finding for this question remains that the abstracts 
for these papers were not created in such a way that they can 
be properly analyzed using a systematic mapping study.  
Which authors lead the field of agile testing?
 We 
enumerate the top 9 authors for the field of agile testing along 
with a list of topics within 
agile testing on which they have 
published. Out of the 6 top authors mentioned last year, 4 
appear in this list as well. This section may be of particular 
interest to those just getting started in the field of agile testing.  
In which countries do the leading authors work?
 In an 
attempt to understand where, globally, publications were 
being produced, we also looked into the country of affiliation 
of authors. Despite the fact that XP is usually located in 
Europe and could be expected to attract more European 
authors, our paperset was dominated by Canada and the 
United States. 
What tools have been used for agile testing?
 We found that 
a variety of tools were mentioned across papers with tools that 
can be used for automated testing, acceptance testing, unit 
testing, TDD, and ATDD in the lead. Unlike last year, no tools 
for advanced testing concepts, like mutation testing, were 
found.  
Is the field led by practitioners, academics, or 
collaborations?
 Overall, we found a good mix of academic 
and industry authors, though collaboration between the two 
groups could stand to be increased. We were also able to 
analyze the conferences individually to find that XP has a 
stronger academic showing while Agile has a good mix of 
industry and academic authors but far fewer collaborations. 
This knowledge could help authors decide which of the two 
major agile conferences to submit their work to.  
Overall, this paper provides a detailed overview of the 
field of agile testing with respect to the XP/Agile Universe, 
Agile, and XP conferences. For newcomers, this study serves 
as an introduction to the field of agile testing. For authors who 
have already published work on agile testing, this paper serves 
as a guide towards what could be done to improve the field as 
a whole. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, this paper 
provides details on the process of performing this sort of 
systematic mapping study that will be useful for making sure 
that future studies are more comprehensive.  
 
4040 W
ORKS 
C
ITED
 
[1] 
Glenn Vanderburg, "A Simple Model of Agile Software 
Practices 
- or - Extreme Programming Annealed," in 
Object-
Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages, and 
Applications
, New York, 2005, pp. 539-545. 
[2] 
S. MacDonnel, M. Shepperd, B. Kitchenham, and E. Mendes, 
"How Reliable Are Systematic Reviews in Empirial Software 
Engineering?," 
IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering
, 
vol. 36, no. 5, pp. 676-687, Sep. - Oct. 2010. 
[3] 
Theodore D. Hellmann, Abhishek Sharma, Jennifer Ferreira, 
and Frank Maurer, "Agile Testing: Past, Present, and Future - 
Charting a Systematic Map of Testing in Agile Software 
Development," in 
AGILE 2012
, Dallas, Texas, 2012, pp. 55-
63. 
[4] 
Tore Dybå and Torgeir Dingsøyr, "Empirical Studies of Agile 
Software Development: A Systematic Review," 
Information 
and Software Technology
, vol. 50, no. 9
-10, pp. 833-
859 , 
January 2008. 
[5] 
F. Shull et al., "What Do We Know about Test-Driven 
Development?," 
IEEE Software
, vol. 27, no. 6, pp. 16-19, 
Nov. - Dec. 2010. 
[6] 
Adnan Causevic, Daniel Sundmark, and Sasikumar 
Punnekkat, "Factors Limiting Industrial Adoption of Test 
Driven Development: A Systematic Review," in 
International 
Conference on Software Testing,
 Verification, and Validation
, 
Berlin, 2011, pp. 337-346. 
[7] 
Ron Jeffries and Grigori Melnik, 
"Guest Editors' Introduction: 
TDD 
- The Art of Fearless Programming," 
IEEE Software
, 
vol. 24, no. 3, pp. 24-30, May-June 2007. 
[8] 
Barbara Kitchenham, Pearl Brereton, Li Zhi, David Budgen, 
and Andrew Burn, "Repeatability of Systematic Literature 
Reviews," in 
Evaluation & Assessment in Software 
Engineering
, Durham, UK, 2011, pp. 46-55. 
[9] 
Kai Petersen, Robert Feldt, Shahid Mujtaba, and Michael 
Mattsson, "Systematic Mapping Studies in Software 
Engineering," in 
12th International Conference on 
Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering
, Bari, 
Italy, 2008, pp. 71-80. 
[10] 
Barney G. Glaser and Anselm L. Strauss, 
The Discovery of 
Grounded Theory
. Chicago, United States of America: 
Aldine, 1967. 
[11] 
Roel Wieringa, Neil Maiden, Nancy Mead, and Colette 
Rolland, "Requirements Engineering Paper Classification and 
Evaluation Criteria: A Proposal and a Discussion," 
Journal of 
Requirements Engineering
, vol. 1, no. 11, pp. 102-107, 2005. 
 
 
4141