 A Case Study on the Impact of Customer Communication
on Defects in Agile Software Development.
Mikko Korkala
1, Pekka Abrahamsson
2and Pekka Kyllönen
21Department of Information Processing Science
P.O.Box 3000, FIN-90014 University of Oulu, Finland
2VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland
P.O.Box 1100, FIN-90571, Oulu, Finland
Mikko.Korkala@oulu.fi
;Pekka.Abrahamsson@vtt.fi;pekka.kyllonen@vtt.fi
Abstract
    Effective communication and feedback are crucial
in agile development. Extreme Programming (XP)
embraces both communication and feedback as
interdependent process values which are essential

for projects to achieve successful results. Our
research presents the empirical results from four
different case studies. Three case studies had

partially onsite customers and one had an onsite
customer. The case studies used face-to-face
communication to different extents along with email
and telephone to manage customer-developer
communication inside the development iterations.
Our results indicate that an increased reliance on

less informative communication channels results in
higher defect rates. These results suggest that the
selection of communication methods, to be used

inside development iterations, should be a factor of
considerable importance to agile organizations
working with partially available customers. This
paper also proposes some guidelines for selecting
proper communication methods.
1. Introduction
Misunderstood or erroneous requirements are
often the reason why software systems are late and
unreliable [1]. Literature and practice show that
agile methods work with unstable requirements
which are managed through short development
cycles and efficient communication (e.g. [2, 3]).

Agile development approaches tend to rely on
effective personal communication and collaboration
between the project participants [2, 4].

    In fact,two agile principles
(http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html) directly
emphasize the importance of customer-developer
communication. F
ace-to-face comm
unication is
identified as the most efficient means of

communication between the participants. Moreover,

the daily collaborative work of business people and
developers demands efficient verbal com
munica
tionbetween the customer and the developers.  In
addition to communication, feedback is also crucial
in agile development. The most popular agile
method Extreme Programming (XP) embraces both

communication and feedback as interdependent
process values. Previously, XP went to extremes with
customer communication and feedback by proposing

anOnsite Customer
, a real person constantly
available for information [3]. Although some authors
(e.g. [5-8]), have  found weaknesses in  this practice,

on the positive side, having an onsite customer when
possible enables efficient communication and
feedback since the customer is always and easily

available for information. Even though the practice
has its advantages, it is not always possible to have
the customer constantly onsite due to various reasons

(e.g. the customers are too valuable or too remote to
be onsite) [9]. The
Onsite Customer
 has now been
replaced with the
Real Customer Involvement
practice which does not assume fulltime customer
presence, but suggests that the customer can
participate in weekly and quarterly meetings [10].

    As demonstrated above, the importance of
communication has been shown to be paramount in
agile development. Less however is known about the

implications of communication and feedback in this
context. The purpose of this paper is therefore
twofold. First, this paper explores the impact of
customer communication and feedback on software
defect rates. Second, it briefly discusses the selection
 of customer communication channels based on the
existing literature.
    The empirical material is based on four case
studies. From one of the case studies, the researchers

were able to capture reliable metrics about the defect
division and the times required to fix those defects.
Defect follow-up provides a means for increasing our

understanding of how well a team has understood the
customer's intentions. The other three case studies,
including one onsite customer project, are used to

show trends in the development of defect densities.
These cases applied different com
munica
tionchannels, varying in their richness. The richness of
the communication channels is observed from the
viewpoint of the Media Richness Theory (MRT) [11,
12], and personal suggestions on the information

richness of different communication mediums by
Ambler [13] and Cockburn [4].
    We claim that effective and rich mid-iteration

communication
1 is a highly important factor in cases
where rich customer communication is not always
available, and the lack of high-bandwidth  (e.g. face-
to-face) communication and an increasing reliance
on leaner communication channels results in higher
defect rates, despite careful face-to-face requirements

analysis.
    The principal findings of the study are as follows:
It was found that an average of 25.3% of all tasks

involved fixing defects in the three non-onsite
customer projects.  The case proving accurate
metrics about the defects indicated that an average of

62.6% of all defects could have been avoided by
either having an onsite customer or a more effective
mid-iteration com
municat
ion mechanism. These
results indicate that the selection of a mid-iteration
communication medium, especially, must be given
significant attention in agile development efforts

with partially available customers. Some suggestions
to overcome these challenges will be presented in
this paper.

    This paper is organized as follows:  section 2
discusses the relevant communication literature,
focusing on the MRT and communication in agile

context; Section 3 explains the research settings; the
empirical research results and our discussion on
agile communication are in section 4; and the

conclusions are drawn in section 5.
1Mid-iteration communication is used for the customer-developer
communication taking place inside any particular iteration
.2. Related literature
    Effective com
municat
ion is an essential success
factor for any software development effort (e.g. [3,
14, 15], but according to Cockburn [4] it is far from
being an easy task. Sometimes the idea to be

expressed is not even fully conscious, and for the
communication to be effective the participants must
have a shared experience of the subject that is being

discussed. This shared experience is needed for the
participants to compensate for the gaps in
communications. [4]

    Section 2.1 discusses the Media Richness Theory
which, despite criticism, is possibly the most well-
known theory of media selection. Section 2.2 focuses

on communication in the context of agile software
development.
2.1. Media richness theory (MRT)
    Media Richness Theory (MRT) [11, 12] is perhaps
the most prominent theory of media selection, even
though it has been widely criticized (e.g. [16-18]).
The theory suggests that matching the task needs to

mediums ability to convey information will improve
task performance and that certain media are better
capable of transmitting uncertain or equivocal

information [11, 12].
    Uncertainty is interpreted as the lack of
information [19], while equivocality means that
there are multiple, possibly conflicting
interpretations for the information [16]. The values
of these variables can be classified as high or low

[11]. According to Daft, Lengel and Trevino,
uncertainty leads to data acquisition whereas
equivocality results in the exchange of subjective

views, definition of the problem and resolution of
disagreements [12]. Daft and Lengel [11] suggest
that equivocal tasks should be managed through rich

communication channels, while leaner channels are
effective for processing standard data and well
understood messages.

    The richness of different communication mediums
is based on a blend of four criteria [12]. The
characterization of these variables is complemented

by the perceptions of online media by Graveline,
Geisler and Danchak [20], as follows:
    1) Feedback
, instant feedback enables asking
questions and making corrections. The capability of
feedback relates to synchronicity of feedback; online
media are either synchronous or asynchronous [20];
 2) Multiple cues
,different cues (e.g. body
language, voice inflection) can be a part of the
message. Some online media are capable of
transmitting multiple cues (e.g. videoconferencing),

some are primarily single channelled (e.g. email)
[20];
3) Language variety
¸refers to the use of different
languages, such as numbers which convey precision
and natural language conveying the understanding of
a broader set of ideas. Written or typed language

provides more precise language [20];
4) Personal focus
,A message will be conveyed
more fully when personal feelings are infusing the

communication. However, sometimes lesser
emotional content can be better. Cockburn [4]
provides an example of a project leader and her team

who used telephones because she was too aggressive
with her emotions in person.
    MRT suggest that the richest communication
channel enables instant feedback, is capable of
transmitting multiple cues, has a high language
variety and it can transmit emotional contents.

    Based on [12], the following summary of the
richness of different communication channels can be
made. Face-to-face is the richest form of

communica
tion since it enables instant feedback and
it is able to transmit multiple cues [12].
Videoconferencing is capable of sending both video
and audio, and it enables fast feedback [12].
Videoconferencing is however a somewhat leaner
medium than face-to-face and it restricts some visual

cues, but it has more information capacity than
telephone [12]. Email has capabilities similar to
telephone, but the cues are filtered out [12].

    As mentioned above, MRT has been criticized by
several authors. For example, Dennis and Valacich
[16] conclude that the richest medium is defined by

the situation in which it is used. The richness of
medium depends on its ability to provide the
capabilities needed by the situation. These

capabilities include the individuals, tasks and the
social context in which they interact [16]. They also
state that media is not monolithic, since media are

capable of possessing different levels of
communication depending on their usage (e.g. video
and audio files can be attached to email messages)

[16].
2.2. Communication in agile development
    Agile methods work with volatile requirements
and embrace personal communication between the

participants [2]. Since the level of ambiguity can be
considered high in the form of unstable
requirements, it seems that personal communication
is a natural choice (and in line with MRT) for agile
development. Based on the existing literature, Kraut

& Streeter [21] summarized the characteristics of
informal communication. They state that informal
communication is the primary method of exchanging

information within research and development
organizations [21]. Also in many domains, the
physical proximity of the information source is also

important, and transmitting the information through
informal, interpersonal communication is valuable
especially as development and research tasks become

more uncertain [21]. Also Cockburn [4] agrees that
informal communication between the stakeholders
and their physical proximity are important factors.

Personal, verbal com
municat
ion has also been
supported e.g. by the following arguments: according

to Juric [22] verbal communication enables defect

detection early in the development process, and
personal contact with the customer causes less
distortion to the information [23]. Melnik and

Maurer [23] compared the differences between
traditional and agile development. Since in
traditional development the information travels

through a long chain of people, it becomes distorted
and some of it is lost. Agile development embraces
personal communication with the customer, which

reduces both information loss and mutation. [23]
Informal and personal communication is thus highly
efficient, but it has to be maintained since according

to Wake [24], the lack of high-bandwidth
communica
tion leads to a loose feedback
mechanism. This makes the steering of a project
become less responsive, which in turn demands more
effort to get the project back on course [24].
    Despite its usefulness, verbal communication has

also been criticized by e.g. Finsterwalder [5] who has
pointed out the pitfalls in verbal communication
when discussing Extreme Programming, according

to Finsterwalder verbal communication is not always
well thought-out and the contents of the
conversations can be forgotten during time.

    In addition to communication, feedback is another
essential success factor (e.g. Wake [24]). The most
popular agile method Extreme Progr
amming (XP)
embraces communicat
ion and feedback as
interdependent process values. The
Communication
value of XP requires that the communication must be
maximized between the stakeholders through direct,
interpersonal communication.
Feedback
 value, for
its part, requires that the contact with the customer is
 close. These values do not exist in isolation but are
strongly related; without communication the
feedback cannot exist and vice versa [10]. Previously
XP defined
On-site customer
 practice as requiring
the customer™s fulltime presence with the team in a
same shared workspace [3]. Even though this
practice has been found problematic (e.g. [5-8]), it

enabled effective communication and instant
feedback.
    The
On-site customer
 has now been replaced by
less demanding
Real Customer Involvement
 practice
which does not explicitly require customer™s constant
presence. The customer who can contribute to

weekly and quarterly planning is still an essential
part of the team, and team should have close contact
with him [10] . Since the customer is not any longer
required for fulltime presence, the already important
roles of communication and feedback become even
more essential. Thus it is essential that the
communication and feedback mechanisms should

receive special attention in agile development.
    Gottesdiener [25] has defined a framework for
holding requirements workshops with various time

and place combinations. This framework can be
applied to agile development, thus indicating that the
teams can select a proper communication channel

from considerably wide collection of different media.
In this work, time can be either synchronous with
every participant present at the same time or

asynchronous. Place can be either co-located or
distributed when participants are at different
locations.
Figure 1.  Requirements workshop techniques for different time-place configurations,
reproduced from [25].
    McLuhan [26] has used the terms ﬁhotﬂ and ﬁcoolﬂ
when discussing media. McLuhan argues that ﬁcoolﬂ
media require a higher level of participation from
users than ﬁhotﬂ media, and because of the lack of
information, much has to be filled in by the users.
McLuhan also adds that the use of ﬁhotﬂ and ﬁcoldﬂ
media has to be adapted to the underlying situation

[26]. Ambler and Cockburn [4] have also adapted the
use of ﬁhotﬂ and ﬁcoldﬂ communication media. They
argue that ﬁhotﬂ communication channels provide

more information than ﬁcoldﬂ media. The following
figure is Ambler™s [13] modification of Cockburn™s
comparison of communication effectiveness in
different communication media. Different
communication channels have been divided into
ﬁcoldﬂ and ﬁhotﬂ channels based on their
communication effectiveness. ﬁHotﬁ com
munica
tionchannels are thus more efficient than ﬁcoldﬂ media.

Both Cockburn™s and Ambler™s work is based on
personal experience and has not been scientifically
evaluated.
As can be seen from the graph in Fig. 2, face-to-
face communication is the ﬁhottestﬂ communication

channel, while email is positioned in the ﬁcolderﬂ end
of the graph. This division is similar to the

classification made by Daft et al in [12]. Thus, both
theory and practice indicate that personal
communication is the richest form of communication,

while less interactive methods are less effective forms
of communication.
 Figure 2. The communication value of different techniques, reproduced from [13].
3. Research design
    This section describes the research method, data
collection and analysis techniques, and research

settings on which the results of this study are based.
Our research covered four different case [27] studies,
referred to as
Case 1, Case 2, Case 3
and
Case 4
.Case 1
has been previously described in [6] and
Case
2is discussed in [28]. The teams consisted of 5 to 6
developers, and in the case of
Case 3
 one of the
developers was a member of the customer
organization. The aim of projects
Case 2, Case 3
and
Case 4
 was to implement a mobile software product
to the customers, while
Case 1
delivered an
application for internal use.  In the case of
Case 3
,the assignment was to implement a mobile version of
an existing desktop application, implemented by the
customer organization.
    All the cases were implemented following Mobile-

DŽ (hereafter Mobile-D). Mobile-D is inspired by
several agile methods and it is specifically designed
for mobile application development. Mobile-D does
not require a fulltime customer presence. Mobile-D
proposes that the customer should participate
personally in the development when the contents of
the iterations are discussed and analysed, and during

the release when the customer can provide feedback
about the results of the iterations. Otherwise the
customer is not onsite.

    Mobile-D consists of 5 iterations. The first and the
last iterations last for a week, while the duration of
the remaining three is 2 weeks [29]. For the purposes

of the study, the development method is only briefly
described to provide backgro
und information about
the research. Mobile-D is explained in greater detail
in [29, 30].
    Before the projects were launched, the teams
(including the customers) were introduced to the
philosophy and principles of agile development
(Agile Manifesto, available at
http://agilemanifesto.org/) and trained to use the

Mobile-D. The following table summarizes the
characteristics of the case projects.
Table 1. Summary of the case projects.
Case 1Case 2Case 3Case 4
Iterations5555
Iteration span
(weeks)
1+2+2+2+11+2+2+2+11+2+2+2+11+2+2+2+1
Number of product
releases
4444
Product typeIntranet applicationMobile applicationMobile applicationMobile
application
ProgrammingJavaMobile JavaMobile JavaMobile Java
 Case 1Case 2Case 3Case 4
language
Customer presenceOnsite 80%Onsite during the
beginning and the end
of each iteration.
Available for face-to-
face communication.
Onsite during the beginning
and the end of each iteration.
Onsite for

the first 2

weeks.
Afterwards
not onsite.
Customer locationSame facilitySame facilitySame cityDifferent city
Number of customers 1311
Face-to-face
communication level
HighOn demandPeriodicalLow
Mid-iteration

communication

media used
Face-to-faceFace-to-face, emailEmailEmail and
telephone
    During our research the utilization of face-to-face
communication varied as follows:
High
(onsite
customer),
On demand
 (face-to-face communication
available when needed),
Periodical
(face-to-face
communication applied at the beginning and the end
of an development iteration) and
Low
 (customer onsite
for the first two weeks, afterwards face-to-face
communica
tion was not applied or available).
Case 1
had an onsite customer, and during
Case2
 the
customer was required to be onsite during the
Planning Day and Release Day activities of the
Mobile-D [29]. These phases concentrate on deciding
and analyzing the contents of each development

iteration and release, when the results of the iteration
are presented to the customer. During these sessions,
the customer was available for face-to-face

conversation. The mid-iteration communication was
managed via email. The customer was, however,
available for face-to-face communication on demand,

so personal communication and feedback were

available also during the iterations.
Case 3
 was similar
toCase 2,
 excluding the mid-i
teration face-to-face
communication.
    During
Case 4
 the customer was constantly
available for the first two weeks for guidance and
feedback. Thereafter, the communication was
managed entirely by email and telephone.
    The task data was collected from each case and the

defect fixing tasks isolated. The amount of defect-
fixing tasks, from all the tasks, were calculated. The
teams were required to record the time needed to fix

the defects, but this was not properly executed except
in the case of
Case 4
. Table 2 summarizes the defect
data available from the case projects.
    Thus the results from
Case 1, Case 2
and
Case 3
can be used only to show trends in the amount of

defect densities. It must be noticed that the defect data

from the first release of
Case 2
is missing. In addition
to the quantitative research data, qualitative data was
also used. This data is based on onsite observations, a

research diary and interviews.
Table 2. Available defect data from the case
projects.
Case 1 Case 2 Case 3Case 4
Defect
data
XXXX
Defect

fixing
times
---X
4. Empirical research results
In 4.1 the findings of the study are presented. In
4.2 some techniques for customer communication are
discussed based on the existing literature.
4.1. Impact of customer communication on
software defects
    Both theory and practice have shown that rich face-
to-face communication is effective, and its application

proved itself very useful in our research. The
requirements analysis was conducted face-to-face with
the customers and the conversations were further

clarified by lightweight paper-prototyping. This
approach initiated very lively discussions, thus
enabling rich com
munica
tion between the team and
the customers. When compared to the suggestions of
Media Richness Theory [11, 12] and personal
experiences of both Cockburn [4] and Ambler [13],
this finding is not surprising.
    In spite of the wide array of different
communication methods available for managing mid-

iteration communication, only two of the leanest
channels described in chapter 2 were used in non-
onsite customer cases.
Case 2
is an exception, since
 the team was able to discuss with the customer in
person even during the development period. Only
email (and in
Case 4
 also telephone) was used to
exchange information between the customers and the
rest of the development team during the development.
These media were selected, even though the customers
were encouraged to choose richer channels. During

Case 2,
 the customers specifically asked for simple
reports since they were missing the ﬁbig pictureﬂ from

technically oriented reports [28]. The reasons why the

customers wanted to use simple reports in the mid-
iteration communication during other cases remains
unclear. The customers™ inexperience in agile

development could be one possible explanation. If the
customers are not fully aware of the nature of agile
development, the importance of communication and

feedback can go unnoticed. During
Case 2,
 the
customer stated the initial requirements and left the
team alone to complete the product without any

support or feedback. This situation is described in
more detail in [28]. In addition, the findings of Kinney
and Watson [18] are interesting. They report that

email was found to be an appropriate medium for most
communication tasks, including both equivocal tasks,
which according to Media Richness Theory should be

handled through a richer medium, and non-equivocal
tasks. We have some evidence that supports this.
When asked about media selection, the customer in

Case 3
 responded ﬁ
Emails will do just fine, they are
enoughﬂ
. Thus it seems that the customers were
comfortable with simple email reports, and did not

want to change the mid-iteration communication
medium in spite of the increasing amount of defects.
    Even though the customers were pleased with

simple reports, which have been found to provide an
excellent view of a project™s progress at very low cost
[28, 31], it is evident that they do not provide enough

information for crucial customer feedback. The
following excerpt is from an actual status report sent
to the customer in
Case 3
2. The report describes the
number and name of the stories and their status (in
this case either STARTED or DONE) and some brief
explanation of their functionalities
3.ﬁStory 9:  Bug Fixes of R2 - DONE
- Lots of work with scrolling
Story 10: Redesign Architecture Œ STARTED
-Basically finished, move 1 task to the next release
Story 11: Orders Are Shown in OrderListScreen - DONE
2Even though the reports did not follow a similar format, the
information contents were similar. The reports in all the cases were very
simple and described what was done only on a general level.
3The comments are translated from Finnish.
Story 12: Enhancements to SalesItemScreen - STARTED
- Week Level still in progress

Story 13: OrderInfoScreen (Info of One Order) - DONE

Story 14: Search Feature Œ DONE
ﬂ    This report indicates that several stories were
completed, but it is obvious that the simplicity of the
report could not enable the customer to give feedback
that could have been used to steer the development.
The analysis of the email correspondence between the
teams and the customers supports this claim. The

customers did not give any feedback based on the
reports during
Case 2
andCase 3
. The customer
responded once to an email report explaining
implemented features during
Case 4
.    Based on the report above, the customer was not

able to verify that the features were in fact

implemented correctly, thus making the contents of
the report partly ambiguous. On the other hand,
ambiguity does not exist when observing stories with
the status of STARTED, since these parts are well-
defined. Thus this supports the claims of MRT that
ambiguous issues should be managed through rich

channels, while leaner channels are adequate for well-
understood subjects. Similarly, this also supports the
works of Cockburn [4] and Ambler [13].

    The customers™ inability to give feedback  based on
the reports further supports the claim by Wake [24],
who states that the lack of high bandwidth

communication leads to a loose feedback mechanism,
which in turn requires more effort to get the project
back on course.
    The following table summarizes the times in
minutes required for defect corrections during
Case 4.
As mentioned in section 3, there is not sufficient data
available from other cases. The teams, excluding
Case
4 did not record a defect log in sufficient detail. The
defects were at first categorized into customer

independent and customer dependent defects based on
their descriptions. Customer independent defects are
such that can be traced back to developers or to the

development platform. Customer dependent defects
are defects which could have been avoided by either
having constant customer communication and

feedback (onsite customer) or utilizing a rich mid-
iteration communication method. Based on the defect
data analysis, customer independent errors were

further divided into two categories. They were either
caused by developers or, as in one case, the defect was
caused by the underlying Java virtual machine.

Similarly the customer dependent defects were divided
into cosmetic (e.g. the user interface was not what the
customer expected, its elements were not as required,
 the customer was not pleased with the colors or fonts)
or they had requirement related defects (i.e. the
features did not work as expected).
Table 3. Defect fix times in minutes for customer independent and customer dependent
defects in
Case 4
.Release
Customer independent
Customer dependent
#Developer
Platform
Cosmetic
Requirement
1310---
2150-70355
3230-160595
43020-30
Subtotal
720
20230
980Total
740
1210
    It can be interpreted from the above data that the

cost of fixing customer dependent defects was ~1.6
times larger in terms of time when compared to
customer independent defects. Further analysis

indicated that the percentage of defects in the above
table was distributed as follows:
developer
: 37%,
platform
: 1%,
cosmetic
: 12% and
requirements
:50%. When releases were reviewed separately the
amount of customer dependent defects was
distributed as set out in Table 4.
Table 4. The proportion of customer
dependent defects/release in
Case 4
.Release #
% of all defects
10273,9
376,6
437,5
    The contents of the first release during all the
cases concentrated on the technical infrastructure. In
Case 4
 the only implemented feature on which the
customer was able to give feedback to the team was
login functionality. During this particular iteration,
all the defects were caused by the carelessness of the
developers.

    Clearly, the rate of customer dependent defects
was very high during the second and third release
and remained considerably high also in the final

release. Since face-to-face communication was
applied only during the first two weeks, the
communication was managed entirely through lean

communication channels thereafter. This further
supports the MRT™s claim that lean channels are not
suitable for managing ambiguous issues. In

summary, during
Case 4,
62.6% of software defects
were caused by the lack of efficient customer
communication and feedback.
    Our other findings, even though not as precise,
also support this viewpoint. The following figure

shows the percentage of all defect-fixing tasks in
each project. The average percentage of defect-fixing
tasks was 6.3% in
Case 1
 and we can assume that all
the defects were in this case developer-oriented. In
Case 2
 the percentage of the defect-fixing tasks was
reasonably low on average, whereas it increased
continuously in
Case 3
andCase 4
. The last release
ofCase 4
 concentrated solely on defect-fixing,
because all the other scheduled functionalities were

cancelled.
    For more precise information about the defect task
percentages, the following table summarizes the

averages for defect-fixing tasks in each case project.
Table 5. The averages for defect-fixing tasks
in the case projects.
ProjectUtilization of
face-to-face
communication
Average of
defect fixing
tasks (%)
Case 1
High6,3
Case 2
On demand9,4
Case 3
Periodical24,7
Case 4
Low41,8
    When combining the figures from
Case 2, Case 3
andCase 4,
 25.3% share of all the tasks were defect
fixing tasks in non-onsite customer projects. On the

bases of figure 3 and table 5, it can be seen that the

averages for defect-fixing tasks in
Case 1
andCase
2, and their variation in different releases, are very
similar to each other. Even though the customers

were not constantly onsite during
Case 2
, and the
 mid-iteration communication was managed mainly
by email, they were located in the same facility (
ﬁHe[one of the customers] was almost always there in
the room next to usﬂ [Case 2]
 ) and thus easily
available for communication and feedback. Thus the
amount of face-to-face communication and feedback
was higher than in the other non-onsite customer

cases.
Case 2
had a beneficial situation since the
number of customers was higher in
Case 2
 than in
the other cases, and at least one the customers was

always available at the beginning and the end of the
iterations for face-to-face communication and
feedback. Thus the customer communication was

regular, while in
Case 3
 the customer was not always
able to join the scheduled meetings which then had

to be postponed.

    A more alarming trend can be observed when
comparing
Case 3
andCase 4
. These cases applied
lower levels of face-to-face communication and
relied more on leaner communication channels, not
suitable for ambiguous issues. This backfired in
higher defect rates.
Case 3
 usedPeriodical
 face-to-
face communication and suffered from a 24.7%
defect ratio, while
Case 4
 using a
Low
 level of face-
to-face communication had a defect rate of 41.8%,
with 62.2% of all defects being customer-related.

The development of the defect ratios during these
cases also follows a similar pattern. The defect rates
were constantly increasing as the projects

progressed, leaving less time to implement new
features or enhance the existing features. Thus our
research indicates that the lower adoption of high-

bandwidth communication and increasing reliance
on lean communication techniques result in higher
defect rates.
Figure 3. The percentage of defect-fixing tasks in the case projects.
    These findings suggest that effective customer
communication and selection of efficient

communication media, especially during mid-
iteration, should receive proper attention in agile
development.
4.2. Suggestions for customer communication
     As discussed in chapter 2, there is a large amount
of different communication mechanisms that can be
integrated into agile development as well. The focus
of this paper is however out of providing a

systematic solution to customer communication in
agile development, but based on existing literature
described here and in section 2, some suggestions
can be made.
Face-to-face
 communication is the default
communication method in agile development. It has

proven itself effective, so it should be applied
whenever possible.
Videoconferencing
 comes
second in richness to face-to-face and e.g. Wallace et
al. [32] have suggested its utilization in user story

explanation when the customers are remote. We
suggest using videoconferencing in situations that
need effective customer communication and

feedback, where the customer is not available. The
usage of videoconferencing has both positive and
 negative effects. Sumner and Hostetler [33] have
identified the following shortcomings. The difficulty
of coordinating and clarifying ideas, and the time
required to achieve consensus and arrive at a

decision increases [33]. On the other hand, they state
that computer conferencing produces better
decisions, a wider range of options, greater analysis,

and it creates the psychological distance needed to
engage in a more open exchange of options. It is also
reported in [34] that in the case of requirements

negotiation, the teams communicating face-to-face
did not outperform teams using computer support.
Telephone:
Atelephone is not capable of
transmitting visual cues, but it enables instant
feedback. Telephone can be useful for example for
negotiating, for example, schedules with the
customer.
Email:
Emails are suitable for
communicating well-understood issues.
    However, it is not recommended that one blindly

chooses a number of different methods for enriching
the communicat
ion between the customer and the
developers. Rather, the decision about
communication channels should be agreed in
collaboration with the different parties involved, as it
also depends on the situation at hand as proposed by

Dennis [16] (See also McLuhan [26]).
    While the selection of the most appropriate
communication method in agile development is not a

focus of this paper, we believe it is not a
straightforward task and it is a subject that requires
further research.
5. Conclusions
 Agile software development emphasizes face-to-face
communication as the primary communication
channel between the project participants. The
existing literature has promoted the benefits of face-
to-face communication, but less is known about the
implications of communication and feedback in the

context of agile development.
    Our research in four different case studies
provides empirical evidence of the effects of

customer communication. Despite the considerably
wide array of existing communication methods, the
customers chose email, and in one case also

telephone, to manage both clear and ambiguous
issues inside the development iterations. Our
research indicates that when the reliance on leaner
communica
tion mediums increases, the software
defect rates increase accordingly.These results

suggest that the selection of communication methods

to be used inside development iterations must be paid
significant attention by agile organizations working
with partially available customers. Even though it is
not the focus of this paper, some suggestions for
customer communication are also discussed based on

the existing literature.
    We claim that a defect follow-up provides a means
for increasing our understanding of how well a team
has understood a customer's intentions. Yet, we do
not encourage developers and customers to aim at
reducing defect rates per se. We rather emphasize

the importance of intense and meaningful
communication. This is bound to decrease the
number of misunderstandings, increase the efficiency

of the work and offer improved opportunities for
learning.
    This paper has empirically shown that the defect

rates increase due to the use of less informative
communications channels in the development time.
However, due to the agile principle of short

iterations, this is less risky than in traditional
software development where the length of an
iteration may last for quite long periods. Our

empirical data, however, demonstrates that there is
room for improvement even in short cyclical agile
development by making good use of rich

communication mechanisms as we propose in this
paper.
6. References
[1] L. Bernstein. (2005, Taking software requirements
creation from folklore to analysis.
ACM SIGSOFT Software
Engineering Notes 30(5),
pp. 3-5.
[2] P. Abrahamsson, O. Salo, J.Ronkainen and J. Warsta,
Agile Software Development Methods: Review and

Analysis.
Espoo: VTT Publications, 2002, pp. 107.
Available at:www.inf.vtt.fi/pdf/publications/2002/P478.pdf
[3] K. Beck,
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace
Change.
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: Addison-Wesley,
2000.

[4] A. Cockburn,
Agile Software Development.
Indianapolis:
Addison-Wesley, 2002.
[5] M. Finsterwalder, "Does XP need a professional
customerﬂ, XP2001 workshop on customer involvement, in
XP2001,
Cagliari, Italy, 2001.
[6] J. Koskela and P. Abrahamsson, "On-site customer in an
XP project: Empirical results from a case study," in
EuroSPI2004,
Trondheim, Norway, 2004, pp. 1-11.
[7] A. Martin, "A case study: Exploring the role of customers
on extreme programming projects," Victoria University of
Wellington, New Zealand, 2003.
 [8] P. Abrahamsson and T. Jokela, "Usability assessment of
an extreme programming project: Close co-operation with
the customer does not equal to good usability," in
Profes
2004,
Kansai Science City, Japan, 2004, pp. 393-407.
[9] R. Jeffries, A. Anderson and C. Hendrickson,
Extreme
Programming Installed.
Upper Saddle River, New Jersey,
USA: Addison-Wesley, 2001.
[10] K. Beck and C. Andres,
Extreme Programming
Explained; Embrace Change, Second Edition.
Upper Sadle
River, NJ, USA: Addison-Wesley, 2005.
[11] R. L. Daft and R. J. Lengel, "Organizational
Information Requirements, Media Richness and Structural
Design,"
Manage. Sci.,
vol. 32, pp. 554-571, 1986.
[12] R. L. Daft, R. Lengel and L. K. Trevino, "Message
Equivocality, Media Selection, and Manager

Performance:Implications for Information Support Systems,"
MIS Quarterly,
vol. 11, pp. 355-366, 1987.
[13] S. W. Ambler, "Validating Agile Models,"
Cutter IT
Journal,
vol. 15, pp. 33-39, 2002.
[14] A. Edstrom, "User Influence and the Success of MIS
Projects: A Contingency Approach,"
Human Relations,
vol.
30, pp. 580-607, 1997.
[15] R. B. Bostrom and B. D. Thomas, "Achieving
excellence in communications: A key to developing
complete, accurate and shared information requirements," in

Proceedings of the Twentieth Annual Computer Personnel

on Research Conference, Charlottesville, Virginia, United
States,1983, pp. 1-13.
[16] A. R. Dennis and J. S. Valacich, "Rethinking media
richness: Towards a theory of media synchronicity," in
HICSS™99, Hawaii, United States, 1999, pp. 1017.
[17] S. Kinney and A. Dennis, "Reevaluating media
richness: Cues, feedback, and task," in HICSS™94, Hawaii,
United States, 1994, pp. 21-30.
[18] S. T. Kinney and R. T. Watson, "The Effect of Medium
and Task on Dyadic Communicationﬂ in Proceedings of the

13th International Conference on Information Systems,
Dallas, Texas, United States, 1992, pp. 107-117.
[19] R. L. Daft and K. Weick, "Toward a Model of
Organizations as Interpretation Systems,"
Academy of
Management Review,
vol. 9, pp. 284-295, 1984.
[20] A. Graveline, C. Geisler and M. Danchak, "Teaming
together apart:Emergent patterns of media use in
collaboration at a distance," in Proceedings of the 2000 joint
IEEE International and 18
th Annual Conference on
Computer Documentation,Cambridge, Massachusetts,
United States, 2000, pp. 381-393.
[21] R. E. Kraut and L. A. Streeter, "Coordination in
Software Development,"
Communications of the ACM,
vol. 38, pp. 69-81, 1995.
[22] R. Juric. ﬁExtreme programming and its development
practicesﬂ. in Proceedings of the 22
nd International
Conference on Information Technology Interfaces, ITI2000,
Pula, Croatia, 2000, pp. 97-104.
[23] G. Melnik and F. Maurer, "Direct verbal
communication as a catalyst of agile knowledge sharing," in
Agile2004, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States, 2004, pp.
21- 31.
[24] W. C. Wake,
Extreme Programming Explored.
Addison-Wesley, 2002.
[25] E. Gottesdiener,
Requirements by
Collaboration:Workshops for defining needs.
Boston:
Addison-Wesley, 2002.
[26] M. McLuhan,
Understanding Media:The Extensions
of Man.
New York: McGraw Hill, 1964.
[27] R. K. Yin,
Case Study Research Design and Methods.
2nd ed.Sage Publications, 1994
[28] M. Korkala and P. Abrahamsson, "Extreme
programming: Reassessing the requirements management
process for an offsite customer," in
EuroSPI 2004,
Trondheim, Norway, 2004, pp. 12-22
[29] T. Ihme and P. Abrahamsson, "Agile Architecting:The
Use of Architectural Patterns in Mobile Java Applications,"

IJAM,
2005.
[30] P. Abrahamsson, A. Hanhineva, H. Hulkko, T. Ihme, J.
Jäälinoja, M. Korkala, J. Koskela, P. Kyllönen and O. Salo,
"Mobile-D: An agile approach for mobile application
development," in
OOPSLA 2004,
Poster session, Vancouver,
Canada,2004.
[31] M. Korkala, "Extreme programming: Introducing a
requirements management process for an offsite customer,"

Department of Information Processing Science Research
Papers Series A, University of Oulu, Finland, 2004.
[32] N. Wallace, P. Bailey and N. Ashworth, "Managing XP
with multiple or remote customers," in
3rd International
Conference on eXtreme Programming and Agile Processes
in Software Engineering (XP2002),
 Alghero, Italy,
2002,
pp. 134-137.
[33] M. Sumner and D. Hostetler, "A comparative study of
computer conferencing and face-to-face communications in
systems design," in
2000 ACM SIGCPR Conference on
Computer Personnel Research,
Chicago, Illinois, United
States
,2000, pp. 93-99.
[34] D. E. H. Damian, A. Eberlein, M. L. G. Shaw and B.
R. Gaines, "Using Different Communication Media in
Requirements Negotiation,"
IEEE Software,
vol. 17, pp.
28-36, 2000.
