 Agile Transformation Model for Large So
!ware Development 
Organizations
  Maarit Laanti
 Nitor Delta
 Aleksanterinkatu 44 A 8, 00100 Helsinki
 Finland
 Maarit.laanti@nitor.fi
     ABSTRACT
 Many organizations are going through large
-scale agile 
transformations but they face challenges with measuring when 
the transformation has reached its goals or communicating what 

kinds of 
results they are expecting. Based on our experiences we 
developed a large
-scale agile transformation model and tested it 
in a pilot organization. 
!e model was well
-received and taken 
into use as a step
-by-step method to help the organization to 
take the n
ext steps in their agile transformation. 
!is paper 
describes our model and the results from the pilot.
  CCS CONCEPTS
 Software and its engineering 
! Software creation and 
management 
! Software development process 
management 
! Software development methods 
! Agile 
software development 
 KEYWORDS
 Agile software development; la
rge
-scale software development; 
agile transformations
  1 INTRODUCTION
 Since the publication of Scaled 
Agile Framework (SAFe) and 
Lean Enterprise Systems and Solutions (LeSS), many agile 

transformations have been started around the globe [1]. We have 

been helping many companies to go through these kind of large
-
scale agile transformations over the past 10
-15 years at Nokia, 
before SAFe and LeSS went public.
 For most companies, the external pressures to be competitive 
together with the impact of digitalization are main reasons to 

adopt large
-scale agility. Frameworks such as SAFe, LeSS, and 
others are useful 
starting points, because they give traditional 
waterfall organizations a simple cookbook
-style recipe for 
transformation. Yet many organizations are puzzled in the midst 

of the transformation: are they doing the transformation right? 

How far are they in th
e transformation? What steps they should 
take next?
 If SAFe or another framework is a recipe for the 
transformation, then these questions try to measure the 

capability of the organization, i.e. how good a cake can be 

baked? As we know from cooking, there a
re no upper limits for 
such capabilities and skills.
 2 AGILE TRANSFORMATION MODEL
 The reason why many organizations start their agile 

transformation is the pursuit of business success. Thus this 

should be the only measure for measuring agile transformation
s. 
We combined our internal knowledge of agile transformation 

journeys and interviewed a few trusted colleagues and asked 

them how they would describe the journey to large
-scale agile, 
and how they would describe the current state they are in. Based 

on thi
s we developed the categorization presented in 
Figure 1.
 An agile transformation is based on a series of insights or Means 

that describe the agile mindset or reason to adopt agile behavior 

Ð like building a system in sma
ller increments will increase the 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided t
hat copies 
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and 
that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. 
Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the 
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with 
credit is permitted. To 
copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to 
lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request 
permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org
.  XP '17 Workshop
s, May 22
-26, 2017, Cologne, Germany
 © 2017 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights 

licensed to ACM.
 ACM ISBN 978
-1-4503-5264-2/17/05...$15.00 
https://doi.org/10.1145/3120459.3120479
    Fig. 
1. Agile Transformation Model
  cycle time while accumu
lating faster Return
-On-Investment and 
thus the smaller increments are more productive 
Ð and Enablers 
that represent technical capabilities and require investments 
Ð such as investment on DevOps or automated Deployment of a 

Release [2]. An agile transforma
tion is proceeding so that once 
the organization has reached one level they are able to gain a 

different insight into next level and make new investments to 

further advance on this path.  
 Most organizations would like to be among the top of their 
class, o
r to be able to compete globally. Only a few organizations 
however have such capabilities. For example, an organization 

may set a specific Goal such as ÒNo errors released in production 

codeÓ but this is not possible if the organization has significant 

tec
hnical debt or if the organizationÕs building and deployment 
pipeline is not very fast and automated 
Ð all of which require 
heavy investments on Enablers. Any misalignment between 
business and development (IT) may result in not achieving the 
business Goals
 and not knowing why the organization failed. 
There is a complex relationship between Goals, Means, and 

Enablers [2], and is presented in Figure 1 is actually a list of 

Goals.
  2.1 
Five Levels of the
 Agile Transformation 
Model explained
 An organization on 
the Beginner level has understood that 
adaptive and flow
-based models based on small batch sizes are 
more effective than traditional models and has decided to re
-structure for large
-scale agility. This is a phase where a decision 
is made that that a certai
n framework is taken into. In this level 
the work is arranged in to backlogs and smaller batches instead 

of traditional projects and new tools and new roles that support 

agile way of working are taken into use.
 An organization on the Novice level has been 
able to 
establish a flow of value. At this point the organization may 

abandon their traditional way of working models and take agile 

model as primary or only way
-of-working model into use. On 
this level the organization is investing both making work more 

fluent, i.e. removing technical debt, and automation of 
development and testing pipeline and measuring the flow i.e. to 

agile metrics and radiators.
  On the Fluent level the organization fully understands the 
benefits of agile and most of the organizationÕs
 decisions are 
based on quick experimentation and utilization of collected data 

from the markets and rapid experimental releases. These kinds 

of organizations are maximizing learning based on data 
    2  collected. The organization can also create a customer 
enga
gement cycle similar to Amazon [3] as the number of 
returning customers is its most important metric. Here the 

investments are made on further advancing the agility into new 

areas such as budgeting and business agility.
 On the Advanced level the utilizatio
n of data and the process 
models is pushed into perfection, and Agility has become a part 

of company values and strategy. Agility becomes forethought 

rather than an afterthought. Here all the new development 

efforts are approached with an agile mindset, an
d investments 
are focused on new initiatives that are made agile from the start. 

The organization is characterized by being excited on over
-exceeding its goals over and over again by better leverage 

provided by agility.
 On the World
-class level the organiz
ation has invented its 
own approach to agility. Investments are made on new external 

start
-ups as the organization is already on top of its rivals and 
cannot or have decided not to grow in its own area.
 3 EXPERIMENTING AND VALIDATION
 The agile transformati
on model was piloted in a large client 
organization in the banking and insurance sector, employing 12 

000 people that was going through SAFe transformation. The 

author worked there as a consultant, and the agile 

transformation model was used for gaining an
d understanding of 
the current status of the transformation and recommendations 

what the next steps should be. The agile transformation model 

was warmly welcomed as it explains to business people in plain 

language why they should invest in agility.
 We cond
ucted 42 interviews with 117 people in order to 
analyse the model, the current state, and the recommendations 

for the next steps. The interviews and analysis took 350 working 

hours. We asked in these interviews three questions:
 1. In which level do you thi
nk your organization is 
currently?
 2. In which of the five levels do you see your 

organization after one yearÕs time (based on the 

already ongoing improvement actions)
 3. In which level do you see yourself as an 

organization in three years time (representi
ng ideal 
state)
 These self
-evaluations and evaluations of adjacent levels 
(portfolio levels evaluating programs and vice versa; programs 

evaluating teams and vice versa) gave the final adjusted result of 

the current status of agility in the whole organizat
ion. As there 
were multiple persons participating in most of the interviews all 

the answers were carefully analyzed already at that time.
 After that we asked the participants to estimate where they 
would be after one year. We asked them to list the concret
e actions that were in place already to advance the current state, 
and what would be further needed. This helped us to gain 
understanding to all development actions ongoing already, and 

to the ones that were planned. Finally we asked where they 

think they 
should be in three years time and what would be 
needed in order to get there. This helped us to gain 
understanding into the systemic impediments in the 

organization that should be removed because these were 

hindering the agility.
 The result was 
a very deta
iled analysis of e current state and 
recommended next steps reported per each portfolio and agile 

release train.
 3.1 
Coaching and teaching as main 
transformation tools
 In some of these interviews respondents were quite happy of the 

current state of agility
 that they had accomplished. In these 
discussions the model had helped them to see what would be the 

next steps to advance their agility. In these cases we were 

teaching them about agile practices and how to get to the next 

state. This included e.g. the un
derstanding how real
-time 
dashboards and visibility could change how the organization is 

led.
 In some cases the respondents already knew what they were 
doing and how. An example was e.g. an agile release train at an 

early phase, when the next steps were kn
own. Here our role was 
just recording the results. In some cases the people did know 

what actions the others were taking but they were unwilling to 

follow. Examples is e.g. a case where people knew they should 

set
-up an agile portfolio with priorities but 
were afraid to make 
the change. Here we tried to motivate them and share insights 

about the benefits of the new way of working. In these cases we 

ended up coaching the organization.
  In some cases the respondents did not know what actions 
they should take 
nor cared about agile. Here we tried both to 
motivate and teach them to take the next steps. An example is a 

discussion where we discussed the importance of making 

releases more often. Figure 2 presents a four
-square of these 
different kinds of interviews 
and presents that teaching and 
coaching are the main tools for making agile transformation on 

the individual level, when influencing individual people or 

groups. The idea of this quadrant model is loosely based on the 

Johari window [4].
 3.2 
Validation
 During the interviews several small stories of the transformation 

were heard that supported the model. People in general sounded 

to find it very useful. ÒThis was good, it made me thinkÓ; ÒThis is 

an excellent modelÓ; ÒI was positively surprised that this 
was not 
a five page long survey but simple and visualÓ; ÒI could not 

earlier map where we are and where we should goÓ and Òwe 

should do this every two months and see the progress we are 

makingÓ.
 The critics were mainly pointing out the inductiveness of the
 model: as it is based on self
-evaluations it will not provide any 
objective truth. Thus the coaching aspect as part of the interview 

and analysis process was considered very important. Also the 
     Fig. 
2. Coaching and teaching as main tools for influencing people
  results were not seen as comparable with each other because the 
model was based on 
self
-evaluations rather than on an objective 
evaluation. In the end we were asked to provide our expert 

opinion besides the self
-evaluations. This was not easy, as an 
external party can rely only on the information heard on 

interviews. Surveying organizati
on would give wider amount of 
opinions and would be a way to get better results.
 The final results were presented in an auditorium and widely 
discussed within the organization. As a result the organization 

decided in next steps of action to take the agilit
y further.
 4 COMPARISON TO OTHER AGILE MATURITY 
MODELS
 Numerous agile maturity models exist but none like ours. Most 

of the models measure how agility is taken into use [5]. As 

stated by Schweigert & al [5], the focus in our model is the 

business value and
 it is descriptive, as most respondents in the 
survey conducted have answered to the questions Òfirst global 

opinionÓ and Òhow should it be definedÓ. In our model the level 1 

presents a situation where agile is already in use, and the next 

levels reflect t
he level of understanding, practices taken into use, 

and capabilities developed.
 The most famous model may be GartnerÕs agile maturity 
model [6]. This model is measuring (like most of the proposed 
models) the level of agile adoption where level 0 is non
-existent, 
level 1 is ad
-hoc (some agile practices in use), level 2 means 
repeatable with no consistency across the organizations, level 3 

is defined as the organization having documented its agile 

method, level 4 is quantitatively managed and level 5 is 
opti
mizing (value stream optimization) [6].
 Scaled Agile Framework proposes a 1
-2-3 transformation 
model [7] that is also targeted at getting large
-scale agile 
methods into use. Likewise there is a commercial tool called 
Agility health radar that can be used t
o measure if an 
organization is following SAFe or not [8]. Yet none of these 

models measure what kind of results the organization is getting 

with its agility. We have been explaining this difference by 

stating that if the model is the recipe, we measure ho
w good a 
cake the organization will be able to bake.
 5 CONCLUSIONS
 This paper has presented a tool for self
-reflecting how large
-scale agile transformation is progressing within an organization. 

The tool has been validated by experimentation and interviews
. The tool has been taken into use in a few organizations that are 

actively using it in order to systematically advance their agile 

transformation. We have a plan to create a survey tool based on 
I do not see a reason why to 
improve Development / improvement happens I do not know current state and if I should improve I know how others 
are working but do 
not want to improve I do not know I know I want to Don«t want 
to Increase  motivation / coaching 
(disclosure) Increase knowledge / teaching (feedback)     2  the represented model in the near future in order to help ou
r clients to make progress in their agile transformations.
 An organization may have a perfect strategy, but if the execution 
power is a mismatch, it will not get the results it desires. Agile 

transformation model is a model that explains how to develop 

the
 execution power, and facilitate that discussion. It can also 
provide important information for developing the organization 

further as a system. We hope it will be useful tool for agile 

organization coaches.
  REFERENCES
 1. Dikert, Kim, Maria Paasivaara, an
d Casper Lassenius. "Challenges and success 
factors for large
-scale agile transformations: A systematic literature review." 
Journal of Systems and Software 119 (2016): 87
-108. 2. Kettunen, Petri, and Maarit Laanti. "Combining agile software projects and la
rge
"scale organizational agility." Software Process: Improvement and Practice 13.2 
(2008): 183
-193. 3. 
 Norton, David. "The Current State of Agile Method Adoption." Gartner 
(G00163591) (2008): 1
-4. 4. Luft, Joseph, and Harry Ingham. "The johari
 window." Human Relations Training 
News 5.1 (1961): 6
-7. 5. Schweigert, Tomas, et al. "Agile maturity model: oxymoron or the next level of 

understanding." International Conference on Software Process Improvement and 

Capability Determination. Springer Berli
n Heidelberg, 2012.
 6. Norton, David. "The Current State of Agile Method Adoption." Gartner 
(G00163591) (2008): 1
-4. 7. SAFe 4.0 Introduction, Overview of the Scaled Agile Framework¨ for Lean 
Software and Systems Engineering, Whitepaper, July 2016
 8. 
http://agilityhealthradar.com
, accessed 21
-March
-2017 