 Improving Agile Team Learning by Improving Team Reflections 
Marilyn Lamoreux Medtronic, Inc. 
marilyn.lamoreux@medtronic.comAbstractMany Agile proponents encourage reflection as part of 
the feedback/learning cycle. When we began using Agile 
practices, including reflection, I discovered that our 
organization’s norms and beliefs tended to discount the 

value of regular reflection meetings. Many engineers 
wanted to avoid anything that might be seen as “touchy-
feely.” Our initial attempts at holding regular reflection 

meetings for agile teams had mixed results. Some 
reflections turned into gripe sessions where a lot of 
venting occurred but nothing changed. Other reflections 

were short and a little too sweet – team members said 
little and no learning occurred. This paper describes 
some of our efforts helping teams improve their reflection 

meetings and relates some of the positive results in my 
organization as a result of regular reflection. It also 
discusses techniques for overcoming initial reluctance to 

take time out to reflect, keeping reflection meetings 
interesting, and taking reflection to a deeper level.   
1.Introduction. 
Regular reflection is an Agile practice that can 
improve teamwork, productivity, and group learning.  
Reflecting on our experiences individually and in a group 

allows us to learn and improve.  Many authors of Agile 
Software Development books list reflection as an 
important part of the feedback and learning cycle that 

Agile practices rely on.  In our organization, the practice 
of reflection has been one of the most challenging Agile 
practices to implement.  Even though it has been 

challenging, our experiences with reflection have helped 
us to improve our team’s productivity, quality, and collaboration. I have worked on an Agile project for a little over 2 
years and I have learned a lot about what works and what 

doesn’t work in doing reflection.  I hope that by relating 
our experiences, including our mistakes and our 
successes, others will persist in encouraging reflection 
with their teams. 
2.The Value of Reflection. 
Regular reflection is important for many reasons.  Not 
only do our teams reflect on what they are doing, but they 
also reflect on how they are working together as a team.  

Reflecting together helps team members get to know one 
another better, surfaces conflict, and develops a higher 
degree of trust. 
On our team, reflection meetings help us learn together 
and to apply our learning to improving our practices.  Our 

project was one of the first to adopt Agile practices in our 

organization.  Because of the size of the project (>20 
developers) and the unique needs of our product 
development environment we found that using a 

try/reflect/adapt cycle helped us learn which practices 
worked, which practices didn’t work, and how to adapt 
practices to make them work better in our environment.  

In addition to helping us improve our practices, I believe 
that reflection has helped teams resolve conflicts and 
improve team learning. I have also seen significant 

innovation and process improvements as a direct result of 
reflections. These innovations and improvements have 
created significant productivity gains for our team. 
3.  Getting started can be difficult.I still encounter strong resistance from some 
developers and managers when I encourage teams to 

reflect regularly.   Some of their questions include, “What 

is the outcome of a reflection meeting?” and  “Isn’t this 
just another way to decrease velocity?”  I have also heard 
comments from developers like, “It’s just a waste of my 

time.  I have real work to do,” and “We tried reflection 
but it didn’t work.” 
There were many reasons for this resistance and these 
beliefs.  Like many software development organizations, 

Medtronic’s culture is action oriented.  There is a belief 
that in order to be effective, meetings should result in an 

action plan, a decision, or a list of problems requiring 
investigation. Even though we are working more 
collaboratively than ever, many developers still believe 

that attending meetings is not “real work.”  As project 
pressures increase, it’s easy to put off reflection.   We 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 don’t have data yet that shows the cost effectiveness of 
reflection.  And because the effects of reflection can be 
intangible and difficult to quantify, some managers do not 
understand or support it.  
I believe that it is important for someone in the 
organization to recognize the value of reflection and to 

advocate for it.  In our organization, I have become an 

advocate of reflection. In the beginning, as project 
architect, I had the opportunity to sit in on daily meetings, 
planning meetings, and reflection meetings for all of the 

teams on our project.  I could see what was and what 
wasn’t working and make suggestions for improving the 
quality of reflection meetings.  I have also facilitated 
reflection meetings for teams on our project and for other 
projects in our organization.  I also encourage managers 

and team coaches to be open to trying reflection, even if 
they aren’t convinced of it’s value.   
When managers or developers question the value of 
reflection, I cite improvements that I have seen as a result 
of reflection meetings.  I also use a quote a consultant 
shared with me, “There is no learning without 

conversation.” 
Not all Agile teams in our organization reflect 
regularly.  Our project is the only one that I am aware of 

that holds regular reflection meetings.  Others have tried 
holding reflection meetings and encountered many of the 
same roadblocks that we encountered early on.  Because 

there wasn’t someone advocating for the practice of 
reflection and working to try new techniques to improve 
it, the teams dropped the practice. 
4. Roadblocks to Effective Reflection Our initial attempts at reflection had mixed results.  
We spent a lot of time complaining but little time in 
constructive conversation. I learned that while some 
venting may be needed, too much time spent venting has 

no positive result.  Other reflections were short and team 
members said little.   
Our first reflections occurred in conjunction with 
sprint planning meetings.  We found that with the 

combined reflection and planning meetings, teams spent 
either too much time reflecting and didn’t have time to 

complete their planning, or they spent all their time 
planning and didn’t have time to reflect.  Rather than 
extend the meeting time, we decided to separate planning 

and reflection activities.  While there is a benefit to 
applying learning from reflection into the next sprint’s 
planning, this can be accomplished with a reflection 

meeting the day before the planning meeting.  With a 
two-week sprint, we found th
at most of our teams prefer to reflect during the week in which planning meetings do 

not occur. 
Here is a list of some of the “mistakes” that we made 
when first doing reflection: 
Inviting managers and other “chickens” to observe 
or participate in a new team’s reflection meetings.  

We learned that until a team has time to build trust 
and to gain practice reflecting together, including 
managers or outsiders inhibited free exchange of 

ideas.Trying to do a reflection with the entire 

development team (over 20 developers and 8-10 

chickens in the room) when the team was actually 

divided into 4 smaller sub-teams.  Everyone felt 
this was a waste of time and had the effect of 
creating negative attitudes about reflection which 

took some time to overcome. 
Repeating the “What went well that we want to 

keep doing? What needs improvement?” format 

meeting after meeting.  After a couple of 
repetitions, the questions ran out of juice and it was 
all too easy to believe that there was nothing new to 
improve. Expecting a list of action items to result from each 
reflection meeting.  Sometimes teams uncover 

problems and it is appropriate to develop an action 
list. Often, the learning is more subtle.  Team members may come away with a better 

understanding of one another or something that 
happened in the meeting may trigger a great idea 
later.Allowing team members to choose not to attend  

reflection meetings.  I worked with a team member who hated meetings of any kind.  He complained so 
bitterly about reflection meetings that I suggested 
that he could choose whether to attend meetings.  
After he chose not to show up at two reflection 

meetings in a row teammates became very 
unhappy.  They found that they had unfinished 
business that could not be completed with one team 

member absent.  The team requested that he attend 
their reflection meetings.  Resolving conflicts and 
talking about how the team is working together 

require everyone’s input. 
Giving up on reflection after one or two tries.  

Another project at Medtronic began holding regular 

reflection meetings for its team. They used the 

“What is going well? What can be improved” 
format.  After a couple of meetings where no new 
ideas were uncovered team members decided that 
reflection was a waste of time and stopped the 
practice.  Learning to reflect is a process that takes 

persistence, practice, feedback, and adaptation.  
Holding team reflection meetings without a leader.  

Recently the coach of a team was absent from a 

reflection meeting.  No one was designated to lead 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 the reflection in his absence.  Instead of reflecting, 
the team began planning the next phase of work 
they were doing.  A customer who had attended the 
meeting told me that she had not realized the 

importance of having a facilitator for a reflection 
meeting until she attended one without a facilitator.   
5. A Technique for Improving Reflection As we encountered many of the roadblocks to effective 
reflection, I wanted to find a way to improve these 
meetings.  I tried a technique I had experienced at a 
conference. The technique, called Conversation Café, 
combines simple ground rules with the use of a talking 

token to help guide conversations.  It encourages all to 
participate and listen, creates a safe structure for 
conversation, and helps teams develop trust. 
The simple ground rules of the Conversation Café 
method provide reminders of the qualities of good 

conversation—acceptance, listening with respect, 

curiosity, diversity, sincerity, and brevity.  The use of a 
talking token allows everyone’s voice to be heard.  And 
the experience of being heard and moving conversations 

to a deeper level is helping to convince developers that 
there is value in conversations, even when they do not 
result in immediate action items or decisions. 
6. The Conversation Café Technique 
The Conversation Café technique consists of six 
agreements and a meeting process.  According to the 
Conversation Café website, “Conversation Cafés are 
places where collective learning is happening. 

Conversation Cafés are not instead of action. They are 
before action—a place to gather your thoughts, find your 
natural allies, discover your blind spots, open your heart 

to the heart of ‘the other.’  All movements begin in 
conversation.” 
7.  Conversation Café AgreementsAcceptance: Suspend judgment as best you can. 
Listening:With respect 
Curiosity:
 Seek to understand rather than persuade. 
Diversity: Invite and honor all points of view. 
Sincerity: Speak what has personal heart and 
meaning.Brevity: Go for honesty and depth but don’t go on 
and on. 8.  Conversation Café Process Assembleup to 8 people plus host, hearty topic, 
“talking object,” and time (60-90 min.). Host 
explains process and agreements. 
Round 1: 
Pass around the talking object; each 
person speaks briefly to the topic, no feedback or 

response. Round 2: Again with the talking object; each 
person deepens their own comments or speaks what 

has meaning now. 
Dialogue:
 Open, spirited conversation. Use talking 
object if there is domination, contention, or lack of 

focus. 
Final Round: With talking object, each person 
says briefly what was meaningful to them. 
For more information about Conversation Café, visit 
www.conversationcafe.org
.9.  My First Experience Using Conversation 
CafeThe first time I used the Conversation Café method 
with one of our teams, I had a sensitive topic I wanted to 
discuss.  While participating in several design meetings 
with a team, I had noticed a number of errors in the 
team’s code.  While the team’s review process enabled us 

to find the errors, I wanted to explore my concerns about 
how we could prevent such errors from occurring and 
explore what kinds of learning needed to take place for 

the team.  With the team coach’s support, I decided to use 
the Conversation Café method with the team during their 
next reflection meeting. At the meeting I introduced the ground rules, the 
process we would follow, and the talking object to the 

team.  I set an example of speaking with honesty and 
heart.  Talking piece in hand, I described what I had seen 
and the concerns that I had.  I wondered out loud whether 

anyone else had concerns and passed the talking piece to 
the next person.  One by one, every team member but one 
expressed similar concerns.  I was stunned.  After two 

rounds of using the talking piece, we opened up the 
discussion and the team began to explore possible actions 
that they could take to alleviate the problem.  By the end 

of the reflection meeting, they had chosen three actions to 
take and the team went on to improve their processes and 
learning together significantly. 
10.  Success of the Technique 
I knew that I had found a technique that worked when 
I used the technique with a second team.  Both teams 
asked if we could use the talking piece reflection method 
again.  I believe that using this method in many of our 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 early reflections improved the quality of reflection meetings tremendously and taught our teams some of the 
conversational practices that open minds and hearts to 
new ideas.  We don’t start each reflection meeting with a 

specific topic, but almost always, we find a topic that 
resonates with the team. 
I have found that using this method helps us to delve 
deeper and helps topics to emerge that might not 

otherwise arise.  It also introduces learning that impacts 
group behavior and the process and practices that the 

teams follow. I was recently in a reflection meeting where we were 
not using a talking piece.  The conversation began to get 
very lively and fast.  When one of the participants got 
interrupted, he exclaimed, “Where’s our talking pen?”  

(At the last reflection meeting we had used a pen as a 
talking piece.)  The conversation slowed down.  The 
speaker was able to continue uninterrupted and the 

meeting proceeded. 
Recently a coach told me that facilitating reflection 
meetings was one of the hardest parts of the coach role.  

Using the Conversation Café process helped her to 
become more comfortable leading reflection meetings. 
I have to admit that I was surprised by how well the 
teams accepted this practice.  It took great courage for me 

to introduce this technique the first time.  Later when I 
described it to a manager in our area, he was incredulous 

that the method    worked.  His comment was memorable, 
“You did what? With engineers? And they liked it?” 
11.  Conversation Café Cautions While I have found the Conversation Café technique 
helpful, it is not a panacea.  Teams can still have 

unproductive reflection meetings using this technique.  
The first person to speak often determines the direction 

the meeting will take, especially if that person is the 
perceived leader of the meeting.   
Often, the other individuals in the group will learn by 
observing the first person to speak, what the norm and 

expectation of the group is for honesty and depth.  The 
honesty and depth of the reflections of the team are 

directly related to the honesty and depth the leader is 
willing to express.   If I am leading a team reflection and I succumb to 
“Minnesota nice,” then the team members will almost 
always stay in the safety zone of “Minnesota nice” as 
well.  I have led reflections on topics that should have had 

some juice, but because I had difficult going for honesty 
and depth myself, no one else did either.  I can tell when I 
am in a reflection like that because the meeting feels dead 

and there is no “energy” in the group. 
Another mistake I have to school myself to avoid, is 
jumping in when the group has an initial slow start.  
Sometimes a team will start out by saying that they have 

nothing to discuss.  By being patient, sitting through some 
possible silence and letting the meeting continue, I often 
find that either the group happens upon a topic 

accidentally that yields significant learning, or someone 
feels safe enough to bring up a topic of concern.  
Expected behavior may also be at work. A long silence 

with the expectation that someone will speak builds 
tension that has to be released.  
12.  Evolve Reflection Meeting Techniques to 
Keep them Fresh As time goes by I use the Conversation Café technique 
less and less overtly.  I have noticed that once teams 
become adept with this process they don’t need to use a 
talking piece and follow the steps so explicitly.  When I 

notice that reflections have become dull and routine, I will 
bring the talking piece to a reflection meeting and use the 
method again.  I suspect that if we used the Conversation 

Café technique for every reflection meeting, that it too 
would lose its effectiveness.   
When you use Conversation Café, don’t forget to go 
over the ground rules and process, even if you think that 
the team knows them.  The ground rules remind us of 
good practices to use any time we are in a conversation 

and it helps to remind people of the process in case they 
have forgotten.   
I recently observed reflections of four different sub-
teams on our project.  Of the four teams I observed, two 

were using a talking token at their meetings.  Each team’s 
reflection was different and each team’s reflection was 
effective for that team. One team with a new team 
member spent time introducing themselves to the new 

team member and learning about their new teammate.  
Another team  discussed problems they were experiencing 
with their customer and developed a plan to resolve the 

problem.  The team that I coach discussed the results of a 
recent survey on the team’s Agile practices.  During the 
discussion, they explored the reasons that the team’s 

ratings changed and asked for more information on some 
of the practices that they didn’t fully understand.   
13.  Other Factors that Influence the Quality of Reflection Meetings 
There are other factors to consider when planning 
effective reflection meetings.  When a team is first 
reflecting together, they do better without outside 

observers. Once they are accustomed to reflecting 
together, this rule can be relaxed, but initially when the 
group is working on developing trust, outsiders hinder the 
process.  It also helps to set up ground rules for the 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 process.  Many of our teams have agreed that what 
happens in the reflection stays within the team unless they 
agree to talk about it outside the team. 
The size of group is also very important.  Because our 
project team is large (over 20 developers), we have 

divided the team into smaller sub-teams that work 
together, meet together, and reflect together.  We have 

found that teams of 4-6 developers seem to be the optimal 
size in our environment.  If you team is larger than 8 
people, consider dividing into 
smaller groups for a portion 
of the reflection meeting and then coming back together 
and de-briefing the small group conversations with the 
entire group. The shape of the meeting space also impacts the 
quality of reflections.  I think the ideal shape for 

reflection is a circle of chairs with no table present.  
Second best is a team sitting around a table.  If the table is 
too large or u-shaped, the quality of the reflection is 

usually impacted negatively. 
14.  Stories about Reflection Impacts Since the introduction of Conversation Café, our teams 
have created their own reflection meeting innovations and 
explored many areas.  After being asked to fill out 
feedback forms on each teammate by the project’s 

leadership, one team decided that they would like to give 
feedback to one another face-to-face on how they 
perceived one another’s performance.  While it wasn’t 

easy, they each shared one contribution to the team each 
teammate made that they most appreciated and one way 
that each teammate could improve how they worked with 
the team.  One developer told me that the feedback he 
received was not what he had expected, yet it was “dead 

on” and helped him to see how his choices impacted the 
team.  He also told me that this reflection made a palpable 
difference in how the team worked together.  After giving 

one another feedback they were able to say things to one 
another that they would not have said prior to giving one 
another feedback.  This team had been working together 

and reflecting together for almost a year before they held 
this meeting. Trying this technique with a newly formed 
team might not yield the same positive result.  Imposing 
this topic on a team would also not yield a good result.  
Because the idea came from within the team and team 
members had developed sufficient trust in one another it 

worked. The coach of that team later told me that he had found 
that the best reflections for his team seemed to flow from 

a topic that was currently “up” for someone on the team, 
and the least effective reflections happened when he 
introduced a topic that came from outside the team. 
In one of my team’s reflection meetings, I started a 
meeting with a simple, “Does anyone have anything they 
want to talk about today?”  One of the team members 

quickly jumped in to say that she had something she 
wanted to discuss.  She went on to describe how difficult 
it was pairing with one of the senior members on the 

team.  She related that as a relatively new developer, she 
was in learning mode and needed time to ask questions, 
slow down and think about the code, and try things on her 

own.  She found it very frustrating when pairing with a 
teammate who was very skillful and fast because she did 
not feel that she could sl
ow the process down enough to 
learn at a pace that was comfortable for her. She wanted 
to discuss what could be done to improve her pairing 
experience.  As a result of her simple act of courage in 
expressing frustration with the pairing experience, the 
team went on to have a very open and honest conversation 

about pairing.  While there were no easy answers, having 
the discussion made everyone more aware of the 
challenges and a little more considerate of one another as 

they worked together.  
Early in our project, hearing complaints in a reflection 
meeting about a technical problem that everyone was 

encountering led one developer to think about the 
problem in more depth.  She decided that solving this 
problem would be of great benefit to the project With the 

support of the project manager, she convened group of 
volunteers who were interested in working on the 
problem.  Over a period of weeks the group met to 

explore various options.  They developed and 
implemented a solution that has saved our project 
countless hours of effort.  It is difficult to quantify how 

changes like this impact a project, but I believe that we 
have seen more innovation and new ideas on this project 
than on any project I have worked on.  I attribute some of 
this innovation to increasing opportunities for developers 
to reflect together. I am often surprised by the topics that come up in 
reflection meetings.  At my team’s most recent reflection, 

I wondered if anything would pop as an issue.  The team 

had just finished a good sprint.  Team members were 
getting along well and everything seemed to be going 
smoothly.  As I started the meeting with, “What’s up for 

everyone?  Does anyone have anything they want to 
discuss today?” words and body language indicated that 
no one had much to say.  As I let the silence sit for a 

couple of minutes, someone made a comment about a 
technical issue with a task he and a teammate were 
working on.  This led to a short technical discussion and 

led to more questions. Before I knew it, another team 
member noticed that it appeared from the discussion that 
a pair was not following practices that the team had 

agreed on.  Since the team had agreed that ignoring this 
practice had caused problems in a previous reflection 
meeting, they valued it enough to explore further.  As 
they discussed the issue, with one another, they worked to 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 find a solution that met the needs of the pair and at the 
same time followed the practices that they had agreed on 
as a team.  To me, this was a perfect example of the team 
learning that can occur when teams take time to reflect.   
15.  Conclusion We learn from the past through cycles of action and 
reflection that lead to new actions.  Without setting aside 

time for reflection and learning how to reflect well 
together, teams are missing an important learning 
opportunity. The practice of reflection has helped our 
Agile teams become more effective and productive.  I 
hope our experiences with
 reflection meetings inspire you to give the practice of reflection a try. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
