 Waltzing with Changes 
Amy Law and Shawn Learn 
TransCanada450 – 1st Street SW Calgary, Alberta T2P 4K5, Canada amy_law@transcanada.com and shawn_learn@transcanada.comAbstract“The only thing that is a constant is change.”     Greek philosopher, Heraclitus 
 This idiom is especially true when dealing with a 
software development project.  With varying degrees, 
change impacts project delivery, budget, and quality.  

Often in today’s environment, the requirements for 

higher quality software combined with compressed 

timelines and fewer developers can make change 

management a difficult task.  This paper focuses on 
how agile practices play a role in managing changes 

in an industrial software project developed at 

TransCanada.  We discuss how the impacts of changes 

in resources, changes in requirements, and external 

factors can be minimized.  We examine numerous 

methods of overcoming challenges that often occur 
during industrial software development.1. Introduction TransCanada is a leading North American energy 
company.  The TransCanada network consists of 

approximately 41,000 kilometers (25,600 miles) of 
pipeline, which transports most of Western Canada’s 
natural gas production to growing markets in Canada 
and the United States.  An average throughput of 

natural gas is about eleven billions cubic feet per day.  
TransCanada also owns, operates, and is developing 
more than 5,700 megawatts of power generation 

capacity.  This would meet the needs of about 5.7 

millions average households.  To support this 

enterprise, the IS department has delivered many 

software solutions for specific business needs.  One of 
the software solutions developed in TransCanada is 

Project X1.Similar to other software development projects, 
Project X encountered various challenges.  

Requirement changes combined with fewer 

programmers and unexpected external influence made 
project success more elusive than ever.  The project 
team needed to be creative to find solutions to 

overcome these challenges.  Through a retrospective 
session, this paper examines how agile practices were 
tailored to manage changes and discusses numerous 

methods of overcoming challenges that often occur 
during industrial software development. 
2. TransCanada Project Table 1:  Summary of Project X Project X 
Type 
Enhancement 
Number of Programmers 6Programming Skills Intermediate 
Programmer Dedication Time Shared 
TechnologiesJava, Crystal Report, 
and Forte CustomersVarious Business Units Duration8 months Original Delivery Schedule December 2004 
Actual Delivery Schedule 
February 2005 
As shown in Table 1, the goal of Project X was to enhance an existing Java web-enabled enterprise 
application.  This enhancement was developed by six 
programmers with intermediate programming skills.  
The programmers were not exclusively working on 
                                                          
1Project X is a software development project in TransCanada, and its real name is not revealed due to 
confidentiality.
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 this project.  They shared their time between various 
projects and application support during the course of 

software development.  The end product was deployed 

to production in February 2005 serving various in-

house business units and external customers. 
A typical TransCanada software development 
project has two champions.  Project X had a business 

champion representing the customer community, and 

an IS project leader representing the programming 

team.  Both of them had previous exposure to agile 

methods and believed in the benefits of agile practices.  

They valued agile practices as an inexpensive way to 

manage the project, keep the business informed, and 

guide programmers to understand user requirements.  

Their belief was supported by TransCanada’s IS department which delivered many software systems by 
adopting agile methods in the past five years.  

Leveraging from these lessons learned, Project X 
champions decided on adopting many agile practices.  
Some of the practices were master backlog, sprint 

backlog, daily status meeting, monthly scrum demo 

review, and small releases.  These practices proved to 

be effective and beneficial when unexpected changes 

occurred during the course of project execution. 3. Unexpected Changes Project X went through various challenges and 
unexpected changes during the course of software development.  These challenges are typical in any 

industrial project.  The changes affected project 
success as shown in Figure 1. Figure 1:  Influence to Project SuccessThe project underwent several staffing changes.  
The manager was changed during the initial project 
evaluation.  This had an immediate impact to the 

software delivery because it took a couple of months to 

hire and transition to a new manager.  Several weeks 

later, two of the programmers originally allocated to 

Project X were pulled away to work on other projects 

with higher priority.  A new resource was later 

identified to replace the two programmers.  This new 

resource resigned for a career move a month before 

project completion.  In the end, a new expert resource 
was employed to complete the rest of the 

implementation.  The limited resources and unforeseen 

staffing changes contributed to late software delivery. In addition, Project X received system requirements 
changes midway through the project.  Some of the new 
system requirements included a new security group to 
enable a larger user base and new report requirements 

for the ease of data verification.  Other changes in the 
requirements were additional fields to existing screens 
and user interface modification to reduce navigation.  

Figure 2 shows how these changes contributed to late 
software delivery. Figure 2:  Causes to Late Software Delivery User satisfaction was also impacted by external 
factors.  Project X initially planned a three-week 
warranty period2.  In the final month of the project, the 
team encountered an unexpected code freeze 
introduced by Project Y
3.  During the code freeze, programmers were not allowed to change source code 

unless the issue was a critical break fix.  With the 

unexpected code freeze, the warranty period was 

reduced to one-week.  The code freeze was not 

communicated to Project X until a couple of weeks 

prior to the actual freeze.  A combination of inadequate 

cross team communication, often inherent in a large 

organization, and insufficient project planning 
                                                          
2 Warranty period is a period of time when programmers fix 
any post-production issues, regardless of its nature major or 
minor, to ensure customer satisfaction.
3Project Y is another software development project in 
TransCanada, and its real name is not revealed due to 

confidentiality.
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 shortened the warranty period, which impacted the 
overall user satisfaction as shown in Figure 3. Figure 3:  Influence to User Satisfaction 4. Analysis of Situation In response to these changes, the project team had 
to analyze the situation to overcome the challenges in 
order to take proper corrective actions. The resource utilization strategy in TransCanada is 
designed to maximize efficiency.  Everyone in the 

team was occupied with projects, operational support, 

or both.  In order to increase team efficiency, some of 

the project manager’s ability to cope with unexpected 

workload needs to be sacrificed.  Another source of 

inefficiency is the fact that programmers have 

obligations to many different business groups, all of 

whom have varied expectations.  Satisfying the 

interests of one group may alienate others.  This is a 

result of tradeoff between efficiency and flexibility [3]. With the limited resources, the project team had to 
find creative solutions to allocate the right people at 
the right time.  Hiring new staff was a potential 

solution, but the project had a limited budget and 

limited time to locate programmers with the required 

technological skills.  Hiring additional staff was not a 

viable solution. As Brooks' Law indicates, adding manpower to a 
late software project makes it later.  Although there are 

great advantages from splitting and assigning work to 
new programmers, the cost associated with the 
complexity on division of labor, transition, knowledge 

sharing, thorough communications, coordination and 
merging their work is a lot greater. 
The project leader was new to the business functions and had limited project management 

experience.  She had to learn the application 
requirements, and gain a deeper understanding of 
business needs.  This made communication of 

requirements difficult. 
The in-house users and programmers from Project 
X and Project Y were located on different floors.  The 

office layout did not facilitate convenient 
communication.  The lack of communication between 
teams contributed to the unexpected code freeze.  The 
stakeholders did not have enough time to react 

properly.  As the code freeze was discovered in the 
final stage of the project, the programming team 

worked overtime and business accepted a shortened 

warranty period to overcome this problem.  
5. Solutions The project team considered a number of preventive 
controls and potential solutions to address these 

changes.  Some of these controls and solutions 

leverage agile practices, whereas others are possible 
additions to the domain of agile methodology. 
5.1. Solutions to Changes in Resources Common problems in software development 
projects are insufficient experienced programmers and 
inefficient, ineffective use of their time.  With constant 

change of resources, each new staff has to learn the 

system requirements and team’s standard. 
Project X attempted to adopt pair programming to 
minimize the impact of this problem.  Pair 
programming allows the new staff to gain a better 
understanding of the system requirements, coding 
standard, and software design patterns from their 
peers.  This enabled ongoing knowledge sharing and 
peer communication. 
However, pair programming was difficult due to 
task switching.  Programmers, with limited time, 

shared between numerous projects.  This excessive 

multi-tasking jeopardized the benefits of pair 

programming.  Therefore, pair programming was not 

applied consistently in Project X. As a supplement, Project X applied code inspection.  
This practice complementarily used to ensure software 

quality.  Extremely diligent documentation was 

adopted to minimize the impact of inconsistent pair 

programming.  At the beginning, the project manager 

introduced a new Wiki web site to the team.  She 
aimed to effectively create, centralize, and maintain 
documentation that facilitated the foundation of 

common understanding in system requirements.  The 
Wiki web site was mainly used as a communication 
tool to clarify requirements.  Only about 15% of the 

project time was invested to documentation. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 One of the biggest challenges was to provide accurate estimates on project delivery.  The original 
estimate accounted for pair programming which was 

not fully utilized.  This resulted in a poor time and cost 

estimate.  Several solutions could help to overcome 

this challenge.  First, the monthly scrum demo review 

made the project progress transparent to the customer 

communities.  Through monthly review, the project 

leader shared the updated time and cost estimates with 

the stakeholders.  She also explained any deviation in 

order to manage expectations.  This iteration exercise 

enabled the team to communicate, plan, forecast, and 

prioritize requirements for the work in the subsequent 

sprint.The lack of resources caused late software delivery.  
To reduce this impact, small releases were deployed on 

a monthly basis.  This allowed users to be aware of the 

software development progress.  This also helped to 
manage expectations. 
Another practice adopted was a formal change 
process.  This process effectively and accurately 
communicated the changes to various levels.  A project 

change control log was used to keep an up-to-date 

record of all changes, approved or otherwise.  Specific 
trigger points determined when formal change process 
was necessary.  Due to the change of resources, Project 

X had one formal change order; triggered by the delay 

of schedule.  As shown in Table 2, these trigger points 

were developed in collaboration with business unit and 

project manager. 
Table 2:  Project Change Control Triggers Change  Level Trigger Details 
Low < $ 10 K  
Med $ 10 K - $ 15 K  
CostHigh > $ 15 K 
Low < 1 Sprint change  
Med > 1 Sprint change  
Schedule:IntermediateMilestonesHigh > 2 Sprints change  
Schedule:Final
DeliveryHigh > 1 month delay 
LowChanges with no benefits impact 
ProductHigh 
Changes with benefits impact 
Formal change documentation of budget, delivery, 
and requirements ensured key stakeholders were aware 
of the project status and influencing factors.  The 

sprint backlog and small releases provided justification 
for changes.  The decision was made with the business 

considering the priority of the project.  Depending on 
trigger levels, different key stakeholders, such as 
business sponsor, champion, and project manager, 

must provide their signatures to approve or reject the 

changes.  In this fashion, the formal change 

documentation was a communication tool, 

confirmation acknowledgement, and logging reference. 
By adopting these practices, the business champion 
increased the ability to prioritize and the IS project 

leader was able to schedule work.  Both leaders used 

these practices to expand or scale down the project.5.2. Solutions to Changes in Requirements A standard practice at TransCanada is to develop a 
project statement.  This project statement must be 

signed prior to the start date of a project.  It includes a 

high level of system requirements to define a project 

scope.  In order to be flexible, the project leader has to 

respond properly to any requirement changes and 

additions during the project execution. To ensure effective communication and thorough 
understanding between business users and 
programming team, Project X used a master backlog 
and sprint backlog to track the current system 

requirements, estimates, and velocity.  The business 
champion prioritized requirements.  The backlogs were 

used to show the velocity during the resource 

negotiation.Another agile practice facilitated the changes in requirements was the tailored version of daily status 
meeting.  Instead of having every stakeholder at the 

meeting, the business and IS side of the project had 

representatives who met on a regular basis.  These 

representatives also paid informal visits to their team 

to obtain up-to-date progress and requirement changes.  

This allowed for the key benefit of the daily scrum 

meeting with a more efficient use of time. 
Each individual was multi-tasking.  Moving a 
dedicated staff to multiple projects could lead to a loss 

of at least six hours per week of that person’s work 
time [3].  This hidden penalty could increase when the 
partitioning was greater [6].  The time-sharing nature 
also made it a challenge to justify the co-location 
moving costs
4.The use of conference calls was to minimize the 
problems associated with working at different 
locations and context switching.  Due to the 

multitasking nature, the users and programmers did not 

make use of a standard scrum meeting on a daily basis.  
                                                          
4 A typical moving cost in TransCanada is C$500.00 
per person. Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 Instead, they had numerous conference calls per day.  
This allowed quick decision making whenever an issue 

would arise and prevented incorrect assumptions.  For 

larger, more important issues, face-to-face meetings 

were held.  It is important to note that it was not 

uncommon for the daily meetings to be cancelled.  In 

contrast, some days multiple meetings were held.  The 

flexible communication was the key to overcome the 

time sharing nature. 
5.3. Solutions to Impact of External Factors Despite the fact that resources and requirements 
were in continuous flux, the most influential change 

was the impact of external factors.  Daily scrum 

meetings helped to alleviate many problems, but 
Project X developers and its key users were the only 
attendees.  External forces played a significant role in 
the project where other project team did not participate 

the daily status meeting.  Since programmers from 

these projects did not share their status, problems were 
not detected until late in the development cycle. 
As another impact of multi-tasking, Project X’s IS 
project leader was also the scrum master, system 
analyst, programmer, and tester.  This overloading 

assignment increased the probability of insufficient 

overseeing.  The result was that the code freeze was 
not detected, communicated, and consulted to the 

business unit until a couple of weeks prior to the 

freeze.In response, the programmers worked overtime to 
cover the key features prior to the freeze and the 

business users worked overtime to perform user 
acceptance tests in a reduced elapsed time. 
This is a contradiction to agile concept where 
sustainable pace is encouraged and to XP practice 

which uses a 40-hour workweek.  Although agile 
practices are very useful guides, sometimes, alternative 

methods needed to be considered. 
Daily scrum meetings gave an opportunity for 
everyone to share comments about the product and 
discuss any issues, particularly external factors that 

may affect the project.  In this instance, the code freeze 

was missed because Project X and Project Y held 

isolated daily meetings.  Therefore, it is extremely 

important to include the key individuals in the 
meetings and review the attendee lists on a regular 
basis.The small releases, ranged from 30-days to 45-days, 
allowed other parts of the company to see this project 
impact on them.  This is an important factor for 

expectation management.  A combination of these 

tailored practices facilitated effective communication. 
6. Reflection Through a retrospective session, Project X team 
identified a number of practices that worked and 

several practices that did not.  Finally, a list of lessons 

learned was documented to contribute to the IS 

organizational knowledge base. 6.1. Effective Practices The project X team identified a number of practices 
that are worthwhile for future projects:It was highly effective having business 
leaders with power in the monthly review 
meeting to make quick binding decision. 
Business leaders with a strong engineering 

background and business acumen provided 

thorough user requirements, analogies, and 

explanations to the programming team. 
Sprint backlogwas helpful to keep track of 

current and new requirements (color-coated).  

It measured the true velocity, predicted 
product delivery, and gave justification for 
formal change order. 
Monthly scrum demo review provided talking 
points for users to collaboratively discuss and 

finalize system requirements prior to 

deployment. 
Small releases made users aware of the 
realistic project progress.  Flexible releases, 
ranged from 30-days to 45-days, proved to be 

effective in the small project. 
Convening pride at work, programmers were 
willing to work overtime to finish all of the 

key features before the code freeze. Users understood the importance of the code 
freeze and performed user acceptance tests in 

the reduced elapsed time. 
Users understood the importance of the code 

freeze and accepted the shortened warranty period.Open communication was consistently 

applied in the immediate team.  Changes in 

resources and requirements were 
communicated early to ensure everyone could 
respond accordingly. Most staff was receptive to new practices, like 

agile methods, and they were willing to apply 

them to the project. 
It was important to consult users about the 
preference of delivery methodology and their 

availability for participations. Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 6.2. Unsuccessful Practices Although agile methods were very beneficial, some 
of them required tuning based on the unique project 
environment:  
In some cases, pair programming was not and 
could not be consistently applied.  Pair 

programming when needed only provided 

partial benefits of knowledge sharing. Daily scrum meeting was modified to 

accommodate the multi-tasking nature of the 

users and programmers.  This did not provide 

the full benefits to overcome typical problems 

such as the lack of ongoing communication 

between teams. 
To some extent, the conference calls and 
frequent visits between floors facilitated 
communication.  However, they did not 
always encourage the users and programmers 

to work closely together.  There was room for 

improvement in co-location. 
Although there was a benefit to moving 

people to the same floor, the cost could be 

hard to justify.  Alternatively, the company 
could set up a temporary station so that the 
common area could facilitate open 

communication. 
The intent of the monthly review was to 

provide communication opportunities to 

stakeholders.  However, not all stakeholders 

attended the review.  Some people were not 

included on the invitation list even though 

they might initiate changes affecting project.  

Not all of the stakeholders that were invited 

attended the review, due to their workloads 

and other responsibilities.  This was a sign of 

insufficient communication between project 

teams.  To ensure proper communication 

among various departments, it was critical to 

identify the stakeholders at the initial stage 

and review the stakeholder list on a regular 

basis.  This was also a result of multi-tasking.  

The overloading assignment increased the 

probability of poor overseeing. Stable resource allocation could not be relied upon.  A resource backup plan should have 

been developed to alleviate this instability. Programmers provided the original estimates 
might not be the developers involved in the 

project.  Although the assumption was that 

the people doing the work were the ones who 

should be estimating, the constant changes 

voided this assumption. 
A single estimate with a deviation should be 

done.  Monte Carlo estimation could be used 

to provide this more robust estimate.  As an 
alternative, the estimates should be presented 

as a range such that the longer a unit task is 
the greater the range the estimate will need to 
be [7].  For example, the cost of a six-month 

project may have a range of +/- 25%, whereas 

the cost of a one-month project may have a 

range of +/- 5%. Estimation review process and feedback 

session with business leaders should take 
place.  In this fashion, the programmers are 
responsible for the estimates, and the business 

units have the right to tune or withdraw the 

requirements once they realize the effort. 
6.3. Lessons Learned The retrospective wrap up session gave us a list of lessons learned that contributed to the IS 
organizational knowledge base:It was vital to build a high-level project scope 
with enough details to minimize requirement 

changes or additions. The team should revisit priority to ensure the 

high priority items would receive the most 

attention and resources. Velocity needed to be realistic and was an 

important tool to justify change order on 

timeline and cost. 
To explore better and cheaper options, it is 

advisable to educate users about the 
technological limitations and how their 
decisions influence the system requirements.  

The business could make a wiser decision and 
provide an alternative requirement easing the 
existing limitation. 
It was important to keep close radar on 

departments that could introduce changes to 

the project.  Initially, the project leader should 
document stakeholders and their roles in a 
RACI matrix.  RACI stands for Responsible, 

Accountable, Consulted, and Informed.  The 
RACI matrix is a tool to assign and document 

task responsibilities. Another important tool was the risk registry, 
which documented the effect of changes and 

mitigation plan when such events occurred. 
The project leader should apply preventive 

controls on resource planning.  At the 

beginning of the project, she should introduce 

a risk analysis of staff redeployment.  This 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 risk analysis should determine the costs and 
associated impact of moving a staff away 

from the project.  A sweet spot should be 

determined to ensure the optimal resource 

level is maintained. 
Another recommendation was to fill in the 
project team skills and expertise matrix to 

determine the strength of the team and 

consequence of staff changes.The project leader should also create or obtain 
a resource inventory list to identify resource 

expertise in the company. 
The project leader should create and maintain 
a backup staffing plan.  This planning 

identifies the availability and costs of backup 

resources.  The resources might not stay with 

the project for the entire cycle.  Instead, they 
attend monthly review for consultation.  This 
can be considered as an alternative to pair 
programming and used to overcome resource 

problem and project delay. 
It is important to implement a work 
management process where a backlog of 
required tasks are recorded, prioritized, 
measured, and analyzed.  The work 

management process can help to facilitate a 
resource strategy. The company should provide timely training 

to staff to ensure adequate skill sets are 

available in the immediate workforce. 
The company should understand the multiple 
tasking penalties and prevent staff time-

sharing.The company should embrace lessons-learned 
sessions to improve process and practices.  

The lessons learned should be communicated 

to business and IS departments.  Therefore, 

future projects could reuse good practices and improve processes to fit in the unique 

environment. 
7. Conclusion As the famous Greek philosopher, Heraclitus 
challenged the world that “Everything is in flux.”  It is 

common to find change in today’s software 

development projects.  As shown in our industrial case, 
changes can be influential to project success, software 
delivery, and user satisfaction.  There are many ways 

to manage changes, but the most important aspect is 

communication.  Communication needs to occur at 
many levels.  Not only do the business and IS teams 

need to communicate between each other, but they also 

need to communicate within their own teams and with 

other groups that may influence the project.  Although 
agile practices allow flexibility and prepare for 
changes, it is important to minimize the number of 

changes by practicing good effective communication 

early in the project.  By applying and adopting the set 

of practices defined above, we believe that each of us 
can deliver successful software systems, provide 
effective business solutions, and increase customer 

satisfaction in our IS industry. 8. Acknowledgements 
We would like to thank Rick Coutts, Jim Nicholas, 
Claudio Perrella, Shane Savard, Rebecca Wirfs-Brock, 
Scott Ambler, Chris Teare, Patrick Yip, Tam Nguyen, 

Dave Chiste, Raylene Charron, and Jackie Gardner, for 

their comments, guidelines, and encouragement. 
9. References [1] Kent Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained – Embrace 
Change, Addison Wesley Professional, 2000. 
[2] The Standish Group, “The CHAOS Report,” 1994. 
http://www.standishgroup.com/sample_research/chaos_1
994_1.php[3] DeMarco, Tom, 
Slack, Broadway, 2001. 
[4] Brooks, Frederick, 
The Mythical Man-Month - Essays on 
Software Engineering, Addison-Wesley Publishing 
Company, 1995. 
[5] ThinkReliability, 
Cause Mapping – Effective Root Cause 
Analysis, Houston, 2004. [6] Santosus, Megan, “Why More is Less,” 2003.  
http://www.cio.com/archive/091503/reality.html
[7] Ambler, Scott, “Agile Project Planning Tips,” 2005.  
http://www.ambysoft.com/essays/agileProjectPlanning.ht
mlProceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
