  
Towards Extreme(ly) Usable Software:                                                  
Exploring Tensions Between Usability and Agile Software Development 
 
 
Jason Chong Lee and D. Scott McCrickard 
Center for Human-Computer Interaction, Department of Computer Science 
Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, VA 24061-0106 
{chonglee, mccricks}@cs.vt.edu
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
Design is an inherently multidisciplinary 
endeavor.  This raises the question of how to develop 
systems in ways that can best leverage the 
perspectives, practices, and knowledge bases of these 
different areas. Agile software development and 
usability engineering both address important aspects 
of system design, but there are tensions between the 
methods that make them difficult to integrate.  This 
work presents a development approach that draws 
from extreme programming (XP), a widely practiced 
agile software development process, and scenario-
based design (SBD), an established usability 
engineering process.  It describes three key questions 
that need to be addressed for agile software 
development methods and usability engineering 
practices to work together effectively, and it introduces 
interface architectures and design representations that 
can address these questions. 
 
 
1.
 
Introduction  
 
The growing importance of computing systems in 
everyone™s daily lives has made software development 
an inherently multidisciplinary endeavor [17][18].  
This raises the question of how to develop systems in 
ways that can best leverage the perspectives, practices 
and knowledge bases of these different areas.  Software 
engineers, who focus more on the design and 
implementation of software systems, and usability 
engineers who focus more on the interface design for 
end-users, are two areas of design that have not 
traditionally worked well together.  The broad goal of 
this research is to address the problems associated with 
multidisciplinary system designŠfocusing specifically 
on agile software development and usability--Šby 
developing a design process that supports the effective 
creation of usable software-based systems through 
common practices and toolsets derived from both 
areas.  Initially, agile methods such as extreme 
programming provided little guidance on how to 
incorporate best practices from usability engineering 
[2].  The underlying assumption appeared to be that 
having an active, on-site customer would result in a 
usable end product.  However, this turned out not to be 
the case.  Systems could be developed that were 
functionally correct but still hard to use [19].  Usability 
can help by giving developers a more in-depth 
understanding of users, their work and how their goals 
can be realized most efficiently.  This realization has 
led to a surge of interest in usability within the agile 
community [2][5][14][19][24].   
The differing goals and motivations of 
practitioners in software and usability engineering 
combined with the myriad techniques and 
methodologies in each leads to tensions that need to be 
addressed in any development process that draws on 
both.  In this work, we probe these tensions by looking 
at prominent development practices in agile software 
development and usability engineering, namely 
extreme programming (XP) and scenario-based design 
(SBD) respectively, and explore how they can work 
together in developing usable software systems 
efficiently. 
This paper will first present background 
information on usability and current work on 
integrating usability with agile methods.  It will then 
summarize some of key questions that need to be 
addressed to mitigate the tensions between the two 
areas and present an overview of the combined 
XP+SBD process.  The results of two design case 
studies and the following discussion will reflect on our 
approach and its benefits and limitations.  Finally, we 
will discuss further improvements and implications for 
tool support. 
 
 
  
2.
 
Background and related work  
 
This section provides some background on 
usability engineering practices and other work that is 
being done on integrating usability and agile software 
development. This background information will 
highlight some of the conflicting methodologies and 
practices of the two areas which serve as motivation 
for this work. 
 
2.1
 
The need for usability 
 
Usability engineering is concerned with 
developing interfaces that people can use efficiently 
and effectively.  It deals with issues such as system 
learnability, efficiency, memorability, errors and user 
satisfaction [7][9][22].  Usability engineering 
processes are important in that they focus on 
developing systems that are tailored for end users.  Its 
underlying practices and theories can give insights into 
user motivations, characteristics and work 
environments and draw on many different areas 
including psychology, sociology, physiology and 
human factors.  Agile methods and usability practices 
have much in common.  They both follow cyclical 
development cycles, are human-centered and both 
emphasize team coordination and communication.  
However, differences in the philosophies of the two 
areas may cause conflicts that can hinder the 
development process. 
One established usability engineering approach is 
scenario-based design, a design-representation based  
process that uses 
scenarios
Šnarratives describing 
users engaging in some task, in conjunction with 
design knowledge components called 
claims
, which 
encapsulate the positive and negative effects of specific 
design features as a basis for creating interactive 
systems [4][22]. Claims provide compact, designer-
digestible packets of knowledge ideal for use in time-
critical design activities [25].  Like many usability 
engineering approaches, SBD begins with an in-depth 
requirements analysis process followed by an iterative 
development/evaluation cycle.  These development 
cycles are typically longer than XP iterations, and 
focus more on requirements gathering and low-fidelity 
prototyping early in the development process.  These 
design practices, though important in usability, are not 
a good fit in many agile practices which focus on 
continuous of working software and minimal up-front 
design work. 
SBD design practices allow usability engineers to 
design an interaction architecture that supports the 
users™ tasks in an efficient and organized manner.  
Usability evaluations are typically conducted with 
actual end-users and can involve walkthroughs, 
longitudinal studies of use or controlled lab-based 
studies.  Conducting usability evaluations and doing 
the subsequent analysis of the data can be time-
consumingŠespecially with respect to development 
cycles as short as those in XP.  This raises the question 
of how these types of design practices can be 
streamlined to fit in an agile framework. 
 
2.2
 
Agile software and usability  
 
Agile practitioners have begun to explore ways of 
incorporating usability into agile methods [24].    
Development processes from both areas such as XP 
and SBD share many of the same foundational 
concepts including iterative development and a focus 
on users and communication. However, a joint 
approach is difficult because agile methods, which are 
incremental and iterative in nature, do not support any 
kind of comprehensive overview of the entire interface 
architecture which is an important part of making 
consistent and usable interfaces.  Constantine 
advocates a combined usability and agile software 
development process that begins with interface design 
and then continues with existing agile software 
development processes [6].  One potential problem 
with this approach is that the interface usability design 
process becomes a bottleneck in the overall 
development process and violates many of the accepted 
tenets of the agile development philosophy [15].  Other 
approaches suggest a methodology where software 
development and usability engineering proceed in 
parallel [2][5][14][19][21].  This appears to be the 
preferred approach although communication and 
careful coordination are vital as agile developers and 
usability specialists can have differing motivations, 
thought processes and goals. 
 
2.3
 
Tensions between agility and usability 
 
This work will contribute to these continuing 
efforts by exploring some of the tensions between agile 
software development and usability from the 
perspective of SBD and XP.  By looking at how well 
different usability methods and techniques can be 
incorporated into agile methods we hope to gain 
additional insights into opportunities for mutual benefit 
and support.  These tensions lead to three key 
questions that need to be addressed for agile software 
development methods and usability engineering 
practices to work together effectively. 
 
  
1.
 
How can developers design consistent and 
coherent interface architectures within an 
incremental agile development framework? 
2.
 
How can usability evaluations be streamlined so 
they better fit in accelerated development cycles 
while still providing useful results? 
3.
 
How can project members support communication 
and cooperation between designers, customers, 
users and other stakeholders who have different 
backgrounds and expertise? 
 
The remainder of this work explores the questions 
above by exploring the practices in each approach that 
contribute to the tensions and by presenting a way that 
they can be mitigated.  
 
3.
 
XP+SBD process defined 
 
Scenario-based design and extreme programming 
are built on similar foundations.  Both support iterative 
development, are human-centered and emphasize team 
coordination and communication.  However tensions 
between the two approaches need to be addressed for 
them to work together effectively.  The XP+SBD 
process supports the best practices of both processes 
while mitigating the tensions between them. The key 
features of the process are defined below.  Many XP 
practices which are similar to SBD are preserved 
including iterative development and release and 
iteration planning games.  Others such as pair 
programming, unit testing, code refactoring and 
continuous integration are also unchanged.   
 
3.1
 
Scenario-based design 
 
Scenario-based design uses scenarios and claims 
to describe usage situations and highlight the tradeoffs 
of specific interface features.  The scenario in Figure 1, 
based on the Notification Collage [8], describes the use 
of a virtual notice board to allow users to maintain 
awareness of people they work with.  
Unlike the stories of XP, scenarios may involve 
many features of the system and will describe how one 
or more people engage in some activity [1][22].  They 
provide a realistic context of use from which to derive 
insights about the interface design.  The claim in 
Figure 2 describes a specific design feature of the 
Notification Collage.  Claims such as this can help 
designers and other stakeholders consider different 
design tradeoffs throughout the development process: 
 
Pascal, a graduate student, is working on a paper 
related to his research.  While working on the 
paper, he also wishes to be informed of research-
related information that is being shared within his 
lab.  He uses the Notification Collage (NC), which 
runs on his second monitor, in order to be 
constantly aware of such information.  Pascal can 
now casually glance at the NC every once in a 
while in order to see the posted items.  When 
looking at the NC, he visually scans the randomly 
placed most recent items that are on top.  As he 
looks at the various types of information posted, he 
gains an understanding of the information 
contained in the items that are completely visible, 
but does not know if the information is recent.  
Knowing that he must find out at a later time when 
the information items were posted, he returns to his 
research paper. 
Figure 1. Example scenario for the notification 
collage.
 
 
Information artifacts haphazardly posted in an 
unorganized fashion onto a public display for 
relevant information delivery, similar to how fliers 
are posted on a bulletin board. 
+ allows users to gain an understanding of an 
item's age/applicability with respect to the 
number of items that may be covering it 
+ the lack of information categorization 
accommodates a wide range of different types 
of information to be conveyed through the 
display 
- BUT overlapping items due to the lack of 
organization can hinder efforts to read/see a 
particular information item 
- BUT although the relative age of an item that 
appears on top is newer, the actual age of an 
item is not apparent
 
Figure 2. Example claim describing tradeoffs of the 
bulletin board metaphor. 
Scenario-based design specifies four design 
phases: requirements analysis, activity design, 
information design, and interaction design.  
Requirements analysis
 is where designers first collect 
information on current practices through interviews, 
ethnographic studies and other data gathering 
techniques.  This information is used to construct a 
root concept document, which describes the overall 
vision for the system and stakeholder descriptions.  
The designers then craft problem scenarios and claims 
to describe how tasks are currently done and what key 
problems and issues exist.  In 
activity design
, designers 
  
develop scenarios and claims to describe activities and 
tasks the new system will support based on the 
previously developed problem scenarios and claims.  
In 
information
 and 
interaction design
, designers 
determine how the activities will be supported through 
the information the interface provides and the 
interactions it supports.  These phases, though defined 
serially, often intermingle in practice as design 
proceeds iteratively.  For example, information and 
interaction design may occur in a single iteration, 
followed by a usability evaluation that prompts the 
designers to reconsider the overall activity design. 
 
3.2
 
Interface architecture design 
 
In the XP+SBD process, this same basic process is 
followed to develop the interface but it proceeds in 
concert with software development (Figure 3).  Instead 
of an extended up-front requirements analysis phase, 
abbreviated requirements gathering activities such as 
stakeholder identification and task analysis will be 
conducted at the beginning of the project after client 
meetings.  The root concept document is developed 
after an initial client meeting.   
 
 
Figure 3. Key steps in XP+SBD process.  Design 
artifacts are shown in white. 
The interface design representation is called the 
central design record
 (CDR), and is part of our 
continuing research efforts [10][11].  It consists of the 
set of scenarios describing different usage situations, 
interrelated claims describing to specific features in the 
interfaces, and design goals.  Design goals are stated in 
terms of critical parameters which are measures of 
performance used to determine how well a design 
serves its purpose [16].  For example, critical 
parameters used during car design might be mileage or 
top speed.  It is used to guide all stages of interface 
design in the XP+SBD process. Task analysis and 
story elicitation typical occurs first and leads to 
scenario development but the reverse can also happen.  
The CDR allows developers to systematically improve 
the interface during the development process because it 
stores the rationale for the design decisions within an 
organized set of claims called the claims map [27] 
(Figure 9). This makes design decisions explicit and 
highlights important relationships between different 
parts of the interface. 
The challenge is to develop, maintain and make 
use of the CDR within the tight time constraints of the 
XP development cycle. In the XP+SBD process, the 
CDR will be expanded as development pro
ceeds 
incrementally.  Developers will maintain a consistent 
overall view of the interaction architecture and the 
activities it supports by continuously reviewing and 
updating it during each iteration.   
 
3.3
 
Collaboration through the CDR 
 
As a record of design decisions made to the 
interface, the CDR also acts as a communication point 
between and among developers, evaluators and clients.  
Previous studies have shown that the CDR helps 
developers communicate design decisions to other 
stakeholders and facilitates the resolution of design 
issues uncovered in usability evaluations [10][11].  
Scenarios provide easy-to-understand narrative 
descriptions of how users will interact with the system.  
Critical design decisions and tradeoffs are encapsulated 
in the claims, and allow developers to quickly compare 
different design options.  It also allows them to justify 
design decisions to other stakeholders and to better 
plan for and direct meetings with clients or users.   
 
3.4
 
Usability evaluations through the CDR 
 
The other addition we make to the existing XP 
framework are usability evaluations.  XP includes unit 
testing which verifies the functional accuracy of the 
code, and acceptance testing which proves to 
customers that the system works as agreed upon.  
Usability testing will verify that the system is easy and 
intuitive for end users.  Although there may be some 
overlap between acceptance and usability testing, the 
focus of each is distinct and equally important.   
Scenario-based design, the CDR, and related 
techniques from usability engineering provide the 
framework and guidance necessary to support usability 
evaluations. 
Claims in the CDR are used to analyze and reason 
about specific interface features.  Claim downsides or 
upsides can be validated through usability evaluations 
  
and help developers to identify usability problems. By 
tracking which claims correspond to the stories 
currently being developed and looking at their 
interrelationships in the claims maps, developers can 
plan targeted evaluations at the end of each iteration.  
They also leverage light-weight usability evaluation 
methods such as expert walkthroughs and heuristic 
evaluations to quickly evaluate the interface. This 
process complements the XP practice of test-driven 
development to maintain functional correctness of the 
code.  In this case, the usability of the design can be 
validated at regular intervals to prevent entropy in the 
overall interaction design as the system is 
incrementally developed. 
 
4.
 
Design case studies 
 
Two design case studies are detailed below that 
demonstrate how the XP+SBD process addresses the 
key questions detailed in section 2.3.  The developers 
were four undergraduate students receiving research or 
independent study credit.  Three people, including the 
authors of this paper, acted as managers and oversaw 
each development project.  The students were 
introduced to the XP+SBD process over the course of 
several weeks at the beginning of the semester.  The 
remaining 10 weeks were devoted to development. 
Each group used the XP+SBD process outlined in 
Section 3 to develop their respective systems.  
Development proceeded over the course of five two 
week iterations, representing a single release cycle. 
Project information and CDR documentation was 
stored on a wiki that the developers and clients could 
access at all points in the project [12].  All projects 
were developed using C# to run on PocketPCs.   The 
NUnit
1
 framework was used for unit testing in each 
project. 
The development environment was made as 
realistic as possible but there were several limitations.  
First, the developers and clients were all located at the 
Blacksburg Campus at Virginia Tech but developers 
and clients were not collocated in a single office 
environment due to work and academic obligations. 
However, developers at least held weekly meetings 
with their clients and remained in constant email 
contact. In addition, pair programming was not used 
consistently throughout the semester due to conflicting 
schedules.  They were advised to conduct code reviews 
together when they had to work separately.  Project 
managers did a code walkthrough with one or the other 
member of a team (including unit tests) at the end of 
                                                       
 
1
 http://www.nunit.org/ 
each iteration to verify that both developers in each 
team understood the code. 
 
4.1
 
Project descriptions 
 
Each of the two project groups developed 
location-based notification systems for different clients 
at Virginia Tech.  Notification systems are systems 
used in dual task situations where a user mainly 
focuses on a primary task while explicitly or implicitly 
monitoring information through a secondary system.  
Location-based notification systems can calculate their 
own location and use that information to deliver 
targeted information to users.  Location tracking was 
based on the SeeVT system, which uses WiFi access 
point signals to determine the location of any device 
that has wireless access [23].   
 
 
Figure 4. Screen shot of SeeVT Art showing a 
nearby art piece along with identifying information. 
The SeeVT Art project was a new development 
effort whose goal was to implement a location-aware 
tour-guide system that would notify users of nearby art 
pieces and provide detailed information on request 
(Figure 4).  The system was intended to support 
opportunistic navigation of the many art pieces 
displayed at the newly constructed hotel and 
conference center at Virginia Tech.  The client was an 
employee at the Office of the University Architect. 
The VTAssist project was a continuing 
development effort from the previous semester [3].  
One of the student developers had started developing 
the system in the previous semester while the other was 
just joining the project. VTAssist is intended to help 
mobility impaired users locate and maintain awareness 
of accessible areas such as restrooms, water fountains 
  
and entryways (Figure 5).  The system is intended to 
alert users of inaccessible resources, such as when an 
automatic doorway stops functioning, so they can then 
work around those problems. Accessibility information 
is maintained through a collaborative feedback system.  
The primary client contacts were two members of the 
Assistive Technologies Lab at Virginia Tech. 
 
 
Figure 5.  Screenshot of VTAssist.   A top-down 
map view of the user's location is shown along with 
details about the accessibility of several locations. 
 
4.2
 
Evolution of the CDR 
 
The CDR was used to maintain a coherent, 
consistent and understandable interaction architecture 
within the incremental agile development process.  It 
provided a broad overview of the design and specific 
details when needed to guide usability evaluations.  
The relationship between the CDR and the stories 
being developed allowed the developers to make key 
decisions in the development process. 
Each project began with a release planning 
meeting involving the developers and their respective 
clients.  For SeeVT Art, this included getting a better 
understanding of the client, learning what was to be 
developed and coming up with an initial story list 
(Figure 6).  In the previous semester, the VTAssist 
developers developed a handheld application that 
would be used by wheelchair users to become aware of 
and navigate around accessibility problems.  For this 
semester, they focused on developing a way to record 
and keep track of the accessibility problems around 
campus through a collaborative feedback system. 
The start of each project was also where the 
developers set high level design goals in terms of 
critical parameters. These design goals for notification 
systems are defined by how much 
interruption
 the 
system causes, how readily it supports efficient 
reaction
 to the notification, and how much long-term 
comprehension
 the user has of information from the 
system [13].  These values, hereby referred to as IRC 
values, are typically expressed as a value between 0-1.  
The SeeVT Art developers determined that the IRC 
value for their system should be I:.5, R:.5, C: .7.  This 
corresponds to a system with a moderate level of 
interruption, supports a moderate level of reaction from 
the user and supports a moderate to high level of 
comprehension.  The high level of comprehension is a 
result of the client™s desire to provide detailed 
information about the art pieces to foster a deeper 
appreciation of the art at the conference centerŠmuch 
of which is created by alumni.  The VTAssist 
developers estimated the IRC of their system to be I: 
.35, R: .25, C: .9.  The low level for interruption and 
reaction indicates that they and their client did not want 
the system to be too disruptive or intrusive to use.   
 
1. Map Display and Location Awareness  
-Develop a system to display an area map  
-Display a user™s location on the map  
 
2. Opportunistic Information System  
-Recognize when a user is near a POI  
-Display relevant information  
 
3. Basic Administrative Features  
-Implement a mechanism through which the system 
may be updated  
 
Figure 6. Excerpt from initial list of prioritized 
stories for SeeVT Art project. 
After story development, the developers wrote out 
scenarios representing the key task flows identified by 
the clients.  These scenarios were especially important 
for the VTAssist developers because it helped them to 
demonstrate to their clients how the system could rely 
on other Virginia Tech students and faculty to find 
accessibility problems which could later help mobility-
impaired people.  Figure 7 shows two early scenarios 
that demonstrate how the feedback system works. 
From these scenarios, specific claims are developed 
that correspond to the tasks that each system needs to 
support and how they are supported through the 
interface.  The claims are arranged into a 
claims map
, 
which shows how the different tasks and interface 
features are related to one another.  The claims map 
starts with a 
root concept claim
, which describes the 
system being developed in addition to important 
tradeoffs that need to be considered.  These tradeoffs 
  
can relate to a mix of technological, contextual and 
usability issues (Figure 8).   
 
John is a responsible person who liked helping 
other people. He is about to use the TORG elevator 
and observes that it has gone out of service. While 
deciding to use the stairs he uses 
VTAssist Œ
 
Tablet Edition ‚feedback™
 to be able to notify 
other users of this and save them time. After doing 
this he feels happy of his good deed for the day. 
 
Tom uses a wheelchair to get around campus, he 
enters into TORG and uses 
VTAssist Œ Tablet 
Edition ‚map™
 to find the closest elevator. He 
views the information on the elevator and discovers 
that he cannot use it because of the information 
John had left. Tom finds another elevator and is 
able to view directions to it through the map. 
Figure 7. Two activity scenarios that describe how 
the system can be used to record accessibility 
problems and help the mobility-impaired. 
 
Using a handheld device to navigate the  art 
collection 
+ Increases user appreciation through improved 
access to information 
+ Users can more fully experience the art collection 
+ Small form factor fits easily into user™s hands 
+ Intuitive touch screen interface 
+ Low cost (compared to laptops) 
- May interfere with user™s other tasks at the center 
- Small devices are easy to lose or steal 
- Unfamiliar technology to average users 
- handhelds have limited computing power and 
memory 
Figure 8. Root concept claim for the SeeVT Assist 
project. 
Activity claims radiate out from the root concept 
claim and correspond to the specific tasks the system 
should enable.  More specific claims are then linked to 
the activity claims which describe exactly how those 
tasks are supported.  These specific claims can describe 
how information is displayed to the user and what 
interactions are supported.  They generally correspond 
directly to one of the stories.   In the first iteration, the 
claims map primarily consists of the root concept claim 
and the activity claims.  At each iteration, developers 
will implement a small subset of the total functionality 
of the system.  Similarly, the CDR grows 
incrementally as this functionality is developed (Figure 
9).  The developers used IHMC CMapTools
2
, a 
concept mapping tool, to construct the claims maps.  
The claim tradeoffs were not included in the diagrams 
in the interest of space. Observe how the CDR grows 
in a tree-like fashion as development proceeds.   
 
Iteration 1 
 
Iteration 2 
 
Iteration 5 
Figure 9.  Claims map for the SeeVT System.  The 
root concept claim (green) is at the top is linked to 
activity claims (blue) which are linked to 
implementation claims (yellow). Note the 
progressive growth through the iterations. 
The organization of the CDR shows the design of 
the system at multiple specificitiesŠfrom the 
conceptual level to the task level to the interface level.  
Maintaining this organization gives developers a 
constant overview of the most important features of the 
interface, the tasks they support, and how they are 
interrelated.  This claims map allows developers to 
refactor the interface to reflect new usage scenarios 
and changes in response to client feedback and 
                                                       
 
2
 http://cmap.ihmc.us/ 
  
evaluations.  A detailed discussion of the relationships 
used in the claims maps is available here [26].  The 
claims map becomes increasingly complex as design 
proceeds, but the root concept claim and activity 
claims are relatively stable throughout the development 
process. although they can change from iteration to 
iteration.  For example, in the second iteration the 
clients and developers of the VTAssist system added 
the additional system task of notifying users when a 
previously inaccessible location becomes accessible. 
 
4.3
 
Connecting SBD and XP  
 
In the XP+SBD process, usability engineering and 
system development occurs in a single unified 
development process.  In larger teams, different 
developers may focus more on usability or 
development depending on their expertise, similar to 
the development process followed by Lynn Miller and 
the team at Alias [14].  The important point is that both 
software development and usability issues are 
considered concurrently throughout the development 
process.  This ensures that the entire team understands 
both aspects of development and how they interact.   
The parallelizing of software development and 
usability engineering also allowed the developers to 
perform some processes in parallel with development.  
For example, the SeeVT Art project conducted a 
walkthrough of the conference center to gather 
requirements after doing a preliminary task analysis of 
their system and doing some initial development work.  
Since there were only two people in the group, these 
tasks were not actually conducted in parallel, but this 
shows how pairs could work separately and 
simultaneously on usability and development related 
tasks. 
 
SeeVT Technology used to locate users 
+ Discerns user location via WiFi signals 
+ Easily used as a web service 
+ Works indoors 
- Does not work everywhere 
- Requires wireless connection 
- Not very accurate. Can only specify user™s region 
 
Figure 10. Claim describing tradeoffs of using 
SeeVT location tracking system 
There is generally a direct mapping between a 
claim in the CDR claims map and any story that relates 
to some interface feature.  There was no specific tool 
support that allowed the developers to manage this 
relationship but they were able to keep track of how 
they relate to each other, especially when one affected 
the other.  Both projects used the SeeVT system to 
estimate locations using WiFi signals [23].  In the 
second iteration , the SeeVT Art project found that the 
SeeVT system was not accurate enough to identify 
individual art pieces as some were often placed very 
near to each other in the conference center.  This 
required them to work with their client to develop an 
alternative interaction strategy to mitigate this issue.  
They did this by converting one of their stories into a 
claim that they then added to the claims map (Figure 
10).   
They then designed the system interaction to work 
around this limitation by designing the system to 
display a list of artwork near the user along with 
pictures (Figure 11).  This 
mitigated
 the problem of 
accuracy in the SeeVT system and is visible in their 
claims map. 
 
 
Figure 11.  Portion of the SeeVT Art claims map 
showing how the problem of location accuracy was 
mitigated. (Note: only claim titles are shown above) 
As shown above, technological issues can affect 
the way the interface is designed.  The reverse also 
occurred in the projects.  For example, during the 
second iteration in the VTAssist project, the clients 
requested that the developers implement a version of 
VTAssist to run on a tabletPC.  This decision was 
largely driven by usage issues related to the handheld.  
The tabletPC had a larger easier to read display, would 
be easier to operate, and could be mounted on 
wheelchairs thereby freeing the users hand.  This 
required the VTAssist developers to adjust and 
reorganize their ranked list of stories and refocus their 
development efforts. 
 
4.4
 
Evaluating the interface 
 
Evaluating the usability of the interface, unlike 
unit testing, is difficult to completely automate.  
Evaluations can collect any amount of quantitative and 
qualitative data that touch on many different aspects of 
usability including ease of use, learnability and overall 
  
satisfaction.  They also require an actual person or 
persons to conduct the testing.  As a result, the 
XP+SBD process advocates the use of light-weight 
analytic evaluations, which occur at the end of each 
iteration, followed by more in-depth usability 
evaluations at the end of each release cycle.   
The CDR is used to guide these evaluations by 
helping developers determine what areas of the 
interface to evaluate at the end of each iteration and 
what effect redesigning some part of the interface will 
have on other parts of the system.  For example, at the 
end of the third iteration, the VTAssist developers 
conducted a walkthrough of their system with their 
clients acting as proxy users.  The different tasks they 
ran through were based on the scenarios related to the 
parts of the system they had focused on, while the 
questions and feedback they gathered were derived 
from the claims they wrote.  The developers used 
colored dots (green, yellow, red), to indicate whether a 
location was accessible, under repair or inaccessible.  
During the walkthrough, the users noted that this type 
of indicator would be impossible for people with red-
green color blindness to use.  This was an unforeseen 
downside that they addressed in the next iteration by 
using indicators that relied on different shapes in 
addition to colors.  The claim related to location status 
was updated and otherwise verified so subsequent 
evaluations did not have to focus on this area of the 
interface again.  Lightweight usability evaluations at 
the end of each iteration were essentially combined 
with the acceptance testing process.  Clients verified 
the functionality of the system in addition to providing 
feedback on its usability. 
Usability evaluations can have broad impacts on 
the system.  For example, at the end of the third 
iteration, the SeeVT Art developers and clients revised 
their overall IRC value to have very low interruption 
and reaction values.  They determined that they wanted 
the system to be minimally distracting and should rely 
more on direct user engagement so they can focus 
more on the artwork itself.  This led them to explore 
other interaction techniques such as delivering 
information through audio clips and providing pictures 
of the environment instead of an overhead map view. 
These quick, lightweight evaluations provided useful 
usability feedback without excessively limiting system 
development.  The only time where a large amount of 
time was spent running an evaluation was at the end of 
the semester when a comprehensive usability 
evaluation of the entire system was conducted.  This is 
needed at the end of release cycles to validate overall 
usability and uncover additional usability problems.  
The developers were encouraged to recruit actual 
representative end-users to evaluate their designsŠ
although only the SeeVT Art group was able to do this. 
 
4.5
 
Communicating design rationale 
 
The different parts of the CDR facilitated 
communication of design rationale among project 
stakeholders.  The student developers were not 
explicitly told what parts of the CDR to share with 
their clients but they were encouraged to share 
materials they thought could facilitate communication.   
The VTAssist team shared scenarios with their 
clients early in the design process to show how new 
task flows such as the collaborative feedback system 
would work.  Design goals in terms of critical 
parameters were indirectly presented to clients.  
Developers would describe a system as having low 
interruption or distraction instead of introducing them 
directly to the IRC values.  Claims were also not 
directly shown to clients.  Information about specific 
claims was shared through the lightweight and 
summative usability evaluations and through general 
discussions during those meeting.  The more detailed 
parts of the CDR, such as the claims map and its 
component claims were used by developers to iterate 
on their designs and weigh different design options.  
For example, following discussions with their client 
during the third iteration, the VTAssist developers 
wrote several claims to specify the upsides and 
downsides of developing on the handheld versus the 
tablet PC (Figure 12).  
 
VTAssist on pocketPC 
+ Easy to position for use. 
+ Lighter to move around  
+ Not very expensive. 
- Smaller display area. 
- Smaller control area. 
 
VTAssist on tabletPC 
+Larger Display 
+Larger control area 
+Attached to wheelchair 
- Hard to position for use 
- Heavy to carry around. 
- Significant cost 
Figure 12.  Claims showing tradeoffs of developing 
VTAssist for PocketPCs vs. tablet PCs 
The CDR is the common point through which the 
different stakeholders in a project communicate design 
intentions.  By linking between usability design 
artifacts and agile artifacts, developers are able to see 
the interactions between the interface design and the 
underlying system implementation and make 
appropriate tradeoffs and design decisions as 
necessary.  The multiple perspectives of the design it 
shows allows for more high level discussions with 
clients if necessary. 
 
5.
 
Discussion 
 
This section revisits the key questions about the 
tensions between agile processes and usability 
  
engineering presented in Section 2.3 and details how 
XP+SBD addresses them (Table 1).  It summarizes the 
conclusions from the design cases while highlighting 
limitations of the approach.  
The incremental development illustrated by the 
CDR showed how it was possible to develop a 
coherent and consistent interface design representation 
by continuously reviewing the claims map and 
refactoring the interface when the need arose due to 
evaluation results or other factors.  This allows agile 
developers to maintain a consistent, incremental 
release cycle throughout the project.  However, it can 
be difficult to determine how complete a design 
representation should be.  The developers in both 
projects largely relied on their own judgment as to 
what parts of the interface should be represented and 
which do not need to be.  There is a tradeoff between 
completeness and manageability of the representation 
that developers will have to balance when using a 
design representation like the CDR.  Critical 
parameters were shown to be a useful guide for 
defining overall project goals and measuring progress.  
However critical parameters can be difficult to define 
or measure depending on the type of system being 
developed.  The developers relied mostly on rough 
estimates for the IRC values which still proved useful 
in communicating design goals among themselves and 
their clients.  
The developers use of the claims and the claims 
map showed how useful it can be to maintain a list of 
interface design decisions and the potential tradeoffs 
they entail.  These helped them to see exactly what 
parts of the interface needed to be tested in the current 
iteration and which could be deferred or ignored.  
Many of the evaluations were in fact folded into 
regular client meetings.   
 
Table 1. Table showing how XP+SBD approach addresses the tensions between agile methods and usability 
How can developers design consistent and coherent interface architectures within an incremental agile 
development framework? 
 
 Incremental development of an interface supported by a design representation like the CDR 
+ Can help developers maintain consistent and cohesive interaction design through continual evaluation 
of explicit design rationale and systematic improvements. 
+ Does not limit or excessively delay incremental software delivery 
- Can be difficult to determine when a design representation is sufficiently complete 
 
 Using critical parameters like IRC values to guide interface development 
+ Can be used to measure design success through repeated evaluation of explicit metrics 
- Critical parameters may be difficult to define and measure 
 
How can usability evaluations be streamlined so they better fit in accelerated development cycles while 
still providing useful results? 
 
Maintaining an organized list of design tradeoffs, like a claims map, to guide lightweight usability 
evaluations 
+ Can allow designers to target specific areas of the interface to evaluate, thereby saving effort and 
reducing the need to reevaluate parts of the interface in later iterations 
- Requires additional effort by developers to plan and run usability evaluations 
 
How can project members support communication and cooperation between designers, customers, 
users and other stakeholders who have different backgrounds and expertise? 
 
A shared design representation showing both high and low level views of the interaction design 
+ Allow different stakeholder groups with different backgrounds to understand and give feedback about 
the design. 
+ Can make interplay of usability and agile development work explicit and understandable 
+ Can focus planning meetings by reminding stakeholders of key design decisions and concerns 
- Requires designers to actively maintain links between agile and usability artifacts 
 
  
The cases also show that a design representation 
consisting of easy to understand artifacts that make 
connections between the different concerns of the 
stakeholder groups can support communication and 
cooperation.  Communication and buy-in is vital for 
these different groups to work together effectively.  
This representation allowed different stakeholders to 
have a shared understanding of the overall design and 
to make informed tradeoffs when conflicts came up. 
However, maintaining this kind of representation does 
take some effort.   
 
6.
 
Conclusions and future work 
 
There is a need to develop ways to design software 
systems that can draw on the best practices and tools of 
different disciplines.  To that end, this work has 
focused on finding ways for agile software developers 
and usability engineers to work together more 
effectively by addressing the conflicts between 
extreme programming and scenario-based design.  We 
end with four guidelines for usability specialists and 
agile practitioners that can be derived from this work. 
 
-
 
Share design documents and artifacts when 
possible.
 
Maintaining communication among team 
members is vital.  Sharing these artifacts can 
augment face-to-face communications and allow 
developers to make informed decisions about 
design tradeoffs.
 
 
-
 
Strive for continuous interface improvement.  
Incremental additions to an interface can gradually 
erode overall usability.  Always be aware of 
possible improvements and do not be afraid to test 
new ideas.  A larger number of smaller, more 
focused usability studies can result in a similar (or 
better) level of understanding as a small number of 
large testŠand it better fits with the agile 
philosophy. 
 
-
 
Integrate usability into day to day development 
tasks. 
Continuous improvements require 
continuous user feedback.  Conduct informal 
evaluations when more complete usability 
evaluations are not feasible.  Have clients or other 
team members look over new interface features.  
Such data can be valuable when you know who 
you™re designing for, what data you™re collecting 
and why you™re collecting it. 
 
-
 
Avoid having team members overspecialize in 
one area.  
Team cohesiveness is important to 
maintain velocity.  Members with separate focus 
areas/expertise should have an understanding of 
each other™s specialties to prevent 
misunderstandings and wasted work. 
 
Future efforts will build on the foundation laid out 
in this work and address some of the shortcomings that 
were identified.  The researchers are currently 
developing a tool that allows designers to build and 
manage CDRs.    This will help to mitigate some of the 
problems associated with CDR management that were 
experienced in this study. This tool will be built on top 
of an existing knowledge management framework, 
LINK-UP, which acts as a design knowledge 
repository of claims [11][20]. This will open the 
additional research question of how knowledge reuse 
through claims can support agile usability development 
processes. 
Our next study will evaluate this approach with a 
practical development project through an industry 
partner.  We will be able to evaluate how well the 
XP+SBD approach works in a realistic design 
situation.  This will allow us to avoid some of the 
limitations of this study but will present new 
challenges due to the presence of additional factors 
will be more difficult to control.   
 
7.
 
Acknowledgements 
 
We wish to thank the student developers and 
project clients for their valuable feedback, Miten 
Sampat for his help with the SeeVT location-tracking 
system, and Robert Biddle for his insights and 
encouragement. 
 
8.
 
References 
 
[1]
 
Beck, K., ﬁEmbracing change with extreme 
programmingﬂ, 
Computer
, vol. 32, no. 10, 70-77, Oct. 1999. 
[2]
 
Beyer, H., Holtzblatt, K., and Baker, L., ﬁAn Agile 
Customer-Centered Method: Rapid Contextual Designﬂ, 
XP/Agile Universe ™04
, 2004, 50-59. 
[3]
 
Bhatia, S., Dahn, C., Lee, J. C., Sampat, M., and 
McCrickard, D. S., ﬁVTAssist-A location-based feedback 
notification system for the disabledﬂ, 
in Proc. ACMSE ™06
, 
2006, 512-517. 
[4]
 
Carroll, J. M. and Kellogg, W. A., ﬁArtifact as theory-
nexus: Hermeneutics meets theory-based designﬂ, 
in Proc. 
CHI
 
™89
, 1989, 7-14. 
[5]
 
Chamberlain, S., Sharp, H., and Maiden, N., ﬁTowards a 
Framework for Integrating Agile Development and User-
Centred Designﬂ, 
in Proc. XP ™06
, 2006, 143-153. 
[6]
 
Constantine, L. L., ﬁProcess Agility and Software 
Usability: Toward Lightweight Usage-Centered Design.ﬂ 
Information Age
, vol. 8, no. 2. Reprinted in L. Constantine 
  
(Ed.), Beyond Chaos: The Expert Edge in Managing 
Software Development. Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2001. 
[7]
 
Cooper, A., and Reimann, R., 
About Face 2.0: The 
Essentials of Interaction Design
, Wiley Publishing Inc., 
Indianapolis, IN, 2003. 
[8]
 
Greenberg, S., and Rounding, M., ﬁThe notification 
collage: posting information to public and personal displaysﬂ,
 
in Proc. CHI ™01
, 2001, 514-521. 
[9]
 
Hix, D., and Hartson, H. R., 
Developing user Interfaces: 
Ensuring Usability through Product and Process
, John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., New York, NY, 1993. 
[10]
 
Lee, J. C., Chewar, C. M., and McCrickard, D. S., 
ﬁImage is Everything: Advancing HCI Knowledge and 
Interface Design Using the System Imageﬂ, 
in Proc. ACMSE 
™05
, 2005, Vol. 2, 376-381. 
[11]
 
Lee, J. C., Wahid, S., Chewar, C. M., Congleton, B., 
and McCrickard, D. S., ﬁSpiraling Toward Usability: An 
Integrated Design Environment and Management Systemﬂ, 
Computer Science, Center for HCI, Virginia Tech, 
Blacksburg, VA, Tech. Rep. TR-722, 2005. 
[12]
 
Leuf, B. and Cunningham W., 
The Wiki Way: Quick 
Collaboration on the Web
, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 
2001. 
[13]
 
McCrickard, D. S., Chewar, C. M., Somervell, J. P., and 
Ndiwalana, A., ﬁA Model for Notification Systems 
Evaluation-Assessing User Goals for Multitasking Activityﬂ, 
ACM TOCHI
, vol. 46, no. 3, 312-338, 2003. 
[14]
 
Miller, L., ﬁCase Study of Customer input For a 
Successful Product,ﬂ 
in Proc. ADC ™05
, 2005, 225-234. 
[15]
 
Nelson, E., ﬁExtreme Programming vs. Interaction 
Designﬂ, 
Fawcette Technical Publications
, 2002. 
http://www.fawcette.com/interviews/beck_cooper/
. 
[16]
 
Newman, W., ﬁBetter or Just Different? On the Benefits 
of Designing Interactive Systems in terms of Critical 
Parametersﬂ, 
in Proc. DIS ™97
, 1997, 239-245. 
[17]
 
Norman, D. A., ﬁDo companies fail because their 
technology is unusable?ﬂ, 
Interactions
, vol. 12, no. 4, 69, 
2005. 
[18]
 
Olsen, G., ﬁThe emperor has no lab coatﬂ, 
Interactions
, 
vol. 9, no. 4, 13-17, 2005. 
[19]
 
Patton, J. ﬁHitting the target: adding interaction design 
to agile software developmentﬂ, 
in Proc. OOPSLA ™02
, 2002, 
1-ff. 
[20]
 
Payne, C., Allgood, C. F., Chewar, C. M., Holbrook, C., 
and McCrickard, D. S., ﬁGeneralizing Interface Design 
Knowledge: Lessons Learned from Developing a Claims 
Libraryﬂ, 
in Proc. IRI ™03
, 2003, 362-369. 
[21]
 
Poppendieck, T., ﬁThe Agile Customer™s Toolkitﬂ, 
Poppendieck LLC, 2003.  Available at 
http://www.poppendieck.com/pdfs/Agile_Customers_Toolkit
_Paper.pdf 
[22]
 
Rosson, M .B. and Carroll, J. M., 
Usability 
Engineering: Scenario-Based Development of Human-
Computer Interaction
, Morgan Kaufman, New York, NY, 
2002. 
[23]
 
Sampat, M., Kumar, A., Prakash, A., and McCrickard, 
D. S., ﬁIncreasing Understanding of a New Environment 
using Location-Based Notification Systemsﬂ, poster paper 
in 
Proc. HCII ™05
, 2005. 
[24]
 
Sharp, H., Biddle, R., Gray, P., Miller, L., and Patton, J., 
ﬁAgile development: opportunity or fad?ﬂ, 
In proc. extended 
abstracts CHI ™06
, 2006, 32-35. 
[25]
 
Sutcliffe, A. G., ﬁOn the Effective Use and Reuse of 
HCI Knowledgeﬂ, 
ACM TOCHI
, vol.7, no. 2, 197-221, 2000. 
[26]
 
Wahid, S., Allgood, C. F., Chewar, C. M., and 
McCrickard, D. S., ﬁEntering the Heart of Design: 
Relationships for Tracing Claim Evolutionﬂ, 
in Proc. SEKE 
™04
, 2004, 167-172. 
[27]
 
Wahid, S., and McCrickard, D. S., ﬁClaims Maps: 
Treasure Maps for Scenario-Based Design.ﬂ, 
In Proc. ED-
MEDIA ™06
, 2006, 553-560. 
 
 
