 How We Successfully Adapted Agile for a 
Research-Heavy Engineering Software Team 
 
Alfred A. Lorber 
Comp. Thermal & Fluid Mechanics (1541) 
Sandia National Laboratories 
Albuquerque, NM 
aalorbe@sandia.gov 
Kyran D. Mish 
Comp. Solid Mechanics & Structural Dynamics (1542) 
Sandia National Laboratories 
Albuquerque, NM 
kdmish@sandia.gov
 
In our development team at Sandia National Laboratories we 
have honed our Scrum processes to where we continually 
deliver high-performance engineering analysis software to our 
customers. We deliver despite non-ideal circumstances, 
including development work that can be categorized as 
exploratory research, regular use of part-time developers, 
team size that varies widely among Sprints, highly specialized 
technical skill sets and a broad range of deliverables. 
We believe our methodologies can be applied to many 
research-oriented environments such as those found in 
government laboratories, academic institutions and corporate 
research facilities. Our goal is to increase the adoption of 
Lean/Agile project management in these environments by 
sharing our experiences with those research-oriented develop-
ment teams who are considering using Lean/Agile, or have 
started and are encountering problems. 
In this paper we discuss how we create and prioritize our 
product backlog, write our user stories, calculate our capacity, 
plan our Sprints, report our results and communicate our 
progress to customers. By providing guidance and evidence of 
success in these areas we hope to overcome real and perceived 
obstacles that may limit the adoption of Lean/Agile techniques 
in research-oriented development environments.
  
Keywords-Agile, Scrum, 
research, scientific
 programming, 
engineering analysis software. 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
A.
 
General Background and Context 
We are the Scrum Master (SM) and Product Owner (PO) 
of the Thermal/Fluids Scrum team at Sandia National 
Laboratories in Albuquerque, New Mexico. Sandia, which is 
located in Albuquerque and Livermore, CA, has approxi-
mately 8000 employees and is one of the three national 
nuclear weapons laboratories operated by the U.S. Depart-
ment of Energy. Our Scrum team resides in the Computa-
tional Thermal & Fluid Mechanics Department, which is part 
of the Computational Simulation Group that has a total of 
seven Scrum teams and approximately 50 developers.  
Our team is made up of 22 full and part-time developers 
and is responsible for the development, documentation, 
deployment, and support of fluid mechanics and heat transfer 
software. The team is made up almost entirely of domain 
experts with PhDs in various disciplines such as Aerospace, 
Chemical and Mechanical Engineering, and related technical 
disciplines such as Physics and Mathematics.  
 Our software is principally written in C++ and our target 
platforms are massively parallel computers running various 
flavors of Unix, many of which are found in the TOP500 
Supercomputing Sites [1]. Our development is performed 
primarily on PC hardware running Linux, and as needed on 
our target platforms for testing and debugging. Our applica-
tions do not have a graphical front end. 
Our programs solve the mathematical equations that 
govern the various physical phenomena needed to simulate 
the aerodynamic and fire environments experienced by 
hardware in normal operating and accident scenarios, and the 
thermal/fluid response of the hardware to these environ-
ments. Our users are engineering analysts who utilize our 
software’s capabilities to pr
oduce numerical simulations that 
support design and assessment of engineering systems.  
Our group began using Scrum early in 2008 starting with 
three Scrum teams after three developers received SM 
training. Over the years Scrum has been successful and what 
was a pilot program restricted to only a handful of software 
activities has expanded to encompass all development work 
in our group. All seven of our Scrum teams utilize three-
week Sprints that begin in the same week. 
B.
 
Initial Challenges 
When we began using Scrum we essentially did it by the 
book, relying on the processes called out in Ken Schwaber’s 
Agile Project Management with Scrum
 [2] and what the SMs 
had learned in training. During this initial adoption stage, we 
encountered many problems, e.g., non-delivery of the stories 
in our sprint backlog and the lack of trust this caused 
between our stakeholders and the Scrum team. In addition, 
our standup, review and planning meetings were too long, 
delivering too little value to those attending, with attendance 
dropping until these problems were rectified. 
To understand our solutions to these problems one must 
first understand our environment. It is dominated by two 
factors, a heterogeneous team and science and engineering 
research-oriented programming needs. 
C.
 
The Heterogeneous Team 
The ideal Scrum team is what we view as homogeneous, 
i.e., it is made up of five to nine full-time developers with 
overlapping skill sets. Cross-functional ability is continually 
2013 Agile Conference978-0-7695-5076-3 2013U.S. Government Work Not Protected by U.S. CopyrightDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2013.201432013 Agile Conference978-0-7695-5076-3 2013U.S. Government Work Not Protected by U.S. CopyrightDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2013.20156 improved by employing practices such as peer code review, 
working in team rooms and pair programming. Because of 
the overlapping skill set, every Sprint the team members can 
self-organize and divide the labor amongst them after 
agreeing with the PO on a sprint backlog of user stories 
during the planning meeting. Ideally, the result is the 
repeated delivery of a completed sprint backlog at the end of 
each iteration [3].  
Our team is what we view as a heterogeneous team, 
caused by four factors that we suspect are common in 
research environments. The first is staffing realities that 
cause a mix of full- and part-time developers. Second is 
development work that requires specialization of develop-
ment skills for which no individual developer spans the 
spectrum of technical domain expertise. Third is lack of 
colocation and fourth is targeted funding. 
D.
 
Research-Heavy Scien
tific Programming 
We say our software development is research-heavy 
because it involves our developers taking the following steps 
before software can be written:  First, our developers must 
work closely with the our engineering analysts users to 
identify the needed physics for the problem being modeled. 
Then, equations that correctly model the physics must be 
formulated. Finally, these equations must be approximated 
and algorithms identified so that the equations can be solved 
via software. The difficulty is typically increased because 
many of the capabilities developed have few, if any, 
successful precedents as they are inherently exploratory. 
Thus the work required is often at the leading edge of 
scientific and engineering expertise, so much so that the 
work is often reported in peer-reviewed technical journals. 
Once these three steps have been undertaken, software 
development takes on a more traditional role in that the 
computer code can be written. However, this often has a 
research aspect due to ever-changing hardware and software 
components found in supercomputing venues. 
II.
 
WHY
 
AGILE
 
MAKES
 
SENSE
 
FOR
 
RESEARCH 
When considering the effective management of the re-
search-oriented aspects of our projects, Agile ultimately has 
proven to be a good fit. The three fundamental components 
of Agile, i.e., transparency, inspection and adaptation [3], 
offer clear benefits to research performed in our production 
environment. When investigating methodologies and imple-
mentation techniques, transparency provides the mechanism 
for inspection, which leads to adaptation. This implies that 
researchers benefit from fast feedback from both peers and 
stakeholders, which can be invaluable when trying to 
formulate a solution for an unsolved problem, or for finding 
a similar solution that might be utilized to verify the results 
of the current problem. It also leads to quick realignment of 
resources based on current results so researchers do not 
spend undue time investigating dead-end solutions. Impor-
tantly, transparency and inspection also help insure that our 
priorities align with those of our stakeholders, and that 
misunderstandings and individual biases do not lead to work 
that is not aligned with the appropriate solutions.  
III.
 
THE
 
CHALLENGES
 
IN
 
APPLYING
 
AGILE
 
TO
 
RESEARCH 
A.
 
 Why it is Difficult 
“If we knew what we were doing, it wouldn't be called 
‘research’, would it?” – Albert Einstein [4]. 
 
“Scrum is: Lightweight, simple to understand, extremely 
difficult to master.” – Ken Schwaber and Jeff Sutherland [3]. 
 
These two quotes embody why we believe applying 
Agile in general and Scrum in particular to research projects 
is difficult despite our arguments for why Agile is such a 
natural fit. 
The culture of the research professional in science and 
engineering is that the act of performing research is a 
serendipitous endeavor of discovery that cannot be rushed 
and must be done in an environment where the researcher is 
free to explore. All avenues affecting the research program 
should be explored and understood. In addition, research is 
often not taught as a team effort: in U.S. universities, the 
research leading to graduate degrees is specifically empha-
sized as an original individual effort resulting in a student’s 
graduate thesis or dissertation. Thus, the work of the 
individual is valued, even when that individual is working as 
part of a larger research team.  
In addition, as the well-established phrase “publish or 
perish” reminds us, researchers are strongly encouraged to 
publish in peer-reviewed journals and to present at technical 
conferences throughout their careers. While teamwork is 
endorsed in such venues, in practice individual recognition in 
a researcher’s body of work is all-too-often the most 
important criteria for advancement. 
Having been educated and mentored in such an environ-
ment, it is not surprising that developers who have earned 
PhDs and are working in the research phase of a project may 
be apprehensive about completely opening their work up for 
continuous review, especially when that work is incomplete. 
Thus Agile is what we advocate for use in software de-
velopment to manage these types of technical uncertainties, 
but Agile is not what is used when pursuing an advanced 
degree. So realizing the fruits of Agile requires some 
changes to the individual aspects of research culture in 
science and engineering, and some modifications of accepted 
Agile practices that embrace the culture’s realities but still 
stay true to Agile’s principles. 
B.
 
The Mechanics of Misalignment 
Given the culture of the researcher described above, how 
does this clash with Agile in general and with Scrum in 
particular? This potential for misalignment occurs in nearly 
every aspect. First and foremost, the idea of setting a time 
limit via the fixed-length Sprint goes against the fundamental 
idea that one cannot rush exploratory research. This goes 
against the concept of encapsulating a Sprint’s worth of work 
in a user story [5]. If one cannot predict or force results at 
Sprint’s end, how can acceptance criteria be written in such a 
way that they will be agreeable to the development team and 
to stakeholders? And finally, the idea of iteratively reporting 
144157 incomplete work can become uncomfortable for the 
developer performing research. This reporting is done each 
day during the daily standup and once every Sprint during 
the review. Developers can perceive this as presenting 
improperly vetted work at these meetings. 
IV.
 
WHEN
 
AGILE
 
IS
 
NOT
 
WORKING 
The clearest indication we have seen that Agile is not 
successfully managing a research project is when the team 
does not deliver what it promised by the end of the Sprint. In 
the worst cases, all indications during the daily standup are 
that the story is proceeding successfully but it is revealed just 
before review meeting that the work was not completed. 
In fiscal year 2011, in 16 Sprints we delivered all the user 
stories we committed to only 1/3 of the time. Unfortunately, 
this delivery pattern was the norm, and had been since 2008 
when we started using Agile techniques in our enterprise. 
Non-delivery is unacceptable because it erodes the trust 
required between the Scrum team and its stakeholders. 
Without this trust it is difficult 
to build a successful business 
relationship where stakeholders continue to seek the team’s 
services. Non-delivery also leads to waste in the PO role. It 
is difficult to plan for the next Sprint and beyond when it is 
not known until the end of the Sprint, when it is too late, 
what is actually going to be delivered.  
Non-delivery leads to endless tweaking of practices by 
the SM in an attempt to “fix” the team. For developers non-
delivery leads to frustration and low morale. Eventually, in 
search of a solution, the SM, PO, and finally management 
will continually meddle with the team, risking the autonomy 
Lean/Agile seeks to create.  
Another indication is when in the daily standup develop-
ers simply do not discuss some sprint user stories. We will 
discuss a simple way to address this in the next section. 
We have also seen it argued that research work should 
not be placed under Scrum. That is, that various research 
work is not suitable for Scrum’s focus on delivering a 
potentially releasable product increment each Sprint [3]. 
Instead, it is suggested that developers should work outside 
of the Scrum process for a period until they are ready to 
implement their findings in the code base. We will also 
consider these issues in the next section. 
V.
 
ADDRESSING
 
THE
 
CHALLENGES 
Over the six years that we have been using Scrum our 
team struggled as most others do in our adoption of Agile. 
While currently our situation is not perfect, and we never 
expect it to be, we do tackle a large body of work every 
Sprint and for over a year have consistently delivered by the 
Sprint’s end what we have promised to our stakeholders. Our 
stakeholders are generally satisfied with these results, even 
when the technical risk of the work has proven to be higher 
than originally estimated. In this section we describe many of 
the challenges we faced and the practices we implemented to 
overcome them. The discussion is organized based on 
various meetings and artifacts of our Scrum process.  First let 
us explicitly state the issues we have seen and then categor-
ize them so they can be more easily addressed. 
 
1)
 
Issues 
•
 
The larger the team, the longer the meetings and the 
more difficult to provide value to all participants. 
•
 
Average velocity and story-points per story are in-
sufficient to plan a Sprint due to large team size, 
fluctuating participation and specialization. 
•
 
Having developers report on research, especially 
non-progress, during a Sprint can be difficult due to 
the institutional culture of research. 
•
 
Writing research stories that are concrete can be 
difficult due to inherent uncertainty. 
•
 
Moving research forward at an adequate pace re-
quires transparency, inspection and adaptation. 
 
2)
 
Categories 
1.
 
Efficiency: A larger, heterogeneous team amplifies 
the need for efficient practices. 
2.
 
Delivery: The best way to satisfy customers is to 
simply deliver what is promised every Sprint. 
3.
 
Managing Uncertainty: We must manage the uncer-
tainty inherent in research in order to deliver. 
4.
 
Part-Time Developers: Variation in team size and 
Sprint capacity is a reality we must accept. 
5.
 
Specialization: Specialization of skills at the PhD 
level is a reality we must accept and address. 
6.
 
Work Within Scrum: It is tempting to perform re-
search related work outside of the Scrum process. 
7.
 
Research Visibility: Research benefits form transpa-
rency, inspection and adaptation. 
B.
 
Addressing the Issues 
To begin with, all involved with the Scrum process must 
understand what is expected of them. We have found that it 
is extremely effective to explain why these expectations are 
set in terms of others who are relying on the information. 
Our expectations include the following: 
 
1)
 
Daily Standup 
When we started Scum, our daily standup meeting fol-
lowed the standard format of a 15-minute meeting in which 
each developer answered the standard three questions [3]. As 
our team size grew and with it the number of stories in the 
backlog, it became difficult to associate what each developer 
said with specific stories. In addition, it was common for a 
story in the sprint backlog not to be reported on even when 
work was occurring, as the developer did not think the work 
done warranted reporting. This was especially true of 
research stories where slow progress and dead ends are 
difficult issues for researchers to report on for the reasons 
discussed above. We often reached a point where a few 
stories in the sprint backlog were nearly forgotten because 
they were not discussed during the Sprint and there was no 
clear line of responsibility for story completion. As the team 
size grew, the daily standups tended to start late due to late 
arrivals and run long due to a lack of focus. This, along with 
some disarray in reporting, caused developers to stop 
attending, as they were not finding value in the meetings. 
Below are the practices we used to address these problems. 
 
145158 Stories
: 
Story Shepherding
 
Practice
: Every story in the sprint backlog has a devel-
oper who is a shepherd. While not responsible for doing the 
actual work, the shepherd is responsible for ensuring that a 
story is completed. This includes ensuring the story gets 
adequate resources, renegotiating with the PO if needed and 
that a done slide (discussed later) is created. The shepherd is 
also responsible for ensuring the story gets reported on 
during the daily standup even when they cannot attend, 
typically through an appointed surrogate. 
Motivation
: In a large, heterogeneous team, it is easy for 
sprint user stories to not be completed due to lack of 
discussion, inadequate resources and inattention to detail.  
Categories Addressed
: Delivery, Research Visibility 
 
Daily Standup
: 
Task Based Review
 
Practice
: During the daily standup each story in the 
sprint backlog is discussed in sequence. Since we want to 
keep WIP (work in process) low it is understandable that, 
especially at the beginning of a Sprint, “not started” is a valid 
status of a story. 
Motivation
: Given the size of our team and the number 
of stories in the sprint backlog, stories can be missed or 
forgotten during the standup. In addition, if multiple team 
members are working on a story, it is difficult to present the 
work done on a story in an organized fashion if those 
members don’t report on the story consecutively.  
Categories Addressed
: Efficiency, Research Visibility 
 
Daily Standup
: 
Final Chance to Speak
 
Practice
: At least a minute will be reserved at the end of 
the daily standup for additional topics to be raised.  
Motivation
: Given a Task Based Review some develop-
ers may not get a chance to speak or bring up related issues, 
e.g., impediments. This is the time for those discussions. 
Categories Addressed
: Efficiency, Research Visibility 
 
Daily Standup
: 
Start on Time, End on Time
 
Practice
: The daily standup starts on time and ends on 
time, with no exceptions.  
Motivation
: We must respect all attendees’ time, as it is 
one of their most valuable commodities. One cannot manage 
time effectively if meetings do not follow a schedule. Dan 
Mezick [6] taught us that this is the single most effective 
practice for improving daily standup meetings. 
Category Addressed
: Efficiency 
 
Daily Standup
: 
Parking Lot
 
Practice
: Discussions that are taking too long in the daily 
standup are placed in the “parking lot” for discussion after 
the standup. It is essential that the SM ensure the team 
remembers to review the parking lot items after the daily 
standup or the parking lot will have no meaning. 
Motivation
: Placing discussions in the parking lot
 
is 
often the only way to keep the daily standup on schedule. 
Category Addressed
: Efficiency 
 
Daily Standup
: 
Attendance
 
Practice
: If you are modifying the code base during the 
Sprint, you need to attend the daily standup every day.   
Motivation
:  Your changes potentially affect everyone 
else surrounding the code. Even if you did not modify any 
code since the last daily standup, you need to know what 
impediments you may have created for the team or they have 
created for you, and be in a position to address them. 
Categories Addressed
: Part-Time Developers, Work 
Within Scrum. 
 
2)
 
Product Backlog and Writing Stories 
In our Scrum team, as in many Agile teams, we use sto-
ries to capture the requirements in our product backlog. We 
specify that our stories must have a title, a description in the 
format, “As a <type of user> I want <capability> so that 
<business value> [7],” optional notes to provide clarity and 
acceptance criteria. The acceptance criteria include a point of 
contact that may be a stakeholder or the PO, a list of 
specifications and tests to be run. We also use a hierarchy of 
stories in our backlog, with deliverables at the top, which are 
broken down into epics, which are then broken down into 
sprint stories that are sized so the work described can be 
completed in a single Sprint. 
In the early days of our Scrum adoption there was a per-
ception by almost all involved that Scrum could only be used 
to manage code development work. It simply was not clear 
that we could capture other activities occurring in the group, 
especially those related to research. Examples include doing 
preliminary research, writing papers, or simply taking time to 
scope out solutions to a new or seemingly intractable 
problem. In addition, as we realized that the scope of Scrum 
was larger than just development, it took some time before 
we learned how to write good sprint stories. 
A breakthrough came during a retrospective meeting 
when a developer stated that he felt he was not enabled to do 
any preliminary investigation because Scrum was only 
applicable to development work. In the discussion that 
followed it was suggested that we begin using a “de-
sign/discover meeting” story, which we have been doing 
ever since. This story is a small 1 to 2 story-point [5] story 
that describes a meeting to be held among developers to 
discuss the feasibility and potential solutions that govern a 
given research problem.  
Recently, we have added a “scoping study” story that is a 
time-boxed [8] sprint story that is used to carve out time to 
investigate a problem for which too little is known to 
proceed further, and for which a plan of action is required. It 
is typically used for stubborn user support issues that need to 
be elevated to the level of a sprint story 
In addition to our design/discovery meeting and scoping 
study stories we now routinely have stories that capture 
research work. Once we realized that Scrum could encom-
pass research work and that the work could be described in 
stories, there were still challenges with respect to writing the 
stories. Initially, our research stories were too detailed, as we 
would try to eliminate any ambiguity in the description of 
work to be done and the acceptance criteria. Instead we 
found that, especially when starting a research epic, the best 
thing to do was to accurately capture the goals of the 
research in the epic from the user’s point of view, but let the 
initial sprint stories be fairly vague. This type of story 
146159 follows Mike Cohn’s suggestion that stories are, “reminders 
to have a conversation rather than fully detailed requirements 
themselves, they do not need to include all relevant details 
[5].” Of course, relying on conversations instead of detailed 
requirements requires discipline and trust. That is, instead of 
the PO and stakeholder overcomplicating the story they must 
instead trust the developers to do good work and report their 
results consistently at the daily standup and present a 
summary at the review meeting. The developers trust the PO 
to be available during the Sprint and to take the time to 
understand the outcome of the story, and to report it to 
stakeholders for feedback. And, most importantly, the team 
trusts the stakeholders to understand the results of the Sprint 
and help make needed course corrections. 
Finally, two practices we have established that we feel 
are important with respect to user stories are supporting the 
renegotiation of user stories and the presenting and archiving 
the work done via done slides. 
 
Stories
: 
Story Renegotiation
 
Practice
: The team will tell the PO as early as possible 
during the Sprint when a story is in danger of not being 
completed. This may result in the story being renegotiated. 
The SM will remind the team of the renegotiation possibility 
one-third and two-thirds of the way through the Sprint during 
the daily standup, emphasizing any sprint stories that seem to 
be struggling. The one-third point check focuses on stories 
that may have changed based on information discovered 
since the start of the Sprint. The two-thirds point check 
focuses on stories that are requiring more effort than 
expected. Renegotiation typically takes the form of modify-
ing the acceptance criteria.  
Motivation
:  For various reasons stories take longer to 
complete than expected or simply do not make sense based 
on information found when working on the story. This must 
be reported to the PO early so the PO’s confidence in the 
team is not reduced. In addition, no team member should put 
the PO in a position of having to learn about or report to a 
stakeholder about an unfinished story at the review or 
planning meeting or during the following Sprint. It is much 
better for everyone to report delays and problems early so 
that there are no surprises and adjustments can be made. 
Note that in the latest version of 
The Scrum Guide
 the 
authors state, “During the Sprint: … Scope may be clarified 
and re-negotiated between the Product Owner and Develop-
ment Team as more is learned.” 
Categories
 
Addressed
:  Research Visibility, Delivery. 
 
Stories
: 
Done Slides
 
Practice
: A user story is not done until we have a written 
summary of the work. We call this a story’s “done slide.”   
Motivation
:  We have found that having this written 
record to be useful for reporting on our work during review 
meetings and to serve as an archive of our work. 
Categories
 
Addressed
: Research Visibility. 
 
3)
 
Planning Meeting 
The manner in which the Thermal/Fluid Scrum team 
prepares for and executes the planning meeting is described 
in detail in the article 
A Starting Point for Negotiations - 
Delivering with a Heterogeneous Team
 [9]. The article 
describes how the PO with the help of the SM and develop-
ment team use a counterintuitive Pre-Sprint Work Balancing 
methodology to arrive at the planning meeting with a 
proposed sprint backlog. This proposed backlog is sized in 
story points and matched to the capacity of the team using 
estimates of each developer’s capacity for the upcoming 
Sprint and a preliminary matching of developers to user 
stories. This plan is presented to the team at the beginning of 
the planning meeting as a starting point for negotiations from 
which the actual sprint backlog is then derived in the 
traditional fashion outlined in 
The Scrum Guide.
 
Also, during the planning meeting, we use time boxing 
extensively.  This is done when breaking a story into smaller, 
more achievable parts makes little sense and there are too 
many unknowns and/or risks for the developers to be 
comfortable with committing to completing the work in one 
Sprint. When this is done, we place a “[TB]” in the title of 
story so it will be immediately obvious to all familiar with 
our processes which stories are time boxed.  We time box 
with story points, where the developers understand that the 
time box means they are committing themselves to give to 
the story an effort [10] commensurate with the story point 
estimate, and then move on to other stories in the Sprint as 
needed to complete the sprint backlog. Again, this is where 
trust comes in. The PO and Stakeholder trust that the 
developers will put into the story the agreed upon effort and 
report progress at the daily standup, review meeting and 
during ongoing backlog grooming. The developers trust that 
the PO and Stakeholders will listen to the results and modify 
their expectations accordingly, and any modifications will be 
reflected as changes in the product backlog and release plan.  
Another technique that we use instead of time boxing is 
to soften the user story during planning by adding modifiers 
to the story’s title, description and acceptance criteria. 
Adding phrases like “work towards”, “start” or “begin 
implementing” to the title and description can make finishing 
a story seem much more likely. The acceptance criteria may 
also need to be softened by removing items or allowing 
partial completion, e.g. “Begin documenting options” instead 
of “Document options.” Again, this requires trust and 
understanding throughout the team, puts an emphasis on 
communication and adds uncertainty to the planning process. 
 
Planning
: 
Pre-Sprint Work Balancing
 
Practice
: The PO will arrive at the planning meeting 
with a candidate sprint backlog that follows the Pre-Sprint 
Work Balancing methodologies described in 
A Starting Point 
for Negotiations - Delivering with a Heterogeneous Team
. 
Motivation
: Traditional Scrum planning does not ade-
quately address the uncertainties in heterogeneous teams. 
Categories Addressed
: Efficiency, Delivery, Managing 
Uncertainty, Part-Time Developers, Specialization. 
 
Planning
: 
Story-Point Estimation
 
Practice
: Developers do the final story point estimation.   
Motivation
:  The people who are committing to do the 
work are the ones who estimate the work.  
147160 Category Addressed
: Delivery 
 
Planning
: 
Candidate Sprint Backlog
 
Practice
: The PO will arrive at the planning meeting 
with a prioritized list of candidate user stories for the 
upcoming Sprint and these stories will be “sprint ready”. 
Sprint ready means they will have a complete description, 
needed notes, context and acceptance criteria. Stories can 
and most likely will be modified somewhat during the 
planning meeting, but they must be in a good state before the 
meeting.  
Motivation
:  Choosing user stories from the product 
backlog and making stories sprint ready during the planning 
meeting is waste. 
Category Addressed
: Efficiency 
 
Planning
: 
Final Sprint Backlog
 
Practice
: The team will only take on during the planning 
meeting the level of work they believe they can deliver.   
Motivation
:  The PO must manage the backlog in such a 
way as to create the greatest value for the stakeholders. This 
requires the ability to plan with confidence for the next 
Sprint and beyond. This confidence can only be achieved 
when the PO believes that the team will deliver what they 
promise. 
Categories Addressed
: Efficiency, Delivery 
 
Planning
: 
High-Value Work
 
Practice
: In return for the team reporting story status in a 
timely manner and delivering what they promise, the PO will 
strive to provide to the team only high-value stories that 
represent work that will not be unused, thrown-away, 
submitted for rework or otherwise wasted.  
Motivation
: The team must have confidence that the PO 
will only ask them to perform high-value work. 
Categories Addressed
: Efficiency, Delivery 
 
4)
 
Review Meeting 
Our review meeting provided one of our largest chal-
lenges, and we continue to modify them in order to improve. 
One of the biggest problems is that our product does not lend 
itself to typical software demonstrations. There are no 
graphical user interfaces to our codes that can serve as a 
focal point for our demonstrations and most simulations do 
not run in real-time. Instead we rely on text, equations, 
graphs and still shots or movies of simulation results. For 
research and design stories, reporting on these activities to an 
audience of non-experts is clearly difficult. 
When we first began Scrum in January of 2008 our re-
view meetings were two-hour affairs where project status 
and each sprint user story was discussed in excruciating 
detail. Because of their length and the amount of detail 
given, these review meetings were not well attended by those 
outside of the Scrum team. There was so little overall value 
in the user story discussions that most team members 
brought laptops and only participated when the user stories 
they had direct interest in were addressed. Amazingly, this 
dreadful state of affairs continued for two years until late 
2009 when Alan Shalloway and Guy Beaver of NetObjec-
tives presented their results of a “Lean Enterprise Assess-
ment” performed on the entire Computational Simulation 
Group. With respect to our review meetings, the reported 
stated the following: “Review should not be individuals 
reporting out on their activities - these should be known.” 
and “Review should be a demonstration of completed, 
validated and accepted work that the team has undertaken - 
review time should take less than an hour.” The comment 
was made that each discussion of a user story was like an 
internal status meeting for a scientific project, with too much 
detail for non-Scrum team members and detail that should 
already be known by team members because of the daily 
standup and other discussion occurring during the Sprint. 
After this assessment we immediately set out to revamp 
our review meeting for our first 2010 Sprint. Despite the fact 
that 
The Scrum Guide
 states that, “This is an informal 
meeting”, we decided to produce a slide-deck using Power-
Point for each Sprint as it provided the most convenient way 
to collect, display and archive our work. Though the details 
of the format of the slide-deck have evolved over the years, 
the basic one established for the first 2010 review meeting is 
still followed. First, we time boxed the presentation to one-
hour. In the first few slides we graphically present the project 
status via some form of a burnup chart, a history of the 
team’s velocity and a history of how story points have been 
allocated each Sprint among various funding agencies. After 
the status section we present the done slides depicting the 
work done on each sprint user story. 
Challenges we have faced are the following: a) remaining 
on schedule, b) allowing for discussion during the presenta-
tion, c) putting the story being presented into context with 
respect of the team’s overall deliverables and with respect to 
progress against the owning epic, d) providing the correct 
level of detail for the audience and e) attendance of stake-
holders, managers and members from other Scrum teams. 
a)
 
Remaining on Schedule 
After trying many things, we have found that remaining 
within our one-hour time box requires the developer’s 
presenting their done slides to keep their presentations short, 
and the best way to do this is to let each presenter know the 
status of the presentation in terms of the total time remain-
ing, the number of user stories remaining to present, and the 
number of slides remaining to present. Displaying the time 
remaining is as easy as providing an easily viewable clock. 
We report the number of user stories remaining by display-
ing a count on the various transition slides that are used to 
divide the presentation by project areas. Reporting the 
number of slides remaining is done by simply numbering 
each slide and noting the total slide count. 
b)
 
Allowing for Discussion 
While the steps above have allowed us to present every-
thing done during the Sprint in one hour, we found that it did 
not allow time for discussion. Recently, we decided that 
while every sprint user story needs to be archived in the 
slide-deck, all do not need to be presented during the review 
meeting. This has allowed for a much more relaxed presenta-
tion which can accommodate questions and discussion with 
the audience. Typically, stories that are left out are those that 
are one in a series of ongoing work where results are not yet 
148161 significant enough to report, or the story is only of interest to 
team members, and they already know the status because of 
daily standup meetings.  
c)
 
Putting the User Story into Context 
Providing context has been one of the most difficult 
challenges. The most effective and simplest way is to simply 
have each presenter introduce the slide with a very brief 
description of the broader programmatic context of the slide 
and the status before the Sprint began. It is also useful if the 
presenter closes with a few sentences describing any work 
that remains to be done. We have tried providing context 
slides for each done slide, or adding dedicated context 
sections to the presentation, but have found the time is best 
spent showing the work that was done and allowing for 
discussions and audience questions. 
d)
 
Providing the Correct Level of Detail 
Our challenge has always been to reduce the amount of 
detail presented. Recently we have achieved success by 
actually revamping the entire format of the slide-deck into 
what we call an “Apple-Keynote like presentation.” Based 
on an experiment suggested in a retrospective, we decided 
that for our review meeting in late October 2012 we would 
make our presentation look like an Apple Keynote Address. 
We changed to a white-text on black-background slide 
format and eliminated everything that was not essential from 
our slides. We followed the suggestions given in the book 
The Presentation Secrets of Steve Jobs
 [11]. The book drives 
home the fact that for each slide audience members are 
asking themselves one question, “Why should I care?” and 
we strove to answer that question. We also relied heavily on 
pictures and graphics, with the first slide for almost every 
user story being a picture that illustrated the story’s purpose. 
Developers were encouraged to write talking points on note 
cards instead of relying on slide text. Since our slide-decks 
also must serve as archival information, developers were told 
to put details into either the slid
e notes or in additional slides 
that were not shown during the meeting.  
The presentation was a great success, and though we 
have stepped back somewhat on the strictness of the slide 
format, the experiment caused a step-change in how we 
design and deliver our presentations. We received a great 
amount of positive feedback on the new format and our 
attendance, which was already high, increased even more. 
e)
 
Attendance 
Clearly, the first step to achieving good attendance is to 
provide a good presentation, which is what we have tried to 
do as described above. But even if a team can consistently 
deliver a good presentation, one must compete with the other 
items contending for a potential attendee’s time. We have 
found two of the best ways for beating out these competitors 
are to simply send out a short and concise meeting reminder 
via e-mail the day before or the morning of the meeting and 
to consistently provide food and coffee. 
 
Review Meeting
: 
Review Meeting Slide-Deck
 
Practice
: The review meeting consists of the developers, 
SM and PO presenting to the audience a slide-deck of 
relevant team statistics, such as velocity history and project 
status, and a subset of the sprint user stories completed via 
done slides. This slide-deck, with the done slides for all 
sprint user stories completed during the Sprint, is archived to 
record the work done during the Sprint and to provide a 
future source of data, pictures and animations.  
Motivation
: The review meeting is the most important 
avenue the Scrum team has to convey its progress and plans 
to a broad audience and to illicit feedback. In addition, 
ensuring the team statistics and each completed user story 
are adequately documented in the slide-deck allows the team 
to leverage the work done preparing for the review meeting 
to also create an archive of the Sprint. 
Categories Addressed
: Delivery, Research Visibility. 
 
Review
 
Meeting
: 
Slide-Deck Simplicity 
Practice
: The slide-deck presented to the audience dur-
ing the review meeting will strive to supply only the needed, 
salient detail, always answering the question for each 
audience member, “Why should I care about this story?” We 
must respect our audience’s time and interest level, recogniz-
ing that at a high level they want to understand the context of 
the story, the work that was done during the Sprint, possible 
risks, and next steps. Finally, those running the meeting must 
ensure the presenters know the time remaining and amount 
of material left to be presented. 
Motivation
: We strive to have our review meetings pro-
vide value to our customers and respect the other presenters. 
This means that each developer will present only the salient 
detail relative to the time available so the meeting will flow 
smoothly, allow time for discussion, and ensure others will 
be given adequate time to speak and end on time.  
Categories Addressed
: Efficiency, Research Visibility. 
 
5)
 
Reporting to and Planning with Stakeholders 
Every other Sprint, a formal review of development 
efforts is given to our stakeholders. We define stakeholders 
as those personnel who oversee the scope, schedule, and 
budget for our work. Stakeholder meetings include all such 
administrative personnel, the PO, the line manager, and 
relevant technical staff as needed. 
During stakeholder meetings, the progress of the entire 
development project is reported and assessed, along with 
identification of near- and long-term technical risks and 
opportunities. Regular updates are provided demonstrating 
the development team’s progress, and unforeseen problems 
are resolved as necessary. Because so much of research work 
is high-risk by definition, managing the technical risk is an 
essential part of stakeholder meetings. And because our 
stakeholders are invested (technically and financially) in the 
development work, these meetings tend to be both construc-
tive and productive. In summary, we treat our stakeholders 
as equal partners in our research and development enterprise 
and they respond accordingly. 
While the development team operates on a three-week 
Sprint schedule, and our stakeholder updates occur every six 
weeks, our formal reporting to stakeholders is carried out on 
a three-month quarterly schedule. This hierarchical schedule 
permits us to report sprint-by-sprint progress while filtering 
out the highs and lows of productivity that occur in each 
149162 Sprint. Our stakeholder relation processes have proven to 
work very well in practice using this technique. In particular, 
a sequence of time-boxed stories lasting several Sprints can 
be rolled up into a single quarterly progress report, so that 
hard quarterly deadlines are nearly always reached, even 
when some individual Sprint deadlines slip. 
The fundamental principles of our stakeholder relations 
are those of treating our stakeholders as equal partners in our 
work, of candid communication and complete transparency, 
and of formal quarterly reporting to year-long development 
plans that are developed in collaboration with the stakeholder 
community. This approach has proven to work well for us on 
the full range of development tasks, ranging from low-risk 
routine programming of new features up to the highest-risk 
open-ended exploratory research efforts. 
 
6)
 
Retrospective Meetings 
Luckily, we have never experienced significant chal-
lenges within our retrospective meetings. In fact, almost all 
of the practices described here arose from discussions during 
retrospective meetings. 
Our retrospectives follow a simple format and we use a 
wiki page to capture and archive them. First, we look over 
the previous retrospective and discuss items that are flagged 
as either action items or experiments. This is important as 
retrospectives lose their value if the team does not trust that 
issues brought up will be addressed. Next, we move to any 
items located in a “Discussion Topics” section of the wiki 
page. Finally, we move to the answering the two questions: 
“What went well?” and, “What could be improved?” It is 
important to make it clear to all in attendance that anything 
affecting the team can be discussed. At first, the discussion is 
in an open format, which usually generates a substantial 
amount of discussion from which new action items and 
experiments are identified. Once no other issues are brought 
up, the SM asks each participant individually if they have 
anything else they would like to add. Invariably, this portion 
of the retrospective results in an equal amount of discussion 
as the general discussion, usually generated by a few people 
who are less comfortable talking in an open forum. Our team 
does not limit the retrospective’s attendance; it is open to 
anybody who wishes to attend. We revisit this policy 
periodically, but it has never changed. 
V.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS
 
We have observed that managing research-heavy engi-
neering software projects using Agile techniques appears to 
be little different than managing other software projects to 
those familiar with Agile but not research as it is performed 
in government laboratory, academic, or corporate research 
settings. For those familiar with research in these settings but 
not Agile, the practices used to implement Agile seem to 
conflict with how research is performed. From our expe-
riences we believe that the research component of scientific 
and engineering software development brings with it many 
unique challenges, but that Agile is a very good methodolo-
gy and even a natural fit for managing these projects.  
In the above discussions we have identified what we 
believe are the unique challenges, and their causes, encoun-
tered when implementing Agile on such projects. These can 
be categorized into two areas. The first is overcoming a 
research culture that values individual achievement and 
fosters the reporting only of work that is finished. The 
second is looking past the conventional practices used to 
implement Agile to the fundamental principles of transpa-
rency, inspection and adaptation. The cultural norms must be 
overcome to achieve these principles, and the principles must 
be understood to successfully modify the standard practices 
such that they support the research and the environment in 
which research is normally performed.  
We believe that Agile project management is woefully 
underutilized in the scientific and engineering research 
community and hope that the experiences described here will 
encourage others to experiment and eventually succeed. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
 
This paper is dedicated to the late Sheldon R. Tieszen 
who in his role as the PO of the Thermal/Fluids Scrum team 
successfully brought Agile project management to our 
research-heavy engineering software team. Even though he 
had no experience with Agile when he began his role, 
Sheldon implicitly understood Agile project management 
and was able to implement his ideas within the Scrum 
framework and allowed us all to finally, consistently, deliver 
what we promised to our stakeholders. 
We would also like to Linda Rising and the staff of Agile 
2013 for their patience, assistance and invaluable suggestions 
while creating this paper. 
Sandia National Laboratories is a multi-program labora-
tory managed and operated by Sandia Corporation, a wholly 
owned subsidiary of Lockheed Martin Corporation, for the 
U.S. Department of Energy’s National Nuclear Security 
Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
H. W. Meuer, E. Strohmaier, J. J. Dongarra, and H. D. Simon, The 
41st TOP500 List, June, 2013. Available from:  
http://www.top500.org/list/2013/06/.  
[2]
 
K. Schwaber, Agile Project Management with Scrum, 1
st
 ed., Micro-
soft Press, 2004. 
[3]
 
K. Schwaber and J. Sutherland. Scrum Guide, October, 2011. 
Available from: http://www.scrum.org/Scrum-Guides. 
[4]
 
P. Hawken, A. Lovins, L. Hunter Lovins, Natural Capitalism, 1
st
 ed., 
Little, Brown and Company, p. 272, 1999. 
[5]
 
M. Cohn, User Stories Applied: For Agile Software Development, 1st 
ed., Addison-Wesley Professional, 2004. 
[6]
 
D. Mezick, http://newtechusa.net/agile/the-daily-standup/, 
http://newtechusa.net/dan-mezick/. 
[7]
 
M. Cohn, Agile Estimating and Planning, 1
st
 ed., Prentice Hall, 2005. 
[8]
 
J. Rasmusson, The Agile Samurai: How Agile Masters Deliver Great 
Software, 1
st
 ed., Pragmatic Bookshelf, 2010. 
[9]
 
A. Lorber and S. Tieszen, A Starting Point for Negotiations - 
Delivering with a Heterogeneous Team, In Agile Conference 
(AGILE), IEEE, pp. 148-155, 2012. 
[10]
 
M. Cohn, It’s Effort, Not Complexity, Succeeding with Agile - Mike 
Cohn's Blog, June 21, 2010,  
http://www.mountaingoatsoftware.com/blog/its
-
effort
-
not
-
complexity. 
[11]
 
C. Gallo, The Presentation Secrets of Steve Jobs: How to Be Insanely 
Great in Front of Any Audience, McGraw-Hill, 1
st
 ed, 2009. 
150163