 The XP Customer Role in Practice: Three Studies Angela Martin Faculty of Information TechnologyVictoria University of Wellington, New Zealand angela@mcs.vuw.ac.nzRobert Biddle Human-OrientatedTechnology Laboratory Carleton University Canadarobert_biddle@carleton.caJames Noble Faculty of Information TechnologyVictoria University of Wellington, New Zealand kjx@mcs.vuw.ac.nzAbstractThe Customer is the only non-developer role in 
eXtreme Programming (XP). The Customer's explicit 
responsibilities are to drive the project, providing project 

requirements (user stories) and quality control 
(acceptance testing): unfortunately the customer must 
also shoulder a number of implicit responsibilities 

including liaison with external project stakeholders, especially project funders, clients, and end users, while 
maintaining the trust of both the development team and 
the wider business. In this paper, we report on a series of 

case studies of the Customer role in XP projects. We have 
found that Customers have a 
pressured and stressful role, leading to issues of sustainability. 1. Introduction The Customer is the only non-developer role in 
eXtreme Programming (XP). The Customer's explicit 

responsibilities are to drive the project, providing project 

requirements (user stories) and quality control 

(acceptance testing): unfortunately the customer must also 

shoulder a number of implicit responsibilities including 

liaison with external project stakeholders, especially 

project funders, clients, and end users, while maintaining 

the trust of both the development team and the wider 

business. In describing the XP perspective, Beck says: XP is a starting line.  It asks the question, 
“How little can we do and still build great 
software?” [2] 
The customer role is critical
 in making decisions about 
“what to build”, and in the minimalist philosophy of XP, 
the following are recommended for the customer role [2]:  

oThe customer is an integral part of the team and 
should be on-site with the team  
oThe customer writes user stories and then discusses 
each requirement directly with the programmers 
oThe customer is responsible for all business decisions 
including prioritising user story development 
oThe small 2-3 week iterations allow the user to 
evolve their requirements based on concrete working 

softwareoThe customer regularly tests the software to confirm 
it works as expected XP explicitly assumes that the customer knows the 

domain well and is able to make decisions and as such 

does not provide “how-to” advice on gathering, 

expressing and prioritising requirements.  
This paper builds on our initial research [10], which 
reviewed the customer role in a single project, and found 

that that the customers had the most pressured and 

stressful role in the project, 
requiring significantly more 
effort than the development team members.  
In this paper we firstly recap our initial research case, 
Project Endeavour.  We then present two further in-depth 
case studies that outline how the on-site customer role has 
been implemented.  Finally we compare and contrast the 
three cases and present our conclusions. 2. Research Method Information Systems Devel
opment (ISD) methodology 
researchers [7, 12] have expressed a growing concern that 

existing ISD methods do not 
meet the needs of today’s 
business and software developm
ent environments. 
Studies [12, 10] in this area have begun to explore 

practices in natural settings in order to begin to address 

these issues. Given this trend, 
we have used interpretative in-depth case studies to explore our research questions 

within their natural setting, software development 

projects.  We used semi-structured in-depth one-on-one 
interviews to collect the data for this paper. Three XP 

projects are explored; we interviewed a total of 20 people 

across the three projects and in all cases have covered the 

spectrum of core XP roles including the customer, 
programmer, coach and tester. All interviews were taped 

and later transcribed in detail. The interviewees were 
asked to validate both the 
transcriptions of the interview and the interpreted findings.  Please see the technical 

report [9] for further information on the research method. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 We use a number of quotes from the interviews to 
illustrate our findings in this paper; names have been 
avoided or invented to preserve anonymity.  
3. Project Endeavour Project Endeavour is an outsourced custom 
development project, the purpose of the project was to 
build a content management 
system.  The project involves 
three organisations:  oKiwiCorp, a large New Zealand company, is the 
customer organisation  
oDevCorp, a large consultancy, is the development 
vendoroBureauCorp, a large software services company, is 
the infrastructure vendor The data that forms this paper was collected in a series of 
interviews with both KiwiCorp and DevCorp project participants, near the completion 
of the project [10].  3.1. Project Overview Project Endeavour is seen as a success by both 
KiwiCorp and DevCorp, and part of that success was 
attributed to the use of an agile development method; XP. 

Project Endeavour had been attempted by KiwiCorp 

previously, but each previous attempt was unsuccessful. 
In fact, the KiwiCorp customer representative notes that 

when her manager was handed this project to ‘sort-out’: 
“We felt we could probably only do it if we 
used [DevCorp] ... because we had such a lot 

of confidence in them based on previous 

experience ... [later in the interview] ... we 

knew what they were capable of, ... they could actually deliver what they said they 
could ... a key value of working with 
[DevCorp is that] it was a joint effort” 
– Customer, KiwiCorp The project was approximately 15 
months long, and at its 
peak the project team had 11 full-time experienced team 

members.  
3.1.1. Prior Exposure to XP. 
All of the team members 
were new to XP.  DevCorp had recently used XP 
successfully on a similar project.  However, none of the 
team members on the earlier XP project transitioned to 
this project.  There was strong support in the team for 
adopting XP as evidenced below. “I’d had good reports about it in [project 

name], I’d read the book and the book made 

a lot of sense, it was common sense.  [and 

later in the interview]  I was willing to give it 

a go myself but the other thing was the team was willing to give it a go, if the team had pushed back, I probably would have folded”  – Project Manager, DevCorp The team gained an underst
anding of XP by reading the XP books, sharing XP experiences with other 
practitioners of XP and also by regularly reviewing their 

progress with the method throughout the project. 
3.2. Focusing on the Customer 3.2.1. Who was the Customer? The identified customer 
on the project was a librarian from KiwiCorp.  She had 
extensive domain experience of both the functionality 

required for the system and in “getting things done” in 

KiwiCorp.  The customer was responsible for 

determining what to build
, ensuring it was built, and 
managing the outsourcing rel
ationships. The customer 
was supported on this project by: 
oA KiwiCorp senior manager, who assisted the 
customer to prioritise the re
quirements and to drive 
decisions affecting the project through at a senior 

management team level. 
oA KiwiCorp acceptance testing team, who were 
responsible for testing the stories. oA DevCorp analyst who was responsible for writing 
the first draft of the user 
stories based on the initial functional specification and conversations with the 

customer. 
3.2.2. What Happened? Initially the project was a 
traditional waterfall project and was divided into three 

phases, planning (deciding what 
to build), development 
(building the application) and implementation (user 

acceptance testing, training and roll out). The planning 

phase focused on gathering requirements using standard 

workshop techniques and involved a series of user 

workshops that were attended by the business users.  At the end of the planning phase it was decided to use 
XP for the development phase. The requirements 
gathered during the planning phase were used as a basis 

for the XP user stories. The XP iteration process was 

followed, except that the customer was not always on-site 

with developers, but she attempted to spend 50% of her 

time at the same location as the developers. 
The implementation phase was retained as this 
approach meshed with the existing practices of KiwiCorp 
and BureauCorp. Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 3.2.3. How were the Requirements Gathered, Expressed and Prioritised? 
The user stories allowed the customer to adapt or evol
ve the initial requirements as 
they watched the system develop and learnt what does 
and does not work and/or matter.  Both the customer and 
development team members commented on the approach:
“If we’d had to come up with requirements to 
the [nth] degree right at the beginning, I 

think it would ha
ve been very difficult because I hadn’t worked with intranet 

content management systems so a lot of the 

time I was sort of learning as I went and once 

… I saw the bare bones thing, it was much 

easier to make more detailed decisions for 

the next level”  

– Customer, KiwiCorp The team did not follow the standard XP process for 
documentation because the user stories were based on a 

functional specification.  KiwiCorp formally accepted the 

functional specification at the completion of the planning 
phase.  No formal change control was implemented to 
track the changes between the user stories and the 
functional specification.  Neither was there a formal 

agreement that the user stories superseded the functional 
specification.  The DevCorp team noted this approach, 

particularly in an outsourcing arrangement, can result in a 

scope debate between the organisations [11]. However, 
on this project no scope debate occurred. The customer noted the issue with user stories and 
communicating the requirements with conversations, was 

an issue of knowledge transfer.  For example, the end-

user training material
 development required an 
understanding of the system ty
pically obtained from the 
functional specification, but the functional specification no longer reflected the system functionality.  No 

documentation existed that specified the system to the 

level of detail required by the trainers.  Cockburn [4] 

discusses this issue and suggests it is best to determine a 

need for the documentation rat
her than simply producing 
it.  This suggestion indicates new adopters of XP should 
consider their knowledge transfer requirements 

(conversations or documentation) and plan accordingly. 
The other change to the process was that the customer 
did not write the user stories and instead the stories were 
based on the functional specification.  The project 

manager emphasised the time it took the development 

team to write user stories.  He went on to discuss the 

potential impact of relying on the customer to create the 

stories:“I know strictly speaking that’s the clients 
job if you read the books but I actually did 

that to sort of streamline the process a little 

… I don’t think the client would … have had 

enough stories prepared on the day iteration 

kicked off so we’d have delayed start[ing] the 
iteration and I think … delay[ing the] 

iteration is [a] slippery slope”  

– Project Manager, DevCorp The project manager did not
 clarify his concern further.  Possible interpretations include: 
oThe time available to the customer 
on this projectwas insufficient to include this task which is 
supported by the customer’s comment that she 
needed more time to effectively contribute to 

requirements development and testing  
oThe difficulty maybe the tec
hnical skills required to write usable user stories for developers as suggested 
by Beck & Fowler [3] It is interesting to note that no one interviewed noted 
that the development team writing the user stories and the 

customer reviewing and confirmi
ng the stories was an issue or deficiency in the process.Finally, one of the key roles of a customer is to make 
business priority decisions about what functionality is 

delivered when.  During the interview the customer 

demonstrated her strengt
h of feeling regarding prioritisation: I hate it, I hate that word prioritise  [and later in the interview]… Usually I’ve 

done [the prioritisation] myself and in 
conjunction with [my manager], when 
Ican’t
bear the responsibility anymore  
– Customer, KiwiCorp The customer also learnt the importance of not 
assuming all functionality would be delivered on the high 
level plan, and so in hindsight should have started prioritising from the start of the process: 
“We thought we’d bitten off what we could 

chew but we worked out that our eyes are 
bigger than our stomachs – it works for IT 

too … so I guess one way of doing it would 
have been to … do the prioritising right at the 

time – what can we actually leave till last?  

And actually leave that till last.” 
 – Customer, KiwiCorp This point concurs with the XP philosophy of 
delivering functionality in business priority order.  

However, this study also suggests that it is a learning 
process for the customer.   
3.2.4. How Sustainable is the Customer Role? The customer was in no doubt about her preference to use XP 
in the future: “Overall – I love this approach to 
development and I’d certainly like to use it 
again in any future projects I am involved in”  – Customer, KiwiCorp However, when considering the sustainability of the role she notes:Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 “I think we needed some extra roles 
basically.  We probably needed about three 

of me … it's been my life for about a year … 

look at these grey hairs ...” 

 – Customer, KiwiCorp Although the customer would have liked to devote 
100% of her time to being the on-site customer and 

working with the programmers, she also needed to work 
with the end-users and business stakeholders in 
KiwiCorp.  Representing thousands of end users is a 

significant task and the time commitments should not be 
minimised, neither should the importance of being on-site 
with these users.  Finally approximately 50 % of her time 
was spent managing technical 
integration issues between DevCorp and BureauCorp.   3.3. Summary Project Endeavour is a successful implementation of 
XP, in an outsourced environment, where both 
organisations are keen to use XP on their next project.  

This project is of the recommended size and the spirit of 

XP was retained, although the implementation of some 

practices varied. The customer on this project was responsible for all 
business decisions, including the prioritisation decisions.  

Although she was not located on-site with the 
development team, she spent
 approximately 33% of her 
time with the team, and did not rely solely on documents 

to communicate the requirements.  The customer 

recognised more time with the team, allowing them the 

opportunity to just pop over and chat whenever they 

needed to, would have been ideal.  However she, in her 

customer role, also needed to work directly with the users 

and managers she was representing in her organisation as 

well as managing the two outsourced vendors on this 

project.  Finally the customer did not write the user 

stories, a DevCorp analyst always wrote the first draft, 

from that point on the cust
omer modified the story. 
One of the key issues uncovered in this case was the 
sustainability of the on-site customer role.   
4. Project Discovery This section tells the story of Project Discovery, a 
project undertaken by RavenCorp.  RavenCorp is a start-up company based in the United States, specialising in the 

development of scientific programs. 
4.1. Project Overview RavenCorp started in mid 2000, with the intention to 
move a piece of scientific software developed in an 

academic environment into a commercial environment; 
this software is codenamed Discovery.  Discovery will be 
their key product and at the time of the interviews was 
still under development with a team of eight staff. 
Discovery, a piece of scientific software, is comprised 
of two main components, a complex graphical user 
interface and a set of complex scientific computational 

algorithms.  The software product is due to be released in 

the first quarter of 2004 and at the time of the interviews 

was on track for completi
on. Initial external client feedback, based on product demonstrations, is positive. 
4.1.1. Prior Exposure to XP. 
The founders of RavenCorp were not softwa
re developers, and although they had significant experience in developing simulation 
based programs for scientific research, they had very little 
formal software background or experience.  RavenCorp 
recognised, as the focus moved from proving the concept 

to building a commercial product, that a software 
development process would be beneficial to the 
development of a quality commercial product.   
At the end of the first quarter of 2002 RavenCorp 
decided to move to XP.  This decision was made by the 
founding members of the organisation. RavenCorp 

followed what they considered to be best practice 
guidelines in moving to
 XP, including bringing an experienced XP coach full-time onto the project. 
However, it soon became apparent that a few of the 
existing developers could not work in XP and as a result 

they left the company.     
4.1.2. The Environment. RavenCorp created a specific XP working area for Project Discovery, bringing all of 
the team members together in one area.  All of the team 
also retained their individual offices as well as the 
communal working area; however, the team seldom use 
their offices.  The environment 
is a friendly environment 
with a pleasant buzz and has a traffic light to show the 
state of the current build, a wall given over to progress 

charts and story cards, and a collection of toys for the 
programmers.  A project wiki 
also exists which provides external visibility as well as a virtual communal 
workspace.RavenCorp senior management works closely with the 
project team and as such, a trusted and productive 

working environment appears to exist. 
4.2. Focussing on the Customer 4.2.1. Who was the Customer? The identified customer 
on the project, at the time of
 the interviews, was one of 
the founding members of the company and is a scientist.  

He had been involved in devel
oping the original academic software and as a result had a close professional 
relationship with the founding directors of RavenCorp.   Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 The customer has been on the project, full-time, since 
the founding of the company four years ago, and 
throughout this period he has had the role of the 

customer.  He has also had the role of programmer, 

particularly within the first two years of product 

development.  Although he no longer has the role of 

programmer, he has, however, become the development 

manager within the company. 
The customer was supported in his role by: 
oOne of the founding directors of the company, who 
was responsible for the initial vision of the product 

and working with potential buyers to better 
understand their requirements. 
oA scientist with a similar background to the 
customer, who was responsibl
e for using Discovery to produce product demonstrations for potential 

buyers.  This responsibility ensured he tested the 

system as an end-user on realistic production 

scenarios and provided this feedback to the project 
team. 
oA small team of research scientists, who were 
responsible for researching the patented 
computational algorithms that form the back-end of 

the product.   oAn experienced software tester, who implemented an 
automated acceptance testing environment and 

worked with the customer and the research scientists 

to develop a suite of acceptance tests. Finally it should be noted that until recently he has 
shared the role of customer with another founding 

scientist, who has recently left the company.  They 

worked together closely and each had key areas of 

functionality they were responsible for. 4.2.2. What Happened? The product development cycle 
at RavenCorp can be divided into three stages, planning 
the product, evolving the product and releasing the 
product.  This section covers the activities that occurred 
at each stage. Planning the Product. Discovery is a new product, 
there is no existing product to replicate and much of the 
product is based on cutting-edge research discoveries made by RavenCorp scientists.  Planning the full scope of 

the product at the start of 
the project was not feasible or potentially even desirable.  For the first three years, 
including the first year of the team using XP, very little 

long-term release planning 
occurred, instead the team 
focused on evolving the product based on their 

discoveries, iteration-by-iteration.  The customer over the last year has spent a significant 
portion of his time planning the scope of the product for a 
2004 release date.  Although there is a significant portion 
of discovery in this project, the release planning could 
have occurred earlier in the process, the customer noted: 
“In the early days … there was always too 

much to do … we were basically working to 

have enough stories for the next iteration … 

let alone have enough stories where you 

could actually have sort of a larger view … 
[of] a few iterations or a release.” 
– Customer, RavenCorp His solution was to work the release planning process 
in parallel to the iteration pl
anning process, rather than incorporating a small intense release planning process 

into the team’s schedule. The customer works on 

gathering and expressing the release user stories and 

publishing them to the project
 wiki.  He holds regular one 
hour sessions twice a week with the programming team to 
review and estimate the release user stories.  This 

information allows him to review and prioritise the scope 

of the release with the RavenCorp stakeholders.  This 

approach has meant that over the last year he has 

managed to slowly “get-ahead” and establish a release 

plan.  His intimate knowledge of the domain, as a 

research scientist, has potentially been a factor in the success of this strategy.Evolving the Product.  Initially the team followed a 
vanilla XP iteration process, with 
the customer deciding 
on and writing the iteration stories a couple of days 

before the iteration planning meeting.  The release 

planning process has allowed this process to evolve so 

that the time spent in iteration planning meetings has been 

drastically reduced: “In the early days the meetings were… like 
four hour meetings and they just dragged on 

and I think everyone would lose their 

patience at a certain point”  

– Customer, RavenCorp The small regular meetings allow the customer and 
programmers to discuss the stories in small batches, 
resulting in the iteration planning meeting simply being a 
refresher discussion, followed by the tasking process.   One of the other variations to the process was the 
involvement of the research scientists in the acceptance 

testing process within each iteration.  The research 

scientists developed the algorithms in the product and 

were in the best position to accept the implemented 
algorithm.  An automated acceptance-testing framework 
built by the team allowed
 the research scientists to write tests to test their algorithms. 
All other aspects of the 
vanilla XP process are followed by RavenCorp. Releasing the Product.  
Discovery, at the time of the 
interviews, was still some way off being released as a 

shrink-wrap product.  However, Ra
venCorp did release the product regularly, every 2-3 ite
rations, to the internal RavenCorp stakeholders, including the end-user 

representative and the founding director.  These releases 

allowed the team to receive end-user feedback, as the 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 end-user representative used the release to create product demonstrations. 
4.2.3. How were the Requirements Gathered, Expressed and Prioritised?  The customer is an expert 
in his domain, and he is supported by a team of 
RavenCorp domain experts, so deter
mining what to build 
has not been the difficulty for the customer:   
“We are building a scientific application and 

my domain experience is such that I 

understand what the application is supposed 

to do … [and later] I think that for me, 

coming up with the ideas for “what we need 
to get done” or “what this story should be 

about” … [has] not been too challenging for 

me … [however] one of the things that has 

been frustrating for me is how detailed to make the stories”  

– Customer, RavenCorpHe has worked with the programmers for the last two 
years to evolve the level of detail that he places in the 
user stories.  However, he notes the appropriate level of detail is still a concern when
 writing the story.  He struggles with finding th
e level of detail and decomposition that ensures th
e programmer is able to 
engage and understand the purpose of each story, while ensuring the customer does not make design decisions in 

how he decomposes the functionality.  Finally, one aspect 

of story writing he has confirmed is critical to the quality 

of the product is the inclusion of exceptions and error 
conditions for each story.The customer noted that 
one prioritisation issue the 
team encountered, in hindsi
ght, was spending too much 
time in the early iterations on infrastructure functionality 

rather than implementing business functionality.  It is 

tempting to get a solid technical foundation under the 

team prior to moving onto business functions.  Delivering 

business functionally quickly, however, engages the 
stakeholders in the process early to shape the product.  It 
also ensures, when the hard trade-off decisions are being 
made later in the project, th
at business functionality takes precedence over the technical infrastructure.4.2.4. How Sustainable is the Customer Role?  
One of the ways to assess the sustainability of the customer role, 
is the simplistic measure of how many hours the customer 
is working: “For the entire time I have been at the 

company … I’ve always worked at least 70, 
probably more on an average of 80 [hours a 
week] … I don’t even mind it, its like what I 

do … I don’t worry so much about how much 
time I’m putting in because it doesn’t even 
really register for me, but yeah, all these 

different responsibilities can be a little bit wearing.”  – Customer, RavenCorp The level of domain understa
nding, and potentially the 
personal attributes, required to be the customer, also make 

the customer a valuable resource for the company.  As a 

result the customer is too valuable a resource for the 

company to be able to simply focus on the product:  
“… so it’s really been too much 
responsibility … on myself and [the other 
customer] … I think that was a large 

contributor to the problems we have had in 

the past … we weren’t getting the stories 
written up at a fast enough pace … well I’ve 

got to write the stories and think about 

product planning but I’ve [also] got to 
manage the team and I’ve got to think about 

this and that … that’s 
just too much to deal 
with … balancing all those things can be 

difficult, [it would] definitely be nice to be 

able to just focus on one thing like just focus 
on the product”  – Customer, RavenCorp The customer also noted that part of the time 
commitment is due to the 
interactive nature of the on-site customer role: 
 “It may take you an entire afternoon to do 
something that’s like an hour of work 
because you’ve been interrupted and had you 

know 20 minute di
scussions a number of times through the afternoon with the 
developers and its all valuable stuff … then 

you look back and you’re like man did I get 
anything done today … so it is a bit deceiving 
in that respect I think” 
 – Customer, RavenCorp So given the interactive natu
re of the customer role, 
the customer typically struct
ures his day so that during the normal 40 hour working week he is available to the 

programmers, and the rest of his work occurs outside of 
these hours.  Interestingly, this means that many of the 
development team, including the coach, may not be aware 

of the workload on the customer. 
4.3. Summary XP has worked well with the “research and 
development” nature of Di
scovery.  In fact, Project Discovery is another example of a successful 

implementation of XP.  Once again, the project falls 

within the recommended size of projects and the team has 

implemented the values, principles and practices with 

little variation from the standard XP outlined by Beck [2].   
The customer is available on-site to the team, and in 
fact prioritises this interaction above his other duties.  He 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 works with the key stakeholders in order to provide a single voice to the development
 team, and be in a position 
to make all of the required business decisions.  He 
undertakes all of the typical customer tasks including 
writing stories and testing 
stories, although he has some 
help with the later task.   One non-typical aspect with this customer is that he 
has at times also held a programmer role on the project.  

This dual role implementa
tion blurs the boundaries of the business and technical decision making process.  
However, it seems likely that other XP projects may 
encounter this need, particularly 
in start-up organisations and also products where the final users of the product are 

programmers. 
The RavenCorp product manager fulfils all of the 
requirements of the on-site customer role.  However, the 
time commitments required of him to fulfil his on-site 

customer role requirements 
may not be sustainable for 
other product managers in a similar situation. 
5. Project Atlantis This section tells the story of Project Atlantis, a successful project undertaken by EagleCorp.  EagleCorp is a software company in the United States that 
specialises in products that support application 

development and application 
development management. 
5.1. Project Overview The project started in mid 2002, with the intent of 
creating the next-generation of EagleCorp’s flagship product, Atlantis 7.0.  Atlantis 7.0 would be a complete 

re-development of the existing product, Atlantis 6.x, and 

would move the product 
onto a new technical architecture.The interviews to collect the 
data for this case study occurred just as Atlantis 7.0 was moving into internal 

QA.  At the time the project had been underway for 

approximately 18 months and had 16 experienced full 

time staff. All indicators were that the project was 

considered a success, particul
arly with regard to the quality of the product.5.1.1. Prior Exposure to XP.  
EagleCorp had not used XP previously.  The decision to move to XP was made 
after the architecture and the product feature set had been 
defined, approximately 6 months into the project.  

EagleCorp followed what they considered to be best 
practice guidelines in moving to XP, including; the use of 
a local XP mentoring company, for both initial training 
and ongoing advice. EagleCorp attributes the success of Project Atlantis, at least in part, to the predictability provided by XP.  Firstly, 
the predictability of dates.  The two-weekly iteration cycle allowed EagleCorp to plan and execute their 
development significantly more accurately than they had 
in the past.  Secondly, the predictability of quality.  The 

quality focus provided by test-first development and rapid 

customer acceptance testing have enabled EagleCorp to 

increase the quality of Atlantis 
7.0.  Finally the predictability of flexibility, otherwise known as 
“embracing change”:   
“We as a business [would] be foolish if we 

said; no we can’t take any new things. [XP 

enables us to ensure] what we are releasing 

is going to meet our customer’s needs as of 

today, not … what they were several months 

ago”
– VP of Product Development, EagleCorp5.1.2. The Environment.  
EagleCorp created a specific XP joint working area for Project Atlantis.  The managers 

moved out of their offices and the programmers moved 

out of their cubicles into this collaborative working area.  
The working area contained desks on wheels and 

whiteboards.  The desk on wheels allowed the 

programmers to personalise their working environment as 

well as allowing the programmers to easily re-orientate 

their work area to work collaboratively in pairs.  The 
EagleCorp executive team endorsed these changes, which 
were not standard EagleCorp practice, as well as 
supporting these changes financially. Another aspect of the environment was that the 
responsibility for the product definition, quality and 
implementation was clearly divided across three line 

managers; a product manager, a quality assurance 
manager and an engineering manager respectively.  It was 
also evident that each of these managers was trusted by 

the executive team.  For example, when asked about the 

importance of his buy-in to XP succeeding, the Vice 

President of Product Development responded: 
“To me the buy-in was easy because of the 
trust relationship that I’ve built up with [the 
engineering manager], I’ve seen how he 

works, I’ve seen how he attacks problems.  

Him coming to me and saying, okay, we want 

to use XP for this, that’s almost good enough 
for me.”  – VP of Product Development, EagleCorp This trust was also placed in each team member by the 
direct line managers.  For example, no-one was placed on 
the team who was not acceptable to each team member.  

Any team member was able to state they would not work 

with the proposed individual and no reasons were required.  A strong team culture was in evidence, 

particularly within the engineering component of the 

team.  A standard practice was to all head out together for 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 lunch at around 12:30, other 
less regular social events also occurred, such as trips to the movies. 
5.2. Focusing on the Customer 5.2.1. Who was the Customer?  The identified customer 
on the project, at the time of the interviews, was a product 
manager.  The product manager had over 15 years of 

software development experience covering a spectrum of 

roles including, programming, app
lication support, testing and product management.  The majority of this 

experience is in the same area as Atlantis, that is, products 
that support developers and development managers.  The 
product manager had only been with EagleCorp 

approximately 12 months prior to joining the Atlantis 
team.   
The product manager was responsible for the product 
definition and vision as well as the detailed functional 

requirements.  He, however, was supported on this 

project by: 
oAn experienced user interface designer,
 who developed the user interface guidelines and mock-

ups.  A decision was made by the senior management 
in EagleCorp to add an experienced user interface 

designer to the project as one of key improvements to 

Atlantis 7.0 was to be the user interface. oAn experienced technical architect who was responsible for all non-functional requirements, 

including design and code quality.  He also played the role of programmer when required. 
oAn experienced technical writer who was responsible 
for writing the user guide.   oAn experienced Quality Assurance (QA) team who 
was responsible for the final full system and 
integration testing of the product. Finally it should be noted that at the start of the project there was a product management team, consisting of 4 

product managers.  Approximately 4 months after the 

decision to move to XP, this team was reduced to 1 

product manager as part of 
an organisation-wide staff cutback.5.2.2. What Happened?  The product development cycle 
at EagleCorp can be divided into three stages, planning 
the product, evolving the product and releasing the 
product.  This section covers the activities that occurred 
at each stage. Planning the Product.The first activity that occurred on this project, for the product manager, was the 

definition of the product.  The outcome of this phase was 
a product plan; an agreed and prioritised set of 

functionality for Atlantis 7.0.  Running in parallel to this 

activity was a technical stream, focused on deciding and 

proving a new technical architecture.
Once the product plan was agreed and the architecture 
defined, EagleCorp decided to move to XP.  The team 

had an XP release plan, courtesy of this initial work, and 

so immediately began XP at th
e iteration planning stage.  Approximately four months into the twelve month 
development process, this release plan was revisited.  At 
this point enough data had been gathered to recognise that 
the original release plan was unachievable.  EagleCorp 
needed to make a decision to cut scope or increase the 

timeframe.  To assist this decision, the team stopped the 

XP iterations in order to assess and estimate the 

remaining functionality, this process took approximately 

a week.  The EagleCorp executive team chose an option 

that involved both cutting scope and increasing the 

timeframe. 
Evolving the Product.Over the course of the project 
the iteration process evolved.  The resulting refined 
process meant that for the product manager and the user 

interface designer, the two-week iteration started 

approximately a week before the iteration planning 

meeting.  During that week the focus was on developing 

the user stories and user interface mock-ups to present at 

the iteration meeting.   
At the iteration planning meeting, the product manager 
would walk through all of the user stories and user 

interface mock-ups with the programmers and elaborate 

as required to meet the programmers’ questions.  Once 
the programmers felt comfortable that they understood 
the user stories enough to estimate them, the programmers 

estimated all of the user stories.  Finally the group agreed 
the scope of the iteration based on the product manager’s 

prioritisation decisions and the previous iteration’s 

velocity.   During the next two weeks, the programmers would 
implement the stories.  If at any point they required 
clarification of the user story they would discuss the user 
story with the product manager for functional 
clarifications, or the user interface designer for user 
interface clarifications.  At the end of each day the 

product manager, user interface designer and engineering 
manager would review and test each of the completed 
user stories.  Accepted stories would be marked as 

completed; the engineering manager would discuss the 

remaining stories with the programmer pair.   
At the next iteration pl
anning meeting the previous 
iteration would be reviewed for any issues and the 

process would be evolved. Releasing the Product. 
EagleCorp has a Quality Assurance (QA) team that focus 
on full integration testing of the software products.  The QA team was overloaded 
throughout the development process with Atlantis 6.x 
testing commitments, and as such was only brought into 

the process near the end of development.  As a result the 

QA team was not present at e
ither the iteration planning or daily acceptance meetings, and missed these 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 undocumented “conversations”, which has increased the 
difficulty of their job.  However, the QA team is pleased 

with the initial quality of the product and is keen to be 

involved in the “conversations” throughout the next 

release and adapt their QA processes to XP. Another aspect of releasing a product is the development of user documentati
on. The technical writer 
noted the XP process significantly aided her task. She 
was able to write the user manual based on both the user 
stories and working software.  In a typical waterfall 
process she must write a user guide based on a 

specification that is quickly out of date.  She then faces a 
significant rework phase once a working product is available for her to explore, typically only a week or two 
prior to shipping the product. 5.2.3. How were the Requirements Gathered, Expressed and Prioritised? 
As outlined in the previous section, the first step facing the product managers was to 
define the Atlantis 7.0 feature set. The inputs into 

determining the release feature set included the existing 

product functionality as well as specific customer 

requests.  The product manager described this activity 

that took a few months to complete: 
“We [did] a lot of cross-functional, cross-

decision making meetings.  We talked to the 

executive team, we [worked] with the rest of 

the organisation to define requirements …we 
had … broad-brush organisational 

agreement [to the prio
ritised feature set].” 
 – Product Manager, EagleCorp The resulting feature set was a product plan, and it 
listed approximately 50 features with an associated 

priority of 1, 2 or 3.  Priority 1 features were to form 

Atlantis 7.0, with the remaining features to be 

implemented in later versions.  Atlantis 7.0 included some 

new features but did not include all of the features of 

Atlantis 6.x.    Once the product plan had been agreed, the product managers turned their attention to developing the user 
stories:“One thing that helped us [write good user 
stories], is that [around] the same time [we 

started writing user stories we] started with 
[the] persona driven approach … from our 
UI designer, so we … had hypothetical users 

of the system, so we [insisted that all users’ 
stories] must be based on these three 
…identified … primary users.  So that’s 

helped us [to move from] I want this and that 
feature, [to explaining]
 what this person wants [to do in the system]”  
– Engineering Manager & Coach, EagleCorp 
The “persona” approach stems from a method for user 
interface design suggested by Cooper [5]. The personas 
of the three primary users of Atlantis were based on 

market and sales research, and included details such as 

the end-user’s name, age and job role.  This technique 

ensured the prioritisation process focussed on the features required by the primary 
personas.  This technique also 
resulted in a good size piece of concrete functionality for 

a programmer to implement that could be tested, although 

this outcome was not imme
diate, but evolved as the 
product manager and programmers worked together.   
In parallel to the writing 
of user stories was the development of the user interface mock-ups.  The user 

interface designer developed a user interface guideline 
document that included detailed items such as the space 
between fields, as well as a high level picture of the user 

interface metaphor.  The user interface designer then 

worked with the product manager, defining the user 

interface mock-ups for the user stories within the current 

iteration.   In the above description it may appear as if the product 
manager worked in a vacuum.  However, the product 

manager throughout this process interacted with a mixture 

of internal and external stakeholders.
In the case of internal stakeholders, such as the sales 
department, application support
 department and executive 
team, the product manager presented the product as it 
evolved in a regular monthly m
eeting.  This meeting met 
a dual purpose of both reporting progress as well as 
providing a venue for the internal organisation members 

to evolve and/or re-prioritise functions.   In the case of external stakeholders, EagleCorp 
established a Customer 
Advisory Council (CAC), comprised of their key set of accounts.  The CAC 
typically meet once a quarter.  Two of these meetings will 
be face-to face meetings over a 2-3 day period, and the 

other two meetings will be 1-2 hour “webinars”.  

Important to these meetings is the emphasis on two-way 

communication:   
“…for me, from a PM perspective, [these 

sessions are] very valuable because [they] 
help me understand what some [of our] key 
customers are doing, some of the key issues 

that they have …which  parts of the 
application [they] don’t … use, which parts 

of the application need major changes before 
[they] could find them valuable … [although 

not all of our customers are represented] it 

helps me get a very good understanding of … 

where some of the real major holes are and 

how I should … spend my engineering dollars [to build] the next generation [of] tools” 
 – Product Manager, EagleCorp The ability to present Atlantis 
7.0 as it currently stands at each of these meetings, as well as part of an on-site 
customer demonstration, greatly enhances EagleCorp’s 

ability to obtain concrete feedback on the product 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 direction from the end-users, thus completing the two 
way communication loop with
 Atlantis external end-users.5.2.4. How Sustainable is the Customer Role? 
There is a consensus in the team, from all perspectives including 
senior management, programmers and the customer, that 

the on-site customer practice is a drastic improvement 

over the traditional document-centric processes.  

However, the changes that have caused this improvement 

have also had some unintended, and perhaps 
unrecognised, impacts: 
The iteration processes are quite exhausting.  
Every two weeks you’re basically doing 

another product release. … So it’s a very, 

very intense process to keep up and 

maintain… [From] the 
first year of doing it I 
think it’s worked really well but, from a 

longevity perspective, I don’t know how long 

it will be possible to keep [this pace] up 

 – Product Manager, EagleCorp The product manager goes on to compare the 
workload to that of a traditional process, where a 

document is “handed over the wall”.  In the traditional 
process although there are “peaks” there are corresponding “troughs”, when the responsibility is 
passed to the development team.  In XP, the consistent 

pace results in no “troughs” for the customer. Not only 

are there no troughs, but the ty
pe of work is significantly more intense than writing a document: 
“… You know, you can work 40 hours on a 

document or you can spend four hours in an 

intense meeting where you are getting 

hammered with questions, you know, you’re 

getting issues you’re having to face and deal 

with in a four hour meeting and feel more 

tired from the four hour meeting than the 40 

hours of document development.  So it 

creates a different kind of pressure I think on 
the PM.  It makes … again the iteration 

meetings and the requirements to deliver 

every time you go into these iteration 

meetings, ups the pressure, ups the intensity 
and just being prepared for these things is the 

key.  So, you know, you’re also acutely aware 

of the fact that you have this large group of 

people who are sitting in this meeting costing 

the organisation a lot of money.  If you 

haven’t got it right, somet
hing isn’t thought through correctly…” 
 – Product Manager, EagleCorp So although there has been a significant improvement 
as the result of the on-site customer role, the practice of 

sustainable pace has been sacrificed. 5.3. Summary  Project Atlantis is an almost perfect example of an XP 
implementation, it is the recommended size and it retains 

the spirit of XP, its values and principles, as well as 

implementing the practices of XP.  
The product manager fulfils the role of on-site 
customer.  He worked on-site with the development team, 
wrote the user stories, accepted the user stories, and 
worked with both internal and external stakeholders to 
ensure he was able to make the business decisions for the 

project.  The small iterations allowed the product 

manager to use the working software to both report 

progress to internal stakeholders as well as obtain 

feedback and evolve the product with both internal and 
external stakeholders.  EagleCorp tailored XP in three 

significant ways that impacted the XP customer role.  
The first significant modifi
cation was the introduction of user-interface design principles into the process.  

Additional documentation 
was introduced, including a 
user-interface guideline as well as mock-ups of all of the 
screens.  Finally, all of the user-stories were modified to 

implement the persona user interface technique, which 

they discovered had the pleasant side effect of providing a 

good decomposition technique for user-stories.
The second significant modification was the 
introduction of supporting roles for the customer, 

including the user-interface designer, a technical writer, 
an acceptance team and an architect.  All of these 

specialists assisted the customer to define and refine the 

product based on their specialist skills. The third significant modifi
cation was the introduction 
of structured techniques to manage the interaction with 

internal and external stakeholders.  These techniques 
included regular meetings ranging from “webinars” to 
“face-to-face” meetings. 
However, despite the success of the project and the 
initiatives to support the customer, there remains a 
concern over the long-term sustainability of the on-site 
customer role. 
6. Discussion In the three studies presented the project 
characteristics vary, but we have found that the customer 
role is consistently under significantly more pressure than 
the developers or other participants in the project. The commercial settings vary. Endeavour was a new 
internal management system, outsourced by a large 
established company, Discovery
 being a new scientific system, developed as a product by
 a start-up company, 
and Atlantis being a new version of an IT development 
system by an established company in that area. 
The alterations made to XP also vary. Endeavour had 
already done some work on requirements determination 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 before committing to XP. The Discovery customer had 
helped found the company, worked as a developer early 

on, and later was also the development manager. Atlantis 

had already designed a new 
technical infrastructure before committing to XP, and would involve their QA 

team only late in project. 
The kind of person playing 
the customer role also 
varied according to the commercial nature of the project. 
In Endeavour, the customer was a domain expert from the 
client organisation. In Discovery, the customer was a 

founder of the start-up and, as typical in start-ups, had to play several roles as the company took shape. In Atlantis, 
the customer was the product manager, and hence in close 

touch with existing and prospective purchasers and users 

of the new product.  In each of the cases, the customer 

seemed well-prepared to play the role, and seemed a 

sensible choice for the particular kind of project involved. In each of the cases, XP appeared to be working well 
enough, and the projects all seemed to be looking 

successful, with some credit being given to the XP 

process.  Of course, projects do not always go smoothly, 
as we discuss in one of out other studies [11]. 
Each of the customers did use some strategies to cope 
with the workload.  For example, the Endeavour customer 

was supported by a more senior manager, an acceptance 
team, and an analyst i
nvolved early on. The Discovery customer was supported by one of the company founders, 
a research scientist involved in demonstrating the product 
to potential buyers, a team of scientists verifying the 

software, and an experienced software tester. And the 
Atlantis customer was supported by a UI designer, a 

technical architect, a technical writer, and a QA team. In 
other words, each of the customers was assisted by what 

initially seemed a sufficient support structure. 
But in the experience of the person in the customer 
role, there was a conspicuous commonality. In each of the 
cases, the customer was under stress, and committing 

long hours, to fulfil the role. In each case, the customers 

coped, but the question of sustainability is clear.  7. Related Work Members of the agile community have begun to raise 
some of the issues potentially associated with the XP 

Customer Role.  Deursen [6] noted that XP provided a 

“bag of tricks” for developers but little systemic guidance 
for a customer to succeed.  To begin to address this need, 
Deursen ran a workshop at XP2001 that aimed to collate 

a number of guidelines for successful customer 

involvement. The workshop group agreed that developing 

user stories with a “so that” section of the story assisted 

the customer to evolve their long-term goals of the 

system.  The workshop group also agreed that the 

customer role typically can not
 be held by one physical person, rather a customer team is required that includes 
specialist expertise such as acceptance testing as well as domain area specialists, as it is difficult for one person to 
represent such a diversity of users, from system 

administrators to senior managers.  Another customer 

team suggestion was for a programmer to pair with the 

customer, in order to provide effective support for the 

customer.  It was noted that it would be essential for the 

customer pair to facilitate customer/programmer 

communication within the team 
rather than blocking this 
communication.  In all of the three cases presented in this 

paper, an informal customer team was established, and all 
of the teams included acceptance testing support.  
However, the customer remained overloaded.  

EagleCorp’s implementati
on of personas extends the 
concept of the recommended “so that” section and was 
found to be successful, not only in helping the customer 

to identify requirements but also as a communication 

mechanism for the programmers.   
Other agile methods such as Agile Modeling (AM) [1], 
Lean Development [13], Adaptive Software Development 
(ASD) [8] and Scrum [14] include more practices to 

address requirements gathering and analysis, and it may 

be possible to incorporate some of these practices to 

address the short-comings of the XP Customer Role.  For 
space reasons, we consider only one of these, ASD, in 
depth.   ASD is based on complex adaptive theory and 
describes the mind set and principles required to succeed 
in developing software iteratively and incrementally. 
ASD recommends the following for requirements: 

oThere are a set of artefacts (project vision, data sheet 
and specification) that ensure a shared project vision exists. oCollaboration techniques are used to evolve 
requirements: JAD sessions, Customer Focus Groups 
and finally post-mortems or process improvement 

reviews.oA collaboration facilitatorrole is 
introduced to focus on “thinking” about and planni
ng collaboration rather than simply “letting it happen”. 
There is significant cross-over between ASD and XP, 
including: oThe user stories and product specifications all ensure 
there is a centralised list of requirements 
oThe on-site customer role and the JAD/CFG sessions 
all aim to ensure the developers do not need to deal 

with conflicting requirements, including the 

prioritisation of requirements 
oThe small and regular iterations ensure there is 
opportunity to learn and to evolve requirements. 
ASD concentrates on outlining learning and 
collaborative techniques and theories for all project members, and introduces a collaborative facilitator role 

that specialises in collaborative and learning based 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 communication, including th
e communication between 
customers and developers. XP appears to under-
emphasise the challenging job [10] facing the 
on-site customerand in gathering and prioritising the requirements for the project. ASD begins to address this 

issue by recognising the need for structured collaborative 

techniques and roles in this area. 8. Conclusion At the end of Arthur Miller's "Death of a Salesman", 
the speech that passes for Willy Loman's eulogy includes 

the idea that: "For a salesman, there is no rock bottom to 

the life. He don't put a bolt to a nut, he don't 

tell you the law or give you medicine. He's a 

man way out there in the blue, riding on a 

smile and a shoeshine." An XP customer is in much
 of the same situation as 
Miller's salesman. Customers don't write code or refactor 

it – developers do that; they don't make the key decisions 

about the project – in any large business, rather more 
important managers will do that; nor do they tackle the 
key technical or process problems 
with the development – 
the XP Coach does that. Rather the customer "sells" the 

requirements of the business to the development team and 
then "sells" the products of development back to the 
business.  One of the key principles of XP is that "business 
people make business decisi
ons, technical people make 
technical decisions". So phrased, this sounds like an equal 

balance. On the other hand, the customer must be the 

business's main interface to the development team. This 

requires the customer to keep in touch with the ongoing 

evolution of the business – XP allows development to 

keep track of rapidly changing business requirements, but 
the conduit for communicating these rapidly changing 

requirements to development is once again the customer. 

Simultaneously, the customer 
must maintain the project's 
credibility, and funding within the wider business 
environment. In all but the smallest business, the 

customer will have to answer to other business 

stakeholders – managers, employees, boards etc. 
Compounding this effect, as the team member closest 
to the rest of the business, th
e Customer is often saddled 
with additional administrative responsibilities, often 
hiring team members, finding working space, providing 

equipment and infrastructure services, liaising with 

internal or outsourced systems management facilities both 
for the development and the final production or 
deployment environments, 
right down to apparently 
trivial tasks like arranging sick leave, and buying index 
cards.XP practices support the development team in making 
the technical decisions that are their responsibility (Spike 
Solution, Once and Only Once, Merciless Refactoring, 

Do the Simplest Thing That
 Could Possibly Work). XP 
includes very few practices that actually support the 

customer in their role – 
other than proscribing how they 
interact with the developers
. Furthermore, the practices – 
primarily the Planning Game and interactive nature of XP 

– effectively tie the Customer to meet the technical 

rhythms and needs of the development. The customer is 

supposed to provide stories or tests or advice or 
clarifications to the development team instantly, 
whenever they are required. In practice, it is far too easy 

foranything
 that is not to do with programming, or that is 
not explicit covered by XP's practices, to be defined as a 
"business" requirement, and thus, to become the sole 
responsibility of the customer. As in Project Discovery, it 
is easy to see why a Customer may spend forty hours a 

week working with the development team, and another 
forty hours dealing with everything else.  The existing XP Customer practices appears to be 
achieving excellent results, but they also appear to be 

unsustainable, and so constitute a great risk to XP 
projects, especially in long or high pressure projects.  We 
believe that our research shows that, even when most of 
the relevant XP practices have been followed, the 

customer role is difficult and requires serious 

consideration. XP has focused on building effective 

development team practices: we now need to turn our 

attention, given the pivotal nature of the customer role, to 
exploring the processes that will support the XP 

customer. 
9. References [1] Ambler, S.,  
Agile Modeling: Effective Practices for Extreme Programming and the Unified Process, John Wiley & Sons, 2002.  
[2] Beck, K. eXtreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change
, Addison Wesley, 2000. 
[3] Beck, K., & Fowler, M. 
Planning Extreme Programming, Addison Wesley, 2001. 
[4] Cockburn, A. 
Agile software development
, Addison-Wesley, 2001. 

[5] Cooper, A. 
The Inmates are Running the Asylum: Why 
High-Tech Products Drive Us Crazy and How to Restore 
the Sanity. Sams, 1999. 
[6] Deursen, A., (Ed). 
Proceedings of the XP Workshop on Customer Involvement in Extreme Programming
,Sardinia, Italy, 2001.  http://www.cwi.nl/~arie/.Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
 [7] Fitzgerald, B. “System
s Development Methodologies: 
The Problem of Tenses”, 
Information Technology and 
People, 13 (3). pp. 174 – 185. [8] Highsmith, J. 
Adaptive Software Development: A 
Collaborative Approach to Managing Complex Systems
,Dorset House Publishing, 2000. [9] Martin, A. A case study: exploring the role of customers on eXtreme programming projects
, CS-TR-03-1, School of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, 
Victoria University of Wellington, Wellington, 2002. 
[10] Martin, A., Noble, J., and Biddle, R. Proceedings of 

the Fourth International Conference on eXtreme 

Programming and Agile Processes in Software 

Engineering, Giancarlo Succi (Ed.), “Being Jane 

Malkovich: a Look into the World of an XP Customer”. 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2675, Springer-Verlag. 2003. [11] Martin, A., Biddle, R., and Noble, J., Proceedings of 

the Fifth International Conference on eXtreme 

Programming and Agile Processes in Software 

Engineering, Jutta Eckstein & Hubert Baumeister (Ed.), 
“When XP Met Outsourcing”, 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Springer-Verlag, 2004. [12] Nandhakumar, J. & Avison, D. “The fiction of 

methodological development: a fi
eld study of information 
systems development”, 
Information Technology & 
People, 12(2). pp. 176-191. [13] Poppendieck, M & Poppendieck, T.
 Lean Software Development: An Agile Toolkit, Addison-Wesley, 2003 
[14] Schwaber, K., Beedle, M. Agile Software Development with Scrum, Prentice Hall, 2001 Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™04) 
0-7695-2248-3/04 $ 20.00 IEEE 
