 Towards Continuous Validation of Customer Value 
Helena Holmström Olsson       
Department of Computer Science 
Malmö University 
Sweden 
+46 702109797 helena.holmstrom.olsson@ma.se  
    Jan Bosch 
Department of Computer Science and 
Engineering Chalmers University of Technology 
Sweden 
+46 733 664705 jan.bosch@chalmers.se 
   ABSTRACT While close customer collaboration is highlighted as a 
distinguishing characteristic in agile development, difficulties 

arise in large-scale agile development where the product owner 

can no longer represent the different needs of a large customer 
base. While most companies use the role of a product owner to 

represent the customer base, experiences show that prioritizations 

that are made are far from optimal. Also, once the decision to develop a feature has been taken, companies stop to continuously validate if this feature adds value to the large customer base. As 

experienced in the case companies we work with, re-prioritization 

of feature content is difficult once development has started, 
resulting in R&D investments in development of features that 
have no proven customer value. In this paper, and based on our 
experiences from working with five B2B software development 
companies, we present a conceptual model in which qualitative 
and quantitative customer feedback techniques allow for 
continuous validation and re-prioritization of feature content. In 
this way, large-scale software development companies can 
significantly improve responsiveness to customers throughout the 
development cycle, while at the same time increase accuracy of 
their development efforts. Categories and Subject Descriptors Ł Software and its engineering ~ Software creation and management ~ Software development process management ~ 

Software development techniques Keywords Large-scale agile development, customer feedback techniques, 
continuous customer validation,
 feature re-prioritization, hypotheses, customer value. 1. INTRODUCTION During the last decade, the vast majority of software development 
companies have adopted agile development practices. As one of 
the distinguishing characteristics of agile development, close 
customer collaboration allows for more frequent validation of 
functionality and the risk of developing functionality that is not 
appreciated by customers is reduced. Typically, and as advocated 
by many of the agile development methods [1, 2, 3], the role of 
the product owner acts as a proxy to customers to make sure that the functionality that is developed is aligned with their needs.  
However, difficulties arise in large-scale agile development where 
the product owner can no longer represent the needs of a large customer base. To cater for this, the product owner talks to a 
selected number of customers. Also, customer-specific teams are 
introduced [4]. While these approaches are indeed helpful, they 

don™t allow for an accurate understanding of mass-market needs. 
In addition, there is a lack of mechanisms to re-prioritize the 

feature backlog once development has started [5]. Due to lack of 
mechanisms to validate feature value with a large customer base, the outcome of the pre-study is difficult to question and continuous re-prioritizations of feature content is scarce. As a consequence, software companies invest in developing features 
that were considered value adding in the pre-study phase, but have 
no proven customer value [5, 6]. 
In this paper, and based on on-going multiple case study in five 
large-scale software companies, we present a conceptual model 
that helps companies adopt a development approach in which 
focus shifts from early specification of requirements to continuous validation of customer value, and in which agile practices expand far beyond the development teams. 
2. BACKGROUND 2.1 Large-scale Agile Development For more than a decade, agile development methods have gained 

popularity and become widely recognized within the field of 
software engineering. The methods promise shorter time-to-

market, as well as higher flexibility to accommodate changes in 

requirements and thereby, increase companies™ ability to respond 

to evolving customer needs [7]. As recognized by Kettunen and Laanti [8], the concept of agile is multi-dimensional, and there are many reasons for companies to adopt agile ways-of-working. 

Typically, most companies introduce agile methods to increase 
the frequency in which they release new features and new 
products, and as a way to improve their software engineering 
efficiency.  A key stakeholder in most agile methods is the product owner. The product owner acts as a proxy to customers to help make sure 

that their needs are reflected in the development of new software functionality [3]. Part of the product owner responsibilities is to have a vision of what is to be built, and to convey that vision to 
the development team. This is done in part through the product 
backlog, which is a list in which potential new features for the 

product are prioritized, and which is used by the development 

teams when selecting what to build. The product owner is 
typically a lead user of the system or someone from marketing or 

product management who has a solid understanding of customers, the market, the competition and of future trends for the domain in 
which the system or product operates.  
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM must 
be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from Permissions@acm.org. XP 2015 Workshops, May 25 - 29, 2015, Helsinki, Finland © 2015 ACM. ISBN 978-1-4503-3409-9/15/05–$15.00 DOI: 

http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2764979.2764982 
 While agile methods originally evolved to meet the needs of small 
and co-located development teams [8], they have become 
attractive also to companies involved in large-scale development 
of software, and today there are several attempts such as Industrial 
XP and Scrum of Scrums aiming at scaling agile methods [9]. When developing software in a large-scale context, companies 
have to satisfy a large number of customers with different needs. 
Typically, these customers have many ideas on how the software 
product can serve their particular needs. In this context, the role of 
product management is to inventory these needs, to combine, 
merge and prioritize among these, and to present a roadmap with a 
set of requirements for the next release of the system. To do this, 
the collection and management of customer feedback is critical 
for the success of software systems and their evolution over time [10].  2.2 Customer Feedback Techniques As recognized in previous research [11, 12, 13], companies apply 
a broad range of techniques to collect customer feedback in the process of software development. Typically, these techniques allow for customers to engage in problem definition, requirements 
engineering and system evaluation and validation. Already before 
development starts, and in the early stages of the development 
cycle, use cases, scenarios, prototyping, customer interviews, 
customer observations and surveys are common techniques for 
capturing customers™ experiences and perceptions [11]. Likewise, 
alpha- and beta-testing techniques are efficiently used pre- and during development in order to continuously validate feature content with customers. Recently, and due to more and more 
products being connected to the Internet, the opportunity to collect 
post-deployment data from the products has significantly 
increased [14, 15]. Due to the online nature of these systems, data 
is continuously collected while customers use the systems, and the 
cost of collecting this data is low. As experienced in our previous 

research [12, 13], this has resulted in companies collecting huge 
amounts of product data reflecting product operation and performance. However, and as reported in our previous research [5, 12, 13], companies struggle with how to manage the data that 
is collected, and how to include customer feedback into their 
development processes. In our earlier research [5], we coined the 

term ‚the open loop™ problem denoting the situation in which there 
is no way for product management to validate if the features they 
prioritized in the pre-study phase are also the features that are 
used by customers and that generate the expected revenue to the 
company. As a result, most companies experience a situation in which the confirmation of the correctness of the prioritizations 

takes place only after the product has been deployed to its 
customers, and there is the risk that companies invest in 

development of features that have no proven customer value. 
Recently, increasing attention has been put to continuous experimentation with customers [5, 14, 15, 16, 17]. Inspired by 
the ‚Build-Measure-Learn™ loop as a central concept within the 
Lean Startup community [18], a number of approaches 
emphasizing rapid customer evaluation of small product 
increments are emerging. While the concept is not new [19], it has 

become a reality also in B2B contexts and there are a number of 

examples in which large software-intensive companies apply 
experiment techniques, such as e.g. A/B testing, from the Web 2.0 
domain to learn about product use and customer behaviors [15, 

17, 20]. However, and as recognized in this study, although companies have mechanisms to collect large amounts of data from customers and from products, they lack a systematic approach in 
which they utilize different customer feedback techniques to 
continuously validate customer value. Below, and based on our 
experiences in five B2B software companies, we identify the key 
problems they experience in relation to data collection, and we 
present a conceptual model that help them accomplish a more 
flexible and dynamic development environment in which features are continuously re-prioritized based on rapid customer feedback. 
3. RESEARCH METHOD This paper reports on a multiple case study [21] covering a period 
of 20 months (July 2013 Œ February 2015). Our study is based on 
a mix of qualitative interviews and workshops with company 
representatives in five software-intensive companies. Four of the companies are embedded systems companies developing physical 
products in which software is becoming increasingly important 
and where the majority of new product functionality lies in 

software. The companies represent the telecom domain, the 

automotive domain, the networ
k camera domain and the pump manufacturer domain. The fifth company is a pure software 
company developing optimization software systems primarily for the airline industry. The five case companies are presented in Table 1 below. Table 1. The five case companies involved in the study. 
Case company Domain A A provider of telecommunication systems and equipment, communications networks and multimedia solutions for 
mobile and fixed network operators. B A software company specializing in navigational 
information, operations management and optimization 
solutions. C A network video company offering products such as 
network cameras, video encoders, video management software and camera applications for video surveillance. D An equipment manufacturer developing, manufacturing and selling a variety of products within the embedded systems domain. E A pump manufacturer producing circulator pumps for heating and air conditioning, as well as centrifugal pumps 
for water supply.  In all companies, we continuously met with groups consisting of multiple roles such as e.g. product managers, project managers, 

product owners, chief architects and software developers. During our study, we conducted a series of group interviews in each company, and we also met in workshop sessions at which all 
companies were represented. Each group interview lasted for two 
hours and all discussions were held in English. The two 
researchers documented the interviews and after each interview 

we shared our notes. In addition to the group interviews, we 
organized workshops at each company site, as well as joint 
workshops to which all companies were invited. At these workshops, we had pre-defined themes that were discussed among all company representatives, and at some occasions we had 
company representatives give presentations to share their 
experiences related to customer feedback techniques and data 
collection practices. 4. CASE STUDY FINDINGS Below, and based on the group interviews and workshop sessions, 
we summarize the challenges that we identified in the five case 

study companies. The challenges represent the main problems 
they experience in relation to collection and use of customer  feedback in their development of software in a large-scale 
development environment (Table 2). 
Table 2. Challenges identified in the five case companies. 
Problem identified: Description: The ‚open loop™ problem The situation in which product management experience difficulties in getting accurate customer data. This leads to a situation in which 
decisions are taken based on opinions rather than customer data, resulting in R&D investments that are not aligned with customer needs. Large amount of 
unused features Due to limited mechanisms to monitor feature usage, our case companies are convinced that a large number of the features they develop are never used, and that investments are put on 
functionality that are not proven valuable to 
customers. Wrong 
implementation of features There are different ways in which features can be implemented. However, there is no efficient way 
in which the companies can continuously validate these alternatives with customers to decide which alternative that is the most appreciated one. 
Requirements are seen as ﬁtruthsﬂ A common view in all case companies is that requirements are regarded as ﬁtruthsﬂ. All companies experience difficulties in validating requirements also after development has started. 
Lack of feature optimization 
In the companies we study, the majority of the development effort is allocated to new feature development. As a result, time is spent on adding 
functionality instead of re-implementing features 
that don™t work well. 
Misrepresentation of customers In large-scale development of software, customer representation is difficult. Typically, and as 
reported in the interviews, the customers that ﬁscream the loudestﬂ get recognized while other customers get forgotten. Lack of validation of feedback Qualitative customer feedback is never validated 
in later stages, causing a situation in which vast amounts of development takes place although it has never been proven valuable to customers. Large amounts of (useless) data All companies have significant data available that could be used to inform their development efforts, but they are unable to capitalize on this data. 
While big data offers great potential, there is the 
risk of useless data if the wrong questions are asked.  5. THE ‚QCD™ MODEL: A CONCEPTUAL MODEL FOR CONTINUOUS VALIDATION OF CUSTOMER VALUE In response to the challenges outlined above, and as experienced in the case companies, we developed a conceptual model called 
the ‚Qualitative/quantitative Customer-driven Development™ 

(QCD) model (Figure 1). Our model advocates a development approach in which requirements, instead of being frozen early in 
the development process, are viewed as hypotheses that need to be 
continuously validated throughout the development cycle to prove customer value. Validation is done by using qualitative and/or 
quantitative customer feedback techniques (CFT™s), with the main 

intention that the feature backlog is re-prioritized also in later 
stages of development. In this way, customer feedback is used 
capture changing customer needs that can potentially lead to re-
prioritization of features. Also, by continuously validate feature 
content with customers, the model supports an approach in which 
features with no proven customer value are abandoned, a situation 
which rarely happens in the companies we work with due to lack 
of customer data that supports such a decision. The QCD model is presented in Figure 1 below. 
 Figure 1. The QCD model for continuous validation of customer value The QCD development approach is driven by hypotheses. The hypotheses are derived from business strategies, innovation 
initiatives, qualitative and quantitative customer feedback and 

results from on-going customer validation cycles. The hypotheses 
are concepts and ideas that are put into a hypotheses backlog with 
the intention to be validated with customers before being 
prioritized for development. Also, and as the distinguishing 
characteristic of the QCD approach, hypotheses are continuously validated also after development of features has started to allow for re-prioritizations of features during development. Once a 
hypothesis has been selected for validation, the company picks a 
customer feedback technique (CFT) for this purpose. Once a CFT 
has been chosen, the validation cycle starts. The validation cycle 
either involves a limited number of selected customers or it can be 
deployed directly in existing products in the field. If the CFT that 
was chosen is qualitative, the validation cycle consists of direct 
interactions with customers resulting in smaller amounts of qualitative data sets. If the CFT is quantitative, the validation cycle consists of having the feature deployed in products, 
instrument the code with metrics that monitor usage, collecting 

data revealing feature usage and store this in a product data 
database. The CFT data is then used to decide whether to re-
prioritize the hypothesis and put it back. 
The model was developed based on the challenges identified in the five case companies, and in our future research we aim to 

validate the model in the five case companies to learn more about how the model helps them solve the challenges identified. 
6. CONCLUSIONS In this paper, we present the ‚Qualitative/quantitative Customer-
driven Development™ (QCD) model. The model is a conceptual 
model that was inductively derived from the challenges 

experienced in the five case companies. The model advocates an approach in which qualitative and quantitative customer feedback 
techniques are combined to run continuous validation cycles with 
customers throughout the development cycle. By advocating 
continuous validation of customer value, the model helps 

ŁŁŁŁŁŁŁŁŁ

ŁŁŁŁŁ companies adopt a development approach in which focus shifts from early specification of requirements to continuous validation 
of hypotheses, and in which agile practices expand far beyond the 
development teams. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This study was funded by the Software Center at Chalmers 
University of Technology, University of Gothenburg and Malmö 
University in Sweden. We would like to thank all interviewees at 

the case companies for their time and engagement in this study. 8. REFERENCES [1] Highsmith, J., and Cockburn, A. 2001. Agile Software 

Development: The business of innovation, Software Management, September, pp. 120-122.  [2] Larman, C. 2004. Agile and Iterative Development: A Manager's Guide. Addison-Wesley. 
[3] Schwaber, K., and Beedle, M. 2002. 
Agile software 
development with Scrum. Prentice Hall. 
[4] Olsson H.H., Sandberg A., Bosch J., and Alahyari H. 2014. 
Scale and responsiveness in large-scale software development. IEEE Software, Vol 31, Issue 5, pp. 87- 93. [5] Olsson, H.H., and Bosch, J. 2014. From Opinions to Data-
Driven Software R&D: A Multi-Case Study On How To 

Close The ‚Open Loop™ Problem. In Proceedings of EUROMICRO, Software Engineering and Advanced Applications (SEAA), August 27-29, Verona, Italy. [6] Backlund E., Bolle M., Tichy M., Olsson H.H., and Bosch J. 2014. Automated User Interaction Analysis for Workflow-
Based Web Portals. 
In Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Software Business, June 16-18, Paphos, Cyprus. [7] Williams L., and Cockburn A. 2003. Agile Software 
Development: It™s About Feedback and Change. Computer, Vol. 36(6): 39-43. [8] Kettunen P., and Laanti M. 2008. Combining agile software 

projects and largescale organizational agility. 
Software Process Improvement And Practice, Vol. 13: 183-193. [9] McMahon P. 2005. Extending agile methods: a distributed project and organizational improvement perspective. CrossTalk, Vol. 18(5): 16-19. [10] Neumann, M., Riel, A., and Brissaud, D. 2011. IT-supported 

innovation management in the automotive supplier industry to drive idea generation and leverage innovation, Journal of Software Maintenance and Evolution: Research and practice, Volume 301, 2012, pp. 229-240. [11] Bosch-Sijtsema, P., and Bosch, J. 2014. User involvement 
throughout the innovation process in high-tech industries. 
The Journal of Product Innovation Management. Online 
version published October 13. [12] Olsson H. H., and Bosch J. 2013. Towards Data-Driven 

Product Development: A Multiple Case Study on Post-

Deployment Data Usage in Software-Intensive Embedded 
Systems. 
In Proceedings of the Lean Enterprise Software and Systems Conference (LESS), December 1-4, 2013, Galway, Ireland. 
[13] Olsson H. H., and Bosch J. 2013. Post-Deployment Data 
Collection in Software-Intensive Embedded Products. In Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Software Business, June 11-14, 2013, Potsdam, Germany. [14] Bosch, J. 2012. Building Products as Innovations Experiment Systems. 
In Proceedings of 3rd International Conference on Software Business, June 18-20, Cambridge, Massachusetts. [15] Bosch, J., and Eklund, U. 2012. Eternal Embedded Software: Towards Innovation Experiment Systems, In Proceedings of International Symposium on Leveraging Applications, 15-18 
October, Crete. 
[16] Fagerholm, F., Sanchez G., Mäenpää, H., and Münch, J. 
2014. Building blocks for continuous experimentation. In the Proceedings of the RCoSE ‚14 workshop, June 3, Hyderabad, India. [17] Kohavi, R., Crook, T., and Longbotham, R. 2009. Online 

Experimentation at Microsoft. In theThird Workshop on Data Mining Case Studies and Practice Prize. [18] Ries, E. 2011. The Lean Startup: How Constant Innovation Creates Radically Successful Businesses. London: Penguin Group. [19] Blank, S. 2005. The Four Steps to the Epiphany: Successful Strategies for Products that Win (3rd edition), 

Cafepress.com. 
[20] Olsson H. H., Alahyari H., and Bosch, J. 2012. Climbing the 
ﬁStairway to Heavenﬂ: A multiple-case study exploring 

barriers in the transition from agile development towards 

continuous deployment of software, In Proceedings of the 38th Euromicro Conference on Software Engineering and 
Advanced Applications, September 5-7, Cesme, Izmir, Turkey. 
[21] Runesson P., and Höst, M. 2009. Guidelines for conducting 
and reporting case study research in software engineering, Empirical Software Engineering, vol, 14. 