 Agile & Kanban In Coordination 
 
Ryan Polk 
WMS Gaming Inc. 
rpolk@wms.com 
Blog: www.spryyeti.com
 
 
 
Abstract - Iterative development and Kanban are not mutually 
exclusive competing methodol
ogies; in essence they are 
complementary processes that when used together can 
facilitate higher performance in large development teams. This 
paper is a walkthrough of the Network Gaming team’s 
implementation of Iterative Agile alongside Lean Kanban here 
at WMS Gaming.  The intent is to cover the processes created 
and the improvements achieved with this coordinated Agile / 
Lean system.  
Keywords
 – S
crum; Kanban; Lean Software Metrics; Agile 
Software Development; Agile and Lean;
 
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
WMS has been a leader in interactive entertainment 
since Harry Williams founded the company in 1943. A 
Stanford University-trained engineer who devised the “tilt" 
mechanism for pinball machines, Williams changed the 
nature of pinball in wartime America. The company brought 
this spirit of innovation to the home video market (as 
Midway Games) in the 1980s and to the casino gaming 
industry in the early 1990s. 
The NG (Network Gaming) system development team at 
WMS Gaming Inc. is comprised of 18 Engineers of varying 
skill sets and backgrounds. Located in Reno Nevada, this 
development team is respons
ible for development on a 
relatively mature and expansiv
e codebase using primarily a 
Microsoft technology stack including C# / .Net and MS 
Team Foundation Server (TFS). The Remote Configuration 
& Download (RCD) management system is now in its 5
th
 
version with a history of over 4 years in development. The 
RCD functionality is a supporting mechanism for casino 
operators to deliver games remo
tely to slot machines on the 
casino floor.  
Much like most systems development teams we are 
constantly working to balance large scale system feature 
upgrades that make up about 60% of the work with small-
scale changes and bugs that cover the remainder of our time. 
Over the last 2 years we have worked to transition from a 
“Laissez-faire” waterfall team to a simple and well tuned 
Lean / Agile team.  
My role in the team is both as one of the development 
team managers and as Agile coach for WMS as a whole. As 
a manager on this team my role as been to advise on our 
agile process and to facilitate continuous improvement. I try 
to give as much credit as possible to the team by the use of 
the term “we” in this paper, with the understanding that all 
the decisions made were made as a team and all were done 
in the process of continuous improvement.  
II.
 
A
GILE 
/
 
L
EAN 
E
VOLUTION
 
A.
 
How We Got Here 
About 18 months ago our 4-person management team 
was given the opportunity to transform our group of 18 
developers from a so-called “agile” team to a truly effective 
Agile team. What we called agile wasn't very agile. We held 
15 minute daily stand-ups but our team was coordinated 
using a bug tracking tool. We had no systematic process. 
Fig. 1 shows the timeline for our improvements. At the 
beginning of our agile improvements we had three teams of 
5, 6 and 7 developers respectiv
ely.  Together, all three teams 
were working on the same product. Over the first few 
months we found it a problem that there was no well-
defined purpose for each team. As work came in, our 
product owners struggled to define what work should go to 
what team. They tried to break things down by individual 
projects / features and differen
t layers of the system, but 
most times these projects ended up spanning teams. In 
addition, projects were difficult to estimate and track as we 
were using fractions of a team’s Velocity in our planning 
exercises. Most concerning to us, the distribution of project 
tasks across teams forced develope
rs to jump back and forth 
between teams to get work done.  
Overall, the overhead of running three separate teams 
was found to be wasteful, and eventually we started to work 
as one large team. This was not ideal but it created a much 
more cohesive flow of work. One problem though… With 
this large of a team (18 people) about 3 to 5 of the team 
members were falling through the cracks in various ways. 
They were failing to complete their work and generally 
hiding in the large team structur
e. Also, the concept of a self 
organized team was lost when team members began to 
disengage from the process as they had a hard time knowing 
how best to organize themselves within such a large 
structure. To make things even
 worse, the overhead that we 
were trying to escape by combining the teams re-appeared 
in the amount of work it took to coordinate iterations with a 
team of this size. 
2011 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4370-3/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2011.10263 Figure 1 – A timeline of our Agile transition. The 3 phases 
represent changes in thought and were marked by one major 
transitional event each.
 
One interesting thing we noted when working in the 
large team environment was that certain team members 
gravitated towards selecting different types of work. After 
several months of debate the management team decided to 
create 2 groups that were defi
ned by the size and type of 
work they would commit to. Team 1, the Iterative team, had 
9 members dedicated to large 
scale / large project based 
work with very little up front definition. Team 2, the 6 
member Kanban team, was dedicated to developing smaller 
more defined features. Also, the Kanban team was primarily 
comprised of those team members who had seemed to be 
falling through the cracks in our previous agile process. 
These team members were regularly missing stand-up 
meetings, failing to complete work inside iterations and 
were generally performing below what our expectations 
were for our team. Our theory was that they were 
performing below par because they were unable to fit into 
the team dynamic and structure of a large team. Our 
hypothesis in making this change, was that if we created a 
smaller team with more structure, these developers would be 
able to self organize and perform. As part of this re-
organization, I was assigned as the manager of this team. I 
asked the team to try out Kanban as a way to help control 
our environment and manage the work. With their buy-in 
we moved forward with this transition. 
B.
 
Defining Agile 
In our organization we find it valuable to define Agile 
by the key practices that each team implements. Although 
we do not follow an exact me
thodology, we are heavily 
influenced by Scrum and XP. 
I believe it is valuable to list 
our practices and compare how we implemented Lean / 
Kanban in our context. The 8 key practices that we define as 
the WMS Agile implementation are:  
 
 
User Stories 
 
Acceptance tests 
 
Iterative Development 
 
Burn down charts 
 
Project Boards 
 
Daily Stand-Ups 
 
TDD / Automated Unit Tests 
 
Continuous Integration 
 
Beyond this, all developers have been trained in the basic 
principles of Agile. We work constantly to make sure 
everyone has an understanding of how the things we do 
relate back and support these agile principles  
C.
 
Adding in Kanban 
As the Kanban team was formed, they were introduced 
to the practices of Kanban as a part of their everyday routine 
and as a simple modification to their already familiar agile 
process. To explain how this would work we created a 
simple comparison of the agile practices that we currently 
followed with the new Kanban practices. As you can see 
from Fig. 2, the substitution of Kanban was considered a 
simple plug and play substitution of practices. Previously, 
the team had been using story boards to manage work inside 
of their iterations. Using the Kanban board was simply 
equated to a more complex project board with specific rules 
for each queue. After adding the Kanban board to the 
process, I started to teach the team the concept of limiting 
work in progress and coaching them on the importance of 
flow through the system. Weekly cycle times were 
eventually posted on the board as well. Since we were 
unable to fully embed testers into the team, the developers 
worked to be even more cros
s functional; on a rotating basis 
the team members would also work to do simple testing on 
all new code. In addition to testing this rotating team 
member would coordinate the delivery of these new features 
to our Product Assurance (PA) department. With the 
understanding that we don’t just deliver code, we deliver 
264 tested and completed product, came the biggest changes in 
mindset for the Kanban team. 
 
Figure 2 – Our training slide for the beginning of our Kanban 
adoption.
 
III.
 
T
HE 
NG
 
/
 
RCD
 
C
URRENT 
S
TATE
 
A.
 
Organization & Product Ownership 
Early in our transition we created a product owner team 
comprised of one of the team managers and two developers 
/ systems engineers. Their task was to marshal all incoming 
work and help maintain a regular schedule of meetings to 
break out User Stories with the help of the development 
teams. Our product owners regularly maintain the priorities 
of the Kanban board with the understanding that unless 
there is an extreme emergenc
y they are only allowed to 
reprioritize, add to, and change 
work in the waiting queue. 
All other changes are off limits.  
Since we take a more XP style approach to User Stories, 
we involve portions of both the Iterative and Kanban teams 
in the story creation and estimation process instead of 
leaving this responsibility solely to the product owners. As 
part of our planning process 
both teams maintain a standing 
meeting every other Wednesday for 2 hours of story 
planning and estimation. Since 
the teams worked together to 
estimate and define User Stories, we are able to keep both 
teams in sync. A piece of work can flow to either team as it 
has been estimated by a sampling of members from both 
teams.  
At first the Kanban team would break each User Story 
down into multiple tasks and use those as a basis for the 
work items on the Kanban board. After about a month’s 
time the team decided that tasks were too granular and 
creating them added too much overhead. Quickly, they 
moved to just using the User Stories as their standard 
Kanban work item. Since the Iterative team had chosen to 
go solely to stories about 6 months beforehand, this gave us 
a standard unit of work across teams allowing us to flow 
work to either team where necessary.  
B.
 
Iterative Development 
Our Iterative development team
 runs in a quite typical 
agile fashion. They are responsible for all large-scale 
projects that affect the system including any architectural 
roadmap work that may commit us to structural changes to 
the software as a whole. The team is casually limited to 2 or 
3 WIP (Work-in-Progress) 
[3]
 projects at any one time. 
Their iterations are 2 weeks in
 duration and managed using 
a typical project board. They hold an iteration planning 
meeting on the last Friday of the iteration and hold daily 
stand-ups at 10 a.m. The Iteration team’s project board is 
located in the same area as 
their daily stand-up and is 
adjacent to the Kanban team’s board (See Fig. 3).  
 
Figure 3 – The Iterative team’s Storyboard alongside the Kanban 
board. 
C.
 
Kanban Development 
The Kanban development team is responsible for all small 
feature requests along with bugs. This team uses a Kanban 
board 
[2][4]
 that manages development process only, starting 
from the currently selected top 
5 priority items and spanning 
all the way to a deployed queue. The team maintains a 15 
minute daily stand-up immediately following Iterative teams 
stand-up meeting. They main
tain a cycle time and lead time 
metric integrated with our story point system. The queues 
the team maintained in this version of the board are:  (Most 
of these queues can be seen in the board makeup in Fig. 4.)
 
 
Kanban Queues  
1.
 
Goals – Changed to “Waiting Queue”  
2.
 
Stories WIP 5 
3.
 
Tasks – Removed Later  
4.
 
Development WIP 5 
5.
 
Development Complete – Buffer WIP 3 
6.
 
Verify & Accept WIP 4 
7.
 
Done
 
8.
 
Merged / Deployed
 
a)
 
Merged into - NG Release A
 
b)
 
Merged into - NG Release B
 
c)
 
Merged into - NG Release N…
 
 
265 Figure 4 – A closer view of the Kanban team’s first version 
of the board.  
D.
 
WIP (Work-In-Progress) Limits 
When using Story Points with the Kanban system we 
found it useful to maintain WIP limits on our queues by 
constraining the number of stories allowed in each queue as 
well as imposing a limit to the maximum amount of points 
in certain queues. The two primary queues we were 
concerned with were the Development and Verify / Accept 
queues. With a rather inexperi
enced team these queues were 
where we wanted to focus our attention on WIP limits. What 
we found was that in many cases when a larger work item 
was put into the development queue it became a “lump” in 
the flow of the board and stopped us from moving other 
work forward. Shortly after implementing Story Point WIP 
Limits we also set a rule that only stories of a certain size (8 
Points) and below would be allowed on the board. With 
these two controls we found we were able to keep work 
flowing smoothly without the overhead of trying to break 
every story down to equal sized chunks.  
IV.
 
T
EAM 
C
OORDINATION
 
A.
 
Our Current State 
Our product owner team is responsible for nearly all 
coordination of the story planning and priority processes for 
all incoming defects and enhancements. They participate in 
the iteration planning meetings for the Iterative team; they 
also manage the top 5 priority items on the Kanban team’s 
board. The Iterative team maintains a typical daily 15 
minute stand-up that is attended by the product owners. In 
the same location and immediately after that 15 minute 
meeting the Kanban team has their own 15 minute stand-up. 
If there is an urgent change to the teams’ priorities the 
product owners attend both meetin
gs to get the change into 
the pipeline. With this system of simple meetings our 
product owners are capable of staying up-to-date with what 
the teams are doing with a small commitment of 30 minutes 
per day. 
The product owner meeting schedule coordinates 
approximately 99% of all requests that our team is engaged 
in. The remaining 1% includes emergency bug fixes or last 
minute feature changes to either team. These 1% 
interruptions are handled by 
either substituting something 
into the Iterative team’s story board or by adding new work 
into the Kanban queues, bumping
 lower priority items back 
to the waiting queue to account for the emergency item. 
Either way these requests are few and far between and are 
handled quickly causing minimal disruption to either team. 
B.
 
Workflow 
To help explain our work distribution process, we like to 
use a rock crusher / sorter analogy. As you can see from Fig. 
5 below each portion of the process fits well into the 
analogy. 
 
The product owner team sorts and breaks up the 
work into manageable pieces of various sizes. The 
highest priority items go to the front of the line for 
both teams. 
 
The Kanban board high priority list acts as the 
sorting mechanism for all items below a certain size 
and complexity. 
 
In the iteration planning meeting the Iterative team 
chooses the highest priority items needed to satisfy 
the current roadmap priorities. 
Overall, flow is a priority for both teams. The only 
difference between the teams is the size and complexity of 
the work and the cadence of delivery. 
 
 
Figure 5 - The visual Rock Crusher / Sorter analogy. 
C.
 
Agile / Lean Metrics 
Velocity / Pseudo-Velocity - Of course our Iterative 
team monitors their average velocity which they use to plan 
their iterations. We also compute a pseudo-velocity created 
from time slices of the Kanban team’s board. This metric is 
essential for our release planning
 process. To calculate this 
we compile an average velocity by placing work into 
iterations based on the compl
etion date of the Kanban item. 
For example if an item on the Kanban board was completed 
on Nov. 10
th
 and the Iterative team had iteration #8 going 
from Nov. 1
st
 to Nov. 12
th
 that item would be used to 
compile the pseudo-velocity for the Kanban team for 
iteration #8. After placing the items
 into their corresponding 
iterations, we take a rolling averag
e of the last 5 iterations to 
use as an average pseudo-velocity metric for the Kanban 
266 team. We know that this is not an entirely accurate estimate 
as we can't say that all items completed in a 2 week window 
were started in that same window. Since this metric is not 
used for small scale planning we accept this inaccuracy. 
Cycle Time / Pseudo Cycle Time - For our Kanban team 
we use cycle time as a standard 
measure of throughput for 
the team. We coordinate this with the story points for each 
item to calculate a cycle time m
etric for each story size (i.e. 
we have a cycle time for each 1 point story, each 2 point 
story and so on). From this we can give our product owners 
an exact “lead time” 
[5]
 for any new stories at the bottom of 
the priority list. The product owners use this metric when 
scheduling high priority features and bugs to give our 
customers a reliable demo d
ate for the functionality.  
We also create a pseudo cycle time metric for our 
Iterative team. Since we started with the hypothesis that our 
Kanban team could be just as productive as our Iterative 
team we needed a way to compare the two teams and test 
our hypothesis. We can do this because both teams are 
engaged in the estimation process and so they maintain the 
same estimate structure across the organization with very 
little variance. This metric is not published as we are not 
looking to foster competition; 
we use this solely to track 
progress and as the teams diverge in process over time we 
understand that this metric will need to be abandoned. 
D.
 
Agile Release Trains 
Before moving to the mixed iterative Kanban system we 
implemented an Agile Release Train 
[1]
 structure consisting 
of quarterly Potentially Shippable Increments (PSI) 
consisting of 5 full iterations pe
r PSI. This structure has 
remained unchanged for the most part, but we added an 
additional layer to the release (See Fig. 6). Because of the 
integration of the Kanban team we do not use the concept of 
a “hardening sprint” 
[1]
 in our Release Train 
implementation. Instead, we have found that the Iterative 
team can have better focus on closing and hardening 
features as part of a normal iteration if they are buffered by 
the Kanban team against random interruptions. The first tier 
of the release plan includes all large scale projects 
coordinated and integrated into the quarterly plan. The 
second tier of the plan includes a swim lane using the 
Kanban teams Pseudo-Velocity metric to help plan all small 
scale features that are known at the time of the quarterly 
planning meeting. This swim
 lane is calculated using a 
velocity / 2 metric (determined from previous experience 
with our PA team) that leaves more than 50% open room for 
the Kanban team to absorb any incoming work and bugs 
that are intended as the team’s number one priority. This 
allows us to provide a very solid commitment to our 
customers for all large scale fe
atures in each release. With 
the Kanban team absorbing all small scale items, their 
allotment of work at the beginning of a PSI initially seems 
to be under committed. From our experience, we have found 
the 50% velocity commitment works well to keep the team 
fully engaged throughout the release development phase 
while being able to take on bug fixes and high priority items 
that arrive in the backlog. 
V.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS 
&
 
F
UTURE
 
A.
 
Measured Results  
The results of our Agile / Lean transformation have been 
quite successful. Over the last 9 months we have seen a 
steady improvement in cycle 
time and pseudo-velocity of 
the Kanban team bringing them in line with the performance 
of the Iterative team. As Fig. 7 shows, after the first 2 
months the Kanban team continued to make steady progress 
and improvement in average cycle time. 
 
 
Figure 7 – The result measured in Cycle Time – Kanban team and 
Pseudo Cycle Time – Iterative team show considerable 
improvement of the Kanban team over a short period of months. 
Interestingly enough it was at that two month point where 
we started to publish cycle time metrics on our board 
allowing the team to track their own performance. To 
reiterate, we didn’t publish the pseudo cycle time metric for 
the Iterative team as we were looking to avoid competition. 
The Kanban team has made steady progress and has come 
within .10 of the pseudo cycle time of the Iterative team for 
the last 3 months of the data collection period. This 
improvement has been dramatic in numbers but the amount 
of motivation and energy it has provided for the team has 
been immeasurable. 
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
Jun-10
Jul-10
Aug-10
Sep-10
Oct-10
Nov-10
Dec-10
Jan-11
Feb-11
Avg. Cycle Time Per Point
Team Cycle Times
Iterative Team
Kanban team
Figure 6 – A view of the product Release Train taking into
 account the Kanban team’s additional completed work. 
267 Kanban Team Results 
After giving the Kanban team a simple framework to 
work under and giving the team members a bit more 
guidance and control over their environment, we have a 
well-functioning team that has made huge strides in their 
productivity. This new team is confident about the 
challenges they face and highly motivated to improve not 
only in process and practice bu
t in their status as a team. 
B.
 
Overall Team Results 
In our organization we have a system in place that helps 
us smooth out many of the distractions that can cause so 
many problems with Iterative teams. Since we are not only 
cross functional in our teams, but cross functional between 
teams, we are now able to pick
 and choose how we handle 
urgent or just disruptive new work. We have created a 
process framework that fits our team as well as the nature of 
our work and provides us with a level of flexibility that is 
tough to match with iterative development teams alone. By 
combined team estimation and marrying the rituals of 
Iterative Agile with the practi
ces of a Kanban system we 
have successfully created a b
lended process. This process 
has given us greater flexibility as a team, and allowed us to 
maintain a sustainable iterative pace while adding to our 
velocity with an ever-improving Kanban team. 
C.
 
The Future 
The future of the Kanban team is something of a 
question at this point. Because we were successful at 
improving our performance, we are now considering 
opportunities for adding responsibilities to the team 
members. The Kanban team members have proven that they 
are good performers in an or
ganization that provides a bit of 
structure to their environment. After one of our feedback 
sessions where the team asked to be able to work on larger 
and more poignant projects, we 
have started to assign them 
larger system features that are well defined. The team has 
been handling these features quite well. The improved 
performance of the Kanban team has caught the eye of 
management too. This attention has led to an evaluation of a 
possible move to a new project providing the team with new 
work from the ever expandin
g WMS portfolio. In the end, 
the team of “poor performers” proved that the environment 
and lack of granularity in the process was the root of our 
problems. 
D.
 
Iterative & Kanban - A Model 
In the Agile / Lean discussion circles we hear about 
Kanban, Scrum-ban and all kinds of other -Ban ideas every 
day. Some suggest mixing and 
blending processes. We have 
found that running both processes in synchronization, and 
not blending them, has been highly valuable for our 
organization. In my experience, I have found it more 
challenging than it should be to truly run a long term 
systems maintenance and new feature team with Iterative 
Agile alone. The random interrup
tions and fire fighting of 
supporting a product in the field always seems to cause 
disruptions to Iterative teams. By adding a synchronized 
Kanban team alongside an Iterative team we have been able 
to even out our iterations and create a productive and 
healthy work environment where we are able to meet our 
customers’ needs.  For larger development teams that work 
collaboratively on a single product I would highly 
recommend the use of this tiered team approach to Agile / 
Lean development.  Our succ
esses in this process have 
come from a readily implementable structure and simple 
process improvements that can be easily adopted by teams 
in similar environments. 
A
CKNOWLEDGEMENTS
 
I would like to thank Rebecca Wirfs-Brock for her insight 
and input in the iterative process of creating this paper. As 
part of our enterprise Agile ro
llout and constant advisors on 
the process I would like to thank James Halprin and James 
Grenning for helping define Agile at WMS and helping 
shape my strategies both as a manager and as a coach. I 
would also like to thank the NG Development team 
members and specifically the management team: Chris 
Blackburn, Chris Frattinger, Sean Brooks and Vineet 
Vashishta their efforts and collaboration are what made our 
experiment in Agile so successful.  
R
EFERENCES
 
[1] Dean Leffingwell, “Scaling Software Agility”, Addison 
Wesley, 2007. 
 
[2] Alan Shalloway, Guy Beaver, and James R. Trott, “Lean 
- Agile Software Development - Achieving Enterprise 
Agility”, Addison Wesley, 2009. 
 
[3] Mary and Tom Poppendieck, “Leading Lean Software 
Development – Results Are Not The Point”, Addison 
Wesley, 2009. 
 
[4] Jeff Patton, “Kanban Development Oversimplified”, 
http://agileproductdesign.com/blog/2009/kanban_over_simp
lified.html, 2009 
 
[5] David Joyce, “Kanban for Software Engineering”, 
http://leanandkanban.files.wordpress.com/2009/04/kanban-
for-software-engineering-apr-242.pdf, 2009. 
268