 Stakeholder Identification 
in Agile Software Product 
Development Organizations 
A model for understanding who and what really counts 
 
Ken Power 
Cisco Systems, Inc 
Galway, Ireland 
ken.power@gmail.com
 
 
 
Abstract
Š Stakeholder Theory is an area of strategic 
management that defines a stakeholder as someone who affects 
or is affected by the actions of the organization. The principles 
and concepts of stakeholder theory can be applied to software 
development organizations to give managers a better 
understanding of the diverse community of stakeholders that 
influence product development efforts. A deeper 
understanding of the broad community of stakeholders can 
help an organization that is transitioning to agile methods by 
highlighting the stakeholders that are affected. This paper 
describes the application of stakeholder theory to product 
development organizations in the context of a global product 
development company undergoing a multi-year transition to 
agile development. A model is presented for mapping 
stakeholders into stakeholder groups, and for quantifying the 
influence of stakeholders. This paper further uses a 
stakeholder approach to demonstrate how traditional 
organization roles map to roles in an agile product 
development organization. 
Keywords-stakeholder; stakeholder group; salience; agile; 
lean; product development 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
 
There is a body of knowledge that exists in agile [1] and 
lean development [2-5], organization patterns [6], and 
systems design that can help teams become more productive 
and understand better the context in which they are creating 
products. Separately, there is a body of knowledge in 
stakeholder theory that helps organizations understand the 
needs and influences of different stakeholder groups [7-12]. 
A particular focus of this research is on the application of 
stakeholder concepts to software development, and 
specifically to geographically distributed product 
development organizations.  
II.
 
M
OTIVATION FOR 
R
ESEARCH
 
This research attempts to understand how managers of an 
organization can better identify and engage with the 
stakeholders that influence, and are influenced by, its product 
development efforts. This research develops a model for 
understanding how agile and lean principles combined with 
stakeholder concepts apply to a product development 
organization. In other words, this research develops a model 
based on stakeholder concepts that helps managers to 
identify and engage with the stakeholders that influence, and 
are influenced by a product development effort. This same 
model can be applied not just to an organization of people 
but also to something that has value to the organization, such 
as a product or system architecture [13]. 
III.
 
R
ELATED WORK
 
Stakeholder Theory is an area of strategic management 
that provides models for identifying and mapping 
stakeholders [8, 9]. Freeman identifies seven techniques for 
creating value for stakeholders, including stakeholder 
assessment, stakeholder behavior analysis, understanding 
stakeholders in more depth, assessing stakeholder strategies, 
developing specific strategies for stakeholders, creating new 
models of interaction for stakeholders, developing integrative 
value creation strategies [9]. 
 
Figure 1: Typical stakeholder map of 'The Firm' 
 
Traditional stakeholder theory places ‚The Firm™ or the 
corporation at the center and attempts to understand who are 
2010 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4125-9/10 $26.00 © 2010 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2010.1787 the stakeholders in the firm. The diagram in Figure 1 shows a 
typical stakeholder map of the firm [9, 14]. 
While it is informative to understand the stakeholders in a 
firm, it can quickly become unwieldy to try to manage all 
stakeholders at once. Freeman developed a two-tier model 
that distinguishes between primary and secondary 
stakeholders [9]. The diagram in Figure 2 shows a typical 
stakeholder map using Freeman™s two-tier stakeholder 
model. This map shows the firm at the center, and shows the 
primary and secondary stakeholder groups in the firm. 
 
Figure 2: Two-tier stakeholder map 
  
Some stakeholders will naturally have a higher degree of 
relative importance or urgency. Salience, the principle of 
defining who and what really counts to an organization, is 
key to understanding the stakeholders that managers should 
pay most attention to. Mitchell, Agle and Wood define a 
model for classifying stakeholders based on attributes of 
power, legitimacy and urgency that helps managers 
understand and quantify the degree of salience a stakeholder 
possesses [15]. The category of salience of a stakeholder or 
stakeholder group can change over time. Therefore, salience 
has a dynamic aspect. The diagram in Figure 3 shows the 
different qualitative classes of stakeholders as described by 
Mitchell™s model. 
We can evaluate and compare the salience of different 
stakeholders and stakeholder groups by understanding where 
they fit in Mitchell™s model. According to this model a 
stakeholder can possess none, one, two, or all three of the 
attributes of power, legitimacy and urgency. Stakeholders 
that possess none of the attributes are classified as non-
stakeholders (8). Stakeholders that posses all three attributes 
are definitive (7) stakeholders. Latent stakeholders posses 
one attribute, and are dormant (1), discretionary (2) or 
demanding (3), depending on which attribute they possess. 
Expectant stakeholders possess two attributes, and are 
dominant (4), dangerous (5) or dependent (6). 
 
 
Figure 3: Qualitative classes of stakeholders 
  
Phillips brings a deeper ethical dimension to the 
principles of stakeholder identification, discussing concepts 
of fairness when dealing with stakeholders [11]. Svendsen 
presents a collaborative approach to stakeholder relations 
that includes a business case that explains why a model of 
stakeholder engagement is vital to corporate success [16]. 
She provides a framework for understanding the importance 
of stakeholder relations, and, building on the work of 
Freeman, defines a guide to building those relations.  
The organization patterns identified by Coplien and 
Harrison directly address specific stakeholders, and the 
relationships between stakeholders [6]. Viewed in this 
context the patterns provide guidance on building effective 
stakeholder relationships within software development 
teams. The authors consider an organization as a social 
system with structures, and in that context they identify 
patterns that have helped software companies to achieve 
improved efficiencies in organization and performance. They 
group the patterns into four pattern languages, each of which 
addresses a particular set of problems. There is a pattern 
language for project 
management, piecemeal growth of the 
product and process, organization style and role 
relationships, and people and code.  
Although the term stakeholder is often used in software 
development, it is predominantly limited to customers, end-
users, or project sponsors. The field of software development 
does not focus on product development teams as a diverse 
group of stakeholders with diverse interests. Where there is 
deeper mention of stakeholders, they typically treat the 
development team or ‚the customer™ as a single stakeholder. 
As far as I can tell so far, there is currently no formal use of 
Stakeholder Theory applied to software product development 
88 teams, and software development processes in general. I 
have so far been unable to identify any application of 
stakeholder theory in the context of agile and lean 
development. A specific focus of my research is the 
application of stakeholder theory to product development 
organizations that use agile and lean processes.  
IV.
 
T
HE 
C
ASE 
S
TUDY
 
This research is applied to a product development 
organization that is distributed across multiple locations and 
time zones in the US, Europe and Asia. The organization is 
responsible for multiple portfolios of enterprise client and 
server products. The products are for general sale to volume 
markets, as distinct from custom products for a single 
customer. The majority of the products are installed by 
customers and integrated with their enterprise infrastructure, 
as distinct from hosted solutions, or Software-as-a-Service 
models. As with many such organizations there is no single 
customer or end user archetype, but rather a wide variety of 
customers and users that will use the products in different 
ways. A central premise of many agile development 
processes is the notion that the Customer is part of the team. 
For large organizations creating products for general sale, 
there is no single customer. This creates both a challenge and 
a conflict that must be reconciled for such organizations to 
adopt agile development processes successfully. The intent 
behind these Agile processes is still valid, i.e., to have the 
voice of the customer heard in all business-related decisions, 
to create a product that addresses the real needs of the 
customer, and to create a process that allows the customer to 
provide early and continuous feedback to the people creating 
the product, and to allow for that feedback to influence the 
direction of the product even as it is being developed, and to 
allow the team to alter course in a meaningful context if the 
business environment changes. The organization has adopted 
Scrum as its agile project management framework [17, 18], 
and also draws heavily from other agile processes to 
compliment Scrum, e.g., XP for technical practices [19]. The 
application of stakeholder concepts considers the different 
agile roles presented by these processes, and helps relate 
agile roles to the organization™s traditional roles and job 
titles. 
The data in this paper is drawn from a two-year period of 
observation, interviews and retrospectives in the 
organization, as the organization moved through multiple 
product releases while also embarking on a transition to agile 
development. Multiple revisions of the stakeholder groups 
were reviewed, leading to the model presented in this paper. 
The stakeholder concepts and model of stakeholder groups 
are being actively applied to product teams.  
V.
 
S
TAKEHOLDER 
G
ROUPS IN 
S
OFTWARE 
P
RODUCT 
D
EVELOPMENT
 
There are a wide variety of stakeholders that have a stake 
in product development. Many teams transitioning to agile 
processes fail to pay due attention to all necessary 
stakeholders. Sometimes this is through lack of awareness. 
Sometimes it is through lack of opportunity, e.g., it is not 
uncommon for agile processes to begin in a development 
group, and maybe later spread to include a test group. Even 
that is not sufficient. Without wider support throughout the 
organization the efforts of the engineering teams to become 
agile will be limited. Likewise, a product management or 
project management organization can try to apply agile 
concepts for portfolio and product management, or try to 
apply agile project management principles, but unless the 
engineering teams have a solid foundation in agile 
development and test practices the effort will fail.  
VI.
 
S
TAKEHOLDER 
M
APPING
 
A.
 
Identifying the stakeholders 
Many agile adoption efforts fail or become difficult 
because of a failure to identify and engage with all of the 
necessary stakeholders. Table 1 shows many of the different 
stakeholders in the product development organization. The 
table is not exhaustive, but it does illustrate the broad 
diversity of stakeholders in a product development 
organization, and the scope of the challenges faced by agile 
teams engaging with these stakeholders. 
 
 
Table 1: Stakeholders in a product development 
organization 
 
B.
 
Mapping stakeholder groups 
For large-scale product development efforts we 
categorize the stakeholders into six primary stakeholder 
groups using techniques from Freeman [9]. These are 
Product Owner Team, Product Delivery Team, Program 
89 Sponsor Team, Product Consumers, Product Council and 
Program Core Team. The diagram in Figure 4 shows the 
primary stakeholder groups in a product development 
organization.  
We distinguish between product owners and customers, 
because they are generally different stakeholders in the 
context of a product development organization. The 
following sections describe these stakeholder groups in more 
detail. There is a guiding principle for identifying those 
stakeholders that should be part of the group. We identify 
relationships between the stakeholder group and current agile 
processes. A description of the basic responsibilities of the 
members of the group is provided, followed by a description 
of sample stakeholders from the Case Study that are part of 
that group. 
 
Figure 4: Primary stakeholder groups in a product 
development organization 
 
C.
 
Product Owner Team 
1)
 
Guiding principle 
Anyone who has a stake in guiding the end deliverable, 
either through providing input to or reviewing and approving 
the output of, the product delivery teams. 
2)
 
Agile context 
This is an extension of the Product Owner role in Scrum 
terms. Roth describes the concept of a product owner team as 
a way to fill the role of product owner on Scrum teams [20]. 
3)
 
Responsibilities 
We can have multiple Product Owner Teams in a large 
product development organization. Typically, we try to have 
one Product Owner Team per product. 
The Product Owner Team engages directly with 
stakeholders from the Product Consumers. There are a wide 
variety of sources of requirements, so this team must bring 
product requirements to the table from all these sources. 
These stakeholders contribute requirements to the product 
and provide input, direction, feedback, and approval as the 
product evolves. This team manages the backlog, and works 
with the Delivery Team to make sure the backlog is prepared 
for release planning and iteration planning sessions. 
This is a diverse team that ultimately must speak with 
one voice. In the course of gaining consensus on product 
direction, this group must decide priorities, debate trade-offs 
and make the best decision possible at the time with the 
information available. This group writes requirements as user 
stories, and defines acceptance criteria. People from this 
group engage with customers, both internal and external. 
They plan ahead to make sure teams always have what they 
need for release and Iteration planning, and they continually 
refine and communicate long-term product vision. In the 
course of all of this, they need to strike a balance between 
customer value and user value. This group resolves tensions 
and trade-offs between customer desires, user needs, user 
experience requirements, and technology constraints. 
4)
 
Stakeholders 
Typical roles that are part of a product owner team can 
include product managers, engineering managers, architects, 
engineers, user experience designers, testers, and sales 
engineers. In the Case Study, product managers lead product 
owner teams. However, these teams must have broad 
representation from other functions including development, 
QA, user experience, architecture, and sales. User experience 
research is an ongoing activity in the organization, and is 
separate from an individual project. This is why it is 
important that user experience be represented as a 
stakeholder in this group for those products that have a 
significant user experience element. 
D.
 
Portfolio Council 
1)
 
Guiding principle 
These are stakeholders that are responsible for multiple 
products that together form a portfolio. The Portfolio Council 
can be responsible for multiple portfolios of products in the 
organization.  
2)
 
Agile context 
The Portfolio Council is a means of filling the Product 
Owner role in Scrum [20], but at a higher level. This 
organization uses the Portfolio Council to supplement the 
Product Owner Team. A portfolio council can provide 
direction for many Product Owner Teams. 
3)
 
Responsibilities 
They interface with multiple Product Owner Teams to 
define the strategy, vision and direction for multiple products 
and/or families of products. The Portfolio Council is 
responsible for the roadmap that guides the product owner 
teams.  
4)
 
Stakeholders 
90 Stakeholders include directors of engineering, directors 
of product management, senior architects, and senior 
engineering managers. It could also include VPs or other 
executives. Product lines can be managed from a product 
council. Hence architects and managers with responsibility 
for product line architectures should be part of the product 
council. 
E.
 
Product Delivery Team 
1)
 
Guiding principle 
These stakeholders have a stake in building the product, 
and usually are responsible for completing tasks associated 
with a User Story. 
2)
 
Agile context 
This is the Delivery Team in Scrum [21], and any of the 
XP roles that have responsibilities for completing tasks for 
user stories [19], e.g., testers, interaction designers, technical 
writers, programmers, and architects. 
3)
 
Responsibilities 
These stakeholders are responsible for delivering quality 
products that meet the needs of the business. They perform 
the release planning and iteration planning activities, and are 
responsible for sizing and estimating their work. They 
commit to report their progress to each other on a daily basis. 
4)
 
Stakeholders 
Stakeholders in this group form cross-functional delivery 
teams. These people include software developers, testers, 
user interface designers, technical leads, architects, and 
documentation writers. 
F.
 
Product Sponsor Team 
1)
 
Guiding principle 
A stakeholder in this group is someone who has a stake 
in the product and how it fits with the strategic direction of 
the product development organization. 
2)
 
Agile context 
XP talks about the role of executives in sponsoring agile 
teams, and the importance of continually ensuring that agile 
teams are aligned with corporate goals [19]. Crystal 
describes the role of executive sponsor as ‚
nourishing the 
team with decisions and money™ 
[22]. 
3)
 
Responsibilities 
These stakeholders provide executive sponsorship, help 
remove barriers at the wider organization level, and provide 
feedback on product direction via Product Owner Team. Part 
of this team™s responsibility is representing the agile product 
development team in a positive way to the wider 
organization [19]. 
4)
 
Stakeholders 
From this Case Study, examples of stakeholders in this 
group include engineering directors, product management 
directors, Vice Presidents, and General Managers of business 
units. 
G.
 
Product Consumers 
We classify stakeholders in this group as a group rather 
than as a team, because it is a diverse group of stakeholders 
all of which do not necessarily even know each other. We 
expect other stakeholders to interact with these, and to bring 
them in to the product development process as needed. 
1)
 
Guiding principle 
A member of this group is someone who has a stake in 
evaluating, buying, or using the product that we build and in 
determining how it fits with the strategic direction of their 
organization.  
2)
 
Agile context 
This is analogous to ‚The Customer™ in XP terms. 
3)
 
Responsibilities 
These stakeholders use and evaluate product. They can, if 
given the opportunity, provide input to and feedback on the 
product as it evolves. The cadence of an Agile project gives 
them the opportunity to provide early feedback, and to 
influence the product direction as it evolves. At one point we 
called this stakeholder group the ‚Customer Group™ with the 
intent of it being a catchall for consumers of the product. 
However, we found that name to be ambiguous. This was 
reflected through reviews of this paper. In the context of 
responsibility, customers do not necessarily feel a sense of 
responsibility toward the product development organization, 
and particularly, there may be no relationship at all with the 
Product Delivery Team. However, customers do have a 
responsibility to their own organization, and their stake in the 
product is primarily around where the product meets the 
needs of their organization.  
4)
 
Stakeholders 
For product organizations that develop volume products 
for general resale to a wide variety of customers, partners, 
distributors and channels, the notion of a single customer 
does not exist. Therefore we recognize all the stakeholders 
that can be considered as ‚consumers™ under this group. We 
further refine this group into internal customers and external 
customers. Internal customers are part of the wider 
organization or firm, but not necessarily part of the product 
development organization. It is also useful to further refine 
the distinction between customers and users. For example, a 
CTO in a customer organization has a different stake in 
purchasing a corporate instant messaging product than 
someone in the CTO™s firm who will use that same product 
day to day. The CTO will be concerned about how a new 
messaging product will interoperate with the other enterprise 
products in her firm, and care about things like scalability, 
failover, security, support agreements, serviceability and 
product roadmaps. An end user in that same firm will care 
about the usability of the product, how it facilitates them 
getting their work done, and how it works with other 
products they use. From this Case Study, examples of 
stakeholders in the Internal Customers group include pre-
alpha, alpha, solution interoperability testing, early field trial 
engineers, sales, marketing, technical marketing engineers, 
field support, and end users from the same company. 
Examples of External Customers include distribution 
channels, resale partners, governments, other firms, beta 
91 customers, early field trial customers, and end users from 
other companies. 
H.
 
Program Core Team 
1)
 
Guiding principle 
A stakeholder in this group is someone that is responsible 
for general program and project management activities, and 
overall success of the product release. In large product 
development teams there are project management 
responsibilities that go beyond the immediate delivery teams. 
2)
 
Agile context 
Scrum does not recognize the roll of project manger or 
program manager, and leans more towards self-organizing 
teams with the Scrum Master role acting as facilitator and 
coach, and embodying many of the essential project 
management functions [21]. XP talks about the role of 
project manger, and acknowledges the contribution of the 
role [19]. Crystal also recognizes the role of project manager 
[22]. 
3)
 
Responsibilities 
Stakeholders in this group are responsible for and own 
the overall planning and scheduling at a program level. This 
often involves coordination between multiple delivery teams, 
and even multiple products. These people remove barriers at 
the program level, and ensure smooth running of the program 
as a whole. They manage all the work related to a release 
outside of the core delivery teams, including interfacing with 
the wider organization to help the products transition from 
‚done™ to customer shipment. They report progress to 
Sponsor Teams and other stakeholders. They are responsible 
for presenting meaningful metrics to the wider organization. 
For large programs, these stakeholders facilitate and manage 
the Scrum of Scrums [23]. 
4)
 
Stakeholders 
Typical stakeholders include program managers and 
project managers, but can also include engineering managers. 
VII.
 
R
ELATIONSHIPS 
B
ETWEEN 
S
TAKEHOLDER 
G
ROUPS
 
The stakeholders groups that are usually internal to the 
product organization include the Product Delivery Team(s), 
Program Core Team, Product Owner Team(s) and Product 
Council.  
 
 
Figure 5: Stakeholder groups and agile roles 
 
A.
 
Filling agile roles with traditional roles 
 
The diagram in Figure 6 summarizes how this 
organization chooses to fill the roles. 
 
Figure 6: Mapping stakeholder groups and agile roles to 
traditional roles in the organization 
 
The Scrum Master role is normally filled by an 
engineering team lead, but can also be filled by a program 
manager, engineering manager or technical lead. 
A Product Manager normally fills the Product Owner 
role. However, in some cases the organization might not 
have an available product manager, or the product manager 
might be in a different location than the rest of the Scrum 
Team. In these cases an engineering manager, technical lead, 
engineer, or user experience designer fills the Product Owner 
role in a proxy capacity, and finds an appropriate time to 
work with the product manager. In some cases it makes 
sense for an engineering manager to be the Product Owner, 
for example if the product is an internal product, component 
or framework that is not itself customer facing, but gets 
92 consumed by other products that are developed by the 
organization. 
The Product Delivery Team is structured as described 
earlier under the Stakeholder Mapping section. 
A Program Manager generally staffs the role of Scrum of 
Scrum Master, and coordinates the work of multiple Product 
Delivery Teams. The person in this role is responsible for 
interactions with external stakeholders. They focus on the 
multi-release product roadmap, and make sure that all 
stakeholders are aligned with the release plans. They 
facilitate the Scrum of Scrums meeting, and are responsible 
for removing or escalating blocking issues that are identified 
at the Scrum of Scrums. This person is the escalation point 
for individual Scrum Masters and Product Owners that 
belong to multiple Product Delivery Teams.  
The Lead Product Owner is normally a senior Product 
Manager, but is also sometimes an engineering manager. 
This person is also a member of the Portfolio Council and is 
responsible for consistency of vision between the Portfolio 
Council and Product Owner Team. 
The Product Owner Team is structured as described 
earlier in Product Owner Team under the Stakeholder 
Mapping section. 
The Program Core Team is structured as described earlier 
in ‚Program Core Team
™
 under the section Stakeholder 
Mapping. As can be seen from Figure 6 there is some 
overlap between the Program Core Team and the Product 
Owner Team. Some people are part of both stakeholder 
groups, but play different roles at different times. The key 
differentiation is in terms of the area and scope 
responsibility. The Product Owner Team focuses more on 
the 
product
 on its content, while the Program Core Team 
focuses more on the 
project
 and its delivery. 
The Portfolio Council is structured as described earlier in 
this paper. In the context of this case study the Portfolio 
Council is lead by a Director of Program Management who 
has responsibility for multiple product portfolios. 
Membership includes an Engineering Director, a number of 
senior product managers, a number of senior engineering 
managers, and a senior architect, all with portfolio 
responsibility.  
B.
 
Distinction between Portfolio Council and Product 
Owner Team 
The primary distinctions between a Product Owner Team 
and Portfolio Council are that the Portfolio Council will 
provide high-level guidance to multiple Product Owner 
Teams. Product Owner Teams work directly with Product 
Delivery Teams, and must know the details of the product to 
the level where they can write user stories and acceptance 
criteria. The Portfolio Council has broad responsibility 
across multiple products. The Product Owner Team has deep 
responsibility within a single product. 
VIII.
 
F
ROM 
P
RODUCT 
O
RGANIZATION TO 
P
RODUCT 
A
RCHITECTURE
 
So far we have focused on the application of stakeholder 
concepts to the product development organization. We can 
apply the same concepts to a product™s architecture to help us 
understand the stakeholders that influence, and are 
influenced by, the product architecture. The stakeholder map 
in Figure 7 shows the stakeholders in the architecture of one 
of the products developed by the organization in this case 
study.  
 
Figure 7: Stakeholders in
 a Product™s Architecture 
 
This product is a middleware framework that is 
consumed by other applications. Identifying the stakeholders 
in a product™s architecture is the first step in successful 
engagement with them. Applying Freeman™s two-tier model, 
we identify primary and secondary stakeholders. Primary 
stakeholders typically have a more immediate stake in the 
architecture. This specific example is explored further in 
[13]. The role of architect as a key stakeholder in product 
development is expanded in [24]. 
IX.
 
S
TATIC 
S
TRUCTURES AND 
D
YNAMIC 
S
TRUCTURES
 
This paper has focused primarily on the static structures 
of the organization, and specifically on the identification of 
stakeholder groups, and the mapping of traditional roles to 
agile roles using stakeholder concepts. The dynamic 
structures of an organization are also important, and my 
research focuses on that area too. That is the subject of 
another paper and ongoing research [25, 26]. That work 
focuses on the interactions between the different stakeholder 
groups, and how agile processes provide ongoing 
opportunities for stakeholder engagement. Agile practices 
such as iteration planning, iteration reviews, daily stand-ups, 
information radiators, Scrum of Scrums, and retrospectives 
facilitate early and continuous identification of stakeholders, 
help to bring stakeholders into the development process, and 
provide an opportunity to address their needs. Agile practices 
such as continuous integration, unit testing, test driven 
development, and frequent releases provide ongoing 
feedback about the health of the product and whether it is 
93 meeting stakeholder goals. This research also goes deeper 
into the implications of the salience model described earlier 
and examines how stakeholders transition from one category 
to another, and what actions an organization can take to 
cause or prevent such transitions. 
X.
 
F
UTURE RESEARCH AND NEXT STEPS
 
The six core stakeholder groups are being continually 
reviewed and refined through engagement with multiple 
product development organizations. This research will 
develop a model that helps managers understand the broad 
range of stakeholders that influence, and are influenced by, 
its activities. This model can be applied to the firm itself, or 
to units within the firm, such as an individual business unit 
or project team. More fundamentally, this model can be 
applied to a software product development effort to help 
managers understand who and what really counts when 
developing products. The model includes strategies for 
identifying and engaging with stakeholders, and for 
classifying stakeholders by mapping them to one of six 
stakeholder groups. The research will further show, in the 
specific context of how agile and lean processes enable and 
facilitate stakeholder engagement. The model further 
includes a means of classifying the salience of each 
stakeholder or stakeholder group, and for understanding how 
and when stakeholders can transition from one salience 
category to another. This research relates how agile 
processes provide a means to control this salience transition 
and to prevent or affect it. 
C
ONCLUSIONS
 
Like a software system, an organization has a static 
structure and a dynamic structure. This paper described how 
the application of stakeholder theory can help the managers 
of an organization to better understand the static structure in 
terms of the different stakeholders that influence, or are 
influenced by, the product development organization. It also 
explains how traditional roles in an organization map to agile 
roles. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1] A. Cockburn, 
Agile software development : the cooperative 
game
, 2nd ed., Upper Saddle River, NJ: Addison-Wesley, 
2007. 
[2] J. K. Liker, 
The Toyota way : 14 management principles from 
the world's greatest manufacturer
, New York: McGraw-Hill, 
2004. 
[3] J. K. Liker, M. Hoseus, and Center for Quality People and 
Organizations., 
Toyota culture : the heart and soul of the 
Toyota way
, New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008. 
[4] M. Poppendieck, and T. D. Poppendieck, 
Implementing lean 
software development : from concept to cash
, London: 
Addison-Wesley, 2007. 
[5] J. P. Womack, and D. T. Jones, 
Lean thinking : banish waste 
and create wealth in your corporation
, 1st Free Press ed., 
New York: Free Press, 2003. 
[6] J. O. Coplien, and N. Harrison, 
Organizational patterns of 
agile software development
, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Pearson 
Prentice Hall, 2004. 
[7] B. R. Agle, R. K. Mitchell, and J. A. Sonnenfeld, ﬁWho 
Matters to CEOs? An investigation of stakeholder attributes 
and salience, corporate performance, and CEO values,ﬂ 
Academy of Management Review
, no. 42, October, 1999. 
[8] R. E. Freeman, 
Strategic management : a stakeholder 
approach
, Boston,Mass.: Pitman, 1984. 
[9] R. E. Freeman, J. S. Ha
rrison, and A. C. Wicks, 
Managing for 
stakeholders : survival, reputation, and success
, New Haven, 
Conn. ; London: Yale University Press, 2007. 
[10] R. E. Freeman, and J. McVea, "A Stakeholder Approach to 
Strategic Management," 
The Blackwell handbook of strategic 
management
, 1999. 
[11] R. Phillips, 
Stakeholder theory and organizational ethics
, 1st 
ed., San Francisco: Berrett-Koehler, 2003. 
[12] K. Power, ﬁSoftware Development: A Stakeholder 
Approach,ﬂ in The 11th International Conference on Agile 
Software Development XP2010, Trodnheim, Norway, 2010. 
[13] K. Power, ﬁStakeholder Engagement in the Evolutionary 
Design of an API,ﬂ in The 11th International Conference on 
Agile Software Development, Trondheim, Norway, 2010. 
[14] R. E. Freeman, 
Strategic management : a stakeholder 
approach
, Boston [Mass.] ; London: Pitman, 1984. 
[15] R. K. Mitchell, B. R. Agle, and D. J. Wood, ﬁToward a 
Theory of Stakeholder Identification and Salience: Defining 
the principle of who and what really counts,ﬂ 
Academy of 
Management Review,
 vol. 22, no. 4, pp. 853-886, October, 
1997. 
[16] A. Svendsen, 
The stakeholder strategy : profiting from 
collaborative business relationships
, San Francisco: Berrett-
Koehler Publishers, 1998. 
[17] K. Schwaber, 
Agile project management with Scrum
, 
Redmond, Wash.: Microsoft Press, 2004. 
[18] K. Schwaber, 
The enterprise and Scrum
, Redmond, WA: 
Microsoft Press, 2007. 
[19] K. Beck, and C. Andres, 
Extreme programming explained : 
embrace change
, 2nd ed. ed., Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 
2005. 
[20] R. Roth, ﬁIt Takes a Village: 6 ways to fill the Product Owner 
Role,ﬂ 
Better Software
, pp. 24-28, September/October, 2009. 
[21] K. Schwaber, and M. Beedle, 
Agile software development 
with Scrum
, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2002. 
[22] A. Cockburn, 
Crystal clear : a human-powered methodology 
for small teams
, Boston: Addison-Wesley, 2005. 
[23] M. Cohn. "Advice on Conducting the Scrum of Scrums 
Meeting," May 2009, 2008; 
http://www.scrumalliance.org/articles/46-advice-on-
conducting-the-scrum-of-scrums-meeting. 
[24] K. Power, ﬁExamining the role of architect as a key 
stakeholder in agile and lean product and system 
development,ﬂ in 4th European Conference on Software 
Architecture (ECSA), Copenhagen, Denmark, 2010 - 
Submitted. 
[25] K. Power, ﬁSoftware Development: A Stakeholder Approach 
(PhD Thesis),ﬂ J.E. Cairnes School of Business & Economics, 
National University of Ireland, Galway, Galway, In progress. 
[26] K. Power, ﬁDynamic Stakeholder Relationships in Software 
Development Organizations,ﬂ 
In progress
, 2010. 
 
 
 
94