 The SAFe way to the Agile Organization
   Jan Pries
-Heje Roskilde University
 P.O. Box 
260, 400 Roskilde
 Denmark
 janph@ruc.dk
 Malene M. Krohn
 SimCorp
 Weidekampsgade 16, 
2300 Copenhagen
 Denmark
 Malene.M.Krohn@simcorp.com
  ABSTRACT
 How do you make the agile organization? 
!is paper gives an 
answer in form of a case story from the 
"nancial so
#ware 
company SimCorp. In late
 2015SimCorp decided to go agile on a 
big scale. To do so they applied the scalable agile framework 
SAFe. In this framework Scrum teams are working within ÒAgile 

Release TrainsÓ providing value streams that together realize a 

strategic mission. At SimCorp 
there were more than 500 
employees in 55 teams working in eight agile release trains. 

SimCorp has a solid track record of releasing a new version of 

their standard so
#ware product 
Ð SimCorp Dimension 
Ð every 6 
months. In February 2017 a new version of the
 product was 
successfully released according to plan and now with an agile 

organization behind it. 
!e paper tells the story from beginning 
to end focusing on the three things that made it possible to 

become an agile organization within a year. Furthermore
 the 
paper discusses what the main challenges were.
  CCS CONCEPTS
 Software and its engineering 
! Software creation and 
management 
! Software development process 
management 
! Software development methods 
! Agile 
software development 
 KEYWORDS
 Agile software development; large
-scale software 
development; 
scaled agile framework
  1 INTRODUCTION
 Agile developmen
t of software and agile projects has been 
around for the last 20 years. Around the turn of the century this 
new way of working had many names such as Òinternet speed 

developmentÓ but with the agile manifesto in 2001 the common 

denominator for the new way o
f developing software became 
agile.
 Over the years methods such as XP and Scrum became 
popular. In 2015 a Danish study of close to 600 project managers 
(Cordua et al. 2015) showed that 40% of all Danish and 
international projects in all domains were using 
agile methods. 
And of these projects using agile methods more than half were 

using Scrum.
 An interesting question now that agile has become so 
widespread among projects is how to scale agile up to use it 

throughout an organization?
 Version One (2016: p. 13
) report that the most commonly 
used way to scale agile is to use Scrum and Scrum
-of Scrums 
(72%). The second most commonly used way is SAFe 
Ð Scale 
Agile Framework originally developed by Leffingwell (2007) and 

now in version 4.0 (Leffingwell 2017). The c
urrent version of 
SAFe is thoroughly described in a White Paper (scaled Agile 

2017); here is a short excerpt from that:
 ÒSAFe is based fundamentally on Agile teams. Each team is 
responsible for defining, building, and testing stories ÉSAFe 

teams are organi
zed into a virtual program structure called the 
ÒAgile Release TrainÓ (ART). Each ART is a long
-lived, self
-organizing team of Agile teams (typically 5 to 12) É The 

Portfolio level organizes and funds a set of value streams. The 

value streams realize a set
 of solutions, which help the enterprise 
achieve its strategic missionÉÓ (Scaled Agile 2017, p. 5)
 In this paper we describe a case from the financial company 
SimCorp that decided to go agile on a big scale in early 2016 and 

launched their first agile vers
ion of the key product Dimension 
in February 2017.
  2 SIMCORP
 SimCorp is an internationally oriented company with more than 

1,250 top qualified employees of which 90% hold an academic 

degree in economics, finance, or IT. SimCorp work closely with 

170+ 
clients around the world, helping them to manage over 
USD 19 trillion in assets under management. Almost half (46%) 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this 
work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee 
provided that copies are not made or distribute
d for profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full 
citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work 
owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting 
with credit is permitted. To copy otherwis
e, or republish, to post 
on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 

permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from 
Permissions@acm.org
.  XP '17 Workshops,
 May 22
-26, 2017, Cologne, Germany 
 © 2017 Copyright is held by the owner/author(s). Publication 

rights 
licensed 
to 
ACM.
 ACM ISBN 978
-1-4503-5264-2/17/05É$15.00 
 https://doi.org/10.1145/3120459.3120478
     2  of the worldÕs top 100 asset managers have selected the key 
product SimCorp Dimension, a front
-to-back investment 
management solution.
 Each 
year SimCorp use more than 20% of their revenue for 
R&D, ensuring that their SimCorp Dimension product is capable 

of supporting key requirements from customers.
  3 RESEARCH METHOD
 The method applied to write this paper can best be 
characterized as an actio
n case (Vidken & Braa, 1997) or a 
participatory action research undertaking (Whyte 1991). One 

author was employed in SimCorp throughout the change to agile 

and was responsible for planning and carrying out the 

organizational change or the transformation as
 it was called. 
Thus the action part of the case was primarily carried out by this 

author. The other author has followed SimCorp as a researcher 

on and off since 1997. For this specific case meetings and 

interviews were conducted by this other author in Ja
nuary (full 
day), February (half day) March (two interviews lasting 1
-2 hours), April (one meeting and one interview), and May 2017 

(one interview). The first meeting in January was used to elicit a 

semi
-structured interview guide. Here is an example of th
e content of this guide:
  4. The Implementation
 People I have talked with have mentioned your commitment 
and motivating as crucial. Also that you allowed for uncertainty by 
saying ÒI donÕt have all the answersÓ. What are your thoughts on 

that?
 Looking back
 at the whole implementation what were the 3 best 
things that others can learn from?
 And what are 3 things you would do different today?
 If we look at the details of SAFe. What has worked as
-is and 
what have you had to change or adapt?
  
These questions wer
e used for a
 1.5 hour interview with the 
Chief Technical Officer of SimCorp on 29 May 2017. Similar 

semi
-structured guides were used in the following interviews.
 Interviews were recorded and summarized into detailed 
interview notes shortly afterwards. The 
following analysis built 
a Òlogical chain of evidenceÓ and used analytic induction (Miles 

et al. 2014, p. 290ff). Finally the findings were synthesized into 

this paper.  
  4 CASE STORY 
- THE SAFe ORGANIZATIONAL 
CHANGE
 In late 2015 SimCorp decided to change
 from plan
-driven 
waterfall
-like software development to agile development using 
SAFe version 4.0. About 500 software developers, testers and 

project managers in four countries (Mainly Denmark and 

Ukraine; small groups in UK and Germany) were to change the
 way they worked.
 This major organizational change was led by the Chief 
Technical Officer (CTO) whom came to SimCorp seven years 

earlier from Germany.
 In late 2015 the issues that came out in retrospectives at 
SimCorp were:
 A. No way to improve systematica
lly B. Too little visibility
 C. Too early commitment to a design that didnÕt work
 D. Late delivery of new functionality
 E. Problems discovered too late
 F. Under
-estimated dependencies
 G. Growth in complexity of SimCorp Dimensions 
software
 H. Hard to manage
 distributed teams
 I. Phase
-gate software delivery life
-cycle did not help 
reduce risks
 J. Poor morale among software developers in some places
 Based on these issues it was decided to go Òall inÓ on agile 
meaning that every software developer within SimCor
p should 
change the way they worked; SimCorp were to become an agile 

organization.
 After looking at different possibilities it was decided to use 
SAFe. Software development at SimCorp was divided into eight 

ÒAgile Release TrainsÓ. The first train started i
n April 2016 for a 
product stream called ÒMiddle OfficeÓ. The second train followed 

a few months after and the 8
th and last train was initiated in 
January 2017.
  5 THREE MAJOR CHALLENGES
 Looking back at the whole process after the release of the 
first vers
ion of SimCorp Dimension the three major challenges 

had been:
 1. The whole re
-organization to an agile organization. 
SimCorp used SAFe as a blueprint for reorganizing. This meant 

that old jobs as line managers and project managers became 

obsolete. The form
er managers had to apply for SAFe jobs such 
as Òtrain conductorÓ, Òportfolio managerÓ and Òscrum masterÓ. 

There was no direct mapping from the old job roles to the new 

job roles. Thus some of the powerful line managers that before 

had responsibility for bo
th software delivery and people had to 

give up one or the other. In March 2017 some individuals were 

still challenged with this change of role. 
 2. Implementing the agile mindset. Conveying the message 
that it is OK to let go and say goodbye to the Òold wa
ysÓ. Agile is 
all about transparency and about continuously improving based 

on experiments or on failures. Being open about this requires 

courage and a change of mindset 
 3. The interfaces to other parts of the SimCorp organization. 
It was ÕonlyÕ the 500 p
eople working in the software 
development part of the organization that changed to agile 

following SAFe. But itÕs challenging to go full scale agile if 

supporting functions, e.g. Sales and Marketing, HR or IT, do not 

work in an agile way. Thus after the fi
rst release of SimCorp 
Dimension build in an agile way the second part of the 
     3 organizational transformation will be to include and change 
other parts of SimCorp such as Sales and Marketing. This is now 

(June 2017) happening also because customers of SimCor
p have 

started asking for agile. 
 6 LEARNING FROM THE CASE
 In a semi
-structured interview we identified three pieces of 
advice and two things that SimCorp would do differently today. 

The three good pieces of advice were:
 1. Management support and sponsorsh
ip are crucial. In this 
case it was very important that the CTO of SimCorp took the 

lead and stood on the soap box motivating for the change to an 

agile organization
 2. Break out of certainty and change to the Òstart
-doingÓ 
mindset. The CTO of SimCorp was 
known for
 always being 
analytic, having answers and being attentive to details. However, 

in implementing agile he allowed for uncertainty; ÒI donÕt have 

all the answersÓ, he said.
 3. You need the right team to implement agile at scale and an 
agile organiza
tion. The right team is diverse and represents the 

division. The team needs to work in an agile way.
 In relation to 
having the right team it is also important to notice that SimCorp 

early on realized that they did not have the necessary knowledge 

of SAFE 4
.0 internally. Thus they hired two companies to help 

them; one from Sweden (Crisp) and one from UK (Ivar Jacobson 
International). In total four consultants were paid for full time in 
about a year from early 2016 to early 2017. After the agile 

implementatio
n and the first release of SimCorp Dimension by 
the agile organization SimCorp decided to hire agile coaches 

internally and built up a Lean Agile Office in SimCorp. 
 The first thing SimCorp would do differently if they were to 
redo the transformation to ag
ile was to focus more on the 
technical challenge that lies in integrating new code into the 

existing code base 
Ð continuous integration. SimCorp Dimension 
is now an old product in that it has been in existence in approx. 

20 years. That means that there is 
a lot of legacy code and it 
means that every time you integrate new code into the system 

you need to do a lot regression testing. When looking back 

(interview from March 2017) Òwe under
-estimated this 
challengeÓ. All the other parts of SAFe were quite well
 documented but this part was not. ÒWe should have had more 

focus on the individual developerÕs toolboxÓ.
 The other thing to do differently was to dedicate more 
attention to the change following new organizational roles. The 

change management process itsel
f was planned using the 
ADKAR model (Hiatt 2006) an abbreviation for Awareness, 

Desire, Knowledge, Ability, and Reinforcement. The ADKAR
-model talks a lot about the people side of change, about 

sponsorship, and about communication and there has been a lot 

of focus on that during 2016. But the impact of transitioning to 

new roles can never be underestimated. ÒWe now have 

reinforcement left. All of 2017 is dedicated to reinforcementÓ
  7 CONCLUSION
 We will summarize the paper by looking back at the list of iss
ues 
that started the process and discussing what has been solved and 

what not?
 Agile and SAFe works as a way to improve systematically 
and continuously (issue A in the list above), manage distributed 

teams (issue H in the list), discover problems early (is
sue D in 

the list), and provides a lot of visibility (issue B in the list) about 

the software development. 
 Further agile with SAFe can handle the enormous complexity 
that SimCorp has as well as the huge amount of legacy code 

written into the Dimension pro
duct (issue F in the list). 
 Agile with SAFe seems to be better at reducing development 
risks (issue H). 
 It is planned to reduce the final quality and testing phase to 
one month out of six (thereby trying to deal with issues C and D) 

but that has not yet 
been realized partly because integrating new 
code into the existing code base was under
-estimated (issue E). 
 Finally some people shows improved morale (issue I) but 
others are still confused about the new way of working. Thus the 

cultural change of the mi
ndset of people takes a long time.
   REFERENCES
 Cordua, Charlotte, Jan Pries
-Heje, Keld B¿dker, Trine Hald Commisso (2015). 
Hvordan g„r det ProjektDanmark? Roskilde University and Mannaz.
 Hiatt, J. (2006). 
ADKAR: a model for change in business, government, and our 
community. Prosci.
 Leffingwell, Dean. Scaling software agility: best practices for large enterprises. 
Pearson Education, 2007.
 Leffingwell, D. (2017). SAFe reference guide. Scale Agile Inc.
 Miles, 
M. B., Huberman, A. M., & Saldana, J. (2013). 
Qualitative data analysis
. Sage.
 Scaled Agile (2017). Introduction to SAFe: Overview of the Scaled Agile Framework 
for Lean Software and Systems Engineering. Downloaded 13 March 2017 at: 
http://www.scaledagileframework.com/introduction
-to-safe/
 Version One (2016). 
10th Annual State
 of. 
Agileª Report
 Vidgen, R., & Braa, K. (1997). 
Balancing interpretation and intervention in 
information sys
tem research: the action case approach. In 
Information systems and 
qualitative research
 (pp. 524
-541). Springer US.
 Whyte, W. F. E. (1991). 
Participatory action research
. Sage Publications, Inc.
  