 Adopting Agile in an FDA Regulated Environment 
Rod Rasmussen 
Abbott 
Abbott Park, IL, USA 
Rodney.Rasmussen 
@abbott.com
Tim Hughes
 
AgileTek LLC 
Des Plaines, IL, USA 
thughes@agiletek.com
J.R. Jenks
 
AgileTek LLC 
Des Plaines, IL, USA 
jrjenks@agiletek.com 
John Skach
 
AgileTek LLC 
Des Plaines, IL, USA 
jskach@agiletek.com
 
 
Abstract 
 
This paper is an experience report describing 
Abbott™s adoption of agile software development 
practices in its molecular diagnostics division.  We will 
compare two medical device projects; one before agile 
and one after.  Both of these projects required 
submission to the FDA (the U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration). We will describe the adoption of agile 
practices from realization of the need to the selection 
of a mentor to implementation and fine-tuning and 
finally to results and lessons learned. This experience 
has convinced us that an agile approach is the 
approach best suited to development of FDA-regulated 
medical devices. 
1.
 
Introduction 
Abbott's molecular diagnostics business provides 
physicians with critical information based on the early 
detection of pathogens and subtle changes in patients' 
genes and chromosomes, allowing for earlier diagnosis, 
selection of appropriate therapies and monitoring of 
disease progression. [1] 
 
AgileTek is a custom software engineering firm. 
AgileTek focuses on clients that are developing life- or 
business-critical new products and services.  
AgileTek™s methodology, Agile+, is an agile process 
that leverages the speed and cost-effectiveness of agile 
methods while at the same time incorporating features 
that make it a robust, highly-disciplined process 
suitable for large, mission critical projects and even for 
projects in highly regulated industries such as health 
care and aerospace. [2] 
 
The projects discussed in this paper produce 
software for medical device products. They are 
classified as Class III devices, the most stringent FDA 
regulatory category for devices. 
1.1.
 
Looking For A Better Way 
Early in 1994 Abbott Diagnostics Division (ADD) 
initiated the requirements definition process for a ﬁnext 
generationﬂ product family. The family of medical 
devices would integrate disciplines of immunoassay 
and clinical chemistry into a single work cell, use 
common reagents and disposables, and address the low, 
medium, and high volume testing segments. In parallel 
to the requirements definition effort, software 
architects and analysts would complete an in-depth 
assessment and selection, of object oriented 
technologies and tools that would ultimately be used as 
the basis for implementation of the product family 
software.  A pilot project using Shlaer-Mellor OOA 
notation, a commercially available CASE tool, and a 
custom homegrown OOA model translation engine 
completed mid-year 1995, providing proof of concept 
for a model based software engineering approach. 
January 22, 1999, the first of the product family 
systems, ARCHITECT i2000 was launched. 
 
In January of 2004, Abbott™s Molecular 
Diagnostics business began working in earnest on a 
nucleic acid purification platform and a companion 
real-time PCR analyzer, collectively known as the 
m2000. Prior to this point, in July of 2003, the core 
m2000 software team, all members with previous 
ARCHITECT i2000 experience, was evaluating 
options for software process, implementation 
technologies, and software architecture. The 
retrospective assessment of the ARCHITECT i2000 
program yielded the following observations:  
 
•
 
At time of launch, ARCHITECT was staffed 
by nearly 100 FTEs working in some software 
function. Each was a specialist focused on 
either embedded development, UI and data 
management development, simulation 
development, integration testing, functional 
2009 Agile Conference978-0-7695-3768-9/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2009.50151 testing, automated testing, on-line help, 
configuration management, or administration 
of infrastructure. 
•
 
The process required to build the 
ARCHITECT i2000 software was 
cumbersome and did not readily facilitate 
individual developers running private builds 
for debugging purposes. As a result, a higher 
incidence of defects likely escaped developer 
verification, and were subsequently identified 
and resolved during integration testing. 
•
 
Construction of builds was a two step process 
that typically ran overnight 
o
 
Automated code generation 
translating OOA models to C++ 
source 
o
 
Compilation and linking translated 
C++ source into executables 
•
 
Although ARCHITECT i2000 was developed 
incrementally, each increment was at least 6 
months and often longer. The subsequent 
integration process for each incremental 
release was difficult and time consuming.  
•
 
Most of the tools used for ARCHITECT i2000 
software were organically developed. 
Dedicated resources were required to maintain 
and / or evolve the tools. Customized tool 
training was required for new personnel. The 
commercial CASE tool used for specification 
of the Shlaer-Mellor OOA models was no 
longer supported by the vendor. 
•
 
Collaboration of Booch, Rumbaugh, and 
Jacobson at Rational resulted in emergence of 
UML, in essence obsoleting Shlaer-Mellor as 
a mainstream OO notation. Finding resources 
interested in working with Shlaer-Mellor 
notation to staff a new development project 
would be challenging. 
2.
 
Adopting Agile 
By September 2003, the core m2000 software 
team had made several technology choices and initiated 
development of the product software architecture. 
Additionally, the team had completed a cursory review 
of various publications focused on software 
development process. Numerous books and journal 
articles described various ﬁagileﬂ approaches and 
techniques, all claiming to provide improved 
organizational productivity and higher quality 
software. Additionally, agile processes claimed to be 
able to readily accommodate emerging or changing 
requirements throughout the development lifecycle. 
This had a lot of appeal to the m2000 software team: 
 
•
 
The molecular segment of the diagnostics 
market was growing rapidly. Continual 
emergence of new delivery and detection 
technologies in addition to discovery of new 
diagnostic markers were part of the landscape. 
The ability to respond to new or changing 
requirements would be essential.  
•
 
Resource availability for m2000 software 
would be a fraction of that allocated to 
ARCHITECT i2000. Do more with less was a 
requirement in order to successfully 
commercialize the target product in a timely 
fashion. 
 
The decision to adopt a modern software 
development tool set (.NET, C#, ADO.NET, Windows 
Forms, SQL, UML) and move to an agile approach had 
a lot of promise. However, the m2000 team had no 
practical experience with agile processes and putting 
concepts from books and journals into practice is often 
easier said than done. To address this gap, the team 
solicited help from AgileTek, a software engineering 
firm with extensive hands-on experience applying agile 
approaches to complex software development. 
 
By the end of 2003, AgileTek had trained the core 
team on their approach to agile software development 
(Agile+) and conducted workshops on software 
architecture definition and high level application 
design.  Additionally, AgileTek reviewed the m2000 
software architecture and process definition as the team 
defined and evolved them. 
3.
 
Practicing Agile 
In January of 2004, the m2000 software team put 
agile into practice. The process as initially defined by 
the team included the following practices: 
 
•
 
Fixed and short duration iterations (4 to 10 
weeks) delivering functional software.  
•
 
Automated continuous build, unit test, and 
integration 
•
 
Daily team meeting providing high visibility 
of status and promoting concept of collective 
ownership 
•
 
Retrospective assessment at conclusion of 
each iteration by key stakeholders 
 
The software development process as defined by 
the m2000 core team emphasized the concept of time-
boxing. The overall project from inception to 
commercial launch was subdivided into increments. 
152 Each increment resulted in delivery of executable 
software that was intended for distribution to one or 
more stakeholders outside of the software organization. 
Development of an increment consisted of completing 
one or more software iterations followed by a 
verification and validation phase. Each iteration 
delivered functional software. Additionally, an iteration 
generated key artifacts demonstrating compliance with 
design control processes imposed by various regulatory 
agencies. The verification and validation phase 
included formal execution of functional testing, 
formalized design reviews, approval of artifacts 
supporting the design control process, and update of 
the project™s design history file. 
 
The initial software increment was completed over 
five iterations concluding in August of 2004 with a 
release intended for internal use by the projects assay 
development organization. Follow on releases included 
a market evaluation and validation release in January 
of 2005, commercial launch of the m2000rt real-time 
PCR system in May of 2005, and commercial launch of 
the m2000sp sample preparation system in December 
of 2005. Post launch commercial releases were 
delivered on average, every  6-months, to further 
enhance the m2000 product. 
 
4.
 
Fine-Tuning Agile 
The initial increment of software developed by the 
m2000 team consisted of five iterations. The duration 
of each iteration by design was different ranging from 
4 to 10 weeks. The optimal duration as determined by 
the team was between 6 and 8 weeks. Given the 
inherent documentation requirements of medical device 
development, iterations shorter than 6 weeks did not 
generate sufficient velocity. Iterations much longer 
than 8 weeks provided opportunities for loss of 
organizational focus.  
 
Other process modifications identified during 
retrospective stakeholder reviews and adopted over 
time included addition of weekly goals and a shift from 
scenario based planning to feature based planning. 
 
Weekly goals were established for each week of a 
given iteration. These higher level objectives were 
reviewed at the end of each week during the daily 
meeting and provided additional focus on team 
objectives. 
 
The feature based approach better aligned with the 
project stakeholders™ view of the system. Feature teams 
were formed for key software capabilities and included 
both development and testing resources. The output of 
a feature team was a feature description that included a 
feature overview, any assumptions made by the feature 
team, prototype UI bitmaps and draft printed reports, a 
list of relevant scenarios, and draft software 
requirements.  
 
5.
 
Results 
5.1.
 
Lower cost and shorter duration 
The two projects, ARCHITECT i2000 (pre-agile) 
and m2000 (post-agile) are not equal in size.  m2000 is 
a smaller project.  Nonetheless, we feel that a 
comparison of the two projects can demonstrate the 
effectiveness of the agile approach. 
 
m2000 took 24 months to complete with the initial 
product offering launching in just 17 months.  
Following completion of a pilot project, ARCHITECT 
i2000 took approximately 54 months to launch the 
initial product offering.  We estimate that, if 
ARCHITECT i2000 were repeated using the agile 
approach, the overall project duration could be reduced 
by  20% to 30%.  
 
m2000 had an average staff size of 20 people with 
peak staffing at 24 software FTEs..  ARCHITECT 
i2000 peak staffing approached 100 FTEs and probably 
had an average of around 60 people from inception to 
initial product launch.  We estimate that, if 
ARCHITECT i2000 were repeated using the agile 
approach, a headcount reduction of 20% to 30% could 
have been realized.  
 
In summary, we estimate that using an agile 
approach on ARCHITECT i2000 would have resulted 
in a 20% to 30% reduction in both project duration and 
average team size.  In other words, the project would 
have been implemented more quickly while utilizing a 
smaller team.  The net results would have been a total 
cost savings of between 35% to 50%.   
 
 
5.2.
 
 Better, less prescriptive test cases 
Initially, the m2000 test team applied a similar 
model for test case definition as was previously done 
for ARCHITECT i2000.  Test cases were written with 
detailed step-by-step instructions to facilitate execution 
by naïve users. Although this approach had the distinct 
153 advantage of being able to scale test execution 
resources, there were unintended less than desirable 
consequences: 
 
•
 
Test cases were highly coupled to UI navigation. 
Changes in UI organization or navigation required 
analogous changes to test cases, even though the 
intent of the test case and the function of the 
associated software were not impacted. 
•
 
Documentation of test case execution was onerous. 
In many instances, independent auditors 
disapproved executed test cases, when specific UI 
navigation steps were not recorded as complete, 
even though the intent of the case was satisfied 
and the software functioned as intended. 
•
 
Highly prescriptive test cases resulted in 
verification of a single execution pathway. The 
software was essentially hardened to a limited 
subset of scenarios. 
 
To address the deficiencies, the m2000 test team 
refined the test case creation practice. The updated 
practice focused the test case author on the intent of the 
test case. The detailed set of actions required to 
navigate the UI and complete a specific software 
function were replaced by a single bullet point or step 
in the test case. Although the resulting process required 
test cases to be executed by subject matter experts, the 
benefits were considerable: 
•
 
Test case development was more efficient. 
Authors were focused on the intent of the test case, 
not meticulously describing step-by-step process 
of running the application. The less prescriptive 
test cases were easier to understand and debug.   
•
 
First pass acceptance of executed test cases by the 
auditing function increased reducing rework or 
reruns. 
•
 
Alternate execution paths were much more likely 
to be exercised each time a test case was executed 
increasing code coverage. 
•
 
Test cases were in many cases immune to UI 
centric application changes. 
 
 
5.3.
 
Benefits of iteration  
5.3.1.
 
Frequent Integration 
One of the more significant issues for 
ARCHITECT i2000 was associated with infrequent 
integration of embedded and UI / data management 
applications. The initial integration point occurred 
months after development was started. This ﬁBig 
Bangﬂ integration event required several weeks to 
complete during which time, the majority of other 
development activities ground to a halt.  
 
By contrast, the m2000 team generated working 
software frequently. The continuous build and 
integration process eliminated the ﬁBig Bangﬂ 
integration experienced on the ARCHITECT i2000 
project. 
 
Additionally, frequent integration between 
software and hardware elements provided early 
identification of issues to the hardware team.  
5.3.2.
 
Scope management 
The iterative approach allowed the m2000 team to 
effectively manage product scope and limit feature 
creep. Features or scenarios were frequently evaluated 
from a stakeholder perspective (Must have, Nice to 
have, Other). Additionally, the team assessed 
complexity and related risk. Development focus was on 
ﬁMust haveﬂ features or risk reduction.  
 
At completion of an iteration, the m2000 team 
would quantify the amount of work completed and 
assess organizational velocity. The velocity metric 
(scenarios per iteration) allowed the team to effectively 
estimate project duration and negotiate trade-offs with 
key stakeholders. 
 
At time of commercial launch, a number of 
features, once thought by some stakeholders to be 
essential, were not included. Some were deferred for as 
long as three years. Nonetheless, the product was 
considered highly successful and trading off ﬁNice to 
haveﬂ features for three years of sales is an easy choice. 
5.3.3.
 
Changing requirements 
Development of a complex medical device 
typically takes three to five years. During that 
development cycle, it is highly likely that requirements 
will change or additional requirements will emerge.  
The m2000 project employed a strategy where detailed 
software requirements were developed and approved as 
the associated features were designed and 
implemented.  The nearly concurrent execution of 
feature centric development activities significantly 
reduced requirements churn in comparison to 
ARCHITECT i2000 and provided the m2000 team the 
ability to address new requirements. 
 
154 5.3.4.
 
Quality 
As one would expect from an agile project, testing 
was performed throughout the m2000 project by 
developers and test engineers.  The continuous 
availability of working software facilitated ongoing 
testing. By contrast, in a typical waterfall project the 
verification is an end-loaded process. 
 
At completion of an incremental software release, 
both ARCHITECT i2000 and m2000 executed a formal 
testing phase.   Fewer defects were found in formal 
tests at the end of the m2000 project than the 
ARCHITECT i2000 project, requiring the team to 
generate fewer candidate release builds.  The 
availability of working software, early on in the 
project, was a significant contributor for this reduction 
in defects. 
6.
 
Conclusion 
Both ARCHITECT i2000 and m2000 have been 
key product offerings for their respective businesses 
and considered commercial successes.  From a 
software development perspective, the projects were 
significantly different in size and employed very 
different processes and tools. Threads linking the two 
projects were limited to a common set of resources 
engaged in delivering a medical device in a highly 
regulated environment
.  
 
For the most part, there are no hard metrics 
presented, but more or less a qualitative assessment. 
How does one gauge the validity of such an 
assessment?   
 
When comparing a Porsche 911 to an SUV, it™s 
not necessary to see the instrument panel to understand 
that one vehicle outperforms the other, provides 
superior acceleration and handling, is more agile. You 
simply need to experience it.  
 
7.
 
References 
[1]
 
Abbott 2006 Annual Report
, 2006. 
[2]
 
http://www.agiletek.com/approach/methodology, 2009. 
 
155