 Gap Analysis between State of Practice & State of Art 
Practices in Agile Software Development 
 
Abdul Rauf 
Department of Computer Science, College of Computer & 
Information Sciences, Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud 
Islamic University (IMSIU), Riyadh, KSA, Saudi Arabia 
rauf.malik@ccis.imamu.edu.sa
 
 
Mohammed AlGhafees 
Department of Computer Science, College of Computer & 
Information Sciences, Al-Imam Mohammad Ibn Saud 
Islamic University (IMSIU), Riyadh, KSA, Saudi Arabia 
maalghafees@ccis.imamu.edu.sa
 
 
Abstract
— Agile software development can be considered as a 
development methodology which suits the situations where 
requirements are changing frequently. Most of the literature 
about agile is specific to one or two practices. Lack of a 
comprehensive discussion on all the commonly used agile 
practices in literature and their adoption results by industry is 
very much evident. This work is an ongoing effort, where we are 
going to discuss some of the literature, we have gone through to 
solicit common agile practices, score them on the basis of 
frequency of referral and then we have tried to get an opinion 
from industry regarding our findings. Our aim is to have a 
comprehensive review of all the literature presented for Agile in 
last decade and have an analysis of these results based on 
feedback from industry of at-least 2-3 continents. In this short 
paper, we are presenting some of our findings and we hope to 
extend our work gradually.
 
(
Abstract
) 
Keywords— Software development; agile methods; agile 
practices; XP, Scrum (key words) 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION 
 
Software development is considered to be successful if it is 
completed within time and budget while satisfying customers’ 
needs. Software development is always associated with 
ambiguity due to changing requirements, change in technology 
or early delivery, hence plan-driven, engineering based 
methodologies are not suitable for such dynamic environment 
[1][2]. Agile development methodologies provides flexibility 
to handle changing requirements, improved communication 
and coordination mechanisms, and improved quality while 
enhancing the time-to market speed [3]. Many empirical 
studies report the successful adoption and execution of agile 
methods [4]. Software companies are not following any agile 
method as is; rather they are using the most suitable agile 
practices. Hence they should have the knowledge of the 
benefits and issues associated with the use of each practice. 
Empirical studies on agile methods are mainly intended 
towards the findings of adopting any specific agile method 
with the benefits and challenges in adoption. The impact of 
applying each practice of the method is not addressed in detail. 
Also the literature addressing the benefits and challenges of 
each practice is scattered, hence it is difficult to investigate 
each practice with respect to the experiences associated with 
their usage. In order to address this gap, an industrial survey is 
conducted to capture the experience of practitioners to 
investigate the agile practices regarding their benefits and 
challenges. 
The purpose of this study is to accumulate the experience of 
industry practitioners in order to better understand the benefits 
and challenges of applying agile practices in projects. The 
Agile methods: XP and Scrum are found to be the most widely 
used methods [5] [6] [7], hence the practices of XP and Scrum 
are considered for this study. By benefits we mean that how the 
application of agile practices in projects can be valuable. 
Similarly by challenges we mean the factors which create 
hurdles for implementing agile practices in projects. To the 
best of our knowledge, no research effort has been done with 
the focus on accumulating benefits and challenges associated 
with the use of agile practices. The industrial survey 
investigated the strength of benefits of agile practices by posing 
close-ended questions and explored the challenges of agile 
practices by posing the open-ended questions. 79 responses are 
collected from 45 companies to investigate the strength of 
advantages of the practices and exploring their challenge. 
Hence the main contribution of this work is to provide 
guidance for the software teams aiming to apply the agile 
practices by showing the merits and demerits of each practice. 
Findings indicate that besides agreeing with the benefits of 
agile practices, the practitioners have identified many issues 
with agile practices; hence more research efforts should be 
directed to examine the practices critically. The results indicate 
that the issues with agile practices are elevated when applied in 
large companies as agile is intended to be implemented in 
small companies with team size less than 10. Survey results 
indicate that the agile practices are being used by larger teams 
as well hence new issues with agile practices arise which need 
to be resolved to encourage the use of agile practices. 
In section 2 discusses the related literature, section 3 details 
the research methodology describing the research questions, 
research aims, context, data collection and data analysis. 
Section 4 demonstrates the results to answer the research 
questions. Section 5 contains conclusion and future work. 
II.
 
R
ELATED WORK
 
A large number of studies have been conducted on agile 
methodologies with a focus on agile transformation; agile 
adaption, benefits and challenges of applying agile 
methodologies but there is a lack of empirical studies with a 
2015 Agile Conference978-1-4673-7153-7/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/Agile.2015.21102 true focus on investigating agile practices in detail. Here is a 
list of empirical studies assessing some agile practices in detail. 
These studies are mostly based on application of agile methods 
in large organization, hence the challenges of applying agile 
practices is also addressed besides their benefits.  
Chen et al. [8] performed a case study at Intel to investigate 
how agile methods can be employed at large organizations. The 
study highlighted many issues 
as a result of applying agile 
practices in large companies. 
 
Begel and Nagappan [9] performed a survey at Microsoft to 
evaluate their experience of adopting agile methodologies. 487 
respondents contributed in the study to make it a valuable 
study. It was found that Scrum and XP was being used at 
Microsoft. This study provided valuable findings in evaluating 
the widely used, most effective and most problematic agile 
practices while focusing of agile adoption challenges in large 
companies. The study was a good initiative in directing the 
research efforts to focus on the challenges of agile practices 
besides their benefits. 
Fruhling et al. [10] investigated the challenges faced in 
agile transformation in a government organization. Case study 
was conducted to explore the challenges faced in adopting 
agile practices. The study was good initiative in exploring the 
challenges but the results cannot be generalized. 
Salo and Abrahamsson [11] focused on applying XP and 
Scrum practices in embedded software development. The study 
provides generalized results on the application of agile methods 
without detailed exploration of result of applying each practice 
individually. The results cannot be generalized as the study is 
limited to the application of agile methods in embedded 
industry. 
Petersen and Wohlin [12] investigated the experience of 
applying of XP and scrum in a large organization. They 
conducted a case study at Ericsson to investigate the benefits 
and challenges of agile adoption. The study was a good effort 
towards investigating the agile practices in detail by comparing 
the literature findings with case study findings to generalize the 
literature discoveries. 
M. Laanti et al. [13] conducted a large survey comprising 
of 1000 respondents from different geographic locations 
regarding the agile adoption experiences and views. The 
problematic areas and challenges were discussed but the 
challenges with a focus on adopting each agile practice was not 
covered in detail. 
III.
 
R
ESEARCH METHOD
 
This research is conducted using industrial survey is 
conducted to assessing the strength of benefits and exploring 
issues related to agile practices adoption. We have selected 
survey as it is the suitable research method for getting multi-
disciplinary view and to draw generalized conclusions about 
the benefits and issues of agile practices [14]. 
A web-based industrial survey is conducted as it is 
convenient for the respondents instead of filling a paper survey. 
Also the data obtained as a result of web-based survey is easier 
to manage and compiled. The questionnaires consist of 
multiple: (1) demographic information, (2) benefits of practices 
section and (3) challenges of practices. Demographic 
information includes designation and experience of the 
respondent to get assured that the respondents are the right 
people to get the desired information. Respondents are asked 
whether they follow agile development in their companies, the 
name of agile methodology being used to make sure that they 
are using agile methodologies in their organizations. The 
strength of benefits of agile practices is assessed by asking 
close-ended questions with 5-level likert scale (1= Strongly 
Disagree, 2= Disagree, 3=Neutral, 4=Agree, 5=Strongly 
Agree). Open-ended questions are used to explore the issues of 
agile practices experienced by industry practitioners. 
Software companies do not follow any specific agile 
method completely; rather they use a mix of agile practices. 
Hence it is useful to capture the views of industry practitioners 
behind using the specific practices and abandoning the other 
ones. The experience with agile practices varies from project to 
project and team to team, hence it is worth accumulating the 
benefits and challenges associated with individual practice 
usage. This research motivation leads us to the following 
research question: 
What are challenges and benefits of agile practices in state 
of practice? This question is addressed by conducting an 
industrial survey in software industry of Pakistan including the 
main cities: Islamabad, Rawalpindi, Lahore and Karachi. In 
this way, a current view of issues and benefits faced by 
industry is presented. 
The sample for this study consists of 79 responses from 45 
software companies in Pakistan. We conducted an online 
industrial survey over a period of 2 months. 
IV.
 
RESULTS
 
 
Among the survey respondents 33% represent managers 
including (Project managers, team leads), 52% represent 
development staff (developers, architects, software engineers 
and test analysts) and 15% represent other staff. The average 
experience of survey respondents in agile software 
development is 2.9 years having minimum experience of 0.5 
years and maximum 7 years with standard deviation 1.7. Team 
size of respondents is also enquired in order to get insights for 
the trends for adopting agile practices in small and large teams. 
It is found that agile practices are widely applied in projects 
with small team sizes. 28% of respondents have reported their 
team size greater than 15. 
Survey results show that Scrum is the most widely used 
agile method as 57% of survey respondents have reported 
Scrum as their software development methodology. 27% 
respondents use the practices of both XP and Scrum. Only 5% 
respondents have reported to use XP solely. This trend of agile 
methods usage appears the same as reported in literature 
studies [15] 
The extent of adoption of agile practices is enquired by 
providing a list of practices so that the respondents can select 
103 the practices being used in their companies. The prioritized list 
of agile practices according to their extent of usage is shown in 
Table 1. Sprint planning meeti
ng, refactoring and daily Scrum 
meeting are the most widely used agile practices. The least 
used practices are acceptance testing, pair programming and 
onsite customer. 
A.
 
Benefits of Agile practices 
The benefits of agile practices obtained from literature are 
categorized based on commonality to create a short list of 
benefits related to each practice. The strength of the benefits is 
evaluated by asking close ended questions using a likert scale: 
(1= Strongly Disagree, 2= Disagree, 3=Neutral, 4=Agree, 
5=Strongly Agree).  
The benefits of delivering in iterations/sprints have 
received the highest acceptance from industry as shown in 
Figure 1. Iterative development has also reported to be the 
most widely used agile practice, hence respondents also agree 
with its benefits. 
The sprint planning meeting and refactoring are a widely 
used agile practice, hence a large number of respondents also 
agree with their benefits as shown in Figure 2 and Figure 3.The 
respondents giving neutral and negative findings avoid the 
practice of refactoring as it needs care and coordination. 
Refactoring helps in maintaining code quality by eliminating 
errors at early stages. 
The responses for accepting the benefits of daily Scrum 
meetings results have shown positive results. Only 1% of 
respondents have disagreed with the benefits and 16% 
respondents have shown. The neutral responses are due to the 
fact that some respondents are not using this practice as they 
perceive the daily conduct of meetings depends on the 
complexity of projects.  
Sprint review meeting, product backlog, incremental 
design, collective code ownership and test-driven development 
(TDD) are not widely being used in industry but still the 
practitioners strongly agree with their benefits.  
Burndown charts are used by only 54% of industry but still 
the strength of positive responses is larger. Only 3% of 
respondents have shown negative responses. 15 % responses 
are neutral. Although 52% of participants use continuous 
integration, still more are inclined to accept the benefits. 
Negative responses are 3% and neutral responses are 28%. The 
adoption rate is lesser due to the extensive care and control 
required for using the practice.  
Sprint backlog and collective code ownership are used by 
only 48%and 43% but still respondents recognize their 
benefits. Collective code ownership has received only 5% 
negative response and 23% neutral response.  
The practice of onsite customer is used by only 34% of 
respondents. This practice is more suitable in complex projects 
hence it is not widely used as the neutral responses again the 
practice is 31%. Negative response is only 5% which shows 
that instead of limited usage of the practice, respondents still 
agree with the benefits associated with its usage.  
The least used practices in industry are: pair programming 
and acceptance testing. 29% of respondents use pair 
programming (PP) and 21% of respondents use acceptance 
testing. Besides least usage in industry, the percentage of 
negative responses against the practices is also high. Only 3% 
of respondents agree with the benefits of PP which complies 
with its low usage in industry as shown in Figure 4. PP is 
preferred only in complex situations. 
 
B.
 
Challenges of Agile practices 
Challenges of each agile practice are explored by asking 
open-ended questions. The results obtained against each 
practice are grouped into relevant themes to create a list of 
challenges against each practice. The data was tabulated 
against each practice by assigning them a unique ID. The list of 
issues against each practice is shown in Appendix A. 
Challenges reported by the practitioners indicate the reason 
for abandoning the agile practices instead of realizing their 
benefits. The challenges should be addressed in detail in order 
to devise the strategies and suggestions for overcoming the 
challenges. 
V.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
Software development organizations are not following any 
agile methods completely. They adopt a mix of agile practices 
according to their projects. The motivation behind the study is 
to provide industrial insights regarding the use of different 
agile practices, instead of studying any specific agile method. 
An industrial survey is conduct
ed to gain insights regarding the 
application of agile practices in practice. The strength of 
benefits against each agile practice are investigated and 
challenges against each agile practice are explored. First the 
extent of agile practices adoption industry is investigated in 
order to identify the widely accepted and least used practices. 
A prioritized list is provided to analyze the extent of their 
application in industry. Second, the practices are evaluated 
with respect to their extent of adoption and perceived 
usefulness in industry. Although the practices are not adopted 
widely, but the respondents still agree with their benefits which 
show that they are willing to adopt the practices. The reason for 
abandoning some agile practices is the challenges faced by the 
organizations in adopting them. Third, the challenges and 
issues faced while adopting each practice are explored. A list of 
challenges against each practice is provided in order to gain 
insights for the factors hindering the use of agile practices. 
104 It would be interesting to carry out another survey for a 
larger population to find any new challenges of the agile 
practices. The findings can be generalized by comparing the 
survey results with the literature findings. The issues with agile 
practices can be categorized in context dependent issues and 
general issues. This work is an initiative to direct the research 
efforts towards exploring and eradicating issues with agile 
practices in detail. Further work is required to evaluate the 
strength of evidence for agile practices. 
 
 
 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
Serena, An introduction to Agile Software Development, [online] June 
2007. [Cited: January 18, 2012.]  
www.serena.com/docs/repository/solutions/intro-to-agile-devel.pdf  
[2]
 
J. Cho, Issues and Challenges of Agile Software Development With 
Scrum, Issues in Information Systems , VOL IX, No. 2, pp. 188-195, 
2008.  
[3]
 
P. Abrahamsson , J. Warsta, M.T. Siponen , J. Ronkainen, New 
Directions on Agile Methods: A Comparative Analysis . Proceedings of 
25th International Conference on Software Engineering, pp. 244 –254, 
2003.  
[4]
 
Abrahamsson, P., Salo, O., Ronkainen, J., 2002. Agile Software 
Development Methods – Review and Analysis. VTT Publications 478.  
http://www.inf.vtt.fi/pdf/ publications/2002/P478.pdf> (accessed 
December 2005).  
[5]
 
Scrum Alliance, Scrum Alliance Membership Industrial survey Shows 
Growing Scrum Adoption and Project Success, [online] September 28, 
2007. [Cited: January 18,2012.] Available: www.scrumalliance.org  
[6]
 
Versionone, State of Agile Survey:2011, The State of Agile 
Development, [online] june 2011, [Cited: January 20, 2012.] 
http://www.versionone.com/state_of_agile_development_survey/10/  
[7]
 
Versionone, State of Agile Survey:2011, The State of Agile 
Development, [online] june 2012, [Cited: January 20, 2012.] 
http://www.versionone.com/state_of_agile_development_survey/11/  
[8]
 
J. Q. Chen, P. Dien, B. Wang, and D. R. Vogel, "Light-Weight 
Development Method: a Case Study," presented at Service Systems and 
Service Management, 2007 International Conference on, 2007.  
[9]
 
Begel, A. and N. Nagappan, "Usage and Perceptions of Agile Software 
Development in an Industrial Context: An Exploratory Study," presented 
at Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement, 2007. ESEM 
2007. First International Symposium on, 2007.  
[10]
 
A. Fruhling, P. McDonald, and C. Dunbar, "A Case Study: Introducing 
eXtreme Programming in a US Government System Development 
Project," presented at Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences, Proceedings of the 41st Annual, 2008.  
[11]
 
O. Salo and P. Abrahamsson, Agile methods in European embedded 
software development organisations: a industrial survey on the actual 
use and usefulness of Extreme Programming and Scrum, IET Software, 
Vol. 2, No. 1, pp. 58-64, 2008.  
[12]
 
K. Petersen and C. Wohlin, "A comparison of issues and advantages in 
agile and incremental development between state of the art and an 
industrial case," Journal of Systems and Software, vol. 82, pp. 1479-
1490, 2009.  
[13]
 
M. Laanti, O. Salo, and P. Abrahamsson, "Agile methods rapidly 
replacing traditional methods at Nokia: A survey of opinions on agile 
transformation," Information and Software Technology, vol. 53, pp. 
276-290, 2011.  
[14]
 
P. Shari Lawrence and A. K. Barbara, "Principles of industrial survey 
research: part 1: turning lemons into lemonade," SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. 
Notes, vol. 26, pp. 16-18, 2001.  
[15]
 
Zaigham Mushtaq and M. Rizwan Jameel Qureshi,"Novel Hybrid 
Model: Integrating Scrum and XP", IJITCS, vol.4, no.6, pp.39-44, 2012.  
105 A
PPENDIX
:
 
C
HALLENGES OF 
A
GILE PRACTICES REPORTED FROM 
I
NDUSTRIAL SURVEY
 
Iterative Development 
S1. Clients’ unavailability  or Lack of cooperation  
S2. Clients’ willingness to get the system in pieces.  
S3. iterative development for  large projects result in scope management issues 
Incremental design 
S1 Integration and prioritization of features 
S2. Difficult to manage for large projects 
S3. Client involvement for prioritizing requirements, hence Timelines can suffer  
Time Boxed Iterations 
S1. Time limitations enhances pressure on developers which reduces productivity  
S2. The items not completed in an iteration are moved to  next iteration with a result in delayed schedule 
S3. High planning and control is required 
Sprint Planning meeting  
S1. High responsibility on PM for involving client and Team. 
S2. Team availability for sparing time for meeting in tight schedules as meetings gets long. 
S3. Finalization of points due to suggestions conflicts as each member has different view  
Daily Scrum meeting 
S1. Hard to manage in terms of finalization of points, time, prioritizing issues, conducting with updated status. 
S2. Long meetings wastes developer time and divert mind of developers from their coding tasks. 
S3. Daily reporting discourages developers as there is not enough work to show daily. . 
Sprint Review meeting 
S1. Team member unavailability 
S2. Developers are unwilling 
S3. Take extra time of project 
Product backlog 
S1. Difficult to manage/update the product backlog for rapid changes. 
S2. Time consumption in planning for product backlog in tight deadlines. 
Sprint backlog
S1. Continuous updating requires extra resources and time 
S2. Backlog take time of other tasks due to tight deadline and this cycle continues. 
S3. People sometimes add new stories to backlog during the sprint 
Burn down charts 
S1. Difficult to update daily as some tasks are partially done/dependent tasks 
S2. In tight deadlines, it is cumbersome to update daily 
S3. Daily updation can take time of other tasks  
Refactoring 
S1. Not possible every time because it is time consuming and take extra time of project  
S2. Stability of code can be affected 
S3. Risk of external system crash  
Test-Driven development & Unit Testing 
S1. Developers assume it time consuming as they use to test only some common errors and thorough testing. 
S2. To meet tight deadlines, this is often ignored 
S3. Developers think it as hectic and extra work 
Pair programming 
S1. Coordination issues in developers 
S2. Problem occurs if one of those or both leave the organization 
S3. Takes more time, if two developers work on same machine 
Collective code ownership 
S1. Code is not well-designed as no one is responsible individually 
Continuous integration 
S1. Time overhead to integrate everyday  
S2. Close communication and coordination is required  
S3. Documented design is required 
Onsite Customer 
S1. Client unwillingness /client unavailability 
S2. Communication gaps from customers results in delayed feedback. 
S3. Continuous change request leads to scope creep 
 
106