 Use of Agile Methods in Software Engineering Education 
 
 
Dr. David F. Rico 
Boeing, 
dave1@davidfrico.com
 
Dr. Hasan H. Sayani 
University of Maryl
and University College 
hsayani@umuc.edu
 
 
 
Abstract
ŠThe use of contemporary software 
development approaches such as agile methods is 
growing in widespread use throughout the world. 
Although some universities are starting to teach 
them, courses on agile methods at the 
undergraduate and graduate levels are still a new 
phenomenon. The University of Maryland 
University College (UMUC) adapted agile methods 
for its capstone course 
towards a master™s degree 
in software engineering in
 the Fall of 2008. Three 
distributed teams of five students were asked to use 
agile methods to build competing electronic 
commerce websites. With little training in agile 
methods, virtual teams, collaboration tools, or web 
design, each of the th
ree teams completed fully 
functional e-commerce websites using agile 
methods in little more than 13 weeks. Teams who 
struck an optimum balance of customer 
collaboration, use of agile methods, and technical 
programming ability had better productivity and 
website quality. 
 
I.
 
S
OFTWARE 
E
NGINEERING 
E
DUCATION
 
 
The term software engineering was coined in 
1968 as a result of the software crisis or demand for 
software by the U.S. military along with difficulty of 
fulfilling that demand. Computer programmers began 
to be referred to as software engineers from 1970 to 
1980, especially among U.S. DoD firms, and a handful 
of leading-edge colleges and universities began 
offering master™s degrees in software engineering. 
Software engineering became
 the third fastest growing 
career field in the U.S. from 1995 to 2005. Much of 
this growth coincided with the rise of the commercial 
shrink-wrapped software industry, the spread of 
powerful, but low-cost personal computers, and the 
rise of the Internet. Non-traditional colleges and 
universities seemed to spring up overnight and 
master™s degrees in software engineering became 
available to the masses by the late 1990s. Traditional 
universities continued offering bachelor™s and master™s 
degrees in computer science, while non-traditional, 
often online, universities gravitated towards master™s 
degrees in software engineering. 
II.
 
I
MPETUS FOR 
C
HANGE
 
 
UMUC, with 170,000 full and part-time students, 
undertook the challenge of teaching agile methods as 
part of its capstone course towards a master™s degree 
in software engineering. The stewards of UMUC™s 
master™s degree program in software engineering have 
always tried to stay on the leading edge of the 
computer programming industry in order to provide its 
students with marketable skills. It does so by requiring 
students to apply the latest computer programming 
technologies as they emerge, such as Java, Perl, C#, 
.NET, ASP, Ruby, Linux, etc. The students are often 
encouraged to use the latest open source software 
innovations, such as Iona Fuse and Apache Service 
Mix for building service or
iented architecture (SOA) 
and web services-based applications. Along the way, 
the students are also introduced to the disciplines 
associated with the Software Engineering Body of 
Knowledge (SWEBoK). These include requirements 
analysis, software architecture and design, coding 
standards, verification, validation, and maintenance. 
The students are often encouraged to document 
the various software life cycle artifacts using as many 
IEEE software engineering standards as possible. 
From this standpoint, one might say that UMUC™s 
graduate software engineering degree program is 
based on traditional methods. However, true to its 
form, UMUC recognizes that agile methods are 
entering into mainstream use more and more, so they 
decided to infuse agile methods into its program in the 
Fall of 2008. Agile methods were introduced as part of 
the final, capstone course towards a master™s degree in 
software engineering. The students were expected to 
be highly-skilled and highly-competent computer 
programmers, in line with UMUC™s vision of what 
software engineering is supposed to be, a professional 
computer programming discipline. This was the 18th 
capstone course offered by UMUC, where students 
were to draw upon IEEE and SWEBoK disciplines to 
develop a software system for real customers using 
traditional methods. Only this time, UMUC™s software 
engineering students were to apply agile methods for 
their final capstone project instead. 
2009 Agile Conference978-0-7695-3768-9/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2009.13174 III.
 
C
OURSE 
D
ESIGN
 
 
In the Summer of 2008, two months before the 
capstone course was to begin, UMUC adapted agile 
methods for its graduate software engineering degree 
program. Institutional researchers who had been 
experimenting with agile methods and publishing their 
results were asked to adapt agile methods and design 
the lesson plan for the capstone course. The students 
would be allowed to use the agile method of their 
choice, such as Scrum, Extreme Programming, Feature 
Driven Development, Crystal Methods, Dynamic 
Systems Development, etc. However, they would be 
required to use the Release Planning methodology 
from Extreme Programming as a project management 
framework. The students were required to produce 
user stories, metaphors, release plans, iteration plans, 
development tasks, unit tests, and acceptance tests. 
This is not at all unusual, since Release Planning is a 
common practice used by both Extreme Programming 
and Scrum teams. Release Planning templates were 
created for the students to use, introductory training 
and other background materials were made available 
to the students, and an expert in agile methods was 
assigned to the students for day-to-day coaching and 
mentoring, seven days a week. 
 
IV.
 
D
EMOGRAPHICS
 
 
Fifteen students signed up for the final capstone 
course towards a master™s degree in software 
engineering. The students averaged 11 years of 
experience and were proficient in the use of ASP, 
.NET, C#, C++, J2EE, Java, Javascript, Perl, PHP, 
Python, Ruby, SQL, Visual Basic, and Linux. The 
students had undergraduate degrees in computer 
science, information systems, and other technical 
disciplines. Most of the students had full-time jobs as 
software engineers and were already progressing 
beyond the early stages of their computer 
programming careers to such roles as project managers 
and software analysts. Half of the students worked on 
large U.S. government projects and the other half 
worked on small to medium-sized projects for 
commercial clients. All of the students had completed 
the coursework towards a master™s degree in software 
engineering at UMUC, save the capstone. They were 
all proficient in the use of traditional methods, the 
SWEBoK, and application of IEEE standards for 
documenting requirements, architectures, designs, 
code, and various others software life cycle artifacts. 
One or two of the students were familiar with agile 
methods, although none were currently using them. 
The large majority of the students were hearing of 
agile methods for the first time. 
V.
 
C
OURSE 
K
ICKOFF
 
 
The students were asked to self-organize into 
three teams of five computer programmers. Each of 
the teams was asked to build a fully operational and 
functional e-commerce website for buying and selling 
digital media products very much like Amazon.com. 
They were also asked to use agile methods instead of 
traditional methods for doing so. The use of agile 
methods was a little antithetical to everything they™d 
been taught during the prior two years of coursework. 
Historically, they™d been taught to develop 
requirements specifications, software architecture and 
design plans, test plans, and a plethora of documents 
such as software user and maintenance manuals. Many 
of these students had been promoting the use of 
traditional methods on their own real-world jobs and 
enjoyed doing so immensely. The notion of using agile 
methods for managing the software process was 
shocking, surprising, and most of all, confusing. They 
were befuddled as to which agile method to choose, 
use, and apply. The three teams settled down quite a 
bit once routine interactions with the customers, 
coaches, and mentors began. Each of the teams had 
exactly 13 weeks in order to complete their task, 
which included startup, execution, and closeout of 
their project. They were given three weeks to teach 
themselves as much as possible about agile methods 
and were assigned a customer, coach, and mentor. 
Then, the teams were instructed to build their e-
commerce websites in three iterations. 
 
VI.
 
P
ROJECT 
D
ESCRIPTION
 
 
Each of the student teams was asked to develop an 
e-commerce website. A single customer was assigned 
to each of the three teams. Historically, the students 
were asked to find their own customers. This led to 
several problems, such as finding a customer, getting 
adequate requirements, and maintaining a consistent 
level of customer involvement throughout the capstone 
course. Since our primary objective was to have the 
teams focus on the use of agile methods, and customer 
experience with agile methods is imperative to project 
success, we simply assigned teams a single customer 
who was already familiar with agile methods. 
Furthermore, we had the customer give a single set of 
user stories to each of the three teams to minimize the 
effort for the customer and use this as a basis for 
having the teams build competing e-commerce 
websites. There was some concern that the students 
would build identical websites, but we reasoned that 
the students would build highly unique products, 
which they did. The following project and product 
description was given to each of the three teams: 
175 Each team will develop a general-purpose 
business-to-consumer (B2C) class electronic 
commerce website for buying and selling 
digital media products. The end-product 
should be an electronic 
retailing website or 
storefront similar to Amazon.com where 
consumers can search for products and 
identify and purchase the products they 
desire. One constraint is that the website will 
be for digital media products, such as e-
books, market studies, white papers, company 
briefings, and other forms of digital media 
often in PDF format. The website should 
have features and functions for both the 
buyer and the seller. For instance, the buyer 
should have access to a catalog of products, 
be able to browse through or search for 
products, get detailed information on 
products, add items of interest to a shopping 
cart, create user accounts with personal 
information, order products using credit 
cards, and obtain customer services such as 
rating transaction quality, reporting 
problems, or resolving account disputes. The 
seller should also have features and 
functions, such as an attractive website that 
presents a pleasant shopping experience that 
encourages customers to purchase products 
using this website. Furthermore, the seller 
should be able load products into a catalog, 
including photos, product descriptions, 
prices, sale items, special deals, and other 
promotional aids in order to obtain business
. 
 
VII.
 
C
OURSE 
E
XECUTION
 
 
The director of UMUC™s software engineering 
program, a visiting faculty member, and a teaching 
assistant developed the course and provided oversight. 
It was the director™s idea to modernize UMUC™s 
software engineering program by infusing agile 
methods into the capstone course. The visiting faculty 
member designed the course, developed all of the 
preparatory materials, and served as coach, mentor, 
and customer. The teaching assistant provided 
administrative oversight. The visiting faculty member 
designed the basic course in about a week, gathered 
and organized background materials in about a month, 
and provided training for three weeks after the course 
began. He was responsible for conceiving of, and 
designing, the project description for the e-commerce 
website. Once the course was underway, he also 
served as a customer, coach, and mentor 24-hours a 
day and seven days a week for the duration of the 
course. This was a big responsibility since the teams 
were in four time zones and required scheduled and 
unscheduled support on the edges of the normal work 
days. The visiting faculty member also had a full-time 
day job, in addition to serving as customer, coach, and 
mentor. He provided teams with user stories and 
acceptance criteria, attended regularly scheduled 
meetings with each of the three teams, and provided ad 
hoc meeting support with lead developers. He was also 
responsible for participating in administrative 
meetings with UMUC™s faculty and staff, maintaining 
a delicate balance of institutional versus individual 
student needs, and providing written feedback on team 
performance at the end of all iterations, as well as the 
final product. All-in-all, the visiting faculty member 
worked full-time on adapting agile methods to 
UMUC™s capstone course from July 2008 until late 
December 2008. He was also responsible for preparing 
the final experience report and getting it published. 
 
A. Team Awesomesauce 
 
The team named Awesomesauce was the first to 
form, had the most exposure to agile methods, and had 
the most proficient computer programmers. They 
chose to use Scrum as their agile method and they also 
chose an agile project management tool called Version 
One to help manage their project. They were the last to 
engage the customer, coach, and mentor and struggled 
with how to implement Scrum in a virtual 
environment. Their team, like most of the others, was 
spread across four time zones. The customer initiated 
contact with their team, provided them with a broad 
vision of the project, and gave them a list of initial 
user stories. Their coach and mentor also contacted 
them with advice on how to begin their project, 
manage their iterations, and complete their e-
commerce website. The coach and mentor assured 
their team, like all teams, that he expected them to 
ultimately succeed and earn their degrees. This little 
pep talk settled them down and they immediately 
began work on their first iteration. They had never 
used Scrum before and they were a little rusty. They 
decomposed the user stories into development tasks 
and populated their product and sprint backlogs with 
low-level technical activities. In other words, the user 
stories seemed to disappear and prioritization was 
unclear. The coach and mentor asked them to revive 
their user stories and maintain both of the lists, the 
customer™s user stories, their priority order, and the 
low-level development tasks necessary to implement 
them. Their first iteration was the most immature of 
the three teams. However, they nearly completed the 
entire e-commerce website by the end of the second 
iteration. They implemented the most user stories of 
the three teams by the end of the third iteration. 
176 TABLE
 
1.
 
T
EAM 
A
WESOMESAUCE 
P
ROS
/C
ONS
 
Pros 
•
 
Team was formed first/most teamwork. 
•
 
Had most programming talent/skills. 
•
 
Had most agile methods experience. 
•
 
Used an agile methods workflow tool. 
•
 
Completed most user stories. 
Cons 
•
 
Last to contact customer. 
•
 
Initially discarded user stories. 
•
 
Least amount of customer interaction. 
•
 
Used fewest agile methods practices. 
•
 
Needed better aesthetic website quality. 
 
B. Team Kestrel 
 
The team named Kestrel was the second to form, 
had some exposure to agile methods, and had the 
second-most computer programming proficiency. 
Team Kestrel also used Scrum as their agile method 
and set up a simple Wiki for agile project 
management, e.g., tracking user stories. They 
struggled with Scrum and seemed to reject the notion 
of using Release Planning instead of Sprint Planning 
as their primary agile project management framework. 
They seemed to be having intellectual objections to 
mixing and matching best practices across the various 
agile methods. They were also one of the last teams to 
contact the customer, coach, and mentor. The 
customer initiated contact with their team, shared his 
vision of the e-commerce website they were to build, 
and provided them with a list of user stories. The 
coach and mentor routinely engaged them to guide 
them along a path to ultimate project success. All of 
the teams were encouraged to contact the customer 
with any questions about the user stories, which they 
did. Their lead programmer developed wire-frames to 
validate the user stories before implementation. The 
customer was contacted to approve the wire-frames 
before the end of the iterations. The first team often 
made on-the-fly changes during demonstration dry-
runs, instead of using wire-frames. The teams were 
also encouraged to contact the coach and mentor with 
any questions they had about agile methods, which 
they did. The first two teams also used the university™s 
intranet for collaboration. This was monitored by the 
coach and mentor and was used to gauge the progress 
of the first two teams to steer them around various 
roadblocks, as sort of an invisible hand. Team 
Kestrel™s first iteration was a little basic, but like the 
first team, they picked up the pace and implemented a 
fully-functional e-commerce website by the end of the 
third iteration. Each of the teams were prodded by the 
customer, coach, and mentor to pick up the pace and 
implement as many of the user stories as possible, to 
which the first two teams responded nicely. 
TABLE
 
2.
 
T
EAM 
K
ESTREL 
P
ROS
/C
ONS
 
Pros 
•
 
Moderate understanding of agile methods. 
•
 
Captured all user initial stories. 
•
 
Suggested new user stories. 
•
 
Used a Wiki for Release Planning. 
•
 
Exhibited moderately good teamwork. 
Cons 
•
 
Continued to use traditional practices. 
•
 
Contacted customer very frequently. 
•
 
Performed detailed tradeoff studies. 
•
 
Relied on one or two programmers. 
•
 
Needed better aesthetic website quality. 
 
C. Team Yellowstone 
 
The team named Yellowstone was the third to 
form, had little exposure to agile methods, and had the 
least amount of computer programming proficiency. 
Team Yellowstone had the broadest range of industry 
experience, with both the least and the most 
experienced individuals. However, their least 
experienced member assumed responsibility for 
leading the team. Deeply influenced by the principles 
of traditional methods taught to him by UMUC, he 
offered a lot of initial resistance to the use of agile 
methods. However, once his initial inhibitions were 
addressed, he offered the least continuing resistance to 
the use of agile methods and methodically executed 
the Release Planning methodology. This team also 
used a Wiki for agile project management. Unlike the 
other teams, they were the first to contact the customer 
and established a close and continuing relationship 
with the customer, coach, and mentor. The lead 
developer felt burdened by the computer programming 
task at-hand, so the coach and mentor guided his team 
towards the use of WebEx and Skype for successfully 
implementing virtual pair programming sessions. This 
eased the burden on the team lead, the rest of the team 
felt more involved, and they were eventually able to 
complete their tasks. It™s not unusual for academic 
teams to struggle with the concept of cooperation, and 
this team was certainly one of those. This team 
required a lot of extra coaching and mentoring to 
reinforce the concept of teamwork, cooperation, and 
selflessness. Team Yellowstone implemented an initial 
version of their e-commerce website before the first 
iteration and the coach and mentor had to remind them 
to implement the user stories requested by the 
customer, rather than implementing unrequested 
requirements. The team lead was teaching himself as 
much about the latest web technologies, and would 
often involve the customer in low-level technical 
discussions about software implementation. Team 
Yellowstone implemented the least number of user 
stories, in spite of their early promise. 
177 TABLE
 
3.
 
T
EAM 
Y
ELLOWSTONE 
P
ROS
/C
ONS
 
Pros 
•
 
Implemented first operational website. 
•
 
First to contact customer. 
•
 
Used Wiki for Release Planning. 
•
 
Used several collaborative technologies. 
•
 
Established strong customer relationship. 
Cons 
•
 
Team struggled with fierce individualism. 
•
 
Required several/long customer meetings. 
•
 
Often diverged from user stories. 
•
 
Slowest programming velocity. 
•
 
Needed better aesthetic website quality. 
 
VIII.
 
R
ETROSPECTIVE
 
 
Each of the teams demonstrated a fully 
operational e-commerce website. The teams were 
encouraged to perform a dry-run of their iteration 
demonstrations to head-off any issues before 
acceptance testing. All user stories were agreed upon 
and prioritized, before, during, and after the iterations. 
The teams were encouraged to use WebEx to involve 
all stakeholders. Then, demonstrations were rehearsed 
to work out the kinks. The overriding user story was 
for the teams to demonstrate the execution of an end-
to-end e-commerce website transaction. That is, the 
customer had to find a product, add it to a shopping 
cart, check it out, purchase the item with a credit card, 
and receive the product via electronic distribution. 
Each of the teams demonstrated this basic capability. 
There were other user stories constituting website 
adornments. The team with the highest velocity 
implemented more lower-priority user stories, or 
website adornments. 
The teams with the highest programming velocity 
had the least amount of customer interaction. Fast 
teams also used fewer agile methods practices. Teams 
with the lowest programming velocity had the highest 
amount of customer interaction, but used more agile 
methods practices, such as virtual pair programming 
sessions. Teams whose programmers knuckled-down 
and got the job done had a higher velocity. Teams who 
complained the most about teamwork required more 
oversight and had lower velocity. Some teams relied 
on the customer to specify the user stories in a lot of 
detail using wire-frames to validate them, and others 
simply did what they wanted. Although the customer 
gave teams the latitude to express design creativity, 
they didn™t seem to want it. This could have been a by-
product of their prior training in traditional methods, 
where requirements must be specified in excruciating 
detail. The teams exhibited dramatic improvement 
after each iteration due to pointed feedback. A 
customer who was very knowledgeable with agile 
methods was a critical success factor. 
IX.
 
S
UMMARY AND 
R
ECOMMENDATIONS
 
 
The primary purpose of this capstone course was 
to introduce the use of agile methods in software 
engineering education. The use of agile methods is a 
formidable challenge. It took two years to instill the 
principles of traditional methods in our students. We 
attempted to instill the principles of agile methods in 
our students in only 13 weeks. In many ways we 
succeeded in the application and use of agile methods 
in such a short period of time. Each of the three teams 
learned a lot about agile methods, applied the practices 
of Scrum and Release Planning, and implemented 
three fully-functional e-commerce websites. All 15 
students passed the class and went on to ﬁearnﬂ their 
master™s degrees in software engineering from 
UMUC. Agile methods require emphasis on both the 
software engineering process as well as the software 
product. Teams who struck a good balance between 
the agile methods process and proficiency in 
implementing web technologies performed better 
overall. However, our success was not without its 
challenges. We could have all benefitted from earlier 
coursework in agile methods, and more emphasis on 
technical proficiency, virtual collaboration, coaching 
and mentoring, knowledgeable customers, feedback, 
and teamwork, among many other improvements. 
 
•
 
Early coursework
. Training and education in 
agile methods should be started as early as 
possible. Agile methods should be discussed in 
introductory software engineering coursework. 
They should be taught along side traditional 
methods as a viable alternative. Agile methods 
should be taught as a core course or as an elective. 
•
 
Technical proficiency
. The significance of 
technical programming proficiency should not be 
overlooked. The goal of the capstone course was 
for each of the teams to build an operational and 
functional software system. Although many of the 
teams were steeped in the traditional principles of 
software engineering documentation, the teams 
with skilled programmers performed better. 
•
 
Agile roles and responsibilities
. Emphasis 
should be placed on transitioning teams from 
traditional to agile methods roles and 
responsibilities. Teams assume agile methods are 
simply a new process for traditional roles, such as 
project manager, analyst, designer, coder, tester, 
quality assurance, configuration management, etc. 
This is okay if a team has one or more strong 
programmers. However, agile methods require 
more team members to be active programmers 
who perform some if not all of these traditional 
roles in addition to coding responsibilities. 
178 •
 
Virtual co
llaboration
. Unlike traditional 
universities, non-traditional programs often 
involve students in different time zones. This 
presents some technical challenges. Teams within 
the same time zone were able to successfully use 
WebEx and Skype to perform virtual pair 
programming to share the workload. However, 
this proved difficult with other teams. 
•
 
Coaching and mentoring
. The importance of 
coaching and mentoring cannot be emphasized 
enough. Coaches and mentors were required to 
train the faculty and staff, design the course, 
provide orientation for the students, and interact 
with the students throughout the semester. 
Whether in an academic or industrial setting, the 
use of coaches and mentors is required. 
•
 
Knowledgeable customer
. Customers should 
also have training and experience in agile 
methods. Many developers are just starting to gain 
knowledge and experience with agile methods. 
Teams will have a hard time succeeding with 
agile methods, unless both developers and 
customers understand the principles of agile 
methods and how to apply them correctly. 
•
 
Constructive feedback
. Customers, coaches, and 
mentors must be willing to provide direct 
feedback to developers. Developers must also be 
open to feedback. Customers should be firm with 
their user stories, requirements, prioritization, and 
acceptance criteria. Coaches and mentors must be 
bold enough to suggest process improvements and 
make radical course corrections if necessary. 
•
 
Teamwork
. The lack of teamwork in both 
academia and industry continues to be a problem. 
Fierce individualism is a common characteristic 
of Western culture. This proved to be the case 
among the faculty, staff, and students. The teams 
who cooperated with one another the most 
performed extremely well and the teams with the 
least cooperation didn™t perform very well at all. 
•
 
Buy-versus-build
. Developers should consider 
using commercially available web products and 
services first. Developers should not reinvent the 
wheel by building products from the ground up 
using the latest third-generation computer 
programming languages. Developers can achieve 
a higher level of productivity (velocity), quality, 
and customer satisfaction, if they utilize 
commercially-available web services. 
•
 
Aesthetic design
. Developers should be provided 
with training and education in the principles of 
aesthetic design. Poor website quality costs 
billions of dollars in lost e-commerce revenues 
each year. Literature is starting to emerge, which 
attributes poor aesthetic design to agile methods. 
F
URTHER 
R
EADING
 
 
[1] Abran, A., Moore, J. W., Bourque, P., & Dupuis, R. 
(2004). 
Guide to the software engineering body of 
knowledge
. Los Alamitos, CA: IEEE Computer 
Society. 
[2] Dubinsky, Y., & Hazzan, O. (2003). Extreme 
programming as a framework for student project 
coaching in computer science capstone courses. 
Proceedings of the First IEEE International Conference 
on Software, Science, Technology, and Engineering 
(SWSTE 2003), Herzelia, Israel
, 53-59. 
[3] Hedin, G., Bendix, L., & Magnusson, B. (2003). 
Introducing software engineering by means of extreme 
programming. 
Proceedings of the 25th International 
Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2003), 
Portland, Oregon
, 586-593. 
[4] Keefe, K., & Dick, M. (2004). Using extreme 
programming in a capstone project. 
Proceedings of the 
Sixth Australasian Computing Education Conference 
(ACE 2004), Dunedin, New Zealand
, 151-160. 
[5] Kessler, R., & Dykman, N. (2007). Integrating 
traditional and agile processes in the classroom. 
Proceedings of the 38th ACM Technical Symposium on 
Computer Science Education (SIGCSE 2007), 
Covington, Kentucky, USA
, 312-316. 
[6] Laplante, P. (2006). An agile graduate software studio 
course. 
IEEE Transactions on Education, 49
(4), 417-
419. 
[7] Mead, N., Carter, D., & Lutz, M. (1997). The state of 
software engineering education and training. 
IEEE 
Software, 14
(6), 22-25. 
[8] Murphy, C., Phung, D., & Kaiser, G. (2008). A distance 
learning approach to teaching extreme programming. 
Proceedings of the 13th Annual Conference on 
Innovation and Technology in Computer Science 
Education (ITICSE 2008), Madrid, Spain
, 199-203. 
[9] Rico, D. F. (2008). Effects of agile methods on website 
quality for electronic commerce. 
Proceedings of the 
41st Annual Hawaii International Conference on 
System Sciences (HICSS 2008), Waikaloa, Big Island, 
Hawaii
. 
[10] Rico, D. F., Sayani, H. H., & Sone, S. (2009). 
The 
business value of agile methods
. Ft. Lauderdale, FL: J. 
Ross Publishing. 
[11] Rico, D. F., Sayani, H. H., & Field, R. F. (2008). 
History of computers, electronic commerce, and agile 
methods. In M. V. Zelkowitz (Ed.), 
Advances in 
computers
: 
Emerging technologies
, 
Vol
. 
73
. San Diego, 
CA: Elsevier. 
[12] Wolfinbarger, M., & Gilly, M. C. (2003). Etailq: 
Dimensionalizing, measuring, and predicting etail 
quality. 
Journal of Retailing, 79
(3), 183-198. 
179