 Symbolic Innovation in Agile Transformations
Doug Rose 
Syracuse University 
School of Information Studies 
Syracuse, USA 
dbrose@syr.edu 
 
 
Abstract
—Much of the empirical research on agile 
transformations concentrates on the success factors for effective 
change management. Although these factors are essential in 
establishing beneficial norms a
nd practices, the existing research 
does not adequately address the importance of language in 
distinguishing the current plan-driven processes from their agile 
counterparts. The labels in agile and plan-driven processes 
represent practices that are well established. Accurate process 
labeling is the foundation for creating any inter-organizational 
lessons. This paper establishes the link between linguistic 
manipulation and how it might lead to a form of symbolic 
innovation that can impede a greater understanding of 
transformational challenges. During an agile transformation 
some organizational actors re-label deterministic plan-driven 
processes using agile language. The symbolic innovation leads to 
no improvement and as a result is more easily abandoned 
without meaningful process change.
 
Keywords—agile, transformation, re-labeling, language, 
software development, project management, symbolic innovation 
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
For over four decades, software development has been 
rooted in deterministic planning processes. Starting in the 
1970s software development embraced contemporary 
manufacturing processes. The standard manufacturing phases 
included planning, requirements gathering, architecture, 
implementation and testing. In the early 1990s many 
organizations took an interest in Toyota’s lean manufacturing. 
Lean manufacturing centered on continuous improvement and 
value-driven delivery. Lean principles improved delivery 
through adaptive planning and emphasized people over 
process. Software development had several characteristics that 
mirrored lean principles: a team of highly skilled engineers 
creates software and valuable changes are part of continuous 
improvement. In 2001, software developers established a 
framework to apply lean and other lightweight development 
methods. They called the framework “agile development” as a 
way to emphasize the lightweight adaptable approach. 
Agile is a relative newcomer for organizations and most 
structures and norms continue to support plan-driven 
development. The phases of planning, implementation and 
testing were original templates for common organizational 
roles. Detailed plans are a part of the Project Management 
Office (PMO). Software testing is the responsibility of the 
Quality Assurance department. In plan-driven projects, the 
business requirements documentation (BRD) is the 
predetermined map for the project. Agile transformations 
subvert many of these norms and structures. Agile combines 
project phases into a repeatable iteration. Agile developers self-
organize and make incremental adjustments that were 
originally part of a project control process.  
Many organizations opt to incrementally embrace agile 
principles instead of a wholesale abandonment of their 
established control practices. This led to common techniques 
that allowed organizations to explore agility and still leverage 
their current processes. One such technique is a hybrid 
approach. The hybrid approach is an overlapping of the plan-
driven and agile development frameworks. The hybrid 
approach can lead to confusion about the language and purpose 
of agile. Some plan-driven processes transform into re-labeled 
agile processes without much meaningful innovation. The re-
labeled processes cause significant organizational inefficiency. 
Organizational stakeholders looking for improvement find little 
impact. The teams participate in familiar development 
practices with unfamiliar language. The agile transformation 
becomes a symbolic innovation. The language changes but the 
process remains the same. This stifles an already challenging 
transformation process.  
The agile principles of freedom, accountability and 
empowerment are not always consistent with plan-driven 
processes that favor control, compliance and management. This 
can make well-established organizational actors suspicious of 
agile transformations. The bargain of releasing control for 
adaptability is essential for building a self-managed team. This 
exchange might not be an easy arrangement for managers who 
have established compliance roles. The process relabeling 
allows these roles to continue unabated in their original duties. 
This paper attempts to illustrate how symbolic innovation 
can hinder agile transformations. The hybrid approach is 
designed to ease an organization into agility, but may in fact 
cause too much language overlap that ultimately protects the 
status quo.  
II.
 
L
ITERATURE TO 
D
ATE
 
Software development is an arduous process that requires a 
defined project management process (Charette, 2005). The 
most widely used software development frameworks are the 
plan-driven and the agile approach (Paulson, 2001). Initially, 
practitioners drove theory on agile development (Conboy, 
2009). Plan-driven development produced high failure rates 
(Standish Group International, 1995) and lacked flexibility for 
rapid changes (Boehm and Turner, 2003). The term “agile” 
was coined as part of the Manifesto for Agile Software 
2015 Agile Conference978-1-4673-7153-7/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/Agile.2015.1782 Development (www.agilemanifesto.org). The manifesto is the 
original framework that defined a software development 
approach that was lightweight and adaptive. The Manifesto 
listed four values: individuals and interactions over processes 
and tools; working software over comprehensive 
documentation; customer collaboration over contract 
negotiation; and responding to change over following a plan. 
The values are a pendulum that pulls back on established plan-
driven software development processes. The agile values imply 
that plan-driven development overemphasizes processes and 
tools, comprehensive documentation, contract negotiation and 
following a plan. Agile is an umbrella term that encompasses 
several lightweight development frameworks. The common 
trait of agile is the ability to adapt to rapid change, with a short 
customer feedback cycle and an emphasis on value over 
delivery. 
Scholarship on the agile framework has been limited (Dybå 
and Dingsøyr, 2008). Some of the literature has focused on 
agile development practices (Williams, 2010), other empirical 
research describes extending the framework (Agerfalk, 
Fitzgerald and Slaughter, 2009) and creating derivatives. There 
is work on how the derivatives impact the original framework 
(West and Grant, 2010). Much of the research addresses the 
challenges with adopting agile process in plan-driven 
environments. The agile transformation (Hirsch, 2005) replaces 
some or all of the plan-driven processes with agile processes 
(Laanti, Outi and Abrahamsson, 2011) or creates a hybrid 
approach (Fitzgerald, Hartnett and Conboy, 2006; Hayata and 
Han, 2011; Petersen and Wohlin, 2010) 
The work on organizational change and linguistic 
manipulation is more diverse. The relevant research centers on 
how organizations going through a process change often create 
members who resist the change. They are the “organizational 
antibodies” that protect the current processes from foreign 
ideas (Kelley, 2005; Oster, 2008a; Oster, 2008b; von Krogh, 
Ichijo and Nonaka, 2000). The more radical the ideas appear, 
the more intense the response (Davila, Epstein and Shelton, 
2006).  
Organizational antibodies may use linguistic manipulation 
as a form of symbolic innovation. In cognitive terminology, a 
symbolic innovation is when a process acquires new intangible 
attributes even though the substance of the process remains 
unchanged (Hirschman, 1982). The name of the process 
changes to match the proposed innovation, so the relabeling 
supplants innovation. According to Asya (2013) the process 
relabeling is an "indirect method of expression of 
communicative intention [that] presupposes usage of language 
forms to express illocution force not connected with their direct 
linguistic meaning" (P.3). The language and terminology 
communicate a change when the opposite is true. It is a process 
re-labeling without a process retooling. Savaneviciene and 
Stankeviciute (2013) point out that “personnel management” 
replaced “human resource management” and this led to a 
perceived process transformation, but the change was primarily 
a re-labeling. 
III.
 
C
ONCEPTUAL 
F
RAMEWORK
 
Whether or not agile is an improved development 
framework is not the focus of this research. What is essential is 
that agile development is distinguishable from plan-driven 
development. Many organizations are drawn to agile’s allure of 
adaptive incremental delivery (Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2008). 
Plan-driven development often struggles with changing 
development priorities (Pikkarainen, Salo, Kuusela, and 
Abrahamsson, 2012) but is often a better choice for projects 
that require repeatability, scalability or high security (Petersen, 
Wohlin and Baca, 2009). The mixture of benefits leads to agile 
transformations with incremental adoption of some agile 
processes.  
The aim of this research is to show that organizations use 
symbolic innovation as part of the transformation. The agile 
framework has different roles, planning processes, artifacts and 
workspace constraints. Most organizations have a substantial 
investment in plan-based development processes. The re-
labeling over retooling may be the preferred approach when 
organizational antibodies are averse to the change.  
The motivation for symbolic innovation is threefold. The 
re-labeling makes the process more familiar. The labels make 
the process less threatening to antibodies that have sunk cost in 
the status quo. It also might quell risk aversion (Slovic, Peters, 
Finucane and MacGregor, 2005). The re-labeling might be 
particularly comforting for anyone who fears their role in the 
organization is threatened by the transformation (Oster and 
Gandolfi, 2008). 
Organizations may unintentionally re-label as a by-product 
of the hybrid approach. The overlapping of two approaches 
will mix labels and facilitate symbolic innovation. The 
symbolic innovation will re-label plan-driven processes with 
their contradictory agile counterparts. This changeling process 
maintains the original qualities of its plan-driven origins even 
when they are in opposition to the well-established values of 
the agile manifesto. Unchanged processes, that predictably 
provide no discernible benefit, mire the overall goals of the 
agile transformation. 
IV.
 
METHODOLOGY 
My inquiry was guided by two questions. First, I wanted to 
determine if symbolic innovation is a significant factor in agile 
transformations. Second, I wanted to ascertain if the process 
relabeling conflicts with the plain-language values in the agile 
manifesto and the well established agile principles of 
adaptation and efficiency (Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2008). My field 
research recorded the agile process and interviewed the team 
members about their understanding of the artifacts and 
practices involved in the process.  
A.
 
Research Site 
The research site is the headquarters of a large retailer in 
the United States. The company was founded in the late 1970s 
and currently has several hundred thousand employees with 
annual revenue of tens of billions of dollars. The project was a 
web-based software application that consolidated the view of 
several applications used by the customer service call center. In 
83 the current system, the customer support representatives or 
“CSRs” would keep several applications open to search for 
inventory, change orders, and create orders. Management 
tasked the chief executive for human resources with 
consolidating the application. The human resource executive 
worked closely with the chief information officer. The budget 
was $12 million with an 18-month timeframe. 
The organizational makeup included several dozen project 
managers who worked closely with a team of business 
analysts. The teams included a mix of contracted and staff 
positions. The majority of software development was offsite 
and contracted to several large staffing companies.  
I chose the organization for several reasons. First, the 
project was well funded and the organization was committed to 
an agile transformation. Second, the organization had a mid-
level agile “champion.”  This person was the change agent for 
the agile transformation and had a rudimentary knowledge of 
the framework. Third, the project heavily invested in plan-
driven software development. Fourth, the organization was 
receptive to the research, provided the details about the 
company were omitted. For this research paper I will use the 
name HomeMart as a pseudonym. 
B.
 
Data Collection and Analysis 
Direct observation occurred from June to November 2013. 
The author observed regular work practices for the projects 
teams full-time during normal business hours. Direct 
observation formed the bulk of this field research, including 
observation of the customer service call center and visits to the 
out-of-state office that developed the agile transformation 
guidelines. The author conducted informal interviews with the 
employees and contractors. Pictures and notes were taken at 
the meetings and of agile artifacts (task boards, shared 
workspace, meeting rooms). The transformation used Scrum as 
the agile development framework and so the language and 
terms will reflect that choice.  
V.
 
C
ASE 
F
INDINGS
 
In reporting my findings, I created three groupings of 
symbolic innovations: agile roles, agile planning, and the agile 
workspace. Each process relabeling was inconsistent with a 
plain-language reading of the manifesto and lean principles. 
The agile manifesto has been interpreted and clarified through 
succeeding literature. The plain language view of the values 
will potentially remove a layer of abstraction.  
A.
 
Symbolic innovation of agile roles 
Agile teams are self-organized, aware of customer value, 
and provide daily feedback. Typically project managers and 
business analysts perform these tasks in plan-driven software 
development projects. Scrum defines three roles:  the 
developer, the ScrumMaster, and the customer representative 
or Product Owner. The ScrumMaster focuses on removing 
obstacles. The ScrumMaster role is designed to “master” 
Scrum and ensure that the team is correctly following the 
framework. In other agile frameworks this role is often called a 
“coach.” 
Project managers primarily deal with compliance with the 
project plan. They ensure that the project is delivered with the 
scope of deliverables, on time, within budget and with a 
predetermined quality.  
HomeMart had long-term contractors who previously acted 
as both development leads and project managers. The same 
mid-level management staff relabeled themselves as 
ScrumMasters. The symbolic tran
sformation was limited to re-
labeling. The role of the ScrumMaster is to act as a team 
facilitator without traditional management authority. The role 
encourages the team to reach a sustainable level of self-
organization. The role at HomeMart was to “manage the team” 
and “determine outcomes.”  This was much more closely 
aligned with a project manager. The ScrumMaster was focused 
on constraints and control. They asked the team questions 
centered on schedule and delivery. The agile champion for the 
project affirmed this role and added that ScrumMasters were 
accountable to deliver the software milestones. 
“We are using a hy
brid approach so we still need our 
ScrumMasters to maintain a level of accountability.” [Agile 
Champion] 
 
The ScrumMaster also changed the purpose of agile 
meetings to reflect their project manager role. The daily stand-
up meeting was a re-labeled status meeting. In an agile daily 
stand-up meeting the self-managed team updates other team 
members on their progress and obstacles. The ScrumMaster 
records the obstacles as a way to ensure the team focuses on 
development. The format is that each team member updates 
other developers with the answers to three questions: "What 
did I do yesterday?" "What am I doing today?" and "Do I have 
any obstacles?”  The daily stand-up meeting typically lasts 
between fifteen and twenty minutes and is held first thing in 
the morning at 9 AM. 
The HomeMart daily stand-up meeting was led by the 
ScrumMaster. The ScrumMaster would gesture to each 
developer and ask the questions directly: 
“What did you do yesterday?  What will you do today?  What 
obstacles are in your way?” [ScrumMaster] 
 
The developers looked only at the ScrumMaster and 
committed to delivery dates. The meeting didn’t begin until the 
ScrumMaster was attending. If the ScrumMaster wasn’t 
available the meeting was cancelled. 
There was also a daily stand-up meeting at the program 
level. The meeting was listed in the group calendar as “Daily 
Stand-up Meeting.”  This meeting was held in a large 
conference room with a large oval table in the center of the 
room. The program manager sat in the middle of the table and 
organized the meeting from the central position. The meeting 
also connected through a videoconferencing bridge to a large 
office off-site. The meeting began at 9:30 AM Monday through 
Friday and would start when the program manager sat at the 
desk. Everyone was sitting throughout the meeting and it was 
scheduled until 11:00 AM. If the program manager didn’t have 
any questions they would reach out to the team to make sure 
that all the allotted time was used. 
84 “We have about 20 minutes left in our Stand-up meeting. So 
let’s go around the room and everyone give us a status 
update.” [Program Manager] 
 
Although the format was different, the purpose of the 
meeting is consistent. The meeting organizer reports the status 
of deliverables to upper management. The status update and 
approval process is a likely contradiction of the agile value of 
“individuals and interactions over processes and tools.” 
B.
 
Symbolic innovation of agile planning 
Responding to changes is more important than following a 
project plan. Agile stays true to its lean manufacturing heritage 
by minimizing the waste in producing low value 
documentation (Petersen and Wohlin, 2010). Working software 
provides the greatest value to the customer. That is why the 
agile framework strives to produce “barely sufficient” 
(Highsmith, 2009) documentation. 
Plan-driven projects depend on clear customer 
requirements at the beginning of the project. If those 
requirements change then a project manager applies a change 
request or “CR.” HomeMart created Business Requirements 
Documents or BRDs for the CSR consolidation project. The 
first six months of the project were set aside for the 
planning 
sprint
. Once the BRDs were completed, the software 
requirements were copied into user stories and placed into the 
product backlog. Once the stories were in the product backlog 
they went through the same change control process. An 
approved CR would impact both the BRD and the user stories 
in the product backlog. 
“The stories won’t change unless they come from an approved 
CR.” [Agile Champion] 
 
At the Sprint planning meeting, the ScrumMaster would 
pull approved CRs from the BRD and add them to the sprint 
backlog. The team would estimate the stories to verify the 
project was on schedule. The ScrumMaster would work toward 
“maximum velocity” and deliver the stories by milestone dates 
established in the BRD.
 
C.
 
Symbolic innovation of the agile workspace 
The shared workspace in an agile team is one of the 
material affordances that communicate freedom and 
adaptability (Wagner, Newell and Ramiller, 2013). An agile 
shared workspace is designed to foster communication and 
collaboration. This usually includes an open space to facilitate 
impromptu discussion. The purpose of an agile shared 
workspace is to remove obstacles to interpersonal 
communication. 
HomeMart was housed in a multilevel office building with 
several towers. The majority of the floor space contained 
interlocked grey cubicles and the floor’s surrounding white 
walls had offices with glass doors. Some of the staff had 
nameplates on the end of each “cube row.”  Many of the 
contracted staff made makeshift paper nameplates and some 
occupied cubicles were undesignated. The cubicles had a 
sophisticated numbering system. The location numbers were 
based on the floor, the row and cardinal direction. For meetings 
it was not uncommon to use cubical numbers as meeting 
points. So you might hear a staff member say, “please meet me 
at my cubicle 19DSW2045.” The layout and material 
affordances com
muni
cate that each person is
 a discrete part of 
a larger organization. The cubicle walls afford each person an 
isolated workspace to focus on their own work.  
At HomeMart, the agile team was distributed in cubicles 
throughout the organization. Team members worked on 
different floors, in different buildings and in different cities. 
The program manager didn't create a shared agile space for all 
the team members because of the functional makeup of the 
organization.  
“We have too many resources to take down the cubicles. So 
the agile shared workspace is next to their functional 
managers” [Program Manager] 
 
The shared workspace was a space that had one or more 
agile team members. There were several team members who 
worked for different functional managers so the agile team had 
several shared workspaces. HomeMart re-labeled the clusters 
of cubicles agile shared workspaces. 
VI.
 
D
ISCUSSION
 
At HomeMart, the re-labeling over retooling led to peculiar 
practices. They had daily stand-up meetings where no one 
stood up. Instead of mastering Scrum, the ScrumMaster 
ignored key tenets of the framework. The team worked in 
cubicles that were paradoxically relabeled the agile shared 
workspace. The labels of the processes and artifacts 
contradicted their definitional interpretation. The process labels 
were more coherent when reverted to their original plan driven 
language. The stand-up meeting should be a project status 
meeting. The ScrumMaster should be a project manager. The 
isolated cubicles should be  a private workspace. 
It harms the agile transformation when agile labels litter 
plan-driven projects. Labeling acts as a departure point for 
organizational transformation. Organizational change is a 
journey. Like most journeys the route depends on the position 
and the destination. Without these two points there is no 
measurement of progress. The path to innovation is not 
navigable when labels do not accurately reflect either the status 
quo or the transformed state.  
The motivation to label plan-driven process with agile 
terms may be innocent or obstructionist. In either case, the 
result is the same: confusion and no discernible improvement. 
If a fast food restaurant re-labeled their triple-cheese burger a 
low-fat sandwich it would confuse both the dieters and render 
the diet meaningless. Diligent dieters would watch their 
waistlines grow and eventually declare the process a failure. 
Agile transformations with re-labeled processes follow the 
same fate. HomeMart eventually abandoned their agile 
transformation after they found no discernible benefit. In a 
follow-up interview, the agile champion said that agile was not 
ready for "prime-time."  From their perspective the conclusion 
is understandable. The ScrumMasters organized stand-ups. The 
team used a product backlog and created user stories. The 
labels created the rhythm and cadence of an agile 
85 transformation. The project eventually reverted to its 
appropriate labels and followed the plan-driven approach until 
completion. The ScrumMasters once again became project 
managers and the majority of the developers were re-staffed. 
The confusion and churn caused the project to run over budget 
and potentially doomed future transformations.  
VII.
 
F
UTURE 
R
ESEARCH
 
This paper focused on the 
how
 of agile process re-labeling 
and not the 
why
. An opportunity for further research is hinted 
at throughout the case. Was the process re-labeling intentional 
or a byproduct of the hybrid approach?  Within the case, there 
was some evidence of a mixture. The hybrid approach caused 
confusion that was left uncorrected by project managers. At 
HomeMart, the project managers 
and business analysts were 
the transformation experts. They were the staff that attended 
the formal agile training. It was their responsibility to retrain 
the organization. At HomeMart, they neglected these duties. 
It is understandable that some project managers have a hard 
time accepting some of agile’s key differentiators. A project 
manager might not readily embrace self-management after a 
career of balancing constraints. There was some evidence at 
HomeMart that the project managers concluded that agile was 
simply a rewording of what they've been doing all along. 
“Meet the new boss. Same as the old boss.”  The 
ScrumMaster’s duty to remove obstacles might be deceptively 
familiar to long-term project managers. A follow-up study on 
what longtime project managers retain from agile training 
would help answer this question. 
This research is also limited to the normal constraints 
surrounding a single case study. Most organizations transition 
to agile using an incremental approach. It is plausible to 
assume that process re-labeling is widespread. Further research 
is needed to compare multiple organizations attempting agile 
transformations. 
R
EFERENCES
 
 
[1]
 
Agerfalk, P. J., Fitzgerald, B. and Slaughter, S. A. 2009. “Flexible and 
distributed information systems development: state of the art and 
research challenges,” Information Systems Research, 20, 3, 317-328 
[2]
 
Asya, A. 2013. “Linguistic manipulation: Definition and Types,” 
International Journal of Cognitive Research in Science, Engineering and 
Education, 1(2). 
[3]
 
Boehm, B., & Turner, R. 2003. “Observations on balancing discipline 
and agility,” In Agile Development Conference, 2003. ADC 2003. 
Proceedings of the (pp. 32-39). IEEE. 
[4]
 
Charette, R. N. 2005. “Why software fails,” IEEE spectrum, 42(9), 36. 
[5]
 
Conboy, K. 2009. “Agility from first principles: reconstructing the 
concept of agility in information systems development,” Information 
Systems Research, 20(3), 329-354. 
[6]
 
Davila, T., Epstein, M., & Shelton, R. 2006. 
Making innovation work
, 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Wharton School Publishing. 
[7]
 
Dybå, T. and Dingsøyr, T. 2008. “Empirical studies of agile software 
development: A systematic review,” Information and Software 
Technology, 50, 9-10, 833–859. 
[8]
 
Fitzgerald, B., Hartnett, G. and Conboy, K. 2006. “Customising agile 
methods to software practices at Intel Shannon,” European Journal of 
Information Systems, 15, 200-213. 
[9]
 
Fowler, M., & Highsmith, J. 2001. “The agile manifesto. Software 
Development,” 9(8), 28-35. 
[10]
 
Hayata, T., & Han, J. 2011. “A hybrid model for IT project with Scrum. 
In Service Operations, Logistics, and Informatics (SOLI),” 2011 IEEE 
International Conference on (pp. 285-290). IEEE. 
[11]
 
Highsmith, J. 2009. 
Agile project management: creating innovative 
products
, Pearson Education. 
[12]
 
Hirsch, M. 2005. “Moving from a plan driven culture to agile 
development,” In International Conference on Software Engineering 
(Vol. 27, p. 38). 
[13]
 
Hirschman, E. C., 1982. “Symbolism and technology as sources for the 
generation of innovations,” Advances in Consumer Research, 9(1), 537-
541. 
[14]
 
Kelley, T. 2005. 
The ten faces of innovation
, New York: Currency 
Doubleday. 
[15]
 
Laanti, M., Outi, S. and Abrahamsson, P. 2011. “Agile methods rapidly 
replacing traditional methods at Nokia: A survey of opinions of agile 
transformation,” Information and Software Technology, 53, 3, 276-286. 
[16]
 
Oster, G. 2008. “Derailing design thinking,” International Journal of 
Leadership Studies. 4(1), 107–115. 
[17]
 
Oster, G. 2008. “Divining the need: compensatory behavior of 
customers,” Regent Global Business Review, 2(2), 14-18. 
[18]
 
Oster, G., & Gandolfi, F. 2008. “Innovation during an era of 
downsizing,” Review of International Comparative Management, 9(5), 
125-145. 
[19]
 
Paulson, L. D. 2001. “Adapting methodologies for doing software 
right,” IT Professional, 3(4), 13-15. 
[20]
 
Petersen, K., & Wohlin, C. 2010. “The effect of moving from a plan-
driven to an incremental software development approach with agile 
practices,” Empirical Software Engineering, 15(6), 654-693. 
[21]
 
Petersen, K., Wohlin, C., & Baca, D. 2009. “The waterfall model in 
large-scale development,” In Product-Focused Software Process 
Improvement (pp. 386-400). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
[
22]
 
P
ikkarainen, M., Salo, O., Kuusela, R., & Abrahamsson, P. 2012. 
“Strengths and barriers behind the successful agile deployment—
insights from the three software intensive companies in Finland,” 
Empirical software engineering, 17(6), 675-702. 
[23]
 
Savaneviciene, A., Stankeviciute, Z. 2013. “Relabeling or new 
approach: Theoretical insights regarding personnel management and 
human resource management,” Engineering Economics, 24(3), 234-243. 
[24]
 
Slovic, P., & Peters, E., & Finucane, M.L., & MacGregor, D.G. 2005. 
“Affect, Risk, and Decision Making,” Health Psychology, 24, S35–S40. 
[25]
 
Standish Group International. 1995. Chaos Report 
[26]
 
von Krogh, G., Ichijo, K., & Nonaka, I. 2000. 
Enabling knowledge 
creation
. Oxford, UK: Oxford Press. 
[27]
 
Wagner, E. L., Newell, S., & Ramiller, N. 2013. “The Structuring of 
Freedom in Agile Development,” 
[28]
 
West, D., & Grant, T. 2010. “Agile development: Mainstream adoption 
has changed agility,” Forrester Research. 
[29]
 
Williams, L. 2010. “Agile software development methodologies and 
practices,” Advances in Computers, 80, 1-44.
 
86