 Ten Tales of Positive Change 
Aaron Sanders 
Rally Software Development Corp. 
3333 Walnut Street 
Boulder, Colorado 80301, USA 
aaron@rallydev.com 
 
Abstract
—Is it possible to make a difference? Or at least enjoy 
the interactions more? These tales relate successful attempts at 
making improvements. These are my experiences working in 
software shops and using Agile methods. 
Software engineering; Process planning; Best practices; 
Knowledge management; Organizational aspects 
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Suddenly I find myself at home. The last thing I 
remember doing was driving away from my current struggle 
at work and wondering, what can I do to clean up this mess? 
Shutting the door, putting away my keys and walking to the 
table I think about successful 
attempts from the past. It’s 
easier for me to remember the challenges and dwell on what 
could have been. Replaying the drama and mistakes is not 
helping and so I refocus on the wins, no matter how small. 
When did I feel like an improvement was made, and why? 
I reflect over my past six years of work in different Agile 
environments. The time starts at StorePerform, where I 
created software with a team using Extreme Programming 
(XP) development and Scrum. After that I went to a start-up 
called vianet.travel to work as both an XP developer and 
ScrumMaster. Then I moved on to Yahoo to be an Agile 
Coach; run some training, and embed on teams as a 
ScrumMaster. After that I trained and coached as an 
independent consultant. Now I am at Rally, working as an 
Agile Coach. 
Ten tales stand out for me and what follows is a 
recounting of them. They are described mostly in the order in 
which they occurred, from my time working in Agile 
cultures. The tales are about:  
•
 
Creating the Motivation to Pair Program 
•
 
Staying Focused at Stand-up 
•
 
Keeping Progress High and Questions Low 
•
 
Reassigning Points to Validate Estimation 
•
 
Admitting to the Real Date 
•
 
Dealing With an Overwhelming Amount of 
Work 
•
 
Gauging the Rate of Progress 
•
 
Figuring Out How to Construct Teams  
•
 
Finding Predictability in the Velocity 
•
 
Allowing for Cross-Functional Teams 
II.
 
C
REATING THE 
M
OTIVATION TO 
P
AIR 
P
ROGRAM
 
My first immersion in to Scrum occurred at 
StorePerform. We produced workflow solutions for big box 
retail stores. The company retained an external coach on 
contract and we attended training, which eased and 
accelerated the transition. Throughout the time we practiced 
unit testing and had a continuous integration server running. 
A.
 
Keeping the Build Running 
Code coverage for us ran at about 30-35% and we had a 
company policy to keep it over 80%.
 
We used a code review 
system to ensure, among other things, that unit tests were 
created.  
The team agreed that fixing a broken build was highest 
priority. The person responsible for breaking the build was 
awarded a stuffed GIANTmicrobes® “macro virus” toy to 
display at their desk and wait to award to the next person 
who broke the build.
  
A successful build meant the code compiled and ran. 
Success also meant that all unit, integration and functional 
tests passed. 
B.
 
Applying Test Driven Development 
Our manager entered work one morning and called us in 
to a room. He pulled copies of Kent Beck’s book “Test 
Driven Development” (TDD) out of a large box sitting next 
to him and handed us each a copy. Our assignment for the 
day, he told us, was to go home and read it. Tomorrow we’d 
be coming back as test-first developers. It took awhile for it 
to sink in that he was telling us to go home and read a book, 
but we did. 
We assembled the next day and discussed the book with 
our manager and each other. The conversation was moving 
at a pace that made me believe I wasn’t alone in having read 
the book. We agreed to test-drive any code we created and 
discussed what we would need to do to support that kind of 
work. This would increase our code coverage, we hoped, and 
using TDD would help us to hit the 80% company policy.  
C.
 
Getting the Same Result 
After a couple of months, our code coverage was still 
running in the mid-30% range. At the time we worked 
mostly solo and after completing a big effort, we would 
schedule a code review with a lead engineer.  
2011 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4370-3/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2011.47181 D.
 
Creating the Motivation to Pair 
Now that we were apparently adopting XP practices, a 
couple of us felt like trying pair programming. Our manager 
supported the concept. We asked around if people wanted to 
pair and most were not interested. A big concern raised from 
a couple of the leads was that tasks would take double the 
person hours to complete. Some developers also believed 
that it would slow them down from cranking out work. 
The merits of pairing were discussed as we continued to 
work in front of small, low-resolution monitors that were not 
well liked by and of us. Our accounting department saw 
high-resolution monitors as too costly for everyone to have 
one of their own. I asked my manager about the feasibility of 
approving just one. Could we justify it as a low-cost way to 
experiment with pair programming and manage the risk of 
work slow-down for the team? I hoped that folks on the 
fence would try pairing as the larger, higher-resolution 
monitors were so coveted by every one of us.   
Accounting approved the purchase request swiftly. Upon 
the monitor’s arrival, we set it up in a small room where 
nobody currently worked. The room we chose had a wall of 
windows that looked in to the building across the street from 
us. The room was large enough to accommodate two, or 
three, work areas. Setting up the workstation drew curious 
on-lookers who were told that anyone could work in front of 
the new monitor. The privilege required finding someone to 
pair with. 
E.
 
Practicing Pair Programming 
Those of us who were interested created a schedule, with 
three two-hour pairing sessions each day. The demand for 
the sessions grew and pretty soon our manager was able to 
get a second monitor approved. We switched up the pairs 
each session and among four of us we had six pairs. We 
could all pair with each other every day. 
Within another quarter we added two more large 
monitors. Some days our manager would also rotate through 
the pairs. We switched rooms so that most people could pair 
in the large room. The smaller room now became the space 
where people worked solo when desired. 
F.
 
The Results of Pairing 
We found that code coverage increased every Sprint. We 
agreed to increase coverage by 3% a Sprint, instead of failing 
to obtain 80% coverage, and usually exceeded that amount. 
Pair programmers were not awarding each other the “macro 
virus” toy. 
The time spent on task did not double as speculated and 
our velocity increased. We noticed a drop in bugs along with 
an increase in code coverage. Other code measures improved 
for our team, and it was getting quiet around the foosball 
table.  
Work was becoming fun for us and we didn’t need to 
play games for distraction. We did have to start enforcing 
breaks at the end of a two-hour session. Time was flying by 
as we worked intensely together and the breaks helped us 
keep energy levels high during the day. 
Code coverage passed 80% and that level was added to 
the definition of a successful build. Less than one bug per 
week was being produced, and we fixed most bugs within a  
Sprint. We changed our working agreements again. We had 
fun building a system together that became easier to create 
and maintain. 
III.
 
S
TAYING 
F
OCUSED AT 
S
TAND
-
UP
 
Having learned what Scrum and XP could do; I 
convinced the next organization I joined to try Scrum, with 
me as the ScrumMaster. The company built a reservation 
booking and payment engine called vianet.travel. Small 
proprietors with manual bookkeeping used it to advertise and 
rent out their places to people on holiday. 
A.
 
Stand-ups Take Too Long 
Splitting my time as a developer and ScrumMaster, I was 
as likely to join in the conversation during stand-up. Stand-
ups took too long, where we did more talking than we 
should.  Sometimes it took us over an hour for everyone to 
answer the three questions. 
B.
 
Noting Who Speaks 
Instead of employing a draconian measure like using a 
stopwatch and forcing time limits for each person, I decided 
to listen for someone responding to another person 
answering the questions. I paid attention to people who 
spoke for a long time. I jotted down in a notebook the names 
of those who spoke and what seemed to be the heart of the 
issue. 
Nobody at stand-up said anything about my note taking. 
As I wrote, sometimes help was offered to the person 
speaking. Sometimes the team had moved on to the next 
person before I had finished writing it down. Otherwise, I 
waited for a pause and would remark that I had made note of 
who was conversing, and wondered if we could move on to 
the next person. At the end of stand-up I went through who 
was having conversations, in case people needed to follow 
up. 
C.
 
Finding the Purpose of Stand-Ups 
Stand-up time decreased to less than 15 minutes and most 
people would leave to do whatever was next on their list for 
the day. Occasionally some people would find themselves in 
a follow-on session. These optional sessions allowed us to 
end on time, with the opportunity for some people to get 
back to work, while others could continue discussing the 
plan if needed.  
Before long, I added a blocker board next to our task 
board. Sticky notes replaced my notebook for recording the 
impediments that came up in the discussion. At the end of 
stand-up I answered the three questions as a developer. As 
ScrumMaster I went through the new impediments raised 
and gave people a chance to verify or add others. I then 
reported on what impediments were removed yesterday, 
which ones were being worked today and what was in the 
way of removing impediments.  
182 D.
 
Clearing Impediments 
This visibility allowed others to help me when they 
could, since I was splitting my time between ScrumMaster 
and developer. Seeing the impediments on a board allowed 
management to volunteer help with impediments that we as a 
team were unable to remove. Highlighting what was in our 
way made us want to remove them faster. Agreeing on what 
was in our way and how to remove it let us have the courage 
to attack the problem while respecting each other the entire 
time. 
IV.
 
K
EEPING 
P
ROGRESS 
H
IGH AND 
Q
UESTIONS 
L
OW
 
A.
 
Everyone Wants to Know Status 
Vianet established a cadence around Scrum and soon our 
customer, stakeholders, executives and others would ask how 
the current Sprint was going. The people asking questions 
numbered more than we had on the team. The questioning 
increased as a Sprint neared its end.  
I asked if people could hold off with the questions until 
the end of the Sprint. It had become too much of a distraction 
for the team. 
B.
 
Designing Good Retrospectives 
A friend suggested that I read “Agile Retrospectives” by 
Esther Derby and Diana Larsen. The book was 
recommended to me to help weave activities together to get 
the most out of a retrospective. In reading it I noticed that the 
effect could be amplified by tying retrospectives together for 
another level of build-up, from one retrospective to the next. 
It’s suggested by most Agile Coaches to only put in a 
couple of hours to prep for the Sprint review. I would invest 
up to three hours preparing for a good Sprint retrospective 
and another hour and a half to facilitate. I spent some more 
time writing up summary notes to help us remember 
decisions, and to help me design the next Sprint’s 
retrospective. 
C.
 
Communicating Results 
At the end of the Sprint we would have our review and 
take feedback from our customer and others. When asked 
how we thought the Sprint went we could usually point out 
that we had once again met our commitment and if not, a 
quick explanation why not.  
Further comments from the team, we insisted, would 
have to wait until we could have our retrospective. We 
decided in our retrospective what information we wanted to 
share out, which was mostly conclusions and next steps. 
D.
 
Better Interactions 
Our team constantly improved from how we practiced 
retrospectives and we made a habit of relating afterwards 
how we felt about the Sprint. While we included feedback 
from Sprint review into our planning, we would also explain 
our plan for improvement that came out of the retrospective.  
The questions dissipated and we could work without as 
much distraction. This allowed us to meet our commitment 
and celebrate it in the Sprint review. 
V.
 
R
EASSIGNING 
P
OINTS TO 
V
ALIDATE 
E
STIMATION
 
A.
 
Keeping a Good Agile Estimation Practice 
As part of our Scrum practice at vianet, we spent time as 
a team tending to the Product Backlog. We played planning 
poker and kept all our stories sized. We knew the entire size 
of the Product Backlog. Every Sprint we looked ahead and 
refined some User Stories. 
Our velocity was stable and we could predict what User 
Stories would fit in a Sprint. The total size of the Product 
Backlog and the number of Sprints left projected that we 
would not hit the date promised to the customer.  
B.
 
Verifying the Estimates 
The Product Owner started to question our estimates. He 
neither questioned the technique itself nor the merits of 
relatively sizing items, just the numbers we produced from 
this estimation technique. 
We decided to spend a day with the Product Owner 
looking over the backlog. We looked at some of the work 
we’d finished to help calibrate sizes, and triangulated it with 
the items not yet started. Some of our User Story estimates 
changed. We sliced some of our User Stories thinner and 
even removed a couple. The Product Owner was convinced 
that our estimates were sound. 
When we finished and totaled up the points, it was nearly 
the same as the beginning number. We learned that keeping 
the backlog sized is priceless and that reassigning points is 
useless. The total size of the Product Backlog had not moved 
a significant amount from all of our work, although we now 
were intimately familiar with it.  
C.
 
Time for a Talk 
This didn’t help the fact that we all recognized that we 
needed to have a tough discussion with the customer.  We 
couldn’t deliver on the date we promised with the features 
they wanted. 
VI.
 
A
DMITTING TO THE 
R
EAL 
D
ATE
 
We established a trusting relationship at vianet with our 
customer. We invited them to each Sprint review and 
planning ceremonies. They checked out and deployed our 
code from our servers in to their environment. 
A.
 
Negotiating the Date 
It was the end of fall and our customer said they needed 
the work finished by the start of spring. Everyone wanted 
some buffer in case something delayed deployment and we 
agreed to finish development by the middle of winter. This 
date was written in to the contract drawn up by lawyers and 
signed by both sides. The rate that we were now building the 
183 product at had our team estimating we would have 
something out after the date in the contract. 
B.
 
Inspecting Progress 
Our customer attended reviews, inspected progress by 
checking out and building the latest code at any time, and 
saw our responsiveness from requests in planning. It was 
because of this interaction that when we told them, they 
understood that we had more work to do than could be 
delivered by the contract date. Everyone believed the data 
they were seeing. 
C.
 
Working Closer with Our Customer 
The customer then upped our trust in them. They told us 
that the intention was to go live in the early summer. Our 
velocity and Product Backlog size showed that we would 
finish most of the work by the end of spring. The customer 
worked closer with us, providing frequent feedback on the 
direction. 
We worked together deciding on what to build next. 
People from both companies traveled between the two sites. 
Our Product Owner seemed calmer. Everyone understood 
clearly what to do and we launched within the window 
predicted. The customer eventually acquired vianet. 
VII.
 
D
EALING 
W
ITH AN 
O
VERWHELMING 
A
MOUNT OF 
W
ORK
 
I located a job as an Agile Coach working at Yahoo! 
headquarters in Sunnyvale, CA.  I worked with a group of 
internal coaches, offering both training and coaching for the 
nearly 500 teams that were experimenting with the Scrum 
framework inside the organization. My directive there was to 
observe teams in action and offer help when asked. 
A.
 
Observing Team Behavior 
Pretty soon I was invited by a Product Owner to observe 
his team’s stand-up. This team sensed that something wasn’t 
right with their Scrum implementation and he was seeking 
advice. They had also recently lost their ScrumMaster and 
people were wondering what might happen to replace him. 
Walking through the buildings from where I worked, I 
arrived a little early to the meeting and soon about 20 people 
filled the conference room. When everyone got there we 
quickly went around the room and everyone said something 
about what they were doing.  
The tone most people used sounded like a status report. I 
couldn’t detect a common thread woven through what people 
talked about. I looked around and did not see a Sprint task 
board anywhere. The meeting lasted for only 15 minutes and 
then everyone immediately exited the room. 
B.
 
Investigating the Situation 
Asking around afterwards I found that the information 
stored electronically was out of date, having been maintained 
by the ScrumMaster who had left. Nobody was really thrilled 
with the electronic tool, something swiftly put together 
internally to support one of the first Scrum teams. Although 
many teams used the free tool it was no longer supported nor 
maintained by anyone. 
The Product Owner, a couple of managers, two leads and 
myself discussed an approach. We concluded that it would 
be best for me to embed as ScrumMaster for a while, perhaps 
a couple Sprints or more. This would allow me close 
inspection of what was going on. It would give the team 
some time to find a replacement and for me to hopefully 
work with that person. 
Observing a couple more stand-ups I found it very 
difficult to discern what the expected outcome was of all this 
work that the team was doing. I spoke with people about 
how many tasks they currently worked on, and what those 
tasks were.  
Most people worked on more than one Product Backlog 
item at a time. Some people worked on several items 
concurrently. Nothing had been deployed to production for 
over a quarter now. There were around 600 open bugs, and 
technical debt mounted with more being opened than closed. 
C.
 
Exposing the Work 
After discovering all of this, I arrived at a stand-up with a 
pile of sticky notes. I passed them out and asked people to 
write down what they were working on, one task per sticky 
note, and to put how many hours remained. I then asked 
people to initial their sticky notes and place them on the 
white board. We clustered tasks together and wrote down 
what Product Backlog Items they belonged to. The resulting 
sticky notes covered two 4’x8’ whiteboards on one wall and 
one more board on the opposite side of the room. 
There was a shared concern that the team worked on too 
many items. Seeing it hanging on the wall all around them 
convinced everyone. The team decided not to take on any 
more work until the current work in progress diminished 
significantly. The Product Owner prioritized the list and 
provided focus for the team as most people had tasks for 
more than one item. 
D.
 
The Effect of Work Limits 
We calculated how many items finished weekly. Looking 
at this number along with team size helped us establish a 
limit for how many items could be in flight at any time. 
Before long, the team finished one Product Backlog Item 
every two to three days and deployed two to three features 
per week. Hours were no longer tracked. The bug count went 
from close to 600 to several dozen and eventually down to 
zero bugs open by the end of a Sprint. 
The highly visible task board continued to be modified 
by us and now fit on a wheeled 3’x5’whiteboard and stood 
where people worked. The Product Owner was happy with 
what he saw and I caught him once hugging the board. 
Having the work visible resulted in better preparation and 
understanding by the team of the flow of features desired. 
VIII.
 
G
AUGING THE 
R
ATE OF 
P
ROGRESS
 
An interesting pattern was revealed to me. I noticed it in 
my embedded team and with other teams who asked for help. 
Product Backlogs were not being estimated.  
184 Teams were not estimating in points, days, nor even time. 
It is unclear what led to this lack of discipline. A 
consequence of teams not being able to say when something 
might be done resulted in other people setting deadlines for 
those teams. 
A.
 
Playing the Team Estimation Game 
Demand for coaching was high and we were always 
being called in to situations. In looking around if I found a 
backlog with hundreds of items and no estimates, I would try 
to schedule a session for playing the Team Estimation Game. 
To play the game I would print out the Product Backlog first 
and then spend time cutting out each item. I would then place 
8.5 by 11 paper around a table with the planning poker 
numbers on them. 
Handing out portions of the backlog to each team 
member, we would start the session by silently placing items 
into the corresponding point bucket. The bigger the bucket, 
the higher the number on a piece of paper taped to the table. 
Team members were free to move items from one bucket to 
another. The team kept moving some items around and we 
noted these for estimating with planning poker later. 
B.
 
Consequences of the Game 
The intent of playing team estimation is to quickly size 
an entire backlog. These teams went through over one 
hundred items in less than an hour. The technique is not as 
thorough as planning poker. Done silently, team estimation 
doesn’t invite the conversation found in planning poker. It 
does allow for a baseline sizing of the backlog. Team 
estimation can establish an historical base line velocity for a 
team if they estimate finished work as well. 
Consensus is established quickly on the really big items 
and on the volatile items that need refining before they are 
ready for Sprint planning. It helps a team gauge the rate of 
progress and helps everyone conclude when to expect work 
to be done instead of forcing dates on people. 
IX.
 
F
IGURING 
O
UT 
H
OW TO 
C
ONSTRUCT 
T
EAMS
 
After the Agile coaching group shut down at Yahoo!, I 
decided to take a chance at being an independent coach. I 
quickly found work with a network management group. The 
business unit consisted of over 
70 people, mostly working in 
San Jose and Bangalore. The Vice President of the 
technology group wanted to “burn all the ships”, and hoped 
this no retreat attitude would help the team convert to Scrum 
within a quarter. I spent over nine months with the business 
unit. 
A.
 
Creating the Initial Teams 
To begin Scrum, the managers created three large teams 
along architectural boundaries and HR reporting lines. Each 
team was around 15-20 people. Immediately, integration 
issues in the system and between the teams showed 
themselves. It was the norm that for one feature, at least one 
person from each of the teams would need to work on it. 
Stand-ups were taking a long time and I would see the same 
person in multiples. 
B.
 
Using Story Themes for Organizing Teams 
I noticed that the Product Backlog was organized into 
themes and this gave me an idea. At the next planning 
meeting I tried an experiment. I wrote down each theme on a 
separate piece of paper. At Sprint planning I held one up and 
exclaimed, “If you work primarily in the area of the sign I’m 
holding, come stand over here.”. As people gathered, I 
handed them the sign, moved a few paces and held up the 
next piece of paper with another theme on it, repeating the 
process. 
People collected in groups of two or three and as I got to 
the end of the list of themes I asked them to look around. Did 
they see any other groups and/or themes they worked with 
closely? People shuffled around a little and before long, we 
had six teams of around eight to ten people each. 
There was one holdout group and once that was settled, 
we had a few people that still hadn’t decided where they 
belonged. Finding them a place required a little management 
intervention. I then asked each team to think of a name, so 
that we could continue Sprint planning using the new names 
for our new teams. 
I asked the teams if we could try this experiment for a 
Sprint and if necessary, people could switch teams in the 
next Sprint. A balance was reached between steady, 
persistent teams who felt comfortable in the code, and the 
capability to move people around to share knowledge. 
C.
 
Benefits of the Te
am Restructuring 
Within a quarter continuous integration was in place. 
Another quarter after that and each check-in produced a disk 
image. The image included the operating system, all 
necessary third party applications, and packaged code the 
team built, installed on an appliance, which was then 
rebooted. Within another quarter all tests passed with each 
build and unit tests covered over 90% of the code base. 
X.
 
F
INDING 
P
REDICTABILITY IN THE 
V
ELOCITY
 
Being an independent contractor is exciting yet 
somewhat lonely, having to support myself and find every 
opportunity. I look to constantly improve my craft by finding 
others to collaborate with and have found those needs met by 
joining Rally. I now concentrate on improving my coaching 
and training practice with other coaches. We have a support 
system around us and I get to work with people who have 
different strengths and skills. 
One of the clients I work with is a networking company. 
One of the teams I worked with had a difficult time 
establishing a consistent velocity. Forecasting when a release 
might be ready for system testing was difficult for this group. 
This holds back other groups who have to integrate with 
them at the system level. 
A.
 
Leaving Defects Unsized 
The Product Backlog and historical velocity information 
showed me that the team was not sizing defects. When 
inquiring why that decision was put in to practice the answer 
indicated that story points were seen as a measure of value. 
After all, the team is only credited with the point value of a 
185 User Story when the Product Owner has accepted the work 
as done. 
The group sees defects as having no value and show that 
the original story was not really completed. We discussed if 
User Stories can be in an accepted state when defects exist 
for them. We talked about how to apply a formula to 
recalculate velocity and accommodate for defects. It seemed 
to the team to be a lot of work with little reward. 
When prompted, the team came to the conclusion that 
defects looked a lot like User Stories and that they could see 
the relative size of them in comparison to those stories. 
Someone noted that the expected/actual language of a defect 
matched up well to acceptance criteria. 
We discussed what makes up the size of a story, like how 
complex it is, and how much uncertainty we have about it. 
User Story size seemed to us to be correlated to the amount 
of effort the team needed to invest to finish a story. I 
admitted to having thought about story points as a value 
metric and had changed my mind, I now thought that they 
related closer to the cost of an item. 
The team talked about what they believed and concluded 
that it would be worthwhile to try estimating the size of 
defects and see what happened. They already met weekly to 
triage them. Defects were stack ranked with the rest of the 
Product Backlog. It seemed to the team that it would require 
minimal effort to size them as well. 
B.
 
The Effect of Sizing Defects 
Velocity stabilized with the team keeping all the items 
including defects in the Product Backlog relatively sized. 
The total point increase of the Product Backlog confirmed 
what most people thought; the projected release date was 
further out than first promised. 
The predictable velocity allowed this team to now 
reserve a certain amount of point capacity to invest in 
automation and other infrastructure. Preventing defects 
instead of merely fixing them reduced their cost of feature 
deployment. This could be seen by them in different ways, 
such as the reduction of defects backlogged and less time 
spent in triage. 
Understanding velocity showed data to help the team 
decide if more features had to be cut to meet the date, if the 
date would have to move, or if more people needed to be 
hired. In the end the organization acted on all of these 
options. 
XI.
 
A
LLOWING FOR 
C
ROSS
-F
UNCTIONAL 
T
EAMS
 
A home entertainment provider called me in to facilitate 
User Story writing followed by release planning. The 
business unit had not tried either activity before. Leadership 
had been replaced and the new General Manager and Vice 
President of Technology decided to invest in the group’s 
burgeoning Scrum effort. 
The organization followed a structured work breakdown 
approach with tasks functionally derived. People were 
willing to approach product definition in an Agile way and 
wanted to experiment with User Stories. We discussed the 
vertical nature of Stories and that teams were formed 
orthogonally, based on the architectural stack. A few people 
pointed out that teams were split by functional area. 
The group understood that co-located and dedicated 
teams fit the Scrum model. Yet voices grew stronger that 
teams were not set up to autonomously deliver end-to-end 
features. We talked about the merits of the cross-functional 
team and folks insisted that the group could not afford 
another reorganization. One of the Vice Presidents had 
declared that no “dotted line” relationships could be formed 
to create virtual teams. She found that such an approach 
diluted the commitment of individuals and made the process 
opaque. 
We got in too some passionate discussions over the once 
taboo subject. I continued on with Story writing. We later 
revisited the team structure with executives prior to release 
planning. The decision to not allow virtual teams stayed in 
place. Release planning was put on hold for about two 
months and then they asked me back to finish. The VP had 
relented, and kept her job.  
When I got back, the business unit could work in a 
matrixed organizational structure.
 
Virtual
 
Scrum teams had 
been created without going through another Human 
Resources led reorganization. We were able to proceed with 
release planning. The teams were organized where they 
could implement the features independent from each other 
yet stay coordinated. This helped increase their production 
rate while increasing the quality of features as well. 
XII.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
What do all these tales have in common? They started 
out as an idea that led to a small change. These changes 
could be implemented easily, cheaply and quickly when 
there was complete buy-in from everyone that the change 
was necessary and for the better. 
Of course, I didn’t always find myself in a better place. 
One result had us building a product that became attractive 
for an acquisition, while our related labor cost did not. Many 
of us lost our jobs to promote the sale. Another consequence 
of success was having a senior executive in our organization 
determine that formally sponsoring Agile was no longer 
needed. We were invited to look for work in other parts of 
the organization for awhile, or had to leave the company 
entirely. 
Yet there are times when I did help make things better. 
The best improvements I’ve been a part of happened 
gradually, required patience, and added up over time. This 
helps remind me that I can improve my current situation. I 
need to help the team see the problem clearly and suggest 
ways to validate proposed solutions.  
If we have a shared perspective of the current situation, 
then we can agree on how to make it better. We will need to 
check in frequently, and constantly re-validate the 
understanding and approach. 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENTS
 
I would like to thank Erica Young, Ken Clyne, Ronica 
Roth, Ann Konkler, Bob Gower, Jeff Patton and Ben Carey 
for their comments, advice, and encouragement. 
186