 The Confidence of Agile Assessment Methods in the Context of Software Process 
Improvement 
 
Célio Santana 
Universidade Federal Rural 
de Pernambuco, Unidade 
Acadêmica de Garanhuns. 
Garanhuns. Brazil.  
Celio.santana@gmail.com
 
Cristine Gusmão 
Universidade Federal de 
Pernambuco, Núcleo de 
Telesaúde (NUTES). 
Recife, Brazil.  
cristine.gusmao@nutes.ufp
e.br
 
Danilo Caetano 
 Universidade Federal de 
Pernambuco, Centro de 
Informática (Cin). Recife, 
Brazil.  
dcms@cin.ufpe.br
 
 
Alexandre Vasconcelos 
 Universidade Federal de 
Pernambuco, Centro de 
Informática (Cin). Recife, 
Brazil.  
amlv@cin.ufpe.br
 
 
 
 
Abstract
— with the advent of CMMI in the late 1990s, software 
companies tried to use a kind of score to rank themselves in the 
market. Being a CMMI level five company for a long time 
represented the epitome of highly qualified company. This 
phenomenon is also emerging in the agile software 
development with the emergence of methods such as Nokia or 
comparative test agility. This paper presents an analysis of how 
these methods are placed in the context of agile software 
development and its contribution to the improvement of 
software process in the same context from a case study 
developed in real companies.  
Keywords-Agile Assessment Methods; Software Process 
Improvement; Agile Processes. 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
The success of the Capability Maturity Model for 
software, called from now SW-CMM, at the end of the 
1990s was not only obtained by the proposed improvement 
of process maturity, but mainly because a particular 
company could assign a score to your own process. 
This score was relative to the level of maturity that the 
process of an organization could achieve, which was the 
most immature level called the initial or also called level 1, 
and the more mature level known as the "Optimization" or 
Level 5 [1]. 
From then, any company could plan its process 
improvement toward SW-CMM maturity level five. This 
improvement could be achieved gradually since the division 
of the process in about twenty key process areas (KPAs) and 
each could be improved in a manner almost independent of 
the others [1]. 
However, more than one mechanism for Improving the 
Software Process, the score of a process of a company in the 
CMM has become a criterion for classification. And the 
reference of this model was so strong that a company SW-
CMM Level five was considered better than a SW-CMM 
Level three for almost all market segments without the need 
for other indicators [2].  
For agile development to first draft evaluation was given 
by Paulk (2001) where an assessment was made of an agile 
method called Extreme Programming and its partial 
adherence to the SW-CMM model [3]. 
Using traditional models such as SW-CMM, lack the 
needed reference information for agile based Software 
development efficiency evaluation [4]. 
One problem is that, even if the traditional assessment is 
often seen as an opposite to the agile thinking, the agile 
software development should be based on the best software 
development practices. Simplifying does not mean not 
documented or not existence processes [1, 5]. 
Looking at the context of Software Process Improvement 
(SPI) where Salo (2007) states that agile software 
development provides new possibilities for conducting SPI, 
which may well provide grounds for meeting some of the 
central challenges of traditional SPI [6].  
Agile software development provides a highly 
untraditional approach to SPI, in which the process 
improvement knowledge of software developers and 
software development teams is acknowledged and valued. In 
this context using traditional models of assessment could not 
consider these aspects [6]. 
Thus, Agile Assessment does not need to be a complex 
evaluation including the full analysis of CMMI base 
practices. It should be light-weight and based on agile 
principles, such as face-to-face communication, rapid 
feedback to interviewees and organization management and 
include the simple documentation [7]. 
The first documented clue for an agile assessment was 
given by Boehm and Turner (2003) [8] and since then other 
agile approaches to assessment have been suggested. 
However, the agile community not seems interested in 
the idea of assign a score in the capacity of both individual 
and teams because this behavior decreases collaboration and 
increases competition [8]. 
The motivation of this research is to investigate the role 
of the Agile Assessment Models (AAS) considering the 
context of software process improvement in industry. Since 
there is no interest to determine a rating for comparative 
purposes, then the research question being asked is how 
these models can assist in improving the process in agile 
development. 
The objective is to determine how the AAS Models help 
teams and organizations to improve their processes. To this 
end, case studies will be conducted to collect empirical 
evidence on real organizations using agile methods in their 
application. 
2011 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4370-3/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2011.38135 After this introductory section, the section 2 explores 
SPI,
 
the section 3 explores the AAS, the section 4 shows the 
research structure, in section 5 final considerations are 
exposed. 
II.
 
SOFTWARE
 
PROCESS
 
IMPROVEMENT
 
(SPI) 
A software process can be defined as the sequence of 
steps required to develop or maintain software aiming at 
providing the technical and management framework for 
applying methods, tools, and people to the software task [9].  
The SPI aims providing software development 
organizations with mechanisms for evaluating their existing 
processes, identifying possibilities for improving as well as 
implementing and evaluating the impact of improvements 
[10]. 
Traditionally, the ultimate goal of SPI in organizations is 
to provide a Return on Investment (ROI) for the organization 
through the improvement activities yielding more money 
than is spent on them [11].  
ROI has been reported for various SPI achievements, 
such as improved efficiency of the development process and 
reduction of total software costs, increased quality of the end 
product, higher predictability of cost and schedule, and 
increased level of reuse [12]. 
The goal of the traditional software process is to provide 
high predictability, stability, and repeatability using highly 
managed and quantitatively monitored software development 
processes. On the other hand, agile principles highlight the 
need for the software process to be flexible, to be able to 
rapidly respond to the constant changes and context specific 
needs of software development [6]. 
As a result, traditional software development emphasizes 
up-front contract negotiations where the requirements, cost 
and schedule of the product development are fixed and the 
end product will be delivered at the end of the project 
lifecycle.  
In this mode of software development, traditionally, 
extensive documentation and quantitative monitoring of the 
product development process plays a central role while. The 
principles and practices of agile software development, in 
turn, address the constant changes. [6]. 
It should be emphasized that Agile SPI still intended to 
improve organizational indicators and not just fit better to 
Scrum or XP or any other method chosen. That is, reduce 
bureaucracy although is an agile solution it is not the main 
result expected by Agile SPI. 
III.
 
A
GILE 
A
SSESSMENT 
M
ETHODS 
(AAS) 
Boehm and Turner [8] present five factors that influence 
the performance of an agile team, these factors are critically, 
personnel, dynamism, culture and project size. Although the 
recognition of these factors is a good starting point for agility 
evaluation, the authors does not address any specifics 
regarding the application of an agile method. After this, the 
following AAS  were proposed in chronological order. 
A.
 
Assessing Agility 
Lappo & Henry [13] in 2004 proposed the concept of 
measurable goal that is different from the metric itself. So 
when you set goals for the process and these targets are set 
by the company is perceived an improvement-oriented 
approach that does not rank the teams, but have quantitative 
targets from which to arrive. 
B.
 
Agile Assessment Approach 
Pikkarainen & Passoja [7] in 2005 proposed an agile 
approach to evaluate the goals using agile practices in agile 
or traditional projects. The Agile Assessment approach helps 
organizations to find the best suitable agile practices to 
improve a specific aspect of the software development work.  
C.
 
Nokia Test 
In 2005, Bas Vodde was coaching Scrum teams at Nokia 
in Finland and developed the Nokia test based on Scrum 
practices. The test was administered to teams in order to 
assess whether the team members were with the basic 
knowledge of Scrum consolidated [14]. 
Each staff person should get a piece of paper and prepare 
to calculate the score of the nine questions on a scale of zero 
to ten, and at the end, you should make a mean score [15]. 
D.
 
Comparative Agility 
In 2007 Kenny Rubin and Mike Cohn proposed the 
Comparative Agility Survey which is based on a simple but 
powerful concept of determining how good a company is 
compared to its competitors. Rubin & Cohn assumed that 
agile teams and organizations are always looking to make the 
best compared to its competitors and its own past. The 
possible range score of this test is from -2 (worst) until 2 
(best) score [16]. 
E.
 
Others Approachs 
Other methods proposed in academia that were not 
deeply surveyed are: The Agile Hybrid Assessment Method 
for Automotive (AHAA) proposed in 2008 and used in 
automotive industry [17]. 
The Quantitative Agile Assessment [18], where each 
member of the team answer a questionnaire and one score 
are provided based on answers. 
In the industry we can also find the Agile Assessment
1
 
provided by the thoughtworks. 
IV.
 
T
HE RESEARCH 
S
TRUCTURE
 
The structure of the research is summarized in Table 1, 
where it is shown the methodological reference frame. The 
research is based on a case study to evaluate whether the 
AAS are linked to the results of organizational indicators. 
Other information about the research is showed in the 
following subsections. 
A.
 
Premises 
Since SPI is closed related to ROI, is expected that when 
occur these improvements, they are reflected in the final 
results of an organization. This means that a change in the 
process should not only bring a greater suitability to the 
method used, but also increased productivity, profitability, 
                                                          
 
1
 http://www.agileassessments.com/ 
136 return or any other social indicator that an organization 
should set as a goal. 
TABLE I. 
 
M
ETHODOLOGICAL 
F
RAME
 
 
Methodological Reference Frame 
 
Approach Method  Inductive 
Variables Nature  Quantitative 
Method of procedure Statistical 
Objective  Descritive and Causal 
Scope  Field Study (Case Study) 
 
This research will be taken as a premise that the 
improvements made in the way of developing software, 
when bring a better result in ROI, will also bring an increase 
in the classification of AAS. 
For example, a company that uses Scrum Nokia test 
evaluated by averaging 6.0, while performing an action of 
process improvement, not only will your Nokia Test average 
but also increased its productivity (or other indicator of 
ROI). 
Different companies will present different measures, 
different ways for measuring, different goals and, of course, 
different results. Whereas any action of SPI is reflected in 
the ROI and also on adherence to agile approach used, it is 
possible to perform a correlation between the two indicators 
and assess the impact of change scores on the method and 
the result obtained by the company. 
It is unlikely that changes in the way of developing 
software do not change the final results of the indicators of 
an organization, as well as their way of realizing the 
SCRUM or XP. 
The use of multiple metrics is not, a priori, a bias because 
it is not being investigated the influence of a specific 
indicator, but a Boolean relationship between the outcome in 
AAS and the indicator of ROI. That is, if the evaluation 
scores of the assessment increases, the ROI also increase? 
The AASs chosen are Nokia Test for scrum teams and 
Comparative Agility for XP hybrid scrum teams. These 
methods were chosen because they provide a final score, 0 to 
10 in Nokia Test and -2 to 2 in Comparative Agility. 
B.
 
Research Phases 
The first stage of the research is the selection of 
companies where the case study will be conducted. From 
there, will be identified which ones use scrum and which 
ones use other methods at the same time will be also 
identified the key organizational indicators of each company 
for future comparisons. 
The next phase is the preparation of forms that will be 
used in the data collections generated in each organization. 
This form must be unique for each company because it 
contains questions from the AAS chosen to that organization 
and its own indicators. 
The next phase will be the creation of spreadsheets that 
will assist in analyzing the data received of each company 
individually, as well the consolidated of data. 
C.
 
Data Collection 
The forms provided to the companies will be divided in 
two parts: The first contain the AAS questions, the quantity 
this part of the form can vary since that Nokia Test and 
Comparative Agility is answered by all the team. The second 
part contains the result of the indicators chosen to that 
organization. The number of this part of the form can vary 
based in how much teams produces that indicator, or how 
many time the indicator is collected. 
The monitoring of these companies will be longitudinal, 
and then the end of each cycle the companies must deliver 
the completed forms. However, companies presenting 
weekly cycle may not have significant changes in the 
outcome of AAS, which can result in the two parts of the 
form being delivered at different times. These cases will be 
considered baselines of time as may be monthly or 
bimonthly for companies who use longer cycles. 
D.
 
Data Analisys 
Data analysis will be performed using statistical 
correlation between the results of AAS and each indicator of 
the organization. Each individual analysis of this type 
represents the general results for an organization. The 
consolidation will take place from an analysis of quartiles to 
indicate the trend of results. 
V.
 
 FINAL CONSIDERATIONS
 
The result of this research is not intended to be definitive, 
but rather intends to open the discussion about the validity 
and necessity of the existence of such methods. Other results 
can be considered depending on the population of companies 
obtained. One is to evaluate the behavior of the AAS in 
CMMI companies that have a measuring system mounted 
and can incorporate the result of this evaluation as indicator. 
A.
 
Discussion of Results 
These results should be evaluated very carefully, first by 
not yet defined the selection criteria on which companies 
may or may not participate. But the main focus of the 
discussions of the results is inherent in the nature of the 
improvement process itself. 
First observation is to discard the idea that the best result 
of the AAS does not allow us to bring more process 
improvement and consequently an increase in ROI. This is 
false, in first plane, because both AAS which were chosen 
have a finite number of predefined questions that do not 
cover all aspects of agile are involved in a software 
organization 
And also because the authors of this paper believe that 
the relationship between AAS and the ROI in the context of 
software process improvement has not a linear relationship. 
In fact, there may be changes in the process which are so 
expensive that your return will be negative, i.e., the AAS 
score increases but there is a decrease in the final ROI.  
137 Thus, the best result is obtained at the vertex of the 
parabola, but which companies are left or right of the vertex, 
which are near or far significantly likely to impact the final 
result. Probably the outliers should be identified and the 
taken off the sample. 
B.
 
Implications for Research and Practice 
The implications of this work in the industry is able to 
provide organizations a quick way to assess their 
performance based on a quantitative indicator which is easy 
for be obtained. 
Thus, even the goal of AAS is not being the rank of 
teams and individuals they could be used as guides for 
software process improvement within organizations. 
In the research field the implication is to identify the 
usefulness of AAS as well as verification of alignment with 
SPI. The research result, whether positive or negative, open 
discussion about how it should be and what is the importance 
of a guide for improvements. 
C.
 
Limitations and Threats to Validity 
In addition to the points raised in the discussion of 
results, others threats to validity are raised from the selected 
method which is the case study. 
The first limitation aimed at this aspect is the no 
possibilities of indicating relation of cause-effect since the 
lack of control over the environment only allow describing 
the problem and not explain it. But this same phenomenon 
occurs only in real life industry, and it occurs in different 
way for each particular company, there is no other means to 
present a study about issue. 
 A threat identified is to validity is the amount of 
companies involved in the study. A number of small 
companies cannot bring the desired strength to the study. 
Another point also refers to the number of iterations 
evaluated in each organization. A small number of iterations 
can also disable the data of a particular company. 
Another threat comes from the validity of the statistical 
method used in this work. The lack of previous attempts 
prevents to determine which type of method is most 
appropriate for conduct the case study. So the proposition of 
using statistic correlations may not be the best choice.  
A final threat to validity identified is the way data are 
collected from the ASA. In the case of past events, important 
details may be forgotten. Another threat to validity is that 
these tests are susceptible to mood swings of an individual 
who may be positively or negatively influenced by external 
factors. 
D.
 
Future Work 
If the correlation between AAS results and ROI results 
provides a strong correlation, both, linear and non-linear 
regression could be performed to identify the true 
relationship between the two variables. It is expected that the 
relationship shows itself as a non-linear. These regressions 
will be performed in each company individually, and they 
must be consolidated as well. 
E.
 
Acknowledgments 
Célio Santana is a doctoral student at the Center of 
Informatics of the Federal University of Pernambuco where 
he receives the funding from the Brazilian National Research 
Council (CNPq), process #141156/2010-4. The authors 
thank CNPq for partially funding the participation in the 
Agile’2011 Conference. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
M. Paulk, B. Curtis, M. Chrissis, and C. Weber, “Capability Maturity 
Model for Software (Version 1.1)”. CMU/SEI-93-TR-024. Software 
Engineering Institute (SEI). February 1993. 
[2]
 
F. G. Wilkie, D. McFall,and F. McCaffery, “An Evaluation of CMMI 
Process Areas for Small- to Medium-sized Software Development 
Organizations.” In Software Process Improvement and Practice, Vol. 
10, 2 (2), 2005, pp. 189-201. 
[3]
 
M. C. Paulk, “Extreme Programming from a CMM Perspective.” In 
Software, Vol. 18, 6 (6), Nov. 2011, pp. 19-26. 
[4]
 
P. Kettunen and M. Laanti, "How to steer an embedded software 
project: tactics for selecting the software process model," Information 
and Software Technology, 2004. 
[5]
 
C. Vriens, "Certifying for CMM Level 2 and ISO9001 with 
XP@Scrum," presented at Agile Development Conference, 2003. 
[6]
 
O. Salo, “Enabling Software Process Improvement in Agile Software 
Development Teams and Organisations” PhD Thesis, Oulu, (2007). 
[7]
 
M. Pikkarainen, and U. Passoja, “An Approach for Assessing 
Suitability of Agile Solutions: A Case Study.” In: The proceedings of 
the Sixth International Conference on Extreme Programming and 
Agile Processes in Software Engineering. Sheffield University, UK. 
2005, pp. 171—179. 
[8]
 
B. Boehm and R. Turner, "Balancing Agility and Discipline," in 
Balancing Agility and Discipline – A Guide for the Perplexed: 
Addison Wesley, 2003. 
[9]
 
S. W. Humphrey, “Discipline for Software Engineering.” Addison 
Wesley Longman. 1995. 
[10]
 
W. A. Flor
ac, A. D. Ca
rleton, and J. R. Barnard, “Statistical Process 
Control: Analyzing a Space Shuttle Onboard Software Process”. 
IEEE Software, Vol. 17, 4 (4). July 2000, pp. 97-106. 
[11]
 
D. F. Rico, “ROI of Software Process Improvement: Metrics for 
Project Managers and Software Engineers.” J. Ross Publishing. 
Florida, U.S.A. 2004. 
[12]
 
H. Krasner, “The Payoff for Software Process Improvement: What it 
is and How to Get it.” In: Elements of Software Process Assessment 
& Improvement. El Emam, K.& Madhavji, N. H. (ed.). IEEE 
Computer Society, 1999, pp 113-130. 
[13]
 
P. Lappo and C. T. A. Henry, "Assessing Agility," presented at 
Extreme programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering, 
Germany, 2004. 
[14]
 
B. Vodde, “Nokia Networks and Agile Development.” In Proceedings 
of EuroMicro Conference. 2006. 
[15]
 
J. Sutherland, “Money for nothing: And your change for free – Agile 
Contracts.” In Proceedings of Agile Development Conference. 2008. 
[16]
 
M. Cohn, “Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using 
Scrum”.   Addison Wesley Longman. 2009. 
[17]
 
M. Pikkarainen, F. Mc Caffery and I. Richardson “AHAA - Agile, 
Hybrid Assessment Method for Automotive, Safety Critical SMEs”. 
International Conference on Software Engineering, Leipzig, 
Germany, 2008. 
[18]
 
J. Paul, “Quantitative Agile Assessment Method”. Master’s Thesis, 
university of Turku. 2008. 
 
 
 
138