 Software Development for Disney Animated Feature Film Production
Rajesh Sharma, Brian Wherry 
Walt Disney Animation Studios 
Burbank, USA 
rajesh.sharma@disney.com
, 
brian.wherry@disney.com
 
 
 
Abstract 
 
This report describes our experience in adapting 
the Scrum process to develop complex tools and user 
interfaces for use in co
mputer-generated (CG) 
animated feature film production at the Walt Disney 
Animation Studios. We describe the movie making 
process and how the need for tools with good 
interaction led us to adopt a Scrum-based iterative 
design and development process. 
1.
 
Introduction 
1.1
 
A primer on CG animated film production 
 
Feature-length animated film production is a 
complex endeavor that takes a crew of hundreds many 
years to complete.  The story is iterated upon by the 
director and story artists using ﬁstory reelsﬂ which are 
actual movies made from storyboard images, scratch 
dialog, sound effects, and temp music.  The story reels 
give the filmmakers and screening audiences an 
approximation of ﬁthe movie,ﬂ albeit with quick 
sketches for visuals instead of finished frames.  Once 
the story is in good shape (or once the release date is 
about a year out, whichever comes first) the CG 
production begins.  In addition to using many third 
party tools, we develop custom software in-house for 
each stage of the production process. 
The first step in the CG production process is 
modeling.  Every character, prop, and environment 
needs to be modeled in 3-D space using a 3-D 
modeling program. Some models are quite basic, like a 
simple sphere for a tennis ball, whereas a spiny 
dinosaur model would be very complex, with a variety 
of geometric shapes combining to form the overall 
surface.  
In addition, a rig is created for every character 
model to enable it to be animated.  A rig is a skeleton 
of bones and movement controls that is inserted into 
the model.  Animators use the rig to control the 
characters' movements.  Although we use a third party 
tool for modeling, we build custom plug-ins and helper 
applications for making the modeling and rigging 
artists™ lives easier.  We also build and maintain 
systems for revision control of these 3-D assets. 
The next step is layout, which is the process of 
arranging the characters and props into sets, along with 
cameras to capture the action Œ just as would be done 
in a live action movie, but all inside the computer.  The 
layout artists also put in ﬁblockingﬂ animation, which is 
when the characters are simply moved to roughly the 
positions they will be occupying once they're animated 
later on.  As with modeling, the bulk of the layout work 
is done within the 3-D modeling program, but we 
develop additional tools in-house for various tasks.  
One such task is splitting a long, continuous sequence, 
complete with blocking animation and camera moves 
and switches, into multiple shots (and multiple 3-D 
scene files) to be animated individually. 
 
Figure 1. Progression of
  Penny element from 
Bolt
 
Another process runs in parallel with layout:  look 
development.  At this stage there's 3-D geometry, but 
to make a sphere look like a tennis ball it needs ﬁlook 
data.ﬂ  The look of a CG element is defined by its 
surface properties, such as its color, its texture, the way 
it reflects light, and any patterns or graphics it may 
have (such as graffiti on a brick wall).  Look 
development artists create look data for all the 
2009 Agile Conference978-0-7695-3768-9/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2009.60410 elements once they've been modeled.  Everything from 
rusty metal to shiny plastic to a graffiti-covered wall 
must all be designed, programmed, and painted.  We 
develop and maintain a large suite of software tools for 
these look development tasks, some of which we'll talk 
about later.   
Next comes animation.  Animators position and 
articulate every part of every character, frame by 
frame, including moving each character's lips to match 
the dialog, blinking the eyes, and so on.  We develop 
software to interface with the character rigs, enabling 
the animators to essentially directly manipulate a 
marionette, which in turn results in the CG model of 
the character animating as requested. 
 
Figure 2. A typical shot progression
 
The last stage of the process is lighting. Up until 
this point all of the CG elements are laid out in scenes, 
looks have been developed for all the surfaces, and the 
characters are animated.  For th
e audience to be able to 
see all that hard work up on the big screen these scenes 
need to be lit.  Lighting artists add lights to the scenes 
to set the mood and highlight the action, not unlike the 
real lights in a theater production or live action movie.  
The lighting artists™ job is complex because they're 
working with all the data in the scene at once.  
Whereas an animator only works with one or two 
characters per shot and a look development artist is 
only concerned with a single element at a time, the 
lighting artist must incorporate all the look data for 
every element that's been laid out and/or animated in 
the scene in order to apply appropriate lighting.  Once 
lights are added to the scene, the lighting artist 
performs test renders.  Rendering is the process of 
creating a two-dimensional image of a 3-D scene from 
a certain camera's perspective, applying all the 
necessary look data and lighting.   
The final images used in the movie are rendered 
images.  We develop and maintain a suite of tools for 
performing look development, lighting and rendering.  
These tools comprise what we call the render pipeline.  
Render pipeline development is the basis of this 
experience report. 
1.2 The need for a CG tool makeover 
At Walt Disney Animation Studios (WDAS), 
various departments, such as story, modeling, layout, 
rigging, animation, look, effects and lighting, work on 
data using tools specific to their department and pass 
the modified data as input to the next department in the 
pipeline. 
Our current pipeline and tools have evolved over 
years of movie making with some ideas going back 
decades to the hand-drawn animation era. The current 
pipeline had reached the dreaded "5.0" release, where 
technical debt had caused many unfortunate couplings, 
data dependencies, reliance on naming conventions, 
component duplication and overlap, etc. Some parts of 
the old system became so complicated that some users 
didn't even use them Œ they did other things that "got 
close" instead. 
In addition, much inefficiency had crept into both 
the process and tools over th
e years, leading to long 
render times.  Long render times slow down 
production, especially in lighting.  
It was apparent that we needed to rethink the 
workflow for each department and redesign the toolset 
around it. We needed a toolset that enabled faster 
turnaround on renders, quicker iterations on artists™ 
work, was more intuitive to use, and required less 
training for new artists. The goal would be to let the 
artists do more in less time, preserving release dates 
and saving money in the process. 
 
1.3 An opportunity for change 
For the first time in nearly a decade, Walt Disney 
Animation Studios is producing a hand-drawn 
animated feature, 
The Princess and The Frog
, which 
will arrive in theatres in November 2009.  
Rapunzel
, 
the next slated CG feature, was moved to a holiday 
2010 release. As 
Frog
 is a hand-drawn, 2-D 
production, it will not use any part of the render 
pipeline. Additionally, the software department has 
undergone some organizational changes in the past 
couple of years, allowing for more forward-thinking 
development projects, with less emphasis on simply 
reacting to the immediate needs of the current 
production. The combination of these factors gave our 
team the perfect opportunity to address some of the 
aforementioned problems with our render pipeline 
software. 
With a project of this magnitude it was crucial that 
we kept the old system running at all times so that 
existing work could continue without interruptions 
while allowing artists to test and try out the new and 
improved functionality.  
411 2.
 
Trust the process 
A team of seven developers with different areas of 
expertise was formed to undertake a pilot project to test 
the feasibility of replacing the existing render pipeline. 
The primary goals of the pilot project were to get a 
good handle on technical requirements and the scale of 
the required effort, and to gage the support and 
commitment of stakeholders for such a large change.  
Previously we did not have a formal development 
process in place. A couple of us had read the original 
Scrum paper from OOPSLA '95 and thought that it 
would be good process to follow given project 
management requirements.  The description of Scrum 
seemed to match well against our needs.  As all of our 
users are in-house, we would be able to quickly and 
easily leverage their feedback.  Developing in short 
time boxes, Scrum™s sprints, would let us get changes 
and improvements into the system fast. 
No one in the organization had any prior 
experience of actually using the Scrum process in its 
entirety on a real project.  We tried out some Scrum 
practices, such as the daily meeting, but our backlog 
was just a long to-do list.  We hadn™t broken down the 
backlog items to enough granularity, and individual 
developers owned certain areas of development as 
opposed to team ownership. We quickly realized that 
what served us well for the short-lived (but successful) 
pilot project would not be sufficient once we started 
work on the full project. 
We decided that it would be wise to get formally 
trained as a group in the 'way of the Scrum.™ We were 
lucky to be taught a two-day crash course by one of the 
originators, Jeff Sutherland. Our manager also attended 
this course. After the training, we picked out people to 
fill the roles of Product Owner and Scrum Master, 
found a common area for daily meetings with a 
permanent location for the publicly visible Scrum 
board, and collected planning poker cards, post-its and 
markers. We also created a wiki with more details on 
the individual scrum tasks. 
One of the important touchstones of the project 
was to maintain transparency and accountability at all 
times. With a large in-house user base, production 
leadership and management needed to have a clear 
vision of where we were heading and how were going 
to get there.  With millions of dollars to be made or lost 
on the theatrical release alon
e, we certainly didn't want 
to be responsible for production grinding to a halt due 
to this project. We also wanted to make sure we didn't 
try to tackle too much, and the technical leadership on 
Rapunzel
 was kept in the loop on all development 
activities. We needed to show results and steady 
progress via regular demos and deliverables to ensure 
our stakeholders™ awareness of our progress. Finally, it 
was critical that we didn™t remove any existing tools 
without first providing equivalent (and hopefully 
better) functionality. 
3.
 
Importance of good interaction design 
The most complicated part of the production 
process is the final lighting and rendering.  A 
seemingly simple scene with two characters running 
through a forest is really thousands of tree models, 
each containing hundreds of branches and thousands of 
individually modeled leaves.  Every surface in the 
scene has its own look data, and all of it needs to be lit 
and rendered. 
With a ﬁheavyweightﬂ scene such as this forest 
scene, the lighting artist™s interaction with it within the 
3-D geometry viewing application is a slow, painful 
one.  There are so many 3-D elements in it that just 
changing the frame of view can take many seconds for 
the application to respond.  The artists do not have 
immediate, interactive feedback on their lighting 
decisions.  They must make an informed guess as to 
where to place lights and how to set their colors, 
intensities, and other properties.  Then they perform a 
low-resolution test render, which takes anywhere from 
thirty seconds to two hours to complete.  After they see 
the test render they can move lights in space, adjust 
intensities and colors, tweak properties, and do another 
test render.  They repeat this loop until it looks good 
enough to show the art director and/or director, then 
it™s time to move on to the next shot (or potentially 
time to go back to the drawing board). 
Given this inescapably laborious lighting process, 
if the tools available to the artists are difficult to use, 
don™t make sense, and/or don™t match the artists' 
conceptual model of what they™re doing to the scene, 
we™ve got big problems.  The process is so complex 
and time consuming to begin with that anything we can 
do to make the toolset more intuitive will lead to 
quicker shot turnaround and even more importantly, 
happier artists.  In addition, the studio often needs to 
hire many additional lighting artists as the production 
gets closer to the release, to compensate for delays in 
upstream departments.  A more intuitive toolset for 
surfaces, lighting and rendering will enable these new 
artists to get up and running more quickly, with 
minimal training, no matter what studio they™ve 
worked at previously. 
Saving a mouse click here and there adds up to a 
lot of saved time over the course of a production.  
Parameter editing controls living where the artists 
expect to find them saves even more time.  Tools doing 
412 something closer to what the artists expect will result in 
fewer iterative, test renders, saving yet more time and 
artist frustration.  Our ultimate goal is to enable the 
artists to remain in their artistic mindset while they™re 
working, without having to be distracted by all the 
technical stuff.  And with any luck we can help save a 
few dollars from the budget, too. 
4.
 
Balancing interaction design and 
software development 
4.1
 
Research and design 
We started our interaction design process by 
walking through high-level steps/tasks with artists to 
help us understand their artistic and technical needs.  
We then inspected our existing tools with the artists to 
try to determine how well they did or didn™t address 
those tasks.  This process helped us discover the artists' 
pain points.  As we were looking to design tools and 
systems to span many departments, we also worked on 
identifying common interactions and similar tasks 
across departments, to guide us toward a common look 
and feel. 
 
Figure 3. An earl
y design sketch 
Once we had a good handle on this initial 
information-gathering phase, we started designing the 
new system.  We created workflow scripts and 
descriptions, sketched out whiteboard designs, and 
made paper prototypes with which to conduct usability 
tests with the artists.  Despite our best efforts to follow 
interaction design guidelines, these methods were not 
as effective as we had hoped they would be.  We 
discovered that, for the most part, our artists are very 
interested in (and critical of) the aesthetics of the visual 
design. Our sketches and paper prototypes were met 
with concern from some artists and were dismissed 
entirely by others.  We needed to find a way to 
effectively design the artists™ interactions with the 
system while incorporating their feedback early on. 
 
4.2
 
Expert users as designers 
During our R&D phase, a group of production 
artists and technical supervisors began a weekly 
meeting at which they discussed ways to improve the 
lighting and rendering workflow and toolset.  They 
aimed to identify user pain points in hopes of solving 
them for 
Rapunzel
. Called the render pipeline task 
force, this group of people included former software 
developers, ﬁpower usersﬂ of our existing render 
pipeline tools, and some folks with product design 
experience.  
One of the task force members, a lighting 
supervisor named Josh, is a Photoshop master with 
interest in GUI design. He offered to create nice-
looking mockups of our ideas, incorporating the ideas 
of the task force. He actually went a step further and 
built a sort of ﬁconcept carﬂ using link-mapped images 
in HTML pages, resulting in an approximation of how 
the entire application will look and behave.  Once the 
task force had Josh™s blueprint, their discussions 
became much more focused, as they had a tangible 
representation of what they ultimately wanted. Josh 
was able to capture their input and constantly evolve 
the blueprint.  
 
Figure 4. A part of the working blueprint
 
At one point the render pipeline task force was 
meeting multiple times a week, hashing out workflow 
and design ideas as the scope expanded from look 
development tools to lighting, to render settings, and so 
on. Josh was updating the blueprint every step of the 
way to capture the discussion into a living, tangible 
form.  During this time the render pipeline 
development team was Scrumming along, focused on 
the current sprint tasks. To make sure the task force 
wasn™t totally going haywire, a member of the 
development team attended the task force meetings. 
The render pipeline task force™s discoveries in their 
discussions and critiques of the blueprint would not 
only force them to rethink their workflow for different 
tasks within the application, but also help them 
prioritize their needs, which informed the product 
owner's prioritization of the product backlog. Once the 
development team finished the current sprint and came 
up for air, we would all get up-to-date on the latest 
revisions to the blueprint and figure out what we would 
be working on during the next sprint. 
This approach has been working very well for us, 
as the users figure out what they really want (and what 
413 they want it to look like) while the development team 
can stay focused on sprint tasks. 
4.3
 
Do it over ‚til you get it right 
One of the new technologies that will enable faster 
renders for 
Rapunzel
 and beyond is the new shader 
system available in Renderman 14, the latest version of 
the rendering program we use. A shader is a part of the 
look for a 3-D element. Shaders are little programs, or 
modules, that determine what the 3-D geometry will 
look like when rendered. Shaders handle all properties 
such as the color of a surface, its texture, and how it 
reflects light. 
Our old shaders were fine in their supply of artistic 
controls, but suffered from over complexity for simple 
tasks. That is, you got all the parameters, all the time.  
As more and more parameters were added to a shader 
for more complicated surface properties, the shader 
would take longer to do its job, and renders would take 
longer to complete. And since there was a single, 
monolithic shader available, a simple gray plastic ball 
would take the same time to render as a pearlescent 
giant glowing marble sphere of doom. With the new 
shader system, called modular co-shaders, you start 
with a blank slate and add what you need.  So a plastic 
ball would be very simple, and would render very 
quickly.  A complex orb of wonders would require 
many more shader components, and thus would take 
longer to render. 
What modular co-shaders lack in overhead they 
make up for in complexity. The old shaders were 
overkill for simple tasks, but the interface for 
modifying shader parameters was a simple categorized, 
flat list (albeit a very long one). All the shaders looked 
the same Œ they just had different values for certain 
things. Modular co-shaders are different. A modular co-
shader starts as an empty skeleton, into which little 
modules are inserted, each of which has different 
parameters to be modified. Some modules can accept 
other modules as parameter inputs, or even chains of 
other modules. Allowing for the infinite possibilities of 
module building would require a user interface that™s 
far more complex than what was needed for the old 
shaders. One small, yet important piece of the render 
pipeline development was to create a user interface for 
editing modular co-shaders. 
Our first iteration on the modular co-shader editing 
GUI focused on allowing modules to go wherever they 
were allowed to go. We used little module widgets that 
simply showed the module name. Double-clicking a 
module widget would open a dialog where its 
parameters could be edited. While this solution was 
functional, it wasn™t very usable, as the artists couldn™t 
look at a surface material as a whole and see what 
parameters were modified where.  
 
Figure 5. An early sketch
 of the modular co-shader 
editing UI
 
Our second iteration of the co-shader editing GUI 
added some parameter editing widgets to the module 
widgets. The idea was to put the most important 
parameters on the module widgets, with the remainder 
accessible via the parameter editing dialog, as before. 
While this solution was a step in the right direction, it 
was still difficult for artists to visually inspect a 
material to see what it was doing. Also, our decision to 
arrange the parameter editing widgets vertically within 
the module widget led to a lot of unused horizontal 
space and thus, a lot of vertical scrolling. 
In our third iteration we made module ﬁstripsﬂ 
where the module widget would have parameter editing 
widgets arranged horizontally. The user could choose 
exactly how many parameters he would like to see for 
each module type, and in what order he would like 
them to appear. With this solution the artists can 
quickly see what™s going on with their shader modules 
and easily edit the parameters they care about. 
Figure 6. A portion of th
e final iteration of the 
modular co-shader editing UI
 
Each iteration of the UI was fully functional, but it 
took several passes to finally get it usable. Part of the 
reason it took three sprints for us to get it right was we 
were all still coming up to speed on how these modular 
co-shaders work, and what artists will want to do with 
them. Additionally, development of this particular piece 
of the render pipeline was done before the render 
pipeline task force had become so involved in the user 
interface and interaction design, and before the 
blueprint had been started. 
414 5.
 
Process improvements and lessons 
learned 
5.1
 
Time boxing 
Some of the design and development work 
required to finish a tool demanded too much effort and 
we ended up over-designing the interfaces to be 
implemented later. It occurred to us that interaction 
design needs to be agile too. We started time boxing 
design and prototyping. It allowed us to do something, 
demo it, get feedback quickly, adjust the designs and 
implement parts of it in an iterative cycle. This process 
let us explore pie-in-the-sky ideas and new possibilities 
instead of investing too much time on monolithic 
designs that we would be loathe to abandon. The ready 
availability of in-house users allowed us to test these 
iterative implementations even when the software was 
not production ready.  
5.2
 
Swarming 
As we were trying to avoid developers ﬁswimming 
in lanesﬂ by encouraging work on parts of the product 
outside their previous experience or comfort zone, we 
found great productivity increases when a small group 
of developers worked together on a related set of sprint 
tasks, consulting with a domain expert.  We called it 
ﬁswarming.ﬂ Swarming helped us finish tasks quicker 
and was very useful with cross training other team 
members in areas outside their expertise. 
5.3
 
Dedicated support person 
Support is critical when in-house users are 
involved. We pass these users everyday in the hallway. 
We started with the usual, Scrum-prescribed 20% of 
each team member™s time devoted to bug fixes and 
support. As more features got added to the tools and 
more users started using the toolset, it was decided to 
have one team member per week dedicated to support. 
The other team members reduced their 20% support so 
our velocity didn™t suffer. By having a different person 
on support every week, we also made sure that team 
members got to work on all aspects of the product. 
Dedicated support gave the production confidence in 
our ability to address their problems in a timely 
fashion. Also, meeting with them every other day 
established a working relationship and good 
communication. 
5.4
 
Supporting other projects and varying 
schedules 
Many of us work on other projects one day a 
week. Some of us work from home one day a week. By 
establishing a policy of notifying the team members of 
outages and availability early in the sprint, we avoided 
the issue of de-fragmentation of availability. 
Production deadlines are set 
years in advance because 
of the movie release dates. For our software to be 
usable by the production we have to meet those 
deadlines well before the production departments start 
their work. The users have to be trained and need to 
feel comfortable with the new toolset before 
committing to use it. Our product backlog is available 
widely in the organization for anyone to add items to it. 
At the end of every sprint there are prioritization 
meetings with the product owner and key stakeholders, 
like production technical leadership, various 
department leads and users. The open backlog and 
team velocity allowed them to make hard decisions 
regarding features versus deadlines and prioritize 
accordingly.  
6.
 
Conclusion 
At Walt Disney Animation Studios our mission is 
to create beautiful and timele
ss films through the art of 
storytelling, the magic of animation and the science of 
cutting edge technology. The software group develops 
and supports tools for a variety of users, from story 
artists, 3-D animators, modelers, lighters, painters, and 
shader developers to production staff who manage the 
flow of work through the pipeline. We are relative 
newcomers to Scrum but feel that the process suits the 
rapid pace of movie making, hard deadlines and 
frequent requirement changes.  
Several challenges remain to be overcome. 
Something we would like to do in the future is to 
dedicate the last day of the sprint for larger functional 
tests that take a piece of data through the whole 
pipeline. For technical reasons, this cannot be 
automated yet, but we are exploring ideas to do this to 
add stability to our product. 
As the software has grown in size, the number of 
unit tests has grown as well. Every integration task 
takes more time to complete, as tests take longer and 
longer to run. In our process we have reserved the 
week after the sprint for demos and planning for the 
next sprint, but often times we end up finishing and 
polishing items from the previous sprint. This creep 
sometimes prevents us from focusing on the next 
sprint™s tasks. 
The stakeholders sometimes panic at the size of 
the backlog and switch the priorities too wildly, 
causing some thrashing in a way where there isn™t 
much continuity from one sprint to the next.  
There is still room for improvement in the process 
and we hope that the process, just like our software, 
will iteratively evolve to meet our needs.  
 
415