 Applying the Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition to the Adoption of Kanban 
Systems at Software Engineering Professionals (SEP)  
Christopher M. Shinkle 
Software Engineering Professionals 
cmshinkle@sep.com 
 
 
Abstract 
In 2004, SEP tried adopting Agile practices. 
However, Agile failed to 
have the desired lasting 
impact across the entire organization. Things changed 
in 2007, when SEP implemented a kanban system for 
the first time.  Kanban created an effective means for 
institutionalization of Lean 
by providing a unique 
method of discovering and learning practices and 
principles.  Upon examini
ng multiple teams using 
kanban systems it was apparent that teams followed 
similar patterns of adoption and learning.  They 
appeared to follow the Dreyfus Model for Skill 
Acquisition. 
1.
 
Organization Ch
aracteristics 
SEP is a privately held software engineering 
company located near Indianapolis, IN.  It was founded 
by engineers in 1988 and has grown to include 70+ 
employees.  SEP collaborates with many Fortune 500 
companies to develop new software systems and 
products for business, data and safety critical 
applications. They offer full lifecycle software 
solutions to clients in the medical, aerospace, 
healthcare and national defense markets.  
Projects at SEP average four to six people in size 
and last an average of six months, with a high degree 
of variance in size and duration.      
2.
 
Early Agile Adoption 
Early in 2004, SEP began experimenting with 
Agile practices Œ specifically Feature Driven 
Development (FDD).  The approach was to try FDD on 
a project, evaluate the results, and then make a decision 
about how to proceed.  The project was a huge success 
and a decision was made to teach other teams/projects 
one at a time about FDD and the specific practices 
being used.  We hoped that we could institute FDD 
throughout the organization through this organic 
approach.  In order to facilitate this learning, I began to 
coach project teams Œ first starting with the Agile 
principles and then moving to practices.  I presumed 
that by first teaching the principles, the adoption and 
retention rates would be higher. 
FDD and Agile failed to have the lasting impact on 
the organization that I had expected.  As a company, 
SEP was Agile-friendly, but we weren™t able to get 
buy-in from everyone.  Widespread adoption of Agile 
practices was met with resistance and ultimately failed 
to gain traction.  
Over time, experience with Agile practices within 
SEP grew, but only in limited pockets.  This continued 
until early 2007 with the implementation of our first 
kanban system. 
3.
 
Kanban Adoption 
After the initial implementa
tion in 2007, it quickly 
became apparent that kanban would have different 
results.  Kanban provided a more effective vehicle to 
introduce practices and principles.  The resistance I had 
previously encountered seemed to be nonexistent.    
The culture on project teams began to change as they 
learned the system.  And more importantly, the 
attitudes of team members changed. 
Since 2007, I have implemented more than a 
dozen kanban systems at SEP.  While coaching these 
project teams, an adoption and evolution pattern began 
to emerge.  The maturation of a kanban team correlated 
strongly to the understanding of Lean principles.   
I began to research different learning models and 
found the Dreyfus Model for Skill Acquisition.  The 
model provided guidance for the pattern I saw 
emerging and why our previous attempts at introducing 
Agile and Lean principles failed. 
4.
 
The Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition 
The Dreyfus Model of skill acquisition was 
developed in the early 80s by two brothers Œ Hubert 
and Stuart Dreyfus.  They surmised that ﬁin acquiring a 
skill by means of instruction and experience, the 
student normally passes through five developmental 
2009 Agile Conference978-0-7695-3768-9/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2009.25186 stages.ﬂ [1] They labeled the stages as Novice, 
Advanced Beginner, Competent, Proficient, and 
Experts.  ﬁAs the student becomes skilled he depends 
less on abstract principles and more on concrete 
experience.ﬂ [1] They concluded that any skill-training 
procedure must be based on some model of skill 
acquisition.  [1]  
The model was originally prepared for the Air 
Force Office of Scientific Research for the training of 
pilots, but has since been applied to nurses, chess 
players, and even software developers.  The model has 
traditionally been applied to individuals; however, I 
used the model to evaluate software teams.  
Understanding the model allows us to address the 
appropriate issues at each stage in order to facilitate 
team advancement. 
The Dreyfus skill model is summarized in Figure 1 
[4]. 
 
Skill 
Level 
Components 
Perspective 
Decision 
Commitment 
Novice Context free None Analytic Detached 
Advanced 
Beginner 
Context free and 
situational 
None Analytic Detached 
Competent Context free and 
situational 
Chosen Analytic Detached 
understanding and 
deciding 
Proficient Context free and 
situational 
Experienced Analytic Involved 
understanding; 
detached deciding 
Expert Context free and 
situational 
Experienced Intuitive Involved 
Figure 1
 
ﬁAt each stage, you don™t just know more or gain 
skill.  Instead you experience fundamental differences 
in how you perceive the world, how you approach 
problem solving, and the mental models you form and 
use.ﬂ [2] ﬁThe different stages reflect changes in three 
general aspects of skilled performance: movements 
from abstract principles to concrete experience as 
paradigms, situations are not seen as equally relevant 
bits but as a complete whole, and movement from a 
detached observer to an involved performer.ﬂ  [3] 
For each stage, I will identify the characteristics 
that define each stage and describe my observations 
from the teams I observed at SEP. 
   
4.1.
 
Stage 1 Œ Novice 
At the novice stage, individuals have little or no 
previous experience.  ﬁThe instruction process begins 
by decomposing the task environment into context-free 
features which the beginner can recognize without 
benefit of experience.  The beginner is then given rules 
for determining action on the basis of these features.ﬂ 
[1] Individuals often exercise no discretionary 
judgment at this stage.  Their focus is on 
accomplishing an immediate goal, and they often have 
little desire to learn.  Novices often are faced with the 
question as to which rules to apply to a given situation.  
To improve, the novice needs monitoring and coaching 
to bring their behavior more into compliance with the 
rules.     
Think about a typical person wanting to bake a 
cake.  They go to the store, purchase a boxed cake mix, 
and follow the directions as described on the back of 
the box.  They have little to no knowledge about how 
to alter the recipe nor do they have a desire to do so.  
Their goal is simply to bake a cake. 
   At this stage, teams at SEP most often viewed 
the kanban board as a task tracking system with a 
simple rule set such as: when work is completed move 
the sticky note to the next section on the board, use 
yellow sticky notes for scenarios, blue for bugs, pink 
for issues, etc. and prioritize the work to be started in 
the engineering ready queue.  Teams rarely showed 
regard for Work-In-Progress (WIP) limits Œ without 
which the system isn™t a ‚pull™ system.  Daily stand-up 
meetings were conducted in which the teams discussed 
only the state of the current work items. 
Despite this very limited implementation of a 
kanban system, teams still experienced a significant 
culture change.  They told me they had a better 
understanding of the state of the project.  They had a 
much better understanding of the priority of work 
items.  They knew what to work on next without 
having to ask or be told.  The board provided a very 
easy way to get a sense for their progress.  As one team 
member put it, ﬁWe never implemented limits.  What 
kanban DID accomplish though was illustrate the 
development process to a team that had never thought 
about it much before.  It basically exposed them to 
their selves.ﬂ 
 
4.2.
 
Stage 2 Œ Advanced Beginner 
ﬁAs the novice gains experience actually coping 
with real situations and begins to develop an 
understanding of relevant context, he or she begins to 
note, or an instructor points out, perspicuous (clear) 
examples of meaningful additional aspects of the 
situation or domain.ﬂ [4] Advanced beginners start to 
break away from rule sets as they gain experience from 
seeing a sufficient number of examples, but fail to 
experience a holistic understanding.  They don™t want it 
and likely would dismiss it as irrelevant.  At this stage, 
principles, based on experience start to be formulated. 
Returning to the cake example, an advanced 
beginner understands how to apply some context to the 
instructions or rules on the back of the box.  They can 
make minor adjustments for things like altitude, pan 
size, oven conditions, etc.  They are still following the 
basic recipe, but can make minor adjustments likely 
based on previous experiences.   
187 The biggest change I noted from novice to 
advanced beginner was that the team attempted to limit 
the amount of work in progress.  For the first time, they 
began to realize how too much work in progress 
negatively impacted the system.  When WIP was too 
high, lead times grew and as a result so did the bugs 
and rework. The relationship between WIP and quality 
started to be grasped.  Poor quality resulted in more 
rework, leading to higher WIP, and ultimately poorer 
quality.  This basic principle encouraged teams to 
attempt to control WIP.   
Another interesting thing began to occur.  As a 
result of the blocked work items and fixed WIP limits, 
team members began to collaborate more with each 
other.  If they were unable to complete their work item 
and couldn™t start new work because of the WIP limits, 
they would help others complete their tasks.  This 
wasn™t always easy - they weren™t used to collaborating 
on development tasks Œ but the payoff was huge.  Team 
members began to learn how to coordinate work with 
each other in ways that would allow for lower WIP 
limits in the future.   
Finally, as a result of the WIP limits, teams began 
to identify bottlenecks in their process.  This led them 
to seek out areas for improvement to increase the flow 
of the system and reduce the opportunity for the system 
to become clogged.  It was because of the WIP limits 
that teams first started thinking about continuous 
improvement. 
Keith, a developer working on an SEP team 
realized the result of enforcing WIP limits all too well.  
ﬁWIP limits seem to be the worst understood part of 
the kanban system.  When used properly, it exposes 
bottlenecks and reduces lead time for individual work 
items.  Used improperly, it can starve developers for 
work or result in too many people working on the same 
work items.ﬂ 
 
4.3.
 
Dreyfus, Deming, and Fear 
The Dreyfus model suggests that taking 
responsibility is often a critical point for people when 
learning a new skill.  Most people never become 
competent without a willingness to accept 
responsibility for their decisions.   
W. Edwards Deming gives us a clue as to why 
people are unwilling to accept responsibility: fear.  
Deming tells us that fear is a barrier to improvement.  
ﬁNo one can put in his best performance unless he feels 
secure.  
Se
 comes from the Latin, meaning without, 
cure 
means fear or care.  
Secure 
means without fear, 
not afraid to express ideas, not afraid to ask questions.  
Fear takes on many faces. A common denominator of 
fear in any form, anywhere, is loss from impaired 
performance and padded figures.ﬂ [5] We should strive 
to ﬁdrive out fearﬂ from the organization.  Teams 
operating in an environment where they fear making 
decisions will paradoxically 
not
 improve or reach their 
potential.  They will avoid new ideas and changes 
because of their inherent risk and potential 
consequences.  As long as fear exists in the 
organization, it is very unlikely individuals will be 
willing to accept responsibility for their decisions.   
Fear leads to a widespread resistance to 
knowledge. [5] Kanban provides the opportunity for 
team members to make changes confidently and with 
less fear by providing mechanisms for monitoring the 
effects of those changes.  There is no need to fear 
knowledge when one can see how the knowledge is 
being used.  Through this in-depth knowledge of the 
system, kanban helps teams realize and understand 
variation in the system.  As a result, kanban systems 
work to drive out fear.   
 
4.4.
 
Stage 3 Œ Competent 
ﬁCompetence comes only after considerable 
experience actually coping with real situations–ﬂ [1] 
From these situations, patterns and principles begin to 
emerge.  The previous ﬁrulesﬂ become ﬁrules of 
thumbﬂ and guidelines begin to be established.  ﬁThe 
competent practitioner will seek out and solve 
problems; their work is based more on deliberate 
planning and past experience.  Without more 
experience, they™ll still have trouble trying to 
determine which details to focus on when problem 
solvingﬂ [2]  
On competent teams at SEP, all team members 
began to participate in making process changes.  The 
team members began to feel a sense of ownership, and 
as a result, started seeking alternate practices to 
optimize the process.  People are often resistive to new 
practices being pushed on them.  However, at this 
stage, teams pursued the new practices themselves and 
were thus far more open to accepting them.  The 
practices were being introduced to solve specific 
issues.  As teams adopted new practices and improved 
the process, they experienced a genuine sense of 
gratification.  The team witnessed items flowing 
through the system more smoothly than before.  They 
made process changes and observed the effects of those 
changes.   
Competent teams began to see and understand the 
concepts of flow, value, and pull.  They saw these 
things at work every day.  Using a kanban system and 
associated practices, teams began to derive Lean 
principles by themselves.  The teams started to make 
changes and solve problems using Lean principles 
without knowing what Lean was!  One developer, 
Julie, remarked, ﬁIt was like switching on a light, no 
188 joke.  Suddenly, everyone was able to offer ideas on 
how to improve our processes.  It really motivated 
everyone.ﬂ 
From the beginning, there appeared to be a 
relationship between teams using a kanban system and 
having a working knowledge of Lean principles.  What 
I saw led me to believe that the maturation of a kanban 
team caused teams to learn and understand Lean 
principles. 
 
4.5.
 
Stage 4 Œ Proficient 
Proficient students begin to seek out and want to 
understand the ﬁbig pictureﬂ.  They start to see the 
system holistically.  The system is perceived as a 
complete system instead of a set of individual parts. 
ﬁProficient practitioners make a major 
breakthrough on the Dreyfus model; they can correct 
previous poor task performance.  They can reflect on 
how they™ve done and revise their approach to perform 
better the next time.  Up until this stage, that sort of 
self-improvement is simply not available.ﬂ [2] 
Additionally, they can learn from the experience of 
others and take full advantage of reflection and 
feedback. 
While moving from competent to proficient, 
changes to practices on teams at SEP were less 
prominent.  However, one very noticeable change 
occurred around planning.  Teams made throughput 
and reducing cycle-time a primary focus and goal.  In 
order to accomplish this, teams began to focus on 
optimizing the whole and reducing the cost of delay.  
Instead of just following WIP limits, they were actively 
trying to reduce their WIP.  Stand-ups were more 
focused on improving the system rather than tracking 
progress.  Kaizen moments became more 
commonplace.  Matt, a developer, pointed out that, 
ﬁThe entire picture allows me to work with full 
knowledge of our progress in relation to our goals.  The 
limits in each section force me to work in the areas that 
most need help Œ in order for the board to keep 
flowing.ﬂ 
 
4.6.
 
Stage 5 Œ Expert 
ﬁThe proficient performer, immersed in the world 
of his or her skillful activity, sees what needs to be 
done but decides how to do it.  The expert not only sees 
what needs to be achieved; thanks to his or her vast 
repertoire of situational discriminations, he or she also 
sees immediately how to achieve this goal.ﬂ [4]    The 
expert no longer relies on rules, guidelines, or maxims, 
but work primarily from intuition.  A decision made 
stops being a conscious decision and is primarily based 
on instinct.  An expert has enough experience in an 
area that each situation encountered dictates an 
intuitively appropriate response.  The expert can 
distinguish between very important details and those 
considered irrelevant.  They know which details can be 
safely ignored.   
This expert stage was not something I was able to 
observe at SEP.  Some estimate it can take as many as 
10-15 years in a particular area to reach expert.  Only 
time will tell what the expert stage might look like for a 
kanban team. 
5.
 
Common Challenges Observed 
ﬁI have not failed.  I™ve just found 10,000 ways 
that won™t work.ﬂ Œ Thomas Edison 
 
5.1.
 
Coaching Teams 
I failed to coach the first team using a kanban 
system at SEP with a consideration for their maturity.  
Without an understanding of the Dreyfus Model and 
how teams acquired skills I started with principles, few 
rules, and firm WIP limits.  After struggling for a little 
while, I changed my approach.  I began with a small set 
of rules and practices. From there we progressed at a 
pace that felt comfortable to the team.  The results were 
much better and followed a pattern consistent to the 
model. 
   
5.2.
 
Using Little™s Law to Set WIP Limits 
Little™s Law states: Throughput (TP) = Work-In-
Progress (WIP) / Cycle Time (CT).  Because we work 
in a contracted outsourcing environment, desired 
throughput can often be calculated from the contract or 
statement of work.  Using TP and the initial WIP 
limits, we calculated the desired cycle time for work 
items that would lead to successfully meeting budget 
and schedule goals.  Cycle time could then be used as a 
leading indicator to monitor our progress.  However, 
there was an underlying assumption that WIP would 
remain constant Œ a false assumption.  When work in 
progress dropped below the limits, the team could 
continue to hit cycle times, but would fall short of the 
total throughput number, which is the number that 
mattered most from a contractual and reputation 
perspective.  Therefore, when using Little™s Law, it is 
important that the formula be adjusted periodically as 
WIP limits change.   
 
5.3.
 
WIP Limits Too Low For a New Team 
After having initiated several kanban systems at 
SEP, I setup a new team with what seemed like 
reasonable WIP limits.  They were a little lower than I 
189 had used on previous teams, but I thought they would 
encourage the correct habits from the start.  They 
didn™t.  With the WIP limits set too low, the team just 
struggled.  When a work item became blocked, they 
didn™t have the maturity or experience to collaborate 
and team up to complete current work in progress.  
Therefore, team members would try to start new work 
items.  When no new work could be started, they were 
left trying to figure out what to do.  Team members 
were frustrated and felt unproductive.  Depending upon 
the specific context and situation, we address this today 
by taking a conservative approach with our WIP limits.   
Corey Ladas, in his Lean Software Engineering 
blog, suggest three ways to set queue sizes:  (1) Start 
every limit at one.  Add tokens one at a time until one 
person is always busy, then apply the Theory of 
Constraints. (2) Start every li
mit at an arbitrarily large 
value, like 10.  Subtract tokens 1 at a time until flow is 
observed.  Then start looking for a way to remove 1 
more. (3) Create a Value Stream Map and measure the 
time-on-task distribution of each activity. Use Little™s 
Law to calculate the corresponding queue sizes. [6] 
 
5.4.
 
Blocked Issues Resulting from Clients 
Blocked work items create real problems and 
struggles for the development team.  Most of the time 
they were resolved by applying team resources to the 
issue.  However, when the blocked work item resulted 
from a client, a different problem emerged.  The 
blocked items piled up and stopped flow.  Team 
members were left wondering what to work on.  They 
had learned that exceeding WIP limits often resulted in 
more rework and longer lead times.   
Unfortunately, we have not figured out a good 
answer to this problem.  One team took blocked work 
items and placed them in a holding area.  The team 
monitored lead times and quality metrics for leading 
indicators of potential problems.  They proceeded in 
this way throughout the life of the project.  This 
particular project was a verification project; I™m not 
confident whether this would work for a software 
development project, but it was successful in this 
particular situation. 
Ideally, I would like to use the information gained 
through monitoring lead times and throughput in 
conjunction with blocked work items to educate our 
clients on how blocked work affects their projects.   
6.
 
A Project Success Story: How Kanban 
Saved EHMS 
I would like to share how one particular project at 
SEP was impacted by using a kanban system.  Pay 
close attention to how the team matured in accordance 
with the Dreyfus Model. 
Prior to starting the EHMS project, there was a 
long standing, small (4 people), successful team in 
place.  They had been developing similar web 
applications for several years and were well versed in 
how they did things.  The team rarely worked in a strict 
deadline environment.  They were very comfortable 
with their approach to this type of system and our 
client was very happy as well. 
At the start of the EHMS project, the team 
experienced significant changes.  The size of the team 
ballooned to three times its original size.  The 
technology platform the team was accustomed to 
changed.  For the first time, there was a high pressure, 
politically charged deadline.  In spite of all these 
changes, the team did not try to change the process 
they were familiar with.  They continued to work in the 
same manner as before. 
A couple of months into the project, things were 
not proceeding well.  The lead did not have a feel for 
what people were working on.  It was unclear to 
anyone how the project was progressing.  Discontent 
and frustration was felt throughout the team.  There 
was lots of negative emotion.  No one was stepping up 
to fix the bigger problems the team was encountering 
and only heroes were dealing with the symptoms.   
Midway through the project, a kanban system was 
introduced.  At first, the team experienced minor 
confusion but quickly aligned with some coaching.  
Immediately, the kanban system highlighted a major 
issue: they had an enormous amount of work in 
progress.  Even though the team had not implemented 
WIP limits yet, they realized very quickly that WIP 
needed to be reduced.  The kanban system had 
highlighted the current state of project. Even though 
the situation wasn™t ideal, team members started to 
experience a little hope.   
A short time later, the team hit the first delivery 
milestone.  However, it had sacrificed quality to do so.  
After the initial delivery, strict WIP limits were 
enforced and prompted some immediate changes.   
 
Figure 2 - Work in Progress 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
WIP limits instituted 
190 As a result, the team ﬁtook the painﬂ and fixed the 
quality defects along with the process issues.  People 
who were normally quiet began to point out issues and 
come up with different solutions.  The team began to 
take ownership of the process and began down the road 
of continuous improvement.  As the work in progress 
was reduced, the lead times for work items was also 
significantly reduced.   
 
Figure 3 - Lead Time 
Additionally, the number of bugs identified went down 
as work in progress and lead time were reduced. 
 
Figure 4 - Bug Injection Rate 
Now, only six months later, the team enforces 
good behavior in their day to day activities.  The 
kanban board has changed multiple times and fits the 
team™s current situation well.  Overall, there is a sense 
of progress felt throughout the team which has led to 
constructive attitudes.  The team has become a bunch 
of ﬁtrue believersﬂ.  They have started to really look at 
the data, see what they can learn from it, and begin to 
manage objectively.  Kyle, the EHMS project manager, 
said, ﬁI wish we™d started kanban six months earlier.ﬂ 
7.
 
Conclusion 
The Dreyfus model provides a useful topology for 
developing skills.  It can be effectively applied to 
teams using a kanban system as a way to measure team 
maturity.   
Everyone fundamentally understands that having 
the knowledge of an activity doesn™t mean you have 
the skill necessary to perform the activity.  The 
Dreyfus model helps us to understand how to acquire 
the skills necessary to accomplish a goal.  One of the 
fundamental concepts in the model is the placement of 
practices before principles.   
Lean principles are best understood by applying 
the principles through practice.  Kanban proved to be 
an effective tool for teaching these principles.  It 
provided a way for teams to discover and practice the 
principles through application.        
Finally, the model defines multiple stages of 
maturity.  In each stage, certain behaviors guide your 
focus for improving.  This information is invaluable for 
coaches and trainers as they work with teams using 
kanban systems.  The knowledge of how a team 
matures helps to guide their efforts and training to help 
teams mature in the most efficient way. 
8.
 
Acknowledgements 
I would like to acknowledge the contributions of a 
few people to the development of this experience 
report and corresponding presentation.  Raman Ohri 
preformed countless reviews, and provided invaluable 
feedback and suggestions.  Eric Willeke suggested I 
investigate the Dreyfus Model of Skill Acquisition 
which greatly influenced my ideas.  Finally, SEP 
provided enormous support and encouragement as I 
took on this new endeavor.        
9.
 
References 
[1]
 
Stuart E. Dreyfus, Hubert L. Dreyfus, ﬁA Five-Stage 
Model of the Mental Activities Involved in Directed Skill 
Acquisitionﬂ, Operations Research Center, University of 
California, Berkeley, February 1980, pp. 1, 7-8 
[2]
 
Andy Hunt, 
Pragmatic Thinking and Learning: Refactor 
Your ﬁWetwareﬂ
, Pragmatic Bookshelf, October 2008 
[3]
 
P. Benner, From Novice to Expert: Excellence and 
Power in Clinical Nursing Practiceﬂ, Menlo Park: Addison-
Wesley, pp. 13-34 
[4]
 
Stuart E. Dreyfus, ﬁThe Five-Stage Model of Adult Skill 
Acquisitionﬂ, 
Bulletin of Science Technology and Society Vol. 
24 No. 3
, SAGE, June 2004, pp. 177-181 
[5]
 
W. Edwards Deming, 
Out of the Crisis
, Massachusetts 
Institute of Technology Center for Advanced Engineering 
Study, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1982 
[6]
 
Corey Ladas, ﬁThree Ways to Go About Queue Sizingﬂ 
http://leansoftwareengineering.com
, April 9, 2009 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
WIP limits instituted 
191