 Agile Methods Adoption on Software Development - 
a Pilot Review 
Caio Cestari Silva 
IPT 
São Paulo, Brazil 
caiocestarisilva@gmail.com 
Alfredo Goldman  
IME-USP 
São Paulo, Brazil 
gold@ime.usp.br
 
 
Abstract
— Scientific publications throughout the years 
describe study cases and experience reports from organizations 
that have been through the agile adoption process. At the same 
time, frameworks and generic methods for adoption have also 
been published intending to obtain some predictability on the 
steps of this transition. However, when disposing of either 
generic or specific inputs to help them on their way towards 
agility, companies do not know how or where to start their 
changes. This short paper describes the current investigation 
state of a systematic review that aims to understand better how 
organizations effectively adopt agile methods, trying to find a 
correlation between the characteri
stics of an organization and 
the way it effectively transitions to agile. 
Keywords—agile methods; agile methods adoption; 
organizational characteristics; systematic review 
I.
 
MOTIVATION
 
AND
 
RESEARCH
 
GOALS 
Since the Agile Manifesto was published in 2001, the 
number of organizations that have been trying to adopt agile 
methods as a way to deal with software development has 
increased. However, many of them have not reached their 
adoption goals, which include fast and high-quality software 
deliveries, software products that better satisfy users’ needs 
and flexibility to deal with scope changes throughout the 
project. The results, on the other hand, are restricted to the 
adoption of few practices, yielding low value to the developed 
software products and also to people’s potential on delivering 
them [1]. 
 Assuming that an agile transformation is actually an 
organizational change [2], companies have been trying to find 
out from the existing ways to adopt agile methods one (or 
more) that consider or exhibit similar organizational 
characteristics as theirs [1]. On this context, many of the 
published academic papers do not consider organizational 
perspectives, presenting results from controlled environments 
or specific projects and teams. From the studies that consider 
agility as an organizational change, there are two distinct 
groups: generic steps – independent from company context – or 
specific steps (empiric) – related to an existing organization 
and its transformation process. 
No published study that proposed to evaluate the effective 
use of generic adoption steps by the industry was found. Also, 
it is not known if there is any guideline that can emerge from 
specific (empiric) agile method adoption studies and can then 
be used by other similar organizations. 
Our research aims to investigate, by means of a systematic 
review, how organizations adopt agile methods and, from those 
findings, aims to also identify commons ways of empiric 
adoption based on the characteristics of the analyzed 
organizations. We also want to investigate if companies are 
considering generic ways of adoption on their search for 
agility. This paper presents the current state of the research – 
and is declared as a pilot review. It also follows the 
recommendations made by Kitchenham and Charters, widely 
applied by systematic reviews on agile [3]. 
II.
 
PERFORMED
 
SYSTEMATIC
 
REVIEW
 
PROTOCOL 
A.
 
Research Question 
“Is it possible to relate characteristics of organizations 
to the steps they take to adopt agile methods empirically?” 
We also defined three secondary research questions needed 
to help answering the main question: 
1.
 
What are the existing generic ways to guide an 
organizational agile adoption? 
2.
 
What are the main steps taken by organizations that 
adopted agile methods empirically? 
3.
 
Is it possible to relate steps from empiric agile 
adoptions in organizations to any of the existing 
generic ways? 
B.
 
Search Strategy 
Our search strategy included published studies from 
electronic databases (searched by customizing the query 
below) and also a complimentary hand search on the 
proceedings of Agile and XP Conferences. 
(KEYWORD (agile)) AND (software) AND (agile OR 
scrum OR xp OR kanban OR (lean AND development) OR 
(extreme E programming)) AND (adopt OR adopted OR 
adopting OR adoption OR migrate OR migrated OR 
migrating OR migration) 
The results were 4062 publications, distributed as follows: 
•
 
ACM – 207 publications 
•
 
Compendex – 572 publications 
•
 
Elsevier – 71 publications, within Computer Science 
•
 
IEEE – 470 publications 
2014 Agile Conference978-0-7695-5222-4/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2014.1464 •
 
SpringerLink – 1642 publications, within Computer 
Science, without KEYWORD (agile) term 
•
 
AGILE – 455 publications 
•
 
XP – 663 publications 
C.
 
Primary Acceptance Phase 
A study was primarily accepted if its title and its abstract 
(or conclusion) were related to an organizational adoption of 
agile methods, including advantages/challenges, survey results 
and other perspectives. On this phase, 3966 articles were 
rejected – among them we found mostly irrelevant content 
from SpringerLink (due to restrictions on the research query). 
TABLE I. 
 
R
EJECTED 
P
UBLICATIONS ON 
P
RIMARY 
A
CCEPTANCE 
P
HASE
 
Rejection Reason 
N Rejected by 
Duplicated 
732 Title 
Not related to agile adoption
 
3126 Title 
Agile adoption by specific projects or teams 
38 
Abstract or 
Conclusion 
Agile adoption by organization focused on 
specific perspective (eg. distributed teams) 
24 
Abstract or 
Conclusion 
Scenario pre-adoption or post-adoption 
19 
Abstract or 
Conclusion 
Practical tutorial conducted on conference 
9 
Abstract or 
Conclusion 
Agile x Plan-Driven 
5 
Abstract or 
Conclusion 
Other reason 
13 
Abstract or 
Conclusion 
 
The remaining 96 publications were accepted on the 
primary acceptance phase and forwarded to the quality 
acceptance phase (still undergoing). 
III.
 
BRIEF
 
QUALITATIVE
 
ANALYSIS 
We have already found some contributions for our defined 
research questions by classifying the primary approved studies 
and assessing five experience reports (Gap Inc., Amazon.com, 
Yahoo! Music, BabyCenter.com and Gale) and assessing two 
frameworks for adoption (Agile Adoption Framework and 
Agile Adoption Motivation Framework). 
A.
 
Existing Frameworks and Methods 
There are at least 17 generic ways that can be reused by 
organizations to help them adopt agile methods. This number 
can increase during the quality acceptance phase, when studies 
will be assessed in detail. The real number of existing 
frameworks or methods can be bigger due to some articles that 
cover more than one of them. 
TABLE II. 
 
A
CCEPTED 
P
UBLICATIONS ON 
P
RIMARY 
A
CCEPTANCE 
P
HASE
 
Study Type 
N Study 
Type 
N 
Experience Report 
63 Framework 
17 
Study Case 
2 Generic Analysis 
6 
Survey 
3 Uncertain Study 
5 
B.
 
Main Steps Taken by Organizations 
Scrum was selected by Amazon.com [4], Yahoo! Music 
[5] and BabyCenter.com [6] as the way to emerge agility, 
although they had different motivations. All these adoptions 
started with a pilot-project or a pilot-team and expanded to the 
entire organizations after successful results were observed. 
The traditional culture of the companies could be seen as 
their main motivation to move to agility, expressed by a 
command-and-control management style at Yahoo! Music [5], 
by the use of a waterfall model at Gap Inc. [7] and Gale [8], 
and by the inability to deliver on the desired pace by 
BabyCenter.com [6]. 
C.
 
Relation Between Empiric 
and Generic Adoptions 
Both assessed frameworks considered the organizational 
perspective as a restriction to the agile adoption. The Agile 
Adoption Framework [9] proposes a go/no-go phase where the 
ability of the organization to move towards agility is assessed 
by its real necessity, its available budget and its executive 
support. This is strictly connected to the agile adoption steps 
taken by Gale [8] and BabyCenter.com [6], where the 
executive support was the basis for the organizational changes 
needed. 
IV.
 
PRELIMINARY
 
CONCLUSIONS
 
AND
 
NEXT
 
STEPS 
There are consistent contributions to answer the secondary 
research questions provided by our brief qualitative analysis. 
The quality acceptance phase, not yet concluded, will make 
possible to gather the data needed for the 
quantitative/qualitative analysis and the discussion of the 
results, aiming to answer our main research question. We 
believe the findings will be helpful for organizations that want 
to move towards agility and want to be guided from existing 
(and combined) experience from industry and academia. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
Z. Šochová, “Hidden gap in agile methods adoption” Proceedings of the 
2010 conference on New Trends in Software Methodologies, Tools and 
Techniques, IOS Press, 2010, pp. 346-356. 
[2]
 
M. Lacey, “Agile & Organizational Culture”, Agile Alliance, 
http://agile2009.agilealliance.org/culture (accessed Nov 2009). 
[3]
 
A. Sidky, J. Arthur and S. Bohner, “A disciplined approach to adopting 
agile practices: the agile adoption framework” Innovations in Systems 
and Software Engineering, vol. 3, n. 3, 2007, pp. 203-216. 
[4]
 
D. Goodman and M. Elbaz, “’It's Not the Pants, it's the People in the 
Pants’ Learnings from the Gap Agile Transformation What Worked, 
How We Did it, and What Still Puzzles Us”, Proceedings of the 2008 
Agile Conference – AGILE, 2008, pp. 112-115. 
[5]
 
B. Kitchenham and S. Charters, “Guidelines for performing systematic 
literature reviews in software engineering” School of Computer Schence 
and Mathemathics, Department of Computer Science, United Kingdom, 
2007. 
[6]
 
A. Atlas, “Accidental Adoption: The story of scrum at amazon.com” 
Proceedings of the 2009 Agile Conference – AGILE, 2009, pp. 135-140. 
[7]
 
G. Cloke, “Get your agile freak on! Agile adoption at Yahoo! Music” 
Proceedings of the 2007 Agile Conference – AGILE, 2007, pp. 240-248. 
[8]
 
K. Nottonson and K. Delong, “Baby Steps: Agile Transformation at 
BabyCenter.com”, IT Professional, vol. 10, n. 5, 2008, pp. 59-62. 
[9]
 
P. O’Connor, “Anatomy and Physiology of an Agile Transition” 
Proceedings of the 2011 Agile Conference – AGILE, 2011, pp. 302-306.
65