 Undergraduate Student Perceptions of Pair Programming and Agile Software 
Methodologies: Verifying a Model of Social Interaction Kelli M. Slaten
1, Maria Droujkova3, Sarah B. Berenson1, Laurie Williams
2, Lucas Layman
2North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA 1Department of Mathematics Education, {kmslaten, berenson}@ncsu.edu  
2Department of Computer Science, {lmlayma2, lawilli3}@ncsu.edu 
3Natural Math, maria@naturalmath.com      
AbstractOne of the reasons that undergraduate students, 
particularly women and minorities, can become 
disenchanted with computer science education is because 
software development is wrongly characterized as a 

solitary activity.  We conducted a collective case study in 
a software engineering course at North Carolina State 
University to ascertain the effects of a collaborative 

pedagogy intervention on student perceptions.  The 
pedagogy intervention was based upon the practices of 
agile software development with a focus on pair 

programming.  Six representative students in the course 
participated in the study. Their perspectives helped 
validate a social interaction model of student views. The 

findings suggest that pair programming and agile 
software methodologies contribute to more effective 
learning opportunities for computer science students and 
that students understand and appreciate these benefits. 
1. Introduction Traditional computer science and software engineering 
courses often emphasize working alone and position 

collaboration as cheating.  Team projects commonly use a 
“divide and conquer” approach, whereby the project is 

broken up into relatively independent parts for each team 
member to tackle alone.  We have initiated a study of 
pedagogy emphasizing collaboration and teamwork in a 

software engineering course.  
We conducted a collective case study in a software 
engineering course at North Carolina State University 

(NCSU) to ascertain the effects of a collaborative 
pedagogy intervention on student perceptions.  The study 
is a part of a longitudinal study of agile software 

development in the undergraduate software engineering 
course which involves students at NCSU, North Carolina 
A&T State University, and Meredith College.  The goal of 
the study is to investigate collaborative learning 

environments and their effects on advanced undergraduate 

computer science students.  Previous studies have shown 
that collaborative work environments, which provide for 
social interactions, are preferred by many women [13, 14].  
In this paper, we substantiate and strengthen the Social 
Interaction Model of Pair Programming (SIMPP) that was 

initially developed to address the issues relating to the 

success and satisfaction of female students [4]. In this 
paper we further analyze the elements of the SIMPP, and 
examine whether the model also represents the perceptions 

of male students.  
The objective of this study is to address 
the following questions: 
1.How does the Social Interaction Model of Pair 
Programmingreflect the perceptions of male 
and female students?
2.How can the model’s categories and connections 
between them be developed and expanded? 
In this study, interviews were conducted with six 
students from the software engineering course at NCSU.  

The interviews were analyzed together with course 
retrospectives provided by the students.  This analysis 

provided several additional pieces of evidence in support 
of the SIMPP conceptual framework.  We also collected 
new insights from students revealing the complexities of 

the values in the model.  
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 contains background and related work; Section 

3 describes our research methodology; Section 4 
describes the SIMPP conceptual framework; Section 5 
presents our findings; and we provide discussion and our 

conclusion in Section 6. 
2. Background Agile software development methods are a subset of 
iterative and evolutionary methods [10, 11] and are based 

on iterative enhancement [2] and opportunistic 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 development processes [9].  In all iterative products, each 
iteration is a self-contained mini-project with activities 
that span requirements analysis, design, implementation, 
and test [10].  The customer adaptively specifies his or her 

requirements for the next release based on observation of 
the evolving product, rather than speculation at the start of 
the project [6].  A key element to agile methodologies is 

the value of individuals and interactions over processes 
and tools.  This places a strong emphasis on interpersonal 
communication and cooperation to create a successful 

project.     
Pair programming refers to the practice whereby two 
programmers work together at one computer, 
collaborating on the same design, algorithm, code, or test.  
The pair is made up of a 
driver,
 who actively types at the 
computer or records a design; and a 
navigator
, who watches the work of the driver and attentively identifies 

problems, asks clarifying questions, and makes 

suggestions.  Both are also continuous brainstorming 
partners.  The use of pair programming has grown in 
recent years, mainly due to its inclusion as a prominent 

practice of Extreme Programming (XP) [3]. 
Pedagogically, agile software development methods 
promote the use of collaboration among students.  

Computer science faculty are beginning to experiment 
with agile methods in the classroom.  Previous research 
findings suggest that from students’ perspectives, there are 

numerous educational advantages to the use of these 
methods [7, 17, 18].  These findings indicate that student 
pair programmers have higher scores on graded 

assignments, experience less frustration, and gain 
increased satisfaction and confidence. 
3. Methodology In this section, we discuss the details of the software 
engineering course and the student participants. Research 

design and sources of data are also addressed. 
3.1 Course description Two sections of a junior and senior level software 
engineering course contributed data to the study. The 

courses took place in the Fall 2003 and Fall 2004 
semesters.  Both courses were taught by the same 

instructor.  Students attended two 50-minute lectures and 
one two-hour closed lab each week.  In the Fall 2003 
semester, 102 students were enrolled in the course; in the 

Fall 2004 semester, 70 students were enrolled in the 
course.  All students attended the same lecture section.  
The closed lab was taught by a graduate student teaching 

assistant in groups of 24 students or less.   
In both semesters, students completed two, two-week 
assignments in pairs, one three-week assignment alone, 

and one six-week project in teams of three to five.  The 
shorter assignments involved the development of 

relatively small projects, each assignment focusing on a 
different area of the software development process.  These 
assignments were completed using a waterfall-type 

development model.  For the team project, the XP 
methodology was utilized.  Students used the Java 
programming language for all projects.   
The laboratory for this course, the Laboratory for 
Collaborative System Development
1, was set up for pair 
programming.  Each computer was equipped with two 

monitors, two keyboards, and two mice, thereby 
accommodating the positions of driver and navigator and 
easy switches between the roles.   
3.2 Research design 
To examine multiple students’ perspectives, we used a 
collective case study approach, looking for emergent 

themes in perceptions of computer science students. 

Collective case studies are based on the analysis of several 
individuals within a specific domain and the dynamics that 
emerge from that domain [8].  We define our domain as 
“collaboration,” and analyzed the dynamics resulting from 
instructional and programming approaches used by the 

students.  These dynamics were examined from the point 
of view of the Social Interaction Model of Pair 
Programming (SIMPP) developed in the course of our 

longitudinal study [4].  The SIMPP is explained in Section 
4.    
3.3 Participants The participants of the collective case study reported in 
this paper were six students enrolled in either the Fall 

2003 or the Fall 2004 software engineering course. The 
students volunteered to participate in the study.  Due to 

small numbers of females enrolled in the course, all of 
them were contacted about participation.  The male 
students were contacted about participation randomly 

from all of the students enrolled in the course. Three 
participants, Ed, Ron, and Clarence (pseudonyms), all 
male, were enrolled in the course in the Fall 2003 

semester.  The other three participants, Valerie, Nancy and 
Jeff (pseudonyms), one male and two female, were 
enrolled in the Fall 2004 semester.  
3.4 Sources of data The primary sources of data were semi-structured 
interviews and project retrospectives written by the 

students.  Semi-structured interviews are conducted with a 

written protocol, but allow the interviewer to ask further 
questions based on the interviewees’ responses [15].  The 
                                                          
1 http://collaboration.csc.ncsu.edu/laurie/LCSD.htm 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 protocol used in our study can be
 found in Appendix A.  
Each interview lasted approximately 45 minutes.  We have 
previously concentrated on female and minority 
interviews, as the focus of our longitudinal research 

project is the success and retention of women and 
minorities in information technology (IT).  In this study, 
we interviewed males and non-minorities as a reference 

point, and also because we hypothesized that males and 
non-minorities can also benefit from the intervention of 
collaborative pedagogy we are studying. 
Nine interviews with six students were chosen for this 
study.  The choice of participants was based on theoretical 

sampling [8].  Theoretical sampling is used in case studies 
where cases are chosen based on their likeliness to extend 
or reproduce an emergent theory, in our study, the SIMPP.  

Theoretical sampling is first done with a homogenous 
group in order to develop a theory or model, which was 
done in a previous study [4].  Then the sampling is applied 

to a heterogeneous group to confirm or disconfirm the 
conditions of the previously developed model.  Our goal 
in this study was to find how the SIMPP relates to the 

perceptions of both male and female students. 
Three of the participants, Ed, Ron, and Clarence, were 
interviewed on two occasions: first during the Fall 2003 

semester while they were enrolled in the course with a 
follow up interview conducted in the Spring 2005 
semester. The other three participants, Valerie, Nancy, and 

Jeff, were interviewed during the Fall 2004 semester while 
they were enrolled in the course.Project retrospectives were written by all students 
toward the end of the course.  Students were required to 

write about their experiences with their team projects.  
The protocol for the retrospective can be found in 
Appendix B.  In this paper, we also reflect on the 
retrospectives of our six interview participants.   
4. Conceptual framework 
The conceptual framework for our study is based on a 
situated cognition perspective [12], where students learn 
in collaborative apprenticeships, and on social 
constructivism discourse studies [16].  As students move 

beyond their initial peripheral apprenticeships toward 
more responsibilities of an IT worker, we examine their 
perceptions of this learning experience. 
The SIMPP [4, 5] was developed from an initial case 
study of three interviews wi
th female students who took 
the course in the Fall 2003 semester.  SIMPP initially had 

four categories [4] but was later refined to contain five [5].  
In its current version, SIMPP describes five interrelated 
categories of the positive factors the students see in 

collaboration, as shown in Figure 1.  These five categories 
are:  Less Time Spent, Higher Productivity, Higher 
Quality, Increased Confidence, and Increased Interest in 
IT.   
The SIMPP was based on observations from students 
who noted that errors in programming and reasoning were 

corrected more quickly while work with others.  Also, 
partners often had a solution to an arising problem, which 

saved search and research.  Both of these aids saved the 
students 
time.  In the words of students, this positive 
influence of collaboration on the time factor yielded 
higher productivity
 and also higher quality of the end 
product. Producing higher quality products in less time 

appeared to increase the students’ 
confidence
 in their 
abilities. We propose that these four factors fostered or 
retained these students’ 
interest
 in IT careers.  It is 
reasonable to assume that if one can produce a higher 

quality product in less time, one’s confidence should 
increase, which in turn, should foster more interest in that 

particular activity, as supported by [1, 14].  In this paper, 
we expanded our study to examine if the model applies to 
males as well as females. 
Figure 1. Social Interaction Model of Pair 
Programming (SIMPP) 5. Findings In this section, we reflect on each on the SIMPP factors 
based upon interviews with and retrospectives from our 
six participants. We provide verbatim excerpts from 
interviews and retrospectives to illustrate key themes. 
5.1 Time SpentIn our previous interviews with female students, the 
consensus was that pair programming took less time than 
solo work.  Several of the students in interviews for this 
study expressed mixed feelings about the time issue, 
including the belief that explaining ideas to a partner 
slows the work down.  Ed said that pair programming was 

a good practice, except for the time it takes to explain his 
ideas:If you could somehow cut that lag time of having to 
explain to the other person or other people around you 
Less Time 
Spent 
HigherProductivityIncreased 
Interest in IT
HigherQualityPositiveCollaborativeExperiencesIncreased 
Confidence 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 what you are doing…then I’d say yes, you’ve got a 
winner there. 
However, the same student felt that the lag in time was 
compensated by the gains in social skills. Ed further 
stated:I think being cooperative on a team or in a group is a 

really very handy skill that is subconsciouslylearned in 

this and this programming environment fosters that. 
The connection between the category of time and the 
categories of productivity and quality is crucial for the 
understanding of students’ perception of the time issues 
relating to pair programming.  Some students commented 
that some aspects of pair programming, such as initial 
communication of ideas, take more time. However, they 
saw these aspects as a learning experience reflecting the 

realities of the workplace.  The pair programming thus 
increased overall productivity, considering finishing the 
project at hand and overall learning as two parts of the 

“product.”  Both students who saw pair programming as 
taking less time and taking more time commented on the 
increased quality of the projects.  Thus, in the opinion of 

these students, direct time comparisons between waterfall 
and pair programming projects that have superior quality 
do not work. 
5.2Higher Productivity 
The immediate experience of increased productivity 
and efficiency arose in interviews with students who saw 

pair programming as taking less time. For instance, 

Clarence felt the practice of pair programming increases 
productivity: 
Aside from having the knowledge base of two people, it 
helps speed up the productivity a lot.  
Jeff stated in his project retrospective how pair 
programming contributed to the productivity of the team 
project:The pair programming really helped.  We caught each 

other’s small mistakes and it helped the process move 

along.An already mentioned idea related to the category of 
productivity is the efficiency of learning.  Students 
commented on the ways pair programming helped them 
learn efficiently by supplying another view on a problem, 

and by supporting more advanced thinking through 
feedback and discussion of ideas with their partners.  
Thus, higher productivity is achieved by spending less 

time on learning. 
Jeff addressed how he learns from his partner’s view of 
a problem and from working with a partner: 
I’ll see the way someone approaches a problem and I’ll 
implement that as well, along with the way I think 
about it.  You learn from each other.  I do most of my 
homework with someone else now, just because of this 

class, because I can sit there looking at one problem 
thinking, “I don’t understand this.” And my friend will 
understand it and we’ll vibe off each other and learn 

from each other. 
Learning from others contributes to higher productivity 
by helping students to see more efficient ways of 
approaching a problem.  Valerie commented on the time 
saved by learning from others: 
Sometimes I read something and they look at it 
different than I do… it kind of widens your mind with 
what solutions there are to things, and maybe you 
missed some things that you couldn’t understand in 
class and you ask and they do, or they just have more 
experience and even little things, shortcuts, that make 

things more efficient for you. You di
dn’t know they 
were there, so it saves you a lot of time or a lot of work. 
In his project retrospective, Clarence names productive 
learning from people with complementary expertise as a 
reason he enjoyed pair programming: 
Paired programming is something that I like better, 
because it seems to take all the stress and distribute it 
evenly between both people. It also allows for 
productivity while at the same time one partner 

teaching an area the other isn't familiar with. 
5.3Higher Quality 
Students commented on numerous sides of increased 
quality with pair programming. They mentioned fewer 

errors, more ways of solving problems, including more 
elegant methods, and filling in gaps and missing pieces of 
ideas.Ron felt that fewer errors increased the quality of work.  
He also described how working in pairs can help fill gaps 

in knowledge: 
Yeah, I mean, it’s definitely true that when you work 
together with somebody, you have fewer errors and 
better work…What pair programming is trying to tap 

into is that when you do miss stuff and you are inside 
your own head and it is very important to have 
someone else fill in the things that you think are 
obvious or that you’re missing or you forgot
.Ed further addressed an idea similar to Ron’s: 
My partner, he had the logic down really well but he 
wasn’t as familiar with the job as I was so I kind of 
filled in the gaps and he approached it in a way that I 

would not have originally thought to approach it.  So 
we came up with some really good code that 
individually neither one of us would have been able to 

have written, more than likely…th
e way he did it, we 
came out with really elegant code and it was more 

advanced and more efficient than anything I could have 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 made on my own.  So I got to see another way of doing 
something. 
Seeing other ways of approaching a problem was an 
important experience for Clarence: 
If I didn’t get anything else out of it [the course] as far 
as actual programming methods, I think at least it 
brought out the awareness that there could be more 

efficient ways to do things.   
There emerged a new relationship between the 
categories of time, productivity and quality that is 
important for students.  On one hand, the other member of 
the pair has to be “similar enough,” which saves time on 
communication and understanding.  On the other hand, 
students commented on the productivity and quality 
benefits of having complementary skills with their 

“different enough” partners.  
Clarence spoke about the contribution of understanding 
to the saving of time: 
I think if those two people can understand each other 
and what they can contribute, it can probably go faster. 
Valerie spoke of her work experiences and the 
effectiveness of having similar perspectives: 
I have done extreme programming at work before and 
it was a great experience because we both had the 

similar mindsets, and as a result, we did a good job in 
a short time. Nancy wrote in her project retrospective that an 
experience with pair programming was successful with 
partners who had different skills: 
Pair programming was a major success for our group 
especially with each of us having different skills, the 
combined effort made going along a lot smoother. 
5.4Confidence
Two sides of the category of confidence emerged from 
the interviews that are different from previous results [5]: 

the issue of power and the belief that collaborative 
practices in the class realistically reflect the workplace.  
Nancy described how pair programming contributed to 
her confidence in asking questions: 
I think it’s easier if you can talk to friends about this stuff. You can approach those people easier than you 
can approach a TA or a professor, sometimes that can 

be intimidating, and sometimes you feel like your 
questions are really silly or something, even though 
professors try to press that they don’t believe any 

question is silly, it’s still a little intimidating. 
Clarence spoke to the social benefits of pair 
programming and how those skills are important in the 
workplace:In general, pair is much better than single…I think it 
has the benefit also of helping you understand other 
people too and not be quite as antisocial…you learn 
more about your interactions with other people which 

is important…to any kind of company, I think it gives a 
kind of fringe benefit in that way too. 
5.5Increased Interest in IT 
Students noticed that the closeness of the setting of 
their apprenticeship to workplace environments increased 

their confidence, which in turn led to increased interest in 
the IT field. 
For example, Jeff excitedly expressed his desire to 
work for a company that uses pair programming: 
After this class, I have a reason to (work with a 

partner) and I want to push it more…I went for an 
interview with this company…he showed me the XP 
area, where they do pair programming and it looked 

just like where we had the lab. That amazed me…I saw 
people programming together and right there I just 
wanted to work for the company, I wanted to quit 
school and start working with them. 
6. Discussion and conclusions The findings suggest that the SIMPP categories apply 
not only to females, but also to male students. Additional 
data highlighted complexities within each category and 
allowed us to develop further connections between 
categories (Figure 2).  
We changed the 
less time spent 
category to 
time spent,withless and 
more as two possibilities. Although the 
category of less time did not hold for all students, 
time is still a crucial factor in the categories of 
higher productivityandhigher quality. Some students thought that increased 
productivity and faster learning contributed to less time 

spent on assignments, while everybody thought the time 
spent was worth it because of the increased quality.   
The issue of 
learning
 from each other relates to the 
categories of higher productivity, higher quality and 

increased confidence.  Students believed they learned 
more efficient ways of approaching problems, had fewer 
errors, and were able to fill gaps in their own knowledge 
when they worked with other students. Students’ 

perceptions of their partners’ ability levels affected how 
they learned from each other. On the one hand, 
similaritiesbetween students led to more productive collaboration 
through more efficient communication. On the other hand, 
differences were appreciated as leading to filling 
knowledge gaps and supplying complementary skills for 
solving problems.   
Furthermore, students felt more 
confident
 and 
empowered
 to learn when they were able to ask their peers 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 questions. The confidence also increased through the 
closeness between classroom practices and workplace 
practices, that is, through class practice being 
real
.Students valued the connection of these collaborative 
practices to the workplace.  This connection, as well as 
growth in the quality of their work and in the productivity, 
increased their 
interest in working in the IT field.  
Our goal was to characterize student perceptions of the 
collaborative learning environments of pair programming 

and agile software development.  We have substantiated 

and refined the SIMPP collaborative model, as well as 
shown that this model holds true for both women and men.  
We conclude that collaborative environments are viable 
pedagogical alternatives to traditional emphasis on 
working alone. These practices can improve 
undergraduate computer science education by helping 

students learn a variety of different approaches and gain 
confidence from working 
with other students.  
7.Acknowledgements 
This material is based upon the work supported by the 
National Science Foundation under the Grant No, 

00305917.  Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or 
recommendations expressed in this material are those of 
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of 
the National Science Foundation.  
Figure 2. Development of the SIMPP model 
References[1] AAUW Educational Foundation, "Educating Girls in the 
New Computer Age," 
http://www.aauw.org/member_center/publications/TechSav
vy/TechSavvy.pdf, 2000. 
[2] V. R. Basili and A. J. Turner, "Iterative Enhancement:  A 
Practical Technique for Software Development," 
IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering
, vol. 1, no. 4, pp. 
266 - 270, 1975. 
[3] K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained:  Embrace 
Change, Second ed. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 
2005.[4] S. B. Berenson, K. M. Slaten, L. Williams, and C.-w. Ho, 
"Voices of Women in a Software Engineering Course:  

Reflections on Collaboration," 
ACM Journal on 
Educational Resources in Computing
, no., to appear. 
[5] S. B. Berenson, L. Williams, and K. M. Slaten, "Using Pair 
Programming and Agile Development Methods in a 

University Software Engineering Course to Develop a 
Model of Social Interactions," Crossing Cultures, Changing 
Lives Conference, Oxford, UK, 2005, pp. to appear. 
[6] B. Boehm, "A Spiral Model for Software Development and 
Enhancement," 
Computer, vol. 21, no. 5, pp. 61-72, May 
1988.[7] A. Cockburn and L. Williams, "The Costs and Benefits of 
Pair Programming," in 
Extreme Programming Examined
, G. Succi and M. Marchesi, Eds. Boston, MA: Addison Wesley, 
2001, pp. 223-248. 
[8] J. W. Creswell, 
Qualitative inquiry and research design: 
Choosing among five traditions.
 Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 
1998.[9] B. Curtis, "Three Problems Overcome with Behavioral 
Models of the Software Development Process (Panel)," 

International Conference on Software Engineering, 
Pittsburgh, PA, 1989, pp. 398-399. 
[10] C. Larman, 
Agile and Iterative Development:  A Manager's 
Guide. Boston: Addison Wesley, 2004. 
[11] C. Larman and V. Basili, "A History of Iterative and 
Incremental Development," 
IEEE Computer, vol. 36, no. 6, 
pp. 47-56, June 2003. 
Time Spent 
HigherQualit
yIncreased  
Confidence
Learnin
gAbilityLevelsHigher Productivity Increased  
Interest in IT 
RealPracticeProceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 [12] J. Lave and E. Wenger, 
Situated Learning:  Legitimate 
peripheral participation. New York, NY: Cambridge 
University Press, 1991. 
[13] J. Margolis and A. Fisher, "Geek Mythology and Attracting 
Undergraduate Women to Computer Science," Joint 
National Conference of the Women in Engineering Program 
Advocates Network and the National Association of 
Minority Engineering Program Administrators, 1997. 
[14] J. Margolis and A. Fisher, 
Unlocking the Clubhouse:  
Women in Computing
. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT 
Press, 2002. [15] C. B. Seaman, "Qualitative Methods in Empirical Studies of 
Software Engineering," 
IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 557-572, 1999. 
[16] J. L. Wertsch and C. Toma, "Discourse and learning in the 
classroom: A sociocultural approach," in 
Constructivism in 
Education, L. Steffe and J. Gale, Eds. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum, 1995, pp. 159-174. 
[17] L. Williams, E. Wiebe, K. Yang, M. Ferzli, and C. Miller, 
"In Support of Pair Programming in the Introductory 
Computer Science Course," 
Computer Science Education
,vol. 12, no. 3, pp. 197-212, September 2002. 
[18] L. A. Williams, "The Collaborative Software Process PhD 
Dissertation," in 
Department of Computer Science
. Salt 
Lake City, UT: University of Utah, 2000. 
Appendix A:  Interview protocol,October
2003OPENING: 
SAY: We are evaluating the instructional approaches used 

in your computer science 326 course. It is important for 
the instructors to know how well these new methods are 
working for you. This is why we want to ask some of the 
students what they think about the programming 
assignments in this course. 

Your responses will be anonymous. While we will share 
the results of the interviews with the instructor, he or she 
will not know that you were interviewed. 

1)What do you think of the assignments so far? 
a)Can you explain why you think that? 

b)Can you give me an example? 
2)So some of the assignments have been paired and 
some have been solo. What do   you think the students 

in your lab prefer, pair or solo? 

a)What reasons do they give for preferring 
_____________? 
b)What about those who prefer _____________? 
3)What about you? What approach do you prefer? 
a)Why is that true? 
b)Any other reasons? 
4)What makes _________ an effective instructional tool 
for you? 

a)Have you noticed othe
r approaches that help you 
learn? 
b)Can you give me an example? 
5)What do you see yourself 
doing after graduation? 
a)Have you ever done this before? How did it go? 

b)How do you envision the workplace? 
6)Do you think pair programming will work in today’s 
IT workplace? 

a)Why? Please explain this idea some more. 
b)Why not? Please explain this idea some more. 
Thanks very much for your time. You were very 
thoughtful. Your ideas will help many students here at NC 
State and in other programs across the United States. 
Good luck with the semester. 
Appendix B: Project retrospective protocol Turn in a two- to three-page document that enumerates 
honestly and constructively
 what worked and didn't work 
well with your team project.  At a minimum, specifically 
discuss:  
1)User Stories, Iteration, Acceptance Tests:  Did having 
three short iterations help you pace yourself to 
completion?  Do you feel you benefited from 
feedback you got after each iteration?  Did having the 
Acceptance Tests help you to clarify the 

requirements?  
2)Configuration management:  Did CVS help you 
manage your files?  
3)JUnit and FIT:  Do you feel either or both of these 
kinds of testing helped you in creating a high quality 

project?  Do you feel like this kind of testing helped 

reduce debugging time?  Did you create these test 
cases as you went along or did you complete a user 
story and then run the tests?  Based on your 
experience, do you think it is best to create the tests 
all along or at the end?  
4)Your method of work:  Pair programming or Solo 
programming.  How did it work?   What percentage 

of time do you feel like you worked solo, what 

percentage of the time do you feel you worked in 
pairs?  What made you decide when to work solo and 
when to work in pairs [time constraints, difficulty of 

work, etc.]5)How well your team communicated with each 
other.  What vehicles did you use for communication 

– web site, email, setting up a mailing list, etc.    
6)Division of team roles – both the team roles discussed 
in class (team leader, development manager, quality 

manager. planning/process manager) . . . but also did 
you assign a certain person to be the SWT expert, 
etc.  How was technical information shared within the 

team?    
7)Did you enjoy the project?  Why or why not?  Did 
you like the fact that it was an Eclipse plug-in?  [This 

question will help immensely for choosing next year’s 
project.]8)Did you reuse any code found on the web?  How did 
this go?  How was testing this code? 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 9)How did you like Extreme Programming?  Do you 
think your project would have instead been better run 
in a plan-driven way?  Did 
you formally or informally 
create use cases, class diagrams, or sequence 
diagrams?  If so, did you share them among the 
team?  Did you run any CRC card sessions?   
10)What advice do you have for next year’s class that 
will have a 4-5 person, 6 week team project [which 

may or may not be an Eclipse plug-in?]  
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
