 Staying Agile in Government Software Projects 
Barg Upender SRA International, Inc. barg_upender@sra.com 
AbstractCan government software projects be agile?  What do 
Scrum and XP practices have to offer in this regulated 

and highly political environment?  In this experience 
report, I will discuss some of the unique challenges in our 
environment and how we have had to adapt these 

practices to produce commercial-grade software.  I will 
provide a “report card” on our progress in applying 
Scrum and XP practices to a clinical data management 

project over a two-year period.  In addition, I will 
describe the practices that were accepted “religiously”, 
adapted to get the job done, and abandoned completely.  

In particular, I will di
scuss how we got around bootstrapping, Rational tools, documentation needs, and 

managing a product backlog for a diverse, decentralized 

user community.  Putting these practices to work was 
hard, but they resulted in better team communication, a 
more usable product, and improved partnership between 

the users and the development team.  In addition, staying 
agile is just as hard as becoming agile. 
1.Introduction 
Scrum has its origins in the competitive world of 
commercial software product development [1].  This 
paper discusses our experience with applying the Scrum 
practices on a software project in a Federal contracting 

environment.  The project’s goal was to develop a data 
and workflow management system for scientists 
conducting clinical research at the National Institutes of 

Health (NIH).  Clinical research involves studies on 
human subjects in order to find better ways to detect, 
diagnose, treat, and prevent a variety of diseases.  Since 

these studies involve humans, the highest ethical and 
safety standards must be followed.   
The clinical research lifecycle involves proposing a 
hypothesis, developing a research plan, review of the plan 
by a safety review board, conducting the study, analyzing 

results, and publishing the findings.  The proposed 
software would be used by the researchers to reduce 
paper, improve the data collection process, and simplify 
data analysis.  The three-year project is divided into three 
overlapping phases:     
1.Automate the paper-intensive safety review process  

2.Electronically capture clinical research data 

3.Integrate patient data with other databases and 
provide tools to analyze data across studies. 
Each phase is roughly one year.  Currently we are 2 years 
into the project. 
The Team The project is a collaborative effort between two NIH 

institutes.  The sponsoring institute contributes a business 
analyst and a software developer.  The second institute 

contributes four developers and a project manager.  In 
total, the core development team consists of four Java 
developers and an Oracle database administrator.  The 

development team is from SRA International, a leading 
government contractor.  The project manager is a federal 
employee who is accountable to the sponsor.  The sponsor 

reports to a steering committee consisting of research 
scientists.The user base is made up of research groups consisting of 
a Principal Investigator, medical doctors, nurses, post-
doctoral fellows, and administrative assistants.  These 

groups are organized to operate independently in order to 
encourage creative and competitive research (similar to a 
University environment).  Each group has their own 

unique study process, data collection approach, and 
rudimentary tools (e.g. Excel, Access) to capture data. 
The key objective of the project is to replace these point 

systems with a central, enterprise-class data management 
system.   
There had been several failed attempts at solving this 
problem in the past due to the inherent challenges of 

unifying the requirements and the organization.  The 
traditional waterfall-based contracting model was not able 
to address the technical and organizational challenges.   
Our team is composed of senior developers with broad 
experience in software product development. The team 

had a strong commitment to project success and was 
eager to gain the customer’s confidence. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 Project Vision 
During the project kickoff meeting, the sponsor outlined 
the broad capabilities of the system.  The system should 
allow the researchers to design their own data collection 

forms, provide secure access to patient data, and provide 
an audit trail for regulatory compliance.  The project 
manager presented the development approach and 

outlined the development tools to be used.  
Much of the software development work at federal 
agencies is done by contractors.  Contractors come and go 
and the knowledge gets lost.  To preserve the 
requirements, business rules, and design decisions in such 

a dynamic environment, the project manager wanted to 
use the Rational Unified Process (RUP) and the Rational 
toolset, including RequisitePro for managing 

requirements, XDE for modeling the system in UML, 
ClearQuest for configuration management, and IBM 
WebSphere Studio for Integrated Development 

Environment (IDE).  Several of these tools were already 
purchased.  In a previous company, I had successfully 
used Rational Rose to migrate to object oriented 
technology.  Iterative, model-based software development 
made engineering sense.  The team was enthusiastic about 

learning the tools and putting these ideas into practice. 
Phase 1 Approach The initial milestone was to produce the Safety Review 

Management application in six months.  Since the team 

was new to the toolset and the clinical research domain, 
we decided to incrementally inject the tools into the 
development process.  First, we focused on setting up a 
strong development environment based on the best 
practices.  Since we had better experience with CVS than 

ClearQuest in the past, we were able to convince the 
management to adopt CVS.  We installed CVS to manage 
the source code, configured a WebSphere development 

environment, and adopted our corporate coding standards.  
For the time being, we decided to follow a simplified 
Rational Unified Process with a rhythm consisting of 

monthly iterations.  The UML modeling effort was 
deferred until Phase 2.   
As the problem domain was new to the team, the first 
three months were spent understanding the requirements 
and learning the new tools.  The team generated use cases, 

requirements, architecture, and component design 
documents.  We had scheduled team meetings on 
Tuesdays to discuss technical issues.  Often these meeting 

ran long, and they quickly became unpopular.  We also 
had scheduled Friday meetings with the sponsor to 
provide status, show a demonstration, and obtain 

feedback.   
After an initial meeting with the users, the team did not 

have direct access to the end users.  The information was 
conveyed through the business analyst.  The first few 
“iterations” consisted of developing a static HTML-based 

prototype of the requested functionality.  The screens 
used fake data.  The sponsor and the users interacted with 
the prototype and provided early feedback.   
Within the six months, we delivered a system with the 
key features.  However, it took eleven months total 

elapsed time and six more releases before the users started 
using the system.  Several factors contributed to this 
delay:As users interacted with each release, requirements 
changed slightly and new requirements emerged.  

The users did not want to use the system until these 
features were completed. 
The users were extremely busy with the existing 
paper and Excel-based process.  
The development team continued to add the requested 

features to the system.   
2.Road to Agility 
The second phase of the project, which we are completing 

in this fall, has proven to be significantly more 

challenging.  In this phase, we have to manage users with 
diverse needs, build a web-based form design tool, and 
provide mechanisms to share common data elements in a 
decentralized environment.  In anticipation of these 
challenges, I started looking around for methods and tools 

that would help us with managing requirements, planning 
releases, designing the application, and facilitating 
communication in the team. 
In the fall of 2003, I attended the Software Development 
Conference in Boston.  Due to the .com crash and the 

ensuing recession, I hadn’t been to a trade conference in 
several years.  At the conference, half the talks focused on 
RUP and the other half focused on emerging agile 

methods.  In particular, Joshua Kerievsky’s Industrial XP 
[2] and Ken Shwaber’s Scrum [1] presentation had a 
profound influence on me.  These talks resonated with 

me, as they pertained to some of the difficulties I was 
facing as well as potential ways to tackle these challenges.  
In particular, the value-driven, evolutionary design 

approach of IXP looked pr
omising.  This technique would 
allow the team to focus on high-value items first and defer 

uncertain requirements until they became clearer.  
However, IXP was a more radical concept for the 
management and team.  Scrum was simpler to understand 

and more “management friendly”. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 After returning from the trip, I presented the ideas to the 
team.  Both the management and the team were skeptical 
about these practices.  The Rational Unified Process still 
made good engineering sense and seemed to them more 

predictable and controllable.  Meanwhile, the agile 
manifesto [3] sounded like some left-wing, anti-
government document.  Surprisingly, there was even 

more resistance from the developers.  I thought the 
developers would be empowered by the self-organizing 
team approach.  But, most of the developers were 

talented, highly-seasoned engineers and there were a lot 
of philosophical design and process differences.  Shifting 
them to the agile mindset would take time.     
Phase 2: First Agile Cycle Since the problem domain was getting more complex, the 

design meetings were getting intense and the 

requirements remained conflicting and unclear.  We 
decided to do a quick, one-week development cycle using 
an evolutionary design approach.  The goal of this 

iteration was to develop an “embryonic” clinical 
application that provided coarse end-to-end functionality.  
The application would allow the user to design a simple 

form with questions, fill out the form, and export the form 
data.  To keep it manageable, we deferred implementation 

of patient management, support for multiple user groups, 
and authentication screens to future releases. 
Generally, the cycle was a mini-success.  The team was 
pleased to be delivering functionality rather than having 
huge philosophical design discussions and producing 

documentation.  However, the agile ideas and practices 
didn’t stick.  The management was concerned that the 
“big” problems in the system weren’t solved and we 

shouldn’t be developing code until we had a better handle 
on these solutions.  The management asked questions like 
“What is the big picture?,” “What new technologies do 

we need to explore and adapt?,” and “When will the 
application be done?” 
As a result, management decided that the team’s time 
would be better spent investigating technologies for 
addressing the challenging problems. At this point, we 
went into “research and demo mode” and abandoned all 
development.  Over the next couple of months, each 

developer explored and presented different technologies, 
including: Microsoft InfoPath for designing forms, 
XForms for generating web forms, enterprise portals to 

provide a consistent interface, clinical data standards to 
leverage existing designs, and medical vocabularies to 
integrate data.        
Scrum Training 
In February 2004, I was able to encourage the project 
manager to take Ken Schwaber’s Scrum training in 
nearby facilities in Philadelphia.  We got up at four in the 

morning and drove four h
ours to Ken’s training at 
Primavera Systems Inc.  Due to traffic conditions in the 

various cities we passed, we arrived ten minutes late to 

Ken’s training.  We had to pay a dollar each to the “pizza 
fund”; thus started our Scrum training.  At the end of the 
training, I had the management buy-in.  However, to 

minimize controversies, the project manager decided not 
to “flaunt” Scrum terminology and incrementally adopt 
these practices over time.  Over time, the short release 

cycles, working software and user acceptance allowed 
both management and developers to embrace the agile 
model.  Now, the team corrects me if I stray from the 

agile way.  It took us six months to adopt several agile 
practices.3.Adopting and Adapting Scrum Practices 
Scrum practices provide practical methods to prioritize 
requirements, plan iteration, and complete a development 
cycle.  The following section describes how we 
implemented and adapted these practices. 
Product Owner In Scrum, the product owner is typically a single person 

who is responsible for setting the priorities and managing 

the requirements.  Often, this person is from the sales and 
marketing department and would have a good handle on 
the needs of the users. 
Our project had ambitious goals with a high degree of 
uncertainty in the requirements.  The application needed 
to please diverse user groups with limited patients.   Some 
of the groups were large, with over fifty users and many 

years of clinical research data.  Some groups were small, 
with more therapeutic-based research (i.e. clinical trials) 
where there is a more well-defined process mandated by 

the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).  Some groups 
had a variety of data types (images, wave forms, and lab 
data) with sophisticated analytical needs.  Yet other 

groups had elaborate screening and recruitment 
procedures.  Our first challenge was to prioritize these 
requirements and incrementally roll out the system to the 

users.   
Having a single product owner proved to be difficult in 
our environment.  It was difficult for a single person to 
understand the intricacies of the end state of the 
application.  A representative from both institutes was 

needed.  Consequently, we established a team of three 
people to prioritize features and make decisions.  It 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 consisted of the project manager, the senior developer 
from the other team, and me (the Scrum master). 
User Backlog First, we prioritized the user groups based on their 

immediate needs and internal politics.  The evolving 
system would be rolled out to one user group at a time.  
Generally each user group would get one or two releases.    

In essence, we developed a “user backlog”.  Figure 1 
shows a partial backlog for the first three releases.  The 
horizontal axis is the timeline.  The vertical axis shows 

the releases.  Each release, represented by a box, is 
developed for an investigator and is focused on a 
functional theme.  This backlog provided a roadmap for 

prioritizing the product backlog. 






Figure 1: An example user backlog 
The users were tired of new teams coming to them, 
gathering requirements, and coming back in year with 
completely unusable system (or even never coming back).  

The users did not trust developers.  To regain their trust, 
we met with the users, explained our process, 
demonstrated our preliminary system, and captured their 

feedback on a Wiki to share with the rest of the team.  We 
copied the urgent, high-values stories into the product 
backlog, planned and completed a sprint, and went back 

to the users to show them the new features.   
The investigators were pleased with the working software 
and the fact that we listened to their needs.  They were not 

accustomed to such a quick turn around.  They got excited 
about the system and provided more guidance.  In fact, 
our first user group cancelled an existing multi-year 

contract from another vendor and adopted our system.  
Our system provided more features in three months than 
the vendor was able to accomplish in eighteen months. 
Product Backlog In phase 1, we had captured the product requirements in 

an Excel spreadsheet.  Neither managers nor developers 

read this document.  These requirements were helpful in 
planning our monthly releases in Microsoft Project.  In 
Phase 2, we briefly tried Rational RequisitePro and 

abandoned it since it introduced additional barriers for the 
team to access requirements.  We also tried index cards 
used in XP practices [4].  However, the management had 
a strong desire to capture the knowledge in something 

more permanent.  In the end, we settled on Bugzilla, our 
defect tracking system.   
Bugzilla became our single repository to manage both 

product backlog and bugs encountered in the field.  
Bugzilla also helped us with our workflow and 
communication.  For example, it helped us manage the 

bug owner, bug state, as well as email communications.  
We also annotated each “bug” with requirement 
clarifications, design notes, data model changes, and other 

relevant information.  After design discussions, we took 
digital pictures of the whiteboa
rd and put them into  
Bugzilla.  On occasions, we went back to the attachments 

for clarification.  Bugzilla not only helped us with 
managing the product backlog, but also helped the 

address the project manager’s documentation concerns. 
Bugzilla’s simple search and reporting capabilities helped 
us create a “burn-down” chart, which identifies the 
amount of remaining work.  The Bugzilla tool is 
seamlessly integrated with the project Wiki.  The Wiki 

contains informal notes such as sprint dates, design notes, 
release notes, and the burn-down chart.  The combination 
of a Wiki with Bugzilla works well; we abandoned the 

costly tools and adopted the free, flexible ones.  We spend 
very little time on these tools; our focus is on delivering 
working software. 
Sprint Planning 
In Scrum, each sprint is time boxed to thirty days.  During 

an initial meeting the product owner defines the highest 

priority features to the team.  Then, the team has a second 
four-hour meeting to breakdown the features into tasks, 
produce an estimate to complete the tasks, and make 

commitments to the tasks that they think they can deliver.   
Generally, our planning process is not as efficient as the 
official Scrum practice.  For the simple features, coming 
up with estimates is fast and easy.  However, we wrestle 
with some of the more challenging features that impact 

the core data model.  We explore different design ideas in 
an attempt to maintain a balance between getting 
something done for this release versus creating a more 
lasting solution.  Most senior designers are instinctively 
driven to big designs that they feel will last forever.  But, 

I am strong believer in YNGNI, “you’re NOT gonna need 
it” [5].  Ultimately, it’s a balance between over-design 
and sloppy design.  I think achieving this balance is the 

single most important factor in determining the level of 
agility a team can have. 
In the end, we couldn’t complete the planning process 
until we had a rough design approach.  Consequently, our 
planning process takes several days to complete.  
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 However, we continue developing
 code in parallel for the 
easier features while we finalize the plan. 
We tried different estimations and tracking approaches, 
including NUTS (nebulous units of time) as proposed by 
IXP.  Generally, developers didn’t like estimating.  In the 
end, we just based the estimates on actual time.  Kent 

Beck also suggests this practice in the new version of the 
Extreme Programming book [6]. 
For a couple of sprints, we had separate spreadsheets for 
the product and sprint backlogs.  However, when we fully 
migrated to Bugzilla as the product backlog, our sprint 
backlog just became a subset of the product backlog.  We 
just added details to existing bugs or created new bugs as 

needed.  We didn’t have to maintain a separate list for the 
sprint. 
Because there is a pressure to produce big things (high-

value) for each release, sometimes the little, annoying 
tasks always remained low on the priority list.  These 
tasks take several iterations before they are planned into a 

sprint.  Often these tasks are related to user interaction 
design and user satisfaction. 
Sprint Management During the sprint, the Scrum master shields the team from 

external interferences.  The team achieves high bandwidth 
communication and makes all decisions to support the 

sprint goals. 
The sprint executed smoothly once the team agreed on the 
high-level designs and the tasks in a sprint.  In the 
following section we will discuss three key aspects of 
sprint management: daily Scrum, just in time design, and 

sprint burn-down. 
Daily Scrum   
Daily standup meetings are one of the hallmarks of 

Scrum.  I expected a lot of resistance from the team as it 
may seem like over-management.  Surprisingly, this was 
our first successful practice. 
Our project involved collaboration with a developer in 
another institute, located in a different building on the 

campus.  There were communication bottlenecks between 
the institutes.  We introduced daily Scrum at 10am to 
make commitments and to remove obstacles.  The 

developer from the other institute dialed in most of the 
time.  When a tighter coordination was required, the 
developer walked over to the meeting.   
As we had no open space for daily meetings, we met in 
the project manager’s office for the stand-up meeting.  

Reserving conference rooms was a lengthy process.  
Eventually, we were able to get a dedicated conference 

room for our daily Scrums. 
We kept the meetings semi-formal and fun to facilitate 
team building, provide a daily synchronization point, and 
help developers communicate more.  There were no late 
fees and we had sit down meetings.  If an issue required 

detailed discussions, we had follow-on meetings with a 
smaller team.  We also used Instant Messenger (IM) often 
and VNC as needed. 
On several occasions we postponed the meeting to wait 
for an employee who needed to come in late.  However, 
that didn’t go very well because the team’s rhythm was 
disrupted.   In the end, we went with simple, consistent 

rules – start on time with whoever is available.  The daily 
Scrum is crucial, as it keeps the team informed and 
focused.   
Just in time design As mentioned earlier, “thinking light” about the design 
was one of the hardest things that the team had to 
confront.  There were strong and passionate opinions 
about the optimal way of designing the application.  Often 
the disagreements are due to the variety of perspectives 

that developers brought to the team (e.g. data model, 
security, and usability perspectives). 
In addition, the clinical research domain is complex.  We 
are developing a centralized system for an organization 
that is inherently decentralized.  For example, the 

investigators are not used to trying to use common 
vocabularies, common data collection forms, and 
common study processes.  So the requirements are always 

in flux and often in conflict.   
We have tried an evolutionary design approach, and the 
strongest design ideas have survived over the iterations.  

We had to abandon some bleeding-edge technologies (e.g. 
Microsoft Infopath, XForms, Oracle XMLDB) after 
repeated attempts to smoothly integrate with our system.  

Making these decisions has been hard, but things have 
progressed smoothly afterwards. 
Burn-down chart For a few sprints, we maintain
ed a burn-d
own chart in 
Excel.  The spreadsheet and the chart tracked hours 
remaining for each task.  The team just cared about 

making steady progress, so tracking the chart to hours 
remaining wasn’t needed.  In the end, we went with a 
simpler approach of tracking how many “bugs” (i.e. tasks) 

were completed in the last 24 hours, and how many 
“bugs” remained.  I posted these numbers on the Wiki.  
This provided the visible progress that we needed to 

assess how we were doing in achieving our sprint goals. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 Sprint ReviewAt the end of a sprint, Scrum recommends an informal 
meeting that demonstrates the functionality to the product 
owner and other key stakeholders.  The team reflects on 

what worked and what didn’t work.   
In our project, we had an internal demo with the team and 
the project manager.  This allowed the whole team to look 
at the finished product.  During this process, we often 
discovered some rough spots in the navigation, which are 

often easy fixes.  If a fix is more involved, we put it in the 
product backlog for next release.   
The product owners also scheduled separate 
demonstrations for the sponsor and the different user 
groups.  There was a strong desire by most of the 

development team to observe how the users interacted 
with the application, but the whole team could not be 
involved in these demonstrations due to space limitations, 

and also to avoid overwhelming the users.  Unfortunately, 
identifying which team member can attend these meetings 
became contentious.  We resolved this by having each 
developer “adopt” a different clinical researcher (i.e. user 
group) on a rotating basis.  The developer goes to the 

meetings with the product owners.  The developer is also 
responsible for setting up the demo data (e.g. creating 
forms and reports), and putting the notes on the Wiki for 

the others to view. 
After the release is installed on the production 
environment, we have a team lunch to celebrate the 
release.  Then, we start a new sprint. 
4.Scrum Report Card 
It took us six months to get started with agile software 
practices.  Figure 2 shows a self-assessment of how well 
we follow the Scrum principles.  For example, the daily 
Scrum is one of the more successful practices that we 

follow with minimal alterations.  We also have been 
efficient at managing the requirements in the product 
backlog using Bugzilla.   
Backlog16
Planning12
Sprint15
Review12
Score   84
Daily scrum    16
Roles13
BFigure 2: Scrum Report Card 
Due to the small size of the team, each team member is 
responsible for multiple roles.  For example, the Scrum 
master and the product owners are also developers.  The 

developers also support the production environment and 
provide customer support.  If we had dedicated resources 
for these roles, we might follow the process more 

methodically.    
Our planning process is the least efficient as it takes 
several days.  Generally, we can’t finish planning until we 
have agreement on the high level approach.  This design 
process takes time to get everyone on the same page.  
However, once the sprint is planned, we are good about executing the sprint efficiently.     
Other Agile Practices  
We have also experimented with various other agile 
practices.  For example, we tried pair programming on 
several occasions, with positive outcomes.  However, due 

to our small team size, we pair only on the challenging 
coding problems. 
Each developer frequently synchronizes with the CVS 
repository.  We have set up 
CruiseControl to build the 
application on check-ins and run minimal test cases.  This 
application sends an email to the team if the build or test 
cases fail.  Since we have limited test cases, we are not 

benefiting from continuous integration as much as we 
can.    
We tried Test Driven Design (TDD) during several 
sprints.  We used jUnit, httpUnit, and Fitnesse.  Our 
application is HTML-intensive.  At the web-layer, we 

developed some unit tests using httpUnit and acceptance 
tests using Fitnesse.  However, these tests were brittle as 
the user interface changed frequently.  At the business 

object layer, we developed jUnit tests.  Much of our 
business logic consisted of straightforward add/edit/delete 
transactions.  We have limited complex business logic 

and/or algorithms where extensive test case would have 
been more justifiable.  We ran into two issues: 1) getting 
the database to a known state; and 2) writing a set of test 
cases that would find real problems, so that maintaining 
test cases didn’t become a burden.  Perhaps, we can 

overcome these difficulties by using dbUnit and some 
formal training.     
Generally, developing these test cases hasn’t seemed to be 
cost-effective.  However, I think with proper training and 
discipline, TDD can be a valuable practice that can lead to 

a more focused implementation.   
Shared workspace hasn’t been an option.  Each team 
member has a cubicle office.  We have overcome this 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
 limitation by having lot of large white boards on the 
outside of the walls where the team can meet to discuss 
ideas.  We also use Instant Messaging effectively.   
5.Summary
Overall, the Scrum practices have helped us become more 
efficient at delivering software.  The team does not miss 
the scheduled weekly meetings, architecture documents, 
requirements spreadsheets, and variable release cycles. 
We have had to adapt some practices to our particular 
environment.  Putting these practices to work was 
difficult as we were dealing with challenging 
requirements and strong design philosophies.  But agile 

practices have unquestionably helped the team, the project 
managers, and the end users.  The team has better 
communication. We spend more time writing software, 

and are pleased with user acceptance.  The project 
mangers are pleased with the team commitment.  Daily 
visibility into progress gives the team more freedom to 

make decisions.  The users are pleased with the quick 
turn-around and the fact that they have more control over 
the direction of the system.  
Rigidity in the organization and team determines the level 
of agility that can be achieved.  Scrum principles are 

simple.  Internalizing these principles and rigorously 
following them is hard.  Staying agile is just as hard as 
becoming agile. 
6.Acknowledgements 
This project has been successful because of the talented 

and dedicated engineering team; Sarada Chintala, Adam 
Frazin, Raj Lingam, Wen Nie, and Gladys Wang.  I would 
like to thank the customer and the management for their 

confidence and support.  Additional thanks to David 
Kane, Marc Kellogg, and Rob Sfeir for their feedback in 
reviewing the paper.  Special thanks to Rebecca Wirfs-

Brock for valuable input and patiently shepherding the 
paper. 
7.References 
[1]  K. Schwaber, M. Beedle, 
Agile Software 
Development with Scrum
, Prentice-Hall, 2002. 
[2]  Industrial XP (Web Site: http://industrialxp.org/) 
[3] Agile Manifesto, (Web Site: http:// agilemanifesto. 
org/) 
[4]  K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change
, Addison-Wesley, 1999. 
[5]  YAGNI, (Web site http://xp.c2.com/YouArentGonna 
NeedIt.html)[6]  K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change 
(2nd edition), Addison-Wesley, 2004. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC™05) 
0-7695-2487-7/05 $20.00 © 2005
 IEEE 
