 Adapting to Changes in a Project's DNA 
A Descriptive Case Study on the Effects of Transforming Agile Single-site to Distributed 
Software Development 
Raoul Vallon*, Christopher Dräger*, Alexander Zapletal**, Thomas Grechenig* 
*Research Group for Industrial Software 
Vienna University of Technology 
Vienna, Austria 
{raoul.vallon,christopher.draeger,thomas.grechenig}@inso.tuwien.ac.at 
**Research Industrial Systems Engineering R&D 
Schwechat, Austria 
alexander.zapletal@rise-world.com
 
Abstract
—We present a 15-month descriptive case study on a 
real-world Scrum process transformation from a single-site to a 
distributed development environment in a medium-sized 
software development organization in Austria. The study 
describes what effects the scaling to a distributed development 
had on several key process indicators in one of the organization’s 
major projects. An action research approach has been selected to 
generate results from an in-depth and first-hand research setting. 
To increase objectivity and separation of concerns, a two-cycle 
approach, practitioner-oriented and research-oriented, has been 
established that aligns with sprint iterations. Many possible 
adaptations to the Scrum process have been tested over the 
course of the study. Key findings include that constant customer 
shipments after each sprint were a turning point in supporting 
the process of integrating the different sites in the distributed 
development environment and that the retrospective was an 
invaluable tool to keep frustration levels low in an ever-changing 
process environment. 
Keywords— Agile Software Development, Distributed Software 
Development, Scrum, Descriptive Case Study, Action Research 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Agile software development has been of great research 
interest in the last decade [1]. While originally designed for 
collocated teams, agile practices have gained ground on 
distributed software development (DSD) environments in 
recent years as several studies have reported (e.g. [2,3,4]). 
However, the area is still under-researched. DSD environments 
are more complex and several adaptations to process models 
for collocated teams are necessary [2,4], e.g. communication 
between team members needs other mechanisms [5]. Other 
areas for improvement [6] include virtual teams, transparency, 
commitment, planning, estimation, predictability, self-
organizing teams and tools. This paper contributes to the 
research field of agile DSD by describing the effects of 
transforming a former single-site Scrum team to a distributed 
development environment. 
The selected 
action research
 (AR) approach enables an 
extensive case description. AR uses “a spiral of steps, each of 
which is composed of a circle of planning, action, and fact-
finding about the result of the action” [7, p. 38]. The term 
action research has been coined by Kurt Lewin in 1946 [7]. AR 
is, however, close to non-existent in SE research [8,9,10] 
although it provides the most realistic research setting and thus 
enables the researcher to gain an in-depth and first-hand 
understanding [9]. Usually the researcher will incorporate one 
or several feedback cycles [11]. Scrum provides a variety of 
feedback cycles which can be utilized for AR. Hence, AR 
aligns very well with Scrum, as the problem solving cycle is 
already part of the process. A parallel second research cycle 
can be established without altering the original process. 
This descriptive case study provides the following 
contributions: 
1. Report on a real-world Scrum adaptation from a 
single-site to a distributed development environment over an 
extensive period of time (15 months) 
2. Descriptive study enriched by first-hand experiences 
from an action research setting 
3. Establishment of two separate feedback cycles for 
practitioner’s and researcher’s goals, respectively, as well as a 
declared-in-advance theoretical framework to provide scientific 
rigor 
The outline of the paper is as follows. First we present the 
case study’s background and provide an overview of related 
work. Section 4 explains the case study design in detail. 
Section 5 provides the analysis including challenges and how 
they were met. Section 6 discusses results with regard to 
related work, lessons learned and threats to validity. Section 7 
concludes the paper and provides an outlook to future research. 
II.
 
C
ASE 
B
ACKGROUND
 
Software development on this product started as an R&D 
project at the organization 
Research Industrial Systems 
Engineering
 on a single site for 2 years that evaluated several 
technologies for the interplay of hardware devices and a web 
administration. This case study begins with the 15-months 
product development phase. Figure 1 shows the full 
background timeline including the history before the beginning 
of the cases study. Table II lists the changes in project 
specifics. 
2014 Agile Conference978-0-7695-5222-4/14 $31.00 © 2014 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2014.2252  
Fig. 1.
 
Case background timeline: The beginning of the case study period is 
separated from the R&D period by 3 months of management decision making 
on whether or not to proceed with full-fledged product development involving 
additional team members and the trans
formation to a dist
ributed d
evel
opment 
environment.
 
TABLE I. 
 
C
HANGES TO THE 
P
ROJECT
’
S 
DNA 
 R&D 
(before case study) 
Product Development 
(case study period) 
Development sites 
1 
2 
Team members 
9 (1 product owner, 1 
scrum master, 6 
developers and 1 tester) 
19 (1 product owner, 2 
scrum masters, 11 
developers and 5 
testers) 
Time 
24 months 
15 months 
Project Goal 
Technology proof of 
concept and field test 
Market-ready product 
(new feature 
development with 
focus on quality, 
performance and 
operational stability) 
Process model 
Scrum 
Scrum extended for 
agile DSD 
 
With the start of this 15-month case study period, the goal 
was to turn the R&D software status quo to a deliverable 
product. Additional team members had to be split over two 
sites due to office space constraints in the original R&D facility 
at the client. The two different development sites, 
dev site
 and 
test site
, are located in the same city. Table II lists all project 
members with regard to role and site. The following Scrum 
roles were present: one product owner (PO) and two scrum 
master (SM). 
TABLE II. 
 
T
EAM 
S
IZES DISTRIBUTED ACROSS TWO 
S
ITES
. 
Distributed Sites Dev Test SM PO Sum 
Dev Site
 
11 0 1 1 13 
Test Site 0 5 1 0 6 
Overall 11 5 2 1 19 
 
Several fully distributed cross-functional teams, i.e. 
integrated over both sites, have been established, which is an 
effective approach according to Sutherland et al. [12]. 
Since this is an AR-based case study, one of the authors 
assumed the role of Scrum master at the test site during the 
whole case study period. The remaining authors supported the 
action researcher in the research and problem solving activities. 
III.
 
R
ELATED 
W
ORK
 
The case study relates to the following areas: agile 
distributed software development, distributed testing and the 
AR-based case study. 
A.
 
Agile Distributed Software Development 
The research community agrees that Scrum has to be 
extended to work in DSD [3,14]. Sutherland et al. define three 
different types of distributed Scrum in [15]: Isolated Scrums 
(geographically isolated), distributed Scrum of Scrums 
(geographically isolated, but integrated by a regular Scrum of 
Scrums meeting) and fully distributed Scrums (cross-functional 
Scrum teams, team members geographically distributed). In 
our case we analyze a fully distributed Scrum implementation. 
However, fully distributed Scrum is not easily accomplished, 
as Vallon et al. show in their case study [2] of distributed 
Scrum involving two different organizations. Lessons learned 
include an increased effort for self-organizing teams in agile 
DSD. Based on the results of this study, the authors suggest 
cross-functional isolated teams instead of fully distributed 
ones. 
Hossain et al. show that adapting Scrum helped 
practitioners overcome individual project challenges better than 
with previous plan-driven models in their multi-case study [3]. 
B.
 
Distributed Testing 
This paper deals with distributed testing due to the 
separation in dev site and test site. Collins et al. share 
experiences from a distributed testing team in an agile DSD 
environment in [16]. The authors conclude that distributed 
testing can function well in agile DSD if the following key 
lessons are considered: improved communication and 
coordination by allocating one person (test leader) as a link 
between teams, availability of key personnel in an online chat 
tool to clarify doubts, periodic physical meetings between 
development and test for building a common understanding of 
user stories. 
Grechanik et al. argue in [17] that new approaches must be 
developed to deal with testing in DSD, including: traceability 
between diffe
rent software ar
tifacts, detection of semantic 
interference (merge conflicts), regression test selection and 
prioritization, coordination and awareness before a new 
revision is delivered. 
C.
 
AR-based Case Study 
Dos Santos and Travassos report that AR studies represent 
only a small fraction in SE research [10] although AR is “the 
most realistic research setting” [9]. We have found two AR-
based case studies that relate to our work in terms of case study 
design. Jolly et al. report an AR case in [18], which follows a 
standard case study routine: case description, related work, 
case study design, case study report (including lessons learned 
53 and threats to validity) and conclusion. We chose a similar 
design for this paper. Marshall et al.’s Action Research in 
practice case study [19] follows the dual imperatives of AR, as 
originally defined in [20]. The paper deals with finding a 
balance between the problem-solving and research interests. 
An overly strong focus on only one of the two can prevent a 
lasting solution for the other [19]. The dual imper
atives 
approach is also part of this case study’s design. 
IV.
 
C
ASE 
S
TUDY 
D
ESIGN
 
The research design is based on Yin [21], who established 
the case study as a rigorous and comprehensive research 
strategy including the logic of design, data collection 
techniques and specific approaches to data analysis. The theory 
is built upon the following focal points [21]: research question, 
propositions, unit of analysis, logic linking data to proposition 
(procedure) and criteria for interpreting findings. The case 
study design is based on [21] and action research design on 
[20]. AR is especially useful to investigate a phenomenon in its 
real-life context in depth. 
The study is a descriptive study because it 
attempts
 to 
explore and explain, yet does not have the capacity to fully 
understand cause and effect in a broader context as would an 
explanatory study. There is yet no comprehensive process 
framework to fully cover what agile distributed software 
development is all about - on the contrary most research on the 
matter is still exploratory in nature with little possibilities for 
generalization. Hence, we devote this study to provide further 
insight into the matter and improve the description of 
characteristics of the phenomenon. It serves – among other 
related studies in the past years - as a basis for follow-up cases 
until enough evidence is collected to mature the field and 
conduct explanatory, probably multi-case, studies with 
generalizable results and implications of broader scope. 
A.
 
Research Question 
The objective of the study is to enhance the body of 
knowledge of using agile development in DSD with a special 
focus on the transition from a collocated to a distributed Scrum 
implementation. We formulated the following research 
question (RQ): 
RQ.
 
What are the effects of scaling Scrum from a single-
site to a distributed software development environment and 
how can challenges be overcome?
 
B.
 
Declared-in-Advance Theoretical Framework 
We address criticism on AR that the researcher is neither 
able to control processes and outcomes nor free to pick and 
choose problems [24] by providing a declared-in-advance 
theoretical framework as suggested by Blichfeldt and Andersen 
in [25]. To build a theoretical framework, we analyze the 
assumptions of regular Scrum supported by research on 
coordination theory in agile collocated environments [13] and 
compare where DSD violates those assumptions. As a result, 
we define up-front propositions prior to the execution of the 
study. 
1)
 
 Assumptions for collocated Scrum
: The agile manifesto 
[28] values “individuals and interactions”, “working 
software”, “customer collaboration” and “responding to 
change”. Other more structured elements are mentioned in the 
agile manifesto but carry less weight: “processes and tools”, 
“comprehensive documentation”, “contract negotiation” and 
“following a plan”. Strode et al. analyze in [13] how 
coordination is achieved in collocated agile development. 
Based on Strode et al.’s components, we assign the 
corresponding implementation in Scrum in brackets: 
synchronisation activity
 (daily scrum, sprint planning, sprint 
retrospective), 
synchronisation artefact
 (task board, sprint 
backlog, impediment list), 
proximity
 (daily scrum), 
availability
 (collocated teams), 
substitutability
 (agile 
generalist), 
boundary spanning activity
 (sprint review), 
boundary spanning artefact
 (task board, product backlog) and 
a 
coordinator role
 (scrum master). Their research shows that 
Scrum adresses these components very well in a collocated 
environment. 
 
2)
 
Violations of assumptions for collocated Scrum in DSD 
environments:
 Both the agile’s values [28] and the 
components in agile coordination theory [13] rely heavily on 
the collocation of teams (especially: proximity, availability 
and synchronisation). Based on this rationale, we define the 
first a priori proposition as:
 
 
P1.
 
Since agile development has been designed for 
collocated teams, it has to be extended to work in DSD 
environments. 
By looking at collocated coordination theory that explains 
why Scrum works [13], we can see that most of the elements 
cannot be used in DSD without modification. Hence we define 
the second proposition as: 
P2.
 
Agile DSD cannot achieve the same level of proximity, 
av
ail
ability and synchronization as collocated development. 
Hence agile DSD does not strive to compete with collocated 
processes. It aims to find mechanisms to improve coordination 
by maintaining agile core values such as self-organization and 
synchronization, while acknowledging assets and drawbacks of 
distributing software development. 
DSD complicates direct human interaction which is a major 
concern for agile development. Hence, agile DSD needs tools 
t
o substitute missing face-to-face communication: 
P3.
 
Due to the nature of distributed development, agile 
DSD needs to rely more heavily on processes, tools and 
documentation than in its collocated counterparts. In 
consequence, balancing the amount of structured and agile 
elements is a major concern in applying agile concepts to 
DSD.
 
C.
 
Unit of Analysis 
“The essence of a case study, (...), is that it tries to 
illuminate a decision or a set of decisions: why they were 
taken, how they were implemented, and with what result” [22, 
54 p.12]. Hence, our unit of analysis is occurring problems and 
their corresponding decisions within the set time span of 15 
months, i.e. from start of the product development phase in an 
agile DSD environment to a market-ready product. 
D.
 
Procedure and Data Collection Strategy 
Based on [23], McKay and Marshall [20] propose a two-
cycle feedback loop with one problem cycle to address the 
problematic situation and one research cycle to achieve 
scientific goals. This supports the separation of the dual 
imperatives of AR and enables scientific rigor. The 
stakeholders and participants own the problem-solving cycle, 
while the researchers own the research cycle [20]. Researchers 
and participants collaborate to meet respective goals. 
Usually the researcher will incorporate one or several 
feedback cycles [11]. With Scrum we have the opportunity to 
include a feedback cycle each sprint. Hence, AR aligns very 
well with Scrum, as the problem-solving cycle is already part 
of the standard process. An additional research cycle can be 
added as pictured in Figure 2. 
Fig. 2.
 
A dual imperative AR cycle (adapted from [20]): The inbound 
practitioners’ cycle, designed to solve practical problems, provides input to 
the parallel outbound researchers’ cycle, designed to gather knowledge on the 
research problem.
 
The cycle starts with the research question RQ, a theoretical 
framework F based on propositions, a research method M
R
 and 
a problem-solving method M
PS
. We have defined a research 
problem A, namely the possibilities, challenges and solutions 
of transforming single-site Scrum to a DSD. In our case study 
we analyze P, which is a real-world instance of our research 
problem A. By evaluating actions on P, we strive to derive 
results for A. 
The problem-solving method M
PS
 is the regular Scrum 
process, where decisions on the process are taken and 
evaluated in the retrospective meeting at the end of each sprint 
in the real-world problem situation P. The research method M
R
 
reflects on the problems and decisions (actions) in a separate 
cycle with regard to research problem A. This parallel two-
cycle process enables the separation of problem-solving and 
research interests. The steps of the dual AR cycle of Figure 2 
are further explained in Table III. 
TABLE III. 
 
T
HE 
D
UAL 
A
CTION 
R
ESEARCH 
C
YCLE AND ITS 
I
MPLEMENTATION IN 
S
CRUM AS 
U
SED IN THIS 
S
TUDY
 
Cycle Steps Problem-solving Activity 
Research 
Activit
y
0. Definition of RQ - 
Define RQ 
1. Definition of 
F,M
R
,M
PS
 
(Re-)Define M
PS
 (Sprint) 
(Re-)Define F, 
M
R
 
2. Update 
problems 
Update problems of P 
(Daily, Retro) 
Update 
observations of A 
3. Take action 
Act on problems of P 
(Sprint) 
Collect and 
analyze data 
4. Reflect on 
success 
Reflect on success of 
actions (Retro) 
Draw conclusions 
for A 
5. Update findings 
Update findings to P, M
PS
 
(Retro) 
Update findings 
to A, M
R
 
6. Proceed with step 1 until exit criterion is met 
 
A well defined process is very important to establish 
recoverability [23,10]. Since this a descriptive case study, our 
exit criterion is time-boxed, i.e. the end of the product 
development phase. 
Data collection for research involves the following 
activities: explore possibilities for accessing project data in the 
issue tracking tool (beginning of study), update project diary 
with field notes and photos (daily), extract data from issue 
tracking tool (each sprint), discuss problems and solutions with 
practitioners and record actions (sprint retrospective as well as 
informal discussions during sprint, possible due to action 
research setting), track results of sprint planning/review to 
analyze teams’ performance as well as results of sprint 
retrospective to collect problems and solutions (each sprint). 
E.
 
Criteria for Interpreting Findings 
This study will incorporate both qualitative and quantitative 
methodologies to broaden and strengthen the study [26]. The 
metrics described in Table IV are used to interpret findings and 
evaluate answers to the research question, as they are 
significant to the collaboration of the dev and test site. Bug 
count and release count can be extracted from the issue 
tracking tool. Impediments are maintained in a wiki and need 
to be processed manually by the authors. 
TABLE IV. 
 
M
ETRICS IN 
U
SE
 
Metric Description 
Bug Count
 
Number of bugs 
Release Frequency Frequency of bug fix or feature releases 
Impediments Count 
Number of impediments 
 
V.
 
A
NALYSIS
 
We analyze 27 sprints over the course of 15 months. The 
sprint length was two weeks, although some sprints were 
55 prolonged to three weeks to cope with holidays or adjust to 
upcoming customer’s deadlines. Due to the descriptive nature 
of the study, we describe changing characteristics of the agile 
DSD process over the 
course of the study. In retrospective, we 
found several major phases regarding progress in the 
integration of the two sites, which we present consequently. 
A.
 
Kick-Off: Isolated and Unsynchronized Sites 
The 
initial process
 at the start of the case study period was 
fully focused on the dev site
, since the test site was the 
additional new component that was added to the project after 
the two year R&D phase. We expected problems due to the 
R&D history, which all of the dev site members were part of. 
The dev site worked in sprints without the direct involvement 
of the test site, which resulted in 
test-ready features at the 
end of the sprint instead of deployment-ready ones
. The test 
Scrum master took part in the following Scrum meetings on 
behalf of the test team: sprint planning (first day of sprint), 
review and retrospective (both at last day of sprint). The rest of 
the sprint no meetings were scheduled. 
Specification was 
written at dev site
 and testers used it to deduce test cases. This 
procedure also served as a validity and sanity check of 
requirements. The goal was to have 
test cases (i.e. a double-
checked specification) ready before stories
 could be pulled 
into a sprint, which was 
rarely accomplished
. The 
specification consisted of a written document accompanied by 
design mock-ups. Test cases were written in Gherkin language 
to support behavior driven development [27]. Resulting 
scenarios could either be used for manual testing or selected for 
test automation. 
Daily Scrum meetings were skipped due to the 
separation in micro teams
 where people worked very closely 
and also in pair programming at times. Figure 3 shows a typical 
distribution of team members during this case study. A micro 
team would typically consist of 2-3 developers and 1 tester 
working on one feature. Since these 
developers needed to 
collaborate very closely in micro teams
 to implement a story 
within these micro teams, 
daily Scrums were regarded as 
superfluous
. In reality, a tester would write test cases 
according to available sp
ecification and test the story once it is 
delivered without regular communication with developers. 
Other problems not directly related to the distribution of 
sites include 
low release frequency
, 
definition of done not 
well defined
, 
stories too big to fit in one sprint
, 
highly 
volatile specification resulting in frequently necessary 
rework of test cases
 (overhead) and 
legacy stories from R&D 
project badly documented
. 
B.
 
Progress: First Steps towards Cross-functional Teams 
The process implementation led to various serious 
problems: A story was regarded as accepted once it was 
developed. After that it was released for test, but the 
focus was 
on implementing new stories instead of fixing “old” ones
. 
As a direct consequence a customer deployment failed badly 
due to the 
low quality of software
. That was the turning point 
after sprint 7 to 
include the test site in the process
 more 
properly. Release frequency also increased: the interval for bug 
fix releases increased to three days and features were released 
as soon as they were finished. 
 
Fig. 3.
 
Separation in four Scrum micro teams: The split in micro teams was 
necessary due to a very specialist environment with very different compone
nts 
(web, app and hardware devices) interacting in a security-cr
itical system. The 
figure shows the good case scenario towards the end of the case study. In the 
first few months of the case study the test was isolated and formed a 
component team. 
However the process was still inefficient and did not 
produce the necessary quality in software, as the 
steadily 
increasing bug count
 shows and the 
jump in the impediment 
count 
in sprints 9 and 10 (cf. Figure 4). Reasons were a 
huge 
technical complexity in the interplay of hardware devices 
and software
 that had been underestimated. As a result, 
a 
dedicated bug fixing iteration
 had to be conducted, in which 
over 200 bugs were closed, to improve quality for the customer 
shipment in sprint 11. 
C.
 
Achievement 1: Establishing Cross-functional Teams 
Further measures were taken to improve quality in a 
continuous process without the need for bug fixing iterations. 
Contact visits increased
, especially in the 
second week of 
each sprint the test team joined the dev team at the dev site 
for an intense feature testing and bug fixing session
. To 
make room for the testers, some developers moved either to the 
test site or work in home office for these days. A 
better 
common understanding that bugs need to be fixed within 
the sprint
 has been established. The 
test site
 became an 
integral part of the process and 
has the right to reject stories
.  
56  
 
 
Fig. 4.
 
Bug, release and impediment count measured per sprint: sprints 2, 7, 
11, 15, 19 and 22-26 denote shipments to the customer. In these sprints we 
can see a rise in release frequency and closed bugs (positive) but also a rise 
in new impediments (negative), which shows that these sprints put the process 
to a test. The regular shipments starting with sprint 22 allowed for a more 
continuous flow.
 
Although the integration of the two sites was improved, 
testers had to reject many stories because non-functional 
aspects such as performance and stability were not valued in 
the commitment. This behavior led to 
many stories that were 
only 80% finished
 according to the testers and thus rejected. 
Transparency and focus decreased drastically
. These huge 
problems set the incentive to further improve the process. 
D.
 
Achievement 2: Establishing a Continuous Flow 
Our analysis showed that 
a continuous flow could not be 
achieved so far
: bug count and impediment count steadily 
increased in between customer shipments and only dropped 
shortly before the shipment, usually in the last sprint, in a last 
minute effort to improve quality. Based on our findings we 
proposed to 
drastically shorten intervals of customer 
shipments to each sprint
, starting with sprint 22. It 
helped to 
put greater effort into a more realistic sprint planning and 
commitment and improve quality as a consequence – with 
the customer shipment always in mind
. The metrics show a 
continuously high release frequency and fewer impediments in 
sprints 22-26. The 
bug count was also more stable
. The 
relatively low “closed bugs” count in the last sprint was due to 
the fact that only “hot fix” bugs have been resolved for the 
market release. 
E.
 
Achievement 3: Keeping Team Spirits High and 
Maintaining the Willingness to Change 
Both top management and team members knew it would be 
hard to establish a working distributed development 
environment. During the 15-months of agile DSD, 
the 
retrospective turned out to be an invaluable tool, especially 
at high-stress times, to keep process improvement going 
and thus keep frustration levels low
 as all team members 
could speak their mind and propose solutions. 
The building of trust was an important prerequisite for the 
success of the process improvement. When trust was not 
established in the beginning, finger pointing (between the two 
sites) was more common than in later sprints. Trust was 
established with 
contact visits and the online availability of 
all team members (instant messaging and email)
. 
Instant 
messaging became the equivalent to face-to-face 
coordination that is available only to collocated teams
. 
F.
 
Challenges while Performing the Analysis 
In sprint 9 the issue tracking tool was changed due to its 
limited querying capacities. This posed a threat to the case 
analysis as old data had not been migrated from one tool to the 
other. Hence, reporting facilities of neither tool could be used 
as they only represented part of the whole time span. For the 
sake of a complete analysis, we extracted data from both tools 
to a spreadsheet. 
VI.
 
D
ISCUSSION
 
In this longitudinal 15-month case study many problems 
occurred, decisions have been made and actions have been 
taken. We strive to answer the following research question: 
RQ.
 
What are the effects of scaling Scrum from a single-
site to a distributed software development environment and 
how can challenges be overcome?
 
Table V shows an extensive overview of practical problems 
and decision taken and their learning for the research problem. 
We will discuss our findings 
A1-A7
 (cf. Table V) with regard 
to our a priori propositions: 
P1.
 
Since agile development has been designed for 
collocated teams, it has to be extended to work in DSD 
environments. 
We find evidence for 
P1
 in all findings 
A1-A7
. Extensions 
to the process include (for a full list, cf. Table V): 
•
 
Instant messaging as an equivalent to face-to-face 
communication 
•
 
Contact visits to build and maintain trust among 
team members from different sites 
•
 
Extensive use of electronic issue tracking tools to 
keep track of updated requirements 
57 •
 
Keep documentation up-to-date (including 
relevant informal enquiries) to share knowledge 
across the sites 
P2. 
Agile DSD cannot achieve the same level of proximity, 
availability and synchronization as collocated development. 
Hence agile DSD does not strive to compete with collocated 
processes. It aims to find mechanisms to improve coordination 
by maintaining agile core values such as self-organization and 
synchronization, while acknowledging assets and drawbacks of 
distributing software development. 
The case study shows that 
agile DSD 
cannot compete with 
collocated Scrum. It is slower in adapting to problems (
A7
) and 
in keeping team members synchronized (
A1
). We found several 
mechanisms to bring agile values to agile DSD (see 
P1
 and 
Table V). 
P3.
 
Due to the nature of distributed development, agile 
DSD needs to rely more heavily on processes, tools and 
documentation than in its collocated counterparts. In 
consequence, balancing the amount of structured and agile 
elements is a major concern in applying agile concepts to 
DSD.
 
We experienced a greater need for both up-to-date 
documentation in agile DSD (
A4
) and electronic tools (
A2
) 
which is underlined by the necessity to track results from 
informal enquiries and meetings (
A5
). Documentation and the 
use of electronic tools also help with synchronizing the sites 
(
A1
). The findings from the case study support the initial 
proposition. 
Apart from the propositions, we found 
A3
 and 
A6
 to be 
important contributions to the improvements of the process in 
case study. 
A.
 
Case Study Validity 
We set the study on a robust theoretical framework by 
examining related work and creating propositions at the design 
phase to establish external validity within a single-case study 
[21]. Internal validity was achieved using an adapted AR 
approach and a construct table (Table V) to show causal 
relationships. We increased construct validity by using both 
qualitative and quantitative data and had key team members 
(Scrum master, senior developer) review the paper draft. To 
achieve reliability we maintained a project diary during the 
whole 15 months period and kept records of collected data. 
B.
 
Limitations 
Threats to validity are introduced by the fact that this is a 
single case study. Other case studies may produce different 
results. We aimed to reduce investigator bias by following an 
adapted two-cycle AR approach. 
C.
 
Evaluation against Related Work 
Stettina et al. [29]
 
research ways of handling 
documentation in agile teams. The authors conclude that 
documentation is often seen as a burden in agile teams as it 
does not directly contribute to the development of software. In 
DSD, however, it is very important to maintain documentation 
for knowledge sharing. 
Vax et al. also conclude in [30] that you need the right 
expertise and team for distributed Scrum. We support that 
claim as it took over 20 sprints to establish a working process. 
Paasivaara et al. mention the possibility of having an 
“ambassador/rotating guru” in [31], who is sent to other sites 
for a longer period of time. We saw several key roles pay 
contact visits instead of permanent rotations. 
In related publications we can see a growing interest in 
bringing agile to (globally) distributed software development 
[32], [33]. One of the conclusions over several case studies 
reviewed by Hossain et al. in [32] is that Scrum needs to be 
extended to work in a distributed setting, which corresponds to 
our proposition P1. 
VII.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
In this paper we presented a longitudinal 15-month case 
study based on action research. By implementing a parallel 
feedback cycle we were able to separate actual problem solving 
from generating research outcomes. The case study provided 
various insights into the complexities involved with 
transforming Scrum to distributed environments. Adaptations 
to the process take longer to take effect because solutions need 
to be propagated across several sites. Synchronization of team 
members needs mechanisms such as instant messaging and 
contact visits to substitute on-site availability. Documentation 
and knowledge management is more important in agile DSD 
since even informal enquiries (between a developer and the 
product owner e.g.) need to be communicated to the other site. 
The retrospective served as a mood barometer for team 
members of both sites and was a great driver for process 
improvement. In the last months of the case study, software has 
been successfully shipped to the customer each sprint, which 
underlines the working process adaptations for the given 
distributed project environment. 
Future research interest includes the exploration of agile 
DSD in further projects to be able to enhance and test findings 
of this study and find recurring problems and solutions. 
 
58 TABLE V. 
 
R
ESULTS 
S
UMMARY
. 
Problem P Root Cause Decision Agile DSD Learning A 
Test-ready features at 
the end of the sprint 
instead of deployment-
ready ones 
•
 
Isolation of test site 
•
 
Focus on dev site 
•
 
Give test site the right to reject stories 
•
 
Increase contact visits (for face-to-face 
specification enquiries) 
•
 
Review of test cases for critical user stories 
by a developer 
•
 
Constant availability of team members in 
instant messaging 
A1.
 Fully distributed cross-functional teams 
need to synchronize and work towards the same 
goal in a sprint. Synchronization can be 
achieved with contact visits, instant messaging, 
an up-to-date ticket management system and test 
case or code review. 
 
Transparency for both 
sites not accomplished 
•
 
Dev site members did not keep issue 
tracking system up-to-date 
•
 
Commitment not met (waste in 
commitment) 
•
 
Overhead due to rising bug count 
•
 
All relevant informal communication needs to  
be appended to the feature ticket in the issue 
tracking tool 
•
 
Contact visits to improve trust and team spirit 
A2.
 Informal face-to-face communication needs 
substituation in DSD. Tool support can help 
keep track of changes in requirements. Instant 
messaging can become the equivalent to face-to-
face coordination that is available only to 
collocated teams
.
 
Low software 
quality 
Lack of focus in sprint 
•
 
Feature rush (many 80% ready features 
valued higher by product owner than fewer 
95% ready ones) 
•
 
Huge technical complexity in the interplay 
of hardware devices and software  
•
 
Definition of done not well defined 
•
 
No pressure to deliver potentially shippable 
code 
•
 
Incremental inclusion of test site 
•
 
Bugfix iteration (should be avoided) 
•
 
Sunshine cases should work when a story is 
passed to the tester, so the tester can focus on 
corner cases 
•
 
Build all aspects of a story including non-
functional requirements (e.g. stability, 
performance) 
•
 
Continuous deployment to customer every 
sprint 
A3.
 Continuous customer deployments can help 
establish focus in DSD and lead to more 
releastic sprint plannings and commitments. 
Continuous flow means more reliable 
estimations and higher software quality. 
Volatile specification 
•
 
Legacy stories from R&D project not 
defined 
•
 
Stories not detailed enough before sprint 
•
 
Stories written at dev site only 
•
 
Stories too big 
•
 
Volatile specification 
 
•
 
No informal story updates 
•
 
Meetings with customer before sprint 
•
 
Involve customer more in the prioritization 
•
 
Small managable stories 
•
 
Increased up-front planning and specification 
to identify problems, corner cases and impact 
on existing software early and improve 
estimation of team 
•
 
Staffing: new Business Analyst 
A4. 
While up-to-date documentation does not 
substitute direct interaction, it plays a bigger 
part in agile DSD than in on-site Scrum since 
direct communication is harder to manage.
 
No up-to-date test cases 
•
 
Test cases not ready before stories get 
pulled into sprint 
•
 
Specification wrongly interpreted 
•
 
Informal specification adaptations without 
the other site’s knowledge 
•
 
Wrong effort estimation due to open 
questions in specificaton 
•
 
No story updates during sprint 
•
 
On-demand specification meetings with 
members from both sites 
A5. 
Results from informal on-site enquiries or 
meetings need to be made available to other 
sites, either in terms of updated documentation 
or updated tickets in the electronic ticket 
management system. Contact visits can further 
be used to review test cases for critical stories.
 
Process adaptation in 
DSD is slower and more 
difficult than in regular 
collocated Scrum 
•
 
Harder to propagate changes over multiple 
sites 
•
 
More variables and complexities to take 
into account 
Use retro as a driver for continuous process 
improvement 
A6. 
Keeping the retrospective as a constant in an 
ever-changing process environment provided a 
valuable asset. The retrospective meeting gathers 
members from all sites to reflect on the process 
and discuss improvements. It further functions 
as an important mood barometer across all sites. 
 
A7. 
Process adaptation in DSD is slower and 
more difficult to achieve than in regular 
collocated Scrum.
 
59 R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
Dingsøyr, T., Nerur, S., Balijepally, V., Moe, N.B.: A decade of agile 
methodologies: Towards explaining agile software development. JSS 
85(6), 1213–1221 (2012) 
[2]
 
Vallon, R., Strobl, S., Bernhart, M., Grechenig, T.: Inter-Organizational 
Co-Development with Scrum: Experiences and Lessons Learned from a 
Distributed Corporate Development Environment. In: Proceedings of the 
14th International Conference on Agile Software Devel-opment, XP 
2013, Vienna, 
Austria, pp. 150-164 (2013) 
[3]
 
Hossain, E., Bannerman, P.L., Jeffery, R.: Towards an Understanding of 
Tailoring Scrum in Global Software Development: A Multi-case Study. 
In: Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference on Software and 
Systems Process, ICSSP 11, Honolulu, HI, pp. 110-119 (2011) 
[4]
 
Batra, D.: Modified Agile Practices for Outsourced Software Projects. 
Communications of the ACM 52(9), 143-148 (2009) 
[5]
 
Dorairaj, S., Noble, J., Malik, P.: Effective Communication in 
Distributed Agile Software Development Teams. In: Proceedings of the 
12th International Conference on Agile Software Development, XP 
2011, Madrid, Spain, pp. 102-116 (2011) 
[6]
 
Vallon, R., Bayrhammer, K., Strobl, S., Bernhart, M., Grechenig, T.: 
Identifying Critical Areas for Improvement in Agile Multi-Site Co-
Development. In: Proceedings of the 8th International Conference on 
Evaluation of Novel Approaches to Software Engineering, ENASE 
2013, Angers, France, pp. 149-156 (2013) 
[7]
 
Lewin, K.: Action research and minority problems. Journal of Social 
Issues 2(4), 34-46 (1946) 
[8]
 
Glass, R.L., Vessey, I., Ramesh, V.: Research in Software Engineering: 
An Analysis of the Literature. Information and Software Technology 
44(8), 491-506, (2002) 
[9]
 
Sjøberg, D., Dybå, T., Jørgensen, M.: The Future of Empirical Methods 
in Software Engineer-ing Research. In: Proceedings of the 2007 
Workshop on the Future of Software Engineering, ICSE 2007, 
Minneapolis, MN, pp. 358-378 (2007) 
[10]
 
Santos, P., Travassos, G.H.: Action research use in software 
engineering: An initial survey. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International 
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Measurement, 
ESEM 2009, Lake Buena Vista, FL, pp. 414-417 (2009) 
[11]
 
Davison, R.M., Martinsons, M.G., Kock, N.: Principles of Canonical 
Action Research, Info Systems Journal 14, 65–86 (2004) 
[12]
 
Sutherland, J., Viktorov, A., Blount, J., Puntikov, N.: D
istributed Scrum: 
Agile Project Man-agement with Outsourced Development Teams. In: 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii Interna-tional Conference on System 
Sciences, HICCS-40, pp. 274a (2007) 
[13]
 
Strode, D.E., Huff, S.L., Hope, B., Link, S.: Coordination in co-located 
agile software development projects, Journal of Systems and Software 
85, 6, 1222-1238 (2012) 
[14]
 
Paasivaara, M., Durasiewicz, S., Lassenius, C.: Distributed Agile 
Development: Using Scrum in a Large Project. In: Proceedings of the 
3rd IEEE International Conference on Global Soft-ware Engineering, 
ICGSE 2008, Bangalore, India, pp. 87-95 (2008) 
[15]
 
Sutherland, J., Schoonheim, G., Kumar, N., Pandey, V., Vishal, S.: Fully 
Distributed Scrum: Linear Scalability of Production between San 
Francisco and India. In: Proceedings of the 2009 Agile Conference, 
AGILE 2009, Chicago, IL, pp. 277-282 (2009) 
[16]
 
Collins, E., Macedo, G., Maia, N., Dias-Neto, A.C.: An Industrial 
Experience on the Applica-tion of Distributed Testing in an Agile 
Software Development Environment. In: Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE 
Seventh International 
Conference on 
Global Software Engineering, 
ICGSE 2012, Porto Alegre, Rio Grande do Sul, Brazil, pp. 190-194 
(2012) 
[17]
 
Grechanik, M., Jones, J.A., Orso, A., van der Hoek, A.: Bridging gaps 
between developers and testers in globally-
distributed software 
development. In: Proceedings of the Workshop on Future of Software 
Engineering Research, FoSER 2010, Santa Fe, NM, pp. 149-154 (2010) 
[18]
 
Jolly, S.A., Garousi, V., Eskandar, M.M.: 
Automated Unit Testing of a 
SCADA Control Software: An Industrial Case Study Based on Action 
Research. In: Fifth International Confer-ence on Software Testing, 
Verification and Validation, ICST 2012, Montreal, Canada, pp. 400-409 
(2012) 
[19]
 
Mars
hall, P., Willson, P., de Salas, K., McKay, J.: Action Research in 
Pract
ice: Issues and Challenges in a Financial Services Case Study. The 
Qualitative Report 15(1), 76-93 (2010) 
[20]
 
McKay, J., Marshall, P.: The dual imperatives of action research. 
Information Technology & People 14(1), 46-59 (2001) 
[21]
 
Y
in, R.K.: Case study research. Sage Publishing (2009) 
[22]
 
Schramm, W.: Notes on case studies of instructional media projects. 
Working paper for the Academy for Educational Development (1971) 
[23]
 
Checkland, P., Holwell, S.: Action Research: Its Nature and Validity. 
Systemic Practice and Action Research 11(1), 9-21 (1998) 
[24]
 
Baskerville, R.L., Lee, A.S.: Distinctions among different types of 
generalizing in information systems research. In: Proceedings of the 
IFIP TC8 WG8.2 International Working Conference on New 
Information Technologies in Organizational Processes: Field Studies and 
Theoretical Reflections on the Future of Work, St. Lo
uis, MO, pp.  49-
66 (1999) 
[25]
 
Blichfeldt, B.S., Andersen, J.R.: Creating a wider audience for action 
research: Learning from case-s
tudy rese
arch. Journal of Research 
Practice 2(1), D2 (2006) 
[26]
 
Yin, R.K.: Mixed Methods Research: Are the Methods Genuinely 
Integrated or Merely Paral-lel? Research in the Schools 13(1), 41-47 
(2006) 
[27]
 
North, D.: Behavior Modification. The evolution of behavior-driven 
development. Better Software Magazine, March Issue (2006) 
[28]
 
Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A., Cunningham, 
W., Fowler, M., Grenning, J., Hi
ghsmith, J., Hunt, A., Jeffries, R., Kern, 
J., Marick, B., Martin, R.C., Mellor, 
S., Schwaber, K., Sutherland, J., 
Thomas, D., 2001. Manifesto for agile software development. Retrieved 
24 February 2014 from http://www.agilemanifesto.org 
[29]
 
Stettina, C.J., Heijstek, W., Faegri, T.E.: Documentation Work in Agile 
Teams: The Role of Documentation Formalism in Achieving a 
Sustainable Practice. In: 2012 Agile Conference, pp. 31-40 (2012) 
[30]
 
Vax M., Michaud S.: Distributed Agile: Growing a Practice Together. 
In: 2008 Agile Conference, pp. 310-314 (2008) 
[31]
 
Paasivaara, M., Durasiewicz, S., Lassenius, C.: Using Scrum in 
Distributed Agile Development: A Multiple Case Study. In: 4th 
International Conference on Global Software Engineering, pp. 195-204 
(2009) 
[32]
 
Hossain, E., Ali Babar, M., Paik H.: Using Scrum in Global Software 
Development: A Systematic Literature Review. In: 4th International 
Conference on Global Software Engineering, pp. 175--184 (2009) 
[33]
 
Jalali, S., Wohlin, C.: Agile Practices in Global Software Engineering – 
A Systematic Map. In: 5th International Conference on Global Software 
Engineering, pp. 45-54 (2010) 
 
60