 Including structural factors 
 into the metrics
-based code smells detection 
   Bartosz Walter
 Faculty of Computing
 Pozna
! University of Technology
 Pozna
!, 
Poland
 bartosz.walter@cs.put.poznan.pl
 B"a#ej Matuszyk
 Faculty of Computing
 Pozna
! University of Technology
 Pozna
!, Poland
 blazej.matuszyk@gmail.com
 Francesca Arcelli Fontana
  University of Milano
-Bicocca
 Milano. Italy
 arcelli@disco.unimib.it
  ABSTRACT Code smells help to discover and describe deeper problems in 
software design. Several automated methods of smell detection 
are based the analysis of a combination of code
-related metrics 
relevant for a given flaw. 
However, some smells reflect more 
complex issues and require a holistic perspective that woudl cover 
a number of different sources of data. In this paper we 

experimentally verify the usefulness of including structural factors 
into a metrics
-based detection
 of God Class and Brain Class code 
smells
.   Categories and Subject Descriptors ¥ Software and its engineering
 ¥ Software creation and 
management 
¥ Software post
-development issues 
¥ Maintaining software
 Keywords
 Code smell detection; detection strategies
 1. INTRODUCTION Code smells receive much attention both from the academia and 
industry as a useful metaphor of code mis
-design symptoms. 
Initially, they were supposed to directly reflect the subjective 
developerÕs perception of the code quality. Recently, num
erous 
research studies  investigate methods of automated quality 

assessment based on code smell identification and detection.
 Currently, the existing approaches to smell detection rarely 
utilize information other than metrics. They are sufficient in many 

cases, but also have significant limitations: for example, they 
ignore knowledge of the code structure, about the relations 
between code smells, results of dynamic analysis or the history of 
the code module extracted from code repository. In some cases 
this
 deficiency is addressed by an ad
-hoc metric that provides the 
missing data in quasi
-quantifiable way. 
  For example, coupling dispersion is a metric used in 
detection strategies for Intensive Coupling and Dispersed 

Coupling code smells. It is defined as the ãnumber of classes in 
which operations called from the measured operation are defined, 

divided by the 
coupling intensityÓ, where coupling intensity is 
ãthe number of distinct operations called by the measured 
operationÓ [1]. This metric is intended to capture the extent to 
which coupled methods are spread among unrelated classes in 
different parts of the s
ource code. However, this information is 
not accurately reflected by metric, because Coupling Dispersion is 
defined by only the "number of classes", and it ignores the 

relationships between these classes. Technically, the metrics could 

be enhanced so that 
it also includes the structural data, but it 
would negatively impact its readability and increase the 
computational complexity. 
 The drawbacks of the purely metrics
-based approach can be 
addressed by combining the metrics with the information coming 
from o
ther sources, without transforming it to metrics. In this 
paper we present the concept of including the structural factors to 

a smell detector in order to improve the detection accuracy. This 

approach is demonstrated and validated on God Class and Brain 
Class code smells with a prototypic tool of our design and 
implementation.
 The paper is organized as follows: in Section II we make an 
overvew of two code smells examined in this study and their 
detection methods; in Section III we introduce the tool used fo
r the analysis; Section IV describes the validation procedure and its 

outcome; Section V presents the related work. Finally, in Section 

VI we conclude and outline some future research directions. 
  2. CODE SMELL DETECTION METHODS Most of the currently availab
le smell detectors are based on one of 
two approaches: metrics
-based that employs popular code metrics, 
and the analysis of code graphs and their similarities. 
Foundations, motivation and the results for these two methods are 
very different.
 The metrics
-based approach was popularized by Marinescu 
[1], who introduced detection strategies. They are ãquantifiable 

expressions of a rule by which design fragments that are 

conforming to that rule can be detected in the source codeÓ [2], 

and the quantifiable expres
sions combine relevant design metrics 
and experimentally determined threshold values. Currently, this 
approach seems to dominate among other detection methods both 
in research and practice.
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 

otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a f
ee. XP 2015 Workshops
, May 25
-29, 2015, Helsinki, Finland
 © 2015 ACM. ISBN 978
-1-4503-3409-9/15/05É$15.00
 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/2764979.2764990
   Figure 
1 Overvi
ew of the analysis process in Code Navigator.
 The structural approach is based on analysis of the graph 
represenenting the code, and its similarity to the pre
-defined 
graphs describing some kinds of design violations. Like the 
metric
s-based approach, this one also does not embrace some data 
and is limited to the inter
-class dependencies, and, consequently, 
inter
-class smells.
 Both approaches have limitations which make them 
insensitive or over
-sensitive to specific features of some sm
ells. 
Therefore, in [14] we proposed a holistic model of code smell 
detection that takes into account data of different origin and 
scope. In this study we analyze the combination of metrics and 

structural factors. For that purpose we defined extended detec
tion 
strategies for two smells: God Class and Brain Class, that are 

enhanced with structural factors.
 2.1 God Class The two analyzed smells originate from the more general Large 

Class smell [3] and describe different aspects of excessive 

complexity of a class.
 God Class describes classes that ãtend to centralize the 
intelligence of the system. An instance of a God Class performs 
most of the work, delegating only minor details to a set of trivial 
classes and using the data from other classesÒ [4]. Marinescu 
prop
osed a detection strategy GCC for that smell based on 

standard complexity metrics: WMC, TCC and ATFD
1 . ! GCc(C)=true:WMC(C)"65#TCC(C)$0.75#ATFD(C)>7false:otherwise% & '  Noticeably, the formula concentrates on the complexity measures 
and does not include the external Data Classes mentioned in the 

defintion. For that reason we defined an extended detection 
strategy for that smell (GCE):
                                                                     1 Threshold values were adjusted to reflect the expert evaluation 
more accurately, as described in section 4.1.
 ! GCE(C)=true:(WMC(C)"65)#(WMC(C)/NOM(C)"1.5)#(((count({c$CP(C)#DC(c)})>2)#(ATFD(C)"3))%(count({c$CP(C)#DC(c)}) >3))false:otherwise& ' ( ( ) ( (  where 
CP(C)
 identifies the classes coupled to 
C and 
DC(C)
 determines if 
C is a Data Class instance
 2.2 Brain Class  Brain Class shares common roots with God Class, as it also 
features excessive complexity and centralization of the 

functionality 
[1]. 
However, unlike God Class, it does not 
reference
 foreign classes
, which is reflected in its detection 
strategy 
BCC. ! BCC(C)=true:ÂGCC(C)"WMC(C)#47"TCC(C)<0.18)"(((NBM(C)>1)"LOC(C)#134))$((NBM(C)=1)"(LOC(C)#268)"(WMC(C)#94)))false:otherwise% & ' ' ( ' '  The definition of Brain Class does not include directly any 
structural data, except for the negation of the God Class presence. 

The extended detection strategy BCE that references the strategy 
for GCE is presented below:
 ! BCE(C)=true:ÂGCE(C)"WMC(C)#65"WMC(C)/NOM(C)#1.5false:otherwise$ % &  3. CODE NAVIGATOR
 In order to validate the presented idea of combined detection of 
code smells, we needed an appropriate tool. Code Navigator is a 

prototypic application that provides the means to navigate and 
query the structure object
-oriented models, 
which can be 
combined with several other data sources. At the moment, it uses 
only metrics and the code structure, but other data sources can be 

added in a similar way. As the tool name suggests, the capability 
of code navigation 
is the core feature of the
 system (Fig. 1).
 The analysis is conducted in several subsequent steps. First, 
the high
-level model of the code internal structure is built. This 
 step transforms the code to the language
-independent model that 
includes classes, their relationships and pro
perties. As a 
consequence, next steps do not rely on the specific features of the 
object
-oriented programming language.
 Then, the model is exported to XMI format, which is an 
Object Management Group standard for representing objects and 
their relations in 
XML. This step is necessary as XML itself is not 
object
-oriented 
Ð it can only define nested entities and their 
attributes, but not objects. XMI bridges the gap by providing a 
standard mapping from objects defined by Unified Modeling 
Language to XML.
 XMI i
s commonly used to store models 
expressed in UML [5]. 
 XMI models offer only the structural perspective of the code 
and do not include the code
-level data (like metrics). For that 
reason, in the next step the XMI model is supplemented with such 

additional 
data by applying an appropriate XSLT transformation 
on it. XSLT is an XML
-based language for transforming XML 
documents into other XML documents or other formats [6]. In this 
case, the transformation just adds 
xmi:Extension
 nodes and the 
remaining part of 
the model is preserved as it is. These nodes, 
which represent additional data intended to be use
 used in smell 
detection proces
s, are stored inside respective XMI elements that 
correspond to operations, classes, packages and entire system.
 Code Navigator s
upports two methods of acquiring the 
additional data: internal and external, depending on the 
availability of data. The internal method exploits the XSLT 
capabilities to compute the data from the model by using 

functions and templates defined in the styles
heet. This approach 
reduces the number of external tools, but in many cases also 
increases the computational complexity. This method can be 
applied only to data which is already available at the class
- and 
package levels.
 The external method relies on the 
data provided by external 
tools and injected to the XMI as 
xmi:Extension
 nodes. This allows 
for including data that could not be otherwise computed within the 

XMI model, like code
-level metrics, data about history of the 
artifact, relations with other smel
ls etc.
 Finally, the XMI model is processed with another XSLT 
stylesheet, which acts as a filter to select the candidate methods, 

classes or packages that meet the criteria defining the given code 

smell. Since the stylesheet is easily extensible and modifi
able, 
code smells definitions can be added or modified.
 4. VALIDATION
 In order to evaluate the proposed method, we implemented four 

detection strategies, two for both God Class and Brain Class code 

smells: a classic one proposed by Marinescu [1], and the exte
nded 
one that also exploits the structural data. The experiment has been 

conducted on selected parts of the Apache Tomcat 7.0.14 source 
code.
 4.1 Calibration In the beginning we calibrated the thresholds in detection 
strategies. Six experts (post
-grad students
, having diverse, yet 
considerable practical knowledge of code smells) reviewed a 
fragment of the subject code consisting of about 100 classes. They 
were asked to manually identify God Classes and Brain Classes, 
based on their personal experience. Since pr
ogrammers display 
different sensitivity to code smells, the results were not uniform 

(Fleiss kappa 
!GC=0.306 for God Class and 
!BC=0.093 for Brain 
Class). In order to extract
 representative candidates for code 
smells, for further analysis we selected 100 i
nstances indicated by 
at least three experts.
 4.2 Comparison of classic and extended 
detection strategies The results of calibration have been used for calculating the 
metric thresholds in classic and extended strategies.
 The results for God Class are presente
d in Table 1.
 Classic detection strategy
 Extended detection strategy
 FP% FN%
 recall
 precision
 FP% FN%
 recall
 precision
 1.2
 30.4
 56.3
 92.1
 1.2
 5.9
 93.8
 98.0
 Table 
2 Comparison of classic and extended detection strategies 
for God 
Class.
 FP% and FN% columns present false
-positive ratio and false
-negative ratio, respectively. It is visible that the extended 
detection strategy has a lower false
-negative rate. Numbers of 
falsely
-positive instances in both cases are comparable and small
 (although they can be relatively easily removed manually by a 

manual review). The precision is also slightly better for the 
extended strategy.
 The results for Brain Class are presented in Table 2. In this 
case the extended detection strategy also performs
 better that the 
ÓclassicÓ one, but the difference is smaller than in case of God 
Class detection strategies.  
 For both smells we observe significant increase in the recall, 
which allows for concluding that the extended 
strategies 
demonstrate better perfo
rmance to identify the smell instances.
 Classic detection strategy
 Extended detection strategy
 FP% FN%
 recall
 precision
 FP% FN%
 recall
 precision
 0 47.1
 11.1
 92.1
 4.2 18.2
 77.8 94.1 Table 
3 Comparison of classic and extended 
detection strategies 
for Brain Class.
 4.3 Extrapolation of results in a larger sample
 Finally, we applied both types of detection strategies to the 
remaining parts of the subject code (consisting of ca. 900 classes) 

to verify whether the ratio of the precision
 for extended detection 
strategies related to the ÓclassicÓ ones remains similar to the ratio 
calculated from the expert
-reviewed sample.
 In this part, we assumed that the results provided by the extended 
detection strategy presented in Tables 1 and 2 are 
completely 
correct. Next, the number of smell instances were divided by the 
number detected by the classic strategy. The recall and precision 
of the classic strategy relative to the extended detection strategy 
for both smells are presented in Tables 3 and 
4, respectively. For a 
reference, the relative accuracy achieved in the first part of the 
experiment is also provided (the 
Training set
 column).
 Test set
 Training set
 FP% FN%
 recall
 precision
 FP% FN%
 recall
 precision
 0.9
 39.5
 34.8
 95.7
 1.2
 30.4
 56.3
 92.1
 Table 
4 Recall and precision of FP and FN in the extended 
strategy for God Class.
 Test set
 Training set
 FP% FN%
 recall
 precision
 FP% FN%
 recall
 precision
 0.3
 48.6
 5.5
 92.0
 0 47.1
 11.1
 92.1
  Table 
5 Recall and precision of FP and FN in the extended 
strategy for Brain Class.
 The results show that the relative performance of the extended 
design strategies remains fairly coherent for both the expert
-reviewed, small sample, and the remaining part of the 
subject 
code.
 5. THREATS TO VALIDITY
 This section summarizes several factors that can threaten the 
validity of the presented results.
 Internal validity 
In this study we analyzed a relatively small 
fragment of source code. Therefore, the accuracy of the 
extended 
detection strategy was demonstrated only for this code. The 
analysis performed in the second part of experiment are just 

extrapolation, and there is no confirmed information about code 
smells for the remaining, larger part of code
 External validit
y The analysis has been conducted on a single 
project only. It is possible that extended detection strategies will 
not perform so well when applied to the of systems of of different 

domains, different size or displaying other distinctive features. 

Also, si
nce the detection strategies were calibrated on a small 
sample of specific code, the relation between the classic and 

extended strategies may vary for other systems.
 6. RELATED WORK Several approaches and tools for code smell detection have been 

proposed so f
ar in the literature. Some of them have been 
developed to improve code quality during software development, 
while other support reengineering and maintenance activities.
 Most of the available tools are not able to refactorthe code 
based on detected smells,
 but modern IDEs are usually capable of 
performing refactoring automatically, also if they need  the userÔs 

guidance.
 It would be desirable for code smell detectors to help the user 
to understand the cause of the reported symptom and, as outlined 
by Murphy
-Hill and al. [8], the tools should also not display smell 
information in a way that overloads the programmer, in case of 
smell proliferation.
 The code smell detection rules are usually based on:
 ¥ Computation of a set of metrics which have to satisfy some 
conditions;
 ¥ Program analysis aimed at identifying the refactoring 

opportunities that would remove the smell;
 ¥ Machine learning techniques;
 ¥ Dedicated specification language.
 The majority of the available tools use metrics
-based 
techniques, e.g. inFusion, Che
ckstyle, PMD, iPlasma, and 
CodeVizard. They often provide different results due to 
differences in the rules, selected metrics and thresholds. A single 

rule can involve only one metric, as for example the number of 
LOC metric in the case of Large Class in P
MD, or several 
different metrics for the detection of God Class (similar to Large 
Class) in inFusion and iPlasma.
 Similar approach is presented in the DETEX method [9]. It 
uses a dedicated specification language to define and detect code 
and design smells 
at high level of abstraction, using a unified 
vocabulary and a domain
-specific language.
  JDeodorant is an example of the structure
-based smell 
detectors [10]. It computes and compares similarity scores 
between the smell instance and smell candidate, and a
lso proposes 
refactoring opportunities to remove the smell. 
 Machine learning is another concept used for smell detection. 
Yang et al. [11] study the judgment of individual users by 
applying machine learning algorithms to the detected code clones. 

Arcelli 
et al.  [12] exploit different machine learning algorithms 
for the detection of four code smells. Maiga et al. [13] introduce 
SVMDetect, which is based on the support vector machines.
 7. CONCLUDING REMARKS AND FUTURE WORKS In this paper we presented a method 
of code smell detection based 
on a combination of metrics and the structural data about the 
analyzed code. It is also potentially capable of integrating other 
data that is appropriate for detecting code smells more accurately. 
Moreover, we also developed a
 prototypic tool in order to validate 
the approach. Its application to a sample code delivered evidence 
that the approach can be more accurate in the detection proces.
 However, the method
 has also weaknesses. The most 
important concern is performance. Comp
utational complexity of 
calculating majority of metrics, as well as applying the detect
ion 
strategies, is at least O(n
2). Therefore, in case of very large 
projects consisting of tens of thousands of classes, this method 
may be comsidered inefficient. Also 
the technology chosen for 
implementing the protype can be questioned. Although metric 
definitions and detection strategies are relatively easy to 
implement and maintain in XSLT, their execution in an 

interpreted environment may not be as efficient as it wo
uld be if 
they were natively compiled. 
 In order to evaluate the method, we conducted an experiment 
which compares the accuracy of classic detection strategies with 

the accuracy of extended strategies proposed in the paper. The 

results allowed for concludi
ng that the detection strategies 
extended with structural information perform better in terms of 
recall, at a comparable precision level.
 In the future we plan to extend the tool with other data sources 
and implement detection strategies for other class
-level code 
smells, like Feature Envy or Inappropriate Intimacy. A planned 
large
-scale experiment will also deliver more evidence concerning 
the methodÔs advantages and disadvantages.
  8. REFERENCES [1]
 M. Lanza and R. Marinescu: Object
-Oriented Metrics in 
Practice:
 Using Software Metrics to Characterize, Evaluate, 
and Improve the Design of Object
-Oriented Systems. 
Springer, 2006.
 [2]
 R. Marinescu: Detection strategies: Metrics
-based rules for 
detecting design flaws. In: Proc. of ICSM 2004, pp. 350
-359. [3]
 M. Fowler: Refact
oring: Improving the Design of Existing 
Code. Addison
-Wesley Professional, 1999.
 [4]
 R. Marinescu: Measurement and Quality in Object
-Oriented 
Design. PhD thesis, Politehnica University of 
Timisoara,2002 
 [5]
 T.J. Grose, G.C. Doney, and S.A. Brodsky: Mastering XMI:
 Java Programming with XMI, XML, and UML. Wiley, 2002.
 [6]
 D. Tidwell: XSLT, 2nd Edition. OÕReilly Media, 2008.
 [7]
 S.M. Olbrich, D.S. Cruzes, and D.I.K. Sjoberg: Are all code 
smells harmful? A study of God Classes and Brain Classes in 
the evolution of three open 
source systems. In: Proc. of 
ICSM 2010, pp.1
-10. 
  [8]
 E. Murphy
-Hill and A. P. Black. An interactive ambient 
visualization for code smells. In: Proc. of the 5th ISSV 
SOFTVIS Õ10, Salt Lake City, Utah, USA, 2010, pp. 5
-14.  [9]
 N. Moha, Y.
-G. Gu”h”neuc, L. 
Duchien, and A.
-F. Le Meur, 
DECOR: A Method for the Specification and Detection of 
Code and Design Smells, IEEE TSE, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 20
-36. [10]
 JDeodorant Homepage. http://www.jdeodorant.com (visited 
in March 2015)
 [11]
 J. Yang, K. Hotta, Y. Higo, H. Igaki, and
 S. Kusumoto: 
Filtering clones for individual user based on machine 
learning analysis. In: Proc. of the 6th IWSC 2012, Zurich, 
Switzerland. IEEE Computer Society, June 2012, pp. 76
-77. [12]
 F. Arcelli Fontana, M. M−ntyl−, A. Marino, and M. Zanoni: 
Code Smell De
tection: towards a Machine Learning
-based 
Approach. In: Proc. of ICSM 2013 (ERA Track), 2013.
 [13]
 A. Maiga, N. Ali, N. Bhattacharya, A. Saban«e, Y.
-G. 
Gu«eh«eneuc, G. Antoniol, and E. A¬õmeur, Support vector 

machines for antipattern detection. In: Proc. of the
 27th 
IEEE/ACM ASE 2012. Essen, Germany: ACM, 2012, pp. 

278-281. [14]
 B. Walter, and B. Pietrzak: Multi
-criteria detection of bad 
smells in code with UTA method. In: Extreme Programming 
and Agile Processes in Software Engineering, Springer, 
2005, pp. 154
-161.   