 The Combination of Agile and Lean in Software Development: An Experience 
Report Analysis 
 
Xiaofeng Wang 
Lero – the Irish Software Engineering Research Centre 
Limerick, Ireland 
e-mail: xiaofeng.wang@lero.ie 
 
 
Abstract
—There has been a noticeable focus shift from agile 
methods such as eXtreme Programming (XP) and Scrum to 
lean software development in the last several years, which is 
indicated as “from agile to lean”. However, the reality may not 
be as simple or linear as the term implies. To provide a better 
understanding of the combined use of agile and lean 
approaches in software development, a set of experience 
reports were analysed. These reports were published in the 
past conferences dedicated to agile software development and 
report experiences of using both agile and lean. The results of 
the analysis show that agile and lean can be combined in 
different manners for different purposes in software 
development. Lean is often applied as guiding principles for 
agile development. When combined at practice level, flow-
based lean processes tend to substitute time-boxed agile 
processes. 
Keywords-agile methods; agile software development, lean 
thinking; lean software development; XP; Scrum; experience 
report 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
The practice and research of agile methods has become 
highly prevalent since the Agile Manifesto
1
 was put forth 
almost ten years ago. In recent years a shift of focus from 
agile methods such as eXtreme Programming (XP) and 
Scrum to lean approaches in software development has been 
noticed and advocated. Claimed to be “the next wave of 
software process”
2
, the adoption of lean approaches is 
believed to be a necessary progression for organisations 
planning to scale up agile, and can resolve issues agile 
methods fail to address [3]. More and more people advocate 
“from agile to lean”, and the combined use of agile and lean 
in software development. Other terms like “Lean Startup” or 
“Agile 2.0” have been coined to indicate this trend too [15, 
19]. However, the phenomenon may not be as simple or 
linear as indicated by these terms. And our understanding of 
the combined use of agile and lean in software development 
is still limited.  
The purpose of this study, consequently, is to investigate 
how agile and lean approaches have been combined in 
software development
. To this end, an analysis of a set of 
experience reports, in which real world experiences of 
combining agile and lean are reported, was conducted. These 
                                                          
 
1
 http://www.agilealliance.org 
2
 http://atlanta2010.leanssc.org/ 
experience reports were published in the past Agile and XP 
conference series where they have been peer reviewed. 
Patterns of combining agile and lean that recurred in these 
experience reports were identified. The results are intended 
to be useful for both research and practice. 
The remaining part of the paper is organized as follows. 
Section II reviews the relevant literature on the combination 
of agile and lean. This is followed by a description of the 
research approach employed. Then the findings are reported 
in the next section, and further reflected upon in the 
discussion section. The paper ends with concluding remarks. 
II.
 
C
OMBINING 
A
GILE 
A
ND 
L
EAN IN 
S
OFTWARE 
D
EVELOPMENT
 
Are agile and lean just two different names for the same 
thing? This is one view reflected in some literature. In the 
study reported in [8], the two are not distinguished. They 
have conducted a literature review of agile practices used in 
global software engineering. The search string “agile and 
lean” is used to denote agile practices, which indicates that 
they do not distinguish between the two. If this is the stance 
taken, then the combined use of agile and lean in software 
development, if happens, is generally a non-purposeful act of 
the adopting organisation.  
Most literature however does consider the differences 
between agile and lean approaches, thus the potential to 
combine the two to make the most of both. One view of the 
difference between agile and lean is that lean and agile are at 
different levels. Lean is a philosophy or a set of principles, 
whereas agile is more at practice level [4, 6, 11, 14]. 
References [13] and [14] claim that lean thinking are 
principles that guide ideas and insights about software 
development discipline. Principles are underlying truths that 
do not change over time or space, while practices are the 
application of principles to a particular situation and should 
differ from one environment to the next and change as a 
situation evolves. They believe that lean development further 
expands the theoretical foundations of agile software 
development by applying well-known and accepted lean 
principles to software development.  
Based on this view of agile and lean, references [13] and 
[14] suggest that one way of combining them is to use lean 
thinking as guiding principles to develop and adapt agile 
practices. They propose seven lean principles and translate 
them into agile practices tailored to individual software 
development domains. Reference [11] also sees that agile 
2011 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4370-3/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2011.361 project management has roots in the lean thinking which 
provides strength and credibility to the concept and practice 
of agile project management. Reference [4] uses lean 
thinking as an analytical lens and provides a fresh look at the 
existing agile methods such as Scrum. Reference [4] claims 
that many organizations that have modified their software 
development system based on Scrum consider their work a 
lean implementation. Reference [4] argues that even in its 
simplest state, Scrum uses a lean ‘pull’ technique to smooth 
the flow through the system and prevent overloading. Scrum 
also implements a process for eliminating muda, or waste.   
Another view of the difference between agile and lean 
does not regard lean and agile at different levels, but 
consider them having different scopes and focuses [1, 5, 6, 7, 
12, 15, 16]. Reference [6] believes that agile methods are 
mostly concerned with the specific practice of developing 
software and the project management that surrounds that 
software development. They do not generally concern 
themselves with the surroundi
ng business context in which 
the software development is taking place. Instead, lean 
principles can be applied to any scope, from the specific 
practice of developing software to the entire enterprise where 
software development is just one small part. The larger the 
scope, the larger the potential benefits. In addition, the 
primary focus of agile methods is on close customer 
collaboration and the rapid delivery of working software as 
early as possible whereas the primary focus of lean software 
development is on the elimination of waste in the context of 
what the customer values. 
Based on this view of the difference between agile and 
lean, there are several different types of combination of the 
two suggested in the literature. Firstly, it is suggested that 
top-down implementation of lean is needed to create an 
environment where bottom-up agile adoption can thrive. 
Reference [7] believes that most agile methods are tactical in 
nature. The major changes required to become agile must be 
initiated from the top of the organisation. Organisational 
strategy becomes the context within which agile processes 
can operate effectively. Without this strategic piece, agile 
development is “shunted aside by the organisational forces 
that seek equilibrium” [7]. Major improvements require 
radical rethinking of the entire problem space. Reference [5] 
also suggests that agile and lean address different audience. 
They believe that XP describes a set of practices primarily 
thought for developers. It wants to ease the tension often 
existing between developer and customer because of 
conflicting aims. Instead, lean management is addressed to 
the upper management of a company and sees his task in the 
optimisation of the whole company. Therefore lean 
management is a top-down approach. It is considered not a 
slight optimization but a radical reorganisation of the whole 
company. 
Another potential agile and lean combination is that lean 
can help agile to scale up because lean can be applied to the 
areas that agile is not suitable to. Reference [16] claims that 
“experience gathered during large scale implementation of 
agile concepts in software development projects teaches us 
that the currently popular agile software development 
methods (like Scrum) do not scale to program, product and 
organisation level without change. The fundamentals for 
changes to these methods are found in lean principles, or: the 
future of agile methods is found in its origins.” This claim is 
echoed by industry practitioners (reported in [15]) who 
believe that “lean is both the precursor and future of agile”. 
Reference [16] presents a planning framework based on 
three core lean concepts - muri, mura and muda, which has 
been used successfully in large scale agile projects. 
Reference [1] claims that agile projects can and should be 
governed. However governance is not something that is 
commonly associated with agile software development 
projects, even though there are two aspects of agile software 
development that promote superior levels of governance: 
greater stakeholder visibility into the project and more 
opportunities for stakeholders to steer the projects, 
potentially making them accountable for the scope, budget 
and even schedule of agile project teams. A governance 
framework which is based on the seven principles of lean 
software development is built in [2]. At the core of the 
framework is that good governance should motivate and then 
enable IT professionals to do what an organisation believes 
to be the correct behaviours. The framework also identifies 
18 practices which support the strategy. Reference [1] 
believes that lean governance enables agility at scale. Lean 
governance practices such as aligning the team structure with 
the architecture, risk-based milestones, and staged program 
delivery address complexities inherent in large or distributed 
teams. Other practices such as continuous project 
monitoring, integrated lifecycle environment, and embedded 
compliance help to address the additional complexity of 
regulated environments. 
Yet another potential way to combine agile and lean is 
that agile software processes can be improved using lean 
practices. “Scrumban” is a term coined by [9, 10] and a good 
real-world example of the combination of agile and lean 
practices. It is a software production model based on Scrum 
and kanban. It is believed to be especially suited for 
maintenance projects or projects with frequent and 
unexpected user stories or programming errors. “In such 
cases the time-limited sprints of the Scrum model are of no 
appreciable use, but Scrum’s daily meetings and other 
practices can be applied, depending on the team and the 
situation at hand” [9]. Using these methods, the team’s 
workflow is directed in a way that allows for minimum 
completion time for each user story or programming error, 
but on the other hand ensures each team member is 
constantly employed. Along the same line, the study of [12] 
attempts to identify possible improvable parts in agile 
software development processes, and explores how lean 
practices could be used to improve them. A hypothesis “agile 
software process’s development can be improved using lean 
practice techniques” is proposed in their study. They 
conducted a controlled experiment with university student 
projects to test the hypothesis and obtained positive 
evidences to support it. They conclude that applying lean 
techniques help stabilise the agile development phase 
especially in later stages of the phase.  
Last but not least, reference [6] suggests that existing 
agile methods can be used as valid supporting practices of 
2 lean software development. They claim that, when 
implementing Lean software development, “it is quite 
common to pick a light weight agile methodology as a 
starting point and begin applying other lean tools (such as 
value stream mapping) from there”. They recommend using 
Scrum since it provides all the essentials and has a very low 
learning curve. 
Table 1 below is a summary of the contrast of agile and 
lean as well as the combination types suggested in the 
reviewed literature.  
TABLE I. 
 
D
IFFERENT 
C
OMBINATIONS OF 
A
GILE AND 
L
EAN IN 
S
OFTWARE 
D
EVELOPMENT
 
Perception of the 
Difference between 
Agile and Lean 
Combination Type 
No perceived 
difference between 
agile and lean 
The combination of both is non-
purposeful 
Agile and lean are at 
the different levels. 
Lean is thinking tool, 
agile is prescriptive 
practice 
Use lean  principles to guide the 
development and adaptation of agile 
practices 
Agile and lean are at 
the similar levels, but 
have different scopes 
and focus 
 
Top-down implementation of lean to 
create environment where bottom-up 
agile can thrive 
Use lean to help agile scale up 
Use lean techniques to improve agile 
software development processes 
Use agile practices to support lean 
software development processes 
III.
 
R
ESEARCH 
A
PPROACH
 
To answer the research question 
how agile and lean 
approaches have been combined in software development
, 
secondary data analysis was used as the main research 
method in this study to analyse real world cases that have 
combined the two approaches. Secondary data analysis is the 
analysis of data that was either collected by individuals other 
than the researchers that conduct the study, or for some other 
purpose than the one currently being considered, or often a 
combination of the two. The sources of secondary data 
include newspapers, census data, maps, etc. The advantage 
of using secondary data is that the data collection process can 
be unobtrusive, fast and inexpensive, even though it needs to 
be cautioned that there are issues related to data quality 
control, accuracy of data, etc., which need the attention of 
the researchers. Secondary data analysis is frequently used in 
social science research. If it is undertaken with care and 
diligence, it can provide a cost-effective way of gaining a 
broad understanding of research questions. It is also often 
considered a starting point for other research methods, 
helpful in designing subsequent primary research and can 
provide a baseline with which to compare the primary data 
analysis results [17]. Given the exploratory nature and early 
stage of the study, secondary data analysis is considered a 
feasible way to build initial understanding of the 
phenomenon under the study. 
To obtain the secondary data needed for this study, the 
experience reports, which have been published in the agile 
related conferences since 2000 and are publically available, 
were collected. As suggested in the wikipedia page of agile 
software development
3
, agile development has been the 
subject of several conferences, and some of these 
conferences have published peer-reviewed experience 
reports which share industry experiences of agile software 
development. The experience reports that were published in 
the XP conference series, Agile conference series and 
XP/Agile Universe were scanned. Those experience reports 
that contain explicit evidences of using both agile and lean 
approaches were included in the analysis. Totally there are 
23 experience reports that satisfy the selection criteria and 
are included in the secondary data analysis (see Appendix for 
the list of these experience reports). Table II shows the 
distribution of these experience reports in the past 
conferences. These experience reports were imported and 
coded in NVivo, using Table I as the starting coding schema. 
TABLE II. 
 
D
ISTRIBUTION OF THE 
S
ELECTED 
E
XPERIENCE 
R
EPORTS
 
Conference 
Number of experience 
reports selected 
Agile 2004 2 
Agile 2006 4
 
Agile 2007 3 
Agile 2008 7 
Agile 2009 4 
XP2010 3 
Agile 2003, Agile 2005, XP 2003 – 2009, XP/Agile Universe 2002 – 2004: No experience reports 
containing agile and lean combination; Agile 2010: Experience reports not available online; XP 
2000 – 2002, XP Universe 2001: Proceedings not available online. 
IV.
 
F
INDINGS
 
The 23 experience reports identified report on different 
aspects of software development in 22 companies (two 
experience reports regard the same company). The size of 
these companies ranges from small and medium to large and 
multi-national. They operate in diverse business domains, 
such as telecommunication, finance, healthcare and 
governmental bodies. Both agile and lean approaches have 
been used in these companies, in various manners and to 
various degrees of combination. In some companies, the 
combined use of agile and lean is limited to a single, or 
several development teams or projects. In others instead, it is 
a company wide endeavor. The types of agile and lean 
combination in these companies were classified using both 
the predefined categories in Table I and the emergent 
categories through the data analysis. In this section how agile 
and lean are combined in each company is described under 
these categories.  
                                                          
 
3
 http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Agile_software_development 
3 A.
 
Non-purposeful Combination 
Non-purposeful combination of agile and lean is 
evidenced in 3 experience reports analysed [ER1, ER2, 
ER3]. In these reports lean and agile are generally mentioned 
in parallel and no specific distinction between the two is 
made.  
Healthwise is a non-profit organization that licenses its 
consumer-facing decision support content and software 
solutions to healthcare organizations. In Healthwise Scrum 
and lean principles are used to manage the multi-disciplinary 
product development teams [ER1]. Scrum and lean are 
referenced together in [ER1] without further elaboration on 
what Scrum or lean principles are respectively. In addition, it 
is claimed that the success of Scrum “
allowed the practice to 
evolve into a process resembling lean manufacturing
” 
(automatically). This claim is an interesting contrast to the 
experience in the other companies [ER20, ER21, ER22] 
where the transition from Scrum to flow-based lean 
processes is intentional and effort-taking. 
Similarly, in the account of an internet site company 
BabyCenter’s journey from chaos to a relatively mature agile 
organization, [ER2] claims that “
through the adoption of 
agile and lean practices, and Scrum in particular, 
BabyCenter was able to build a production environment with 
99.99% uptime and increase shared knowledge while 
fostering a collaborative environment
”. Again agile and lean 
practices are listed in parallel without further elaboration, 
even though the benefit of agile and lean combination seems 
impressive. 
The reporter of [ER3] presents the agile practices that he 
has practiced in a project where he worked as a technical 
lead. The practices in his armory include Keep/Problem/Try, 
Estimate Retrospectives, Positive Strokes, Iteration Planning, 
Darts, Task Kanban, and Overtime Tickets. Evidently he is 
practicing a combined approach of agile and lean, even 
though he regards them as agile practices in general. It is 
interesting to mention that the Japanese background of the 
development team may explain the natural and implicit 
adoption of lean practices. 
B.
 
Lean principles guiding agile practices 
Lean principles are used to make sense and guide the 
development and adaptation of agile practices in several 
organizations [ER4, ER7, ER8, ER9, ER10].  
The incremental adoption of agile practices in the 
Government Workflow Project, a project initiated by the 
government of a major California county to automate the 
workflow of key business processes in the criminal justice 
system, is described in [ER4]. The project team ended up 
performing more up-front analysis and using small batch size 
for estimations as a response to frustrating velocity 
fluctuations and inconsistent completion of features.  Initially 
the team had doubt that performing additional up-front 
analysis was against agile principles. However, “
in 
retrospect, the team realized this practice implements the 
‘smaller batch size’ principle of Lean Software 
Development, and in fact increased their agility
”. Notice that 
lean can be used as a sense making tool retrospectively after 
a practice is adapted. 
One of the lean principles, eliminating waste, is a 
recurred theme in [ER7, ER8, ER9, ER10]. In [ER7], Sabre 
Airline Solutions (A.S.), a company developing products for 
the airline industry, encountered agile plateau effect. In the 
effort of overcoming the plateau, the company chose to 
apply lean concepts, such as seeing waste and value chain 
mapping, to brainstorm the ways to improve quality, and 
develop quality improvement goals and action plans 
accordingly. [ER8] examines the use and adaptation of the 
“product owner team” practice in BT, British Telecom. 
Product owner team is used to manage the details of what 
should be built in a project implementing an up to 24Mbps 
service over the 21CN network. The lean principle of 
eliminating waste and the seven types of waste help the 
company to “
break the silo mentality and simplify the 
delivery by reducing the work in progress and developing 
collaborative teams focused on customers’ prioritized 
needs
”. 


the collaborative efforts of the core team to eliminate 
waste – applying one of the core principles of lean

˙
n a mission-critical commercial-off-the-shelf 
upgrade project described in [ER9], lean thinking, especially 
eliminating waste, is used as the guidance to the 
improvement of the manual testing process which is crucial 
to the project.

More lean principles have been applied in a distributed 
team of 35 developers spanning 5 continents in Canonical 
[ER10]. The lean principles that play an important role in the 
experience of this highly distributed agile team include end-
to-end view of the process, removing bottlenecks in the 
process, and Kaizen where process improvement 
experiments are encouraged. 
C.
 
Lean principles facilitating agile adoption 
Lean principles and thinking tools have been utilized to 
facilitate agile adoption in several organizations [ER5, ER6, 
ER11, ER17, ER18].  
[ER5] describes an interesting experience of the bottom-
up, self-funded agile adoption in an engineering consultancy 
and software company that is involved in the automotive 
industry “
where analogous concepts under the umbrella term 
‘lean’ are part of the landscape
” and some of the companies 
they do business with were the originators of lean. Therefore 
it is natural that the driving force behind a lot of what they 
did came from an awareness of lean. According to the report, 
a self funding transformation is one of the key concepts they 
“stole” from lean. Another concept that they borrow from 
lean is that of cost accounting, viewing your software team 
as a fixed cost overhead. In addition, what inspires them to 
bootstrap agile practices themselves is the “inspect and 
adapt” cycle. Therefore, the success of this self-funded agile 
adoption can be attributed partially to the guidance of these 
lean concepts. 
In contrast to the bottom-up, self-funded agile adoption 
described in [ER5], Salesforce.com took a completely 
different approach [ER6]. The company has completed an 
agile transformation of a two hundred person team within a 
three-month timeframe. During this large and fast “big-
bang” agile rollout
,
 lean principles, such as empowered 
4 teams and delivering customer value early, were used as key 
communication tools to
 communi
cate the value of
 changing 
current behavior. 
If 
teams were feeling that something was 
not working the way it should be, they could refer back to 
the values and reject anything they thought did not correlate 
with their core values. Lean principles help agile behaviors 
to stick.
 
 
Capital One, a large Fortune 500 financial services 
company used the lens of lean to evaluate the current 
delivery process and streamline the business values prior to 
agile transition [ER11]. Lean principle “Eliminate Waste” 
and tools value stream mapping, root-cause analysis (5-
whys) were applied to analyse the processes of a product or 
service type before Scrum was chosen as the adopted agile 
method. According to the experience of the company, lean 
tools and principles can help achieving a smoother transition 
and will increase the likelihood of a successful agile pilot 
with tangible business metrics.  
This claim is supported by the experience of Systematic, 
an independent software systems company, which is 
described in two experience reports [ER17, ER18]. In 
[ER17] Systematic made a strategic decision to use lean as 
the dominant paradigm for future improvements after 
achieving CMMI level 5 and identified Lean Software 
Development as the lean dialect most relevant to Systematic. 
The analysis of systematic improvement opportunities and 
lean causal dependencies led to the decision to seek 
improvements based on the Lean Software Development 
principles of Build Integrity In, Amplify Learning and 
Deliver Fast. These lean thinking tools gave inspiration to 
consider Scrum and early testing. The result of the pilots 
confirmed the general idea of using lean mindset as source 
for identification of new improvements. Actually that is what 
happened in Systematic later on, which is the main subject of 
the second experience report [ER18].  
Till this section lean is seen mainly to be applied as sense 
making principles in the organizations. Instead, the following 
sections will show that not only lean principles are applied as 
a thinking tool in agile software development, but concrete 
lean techniques are used alongside agile practices in quite 
several organizations. 
D.
 
Lean facilitating agile to scale up 
4 experience reports have demonstrated how lean can 
help extending agile development to better collaborate with 
different stakeholders of software development, including 
neighboring business units and customer, and extending 
agile approach to non-development, organizational level 
activities. 
In the Cardiac Rhythm Disease Management of 
Medtronic Inc., when the software group adopted agile 
development, they quickly realized that not only they were 
learning something new, but they also need to learn how to 
communicate it with other business units [ER12]. Lean 
concepts and principles become a convenient choice as a 
communication tool with the production development 
organisation since the product development organisation has 
already implemented a lean initiative. Therefore when 
communicating with production development organisation, 
the software group emphasized the principles of Eliminating 
Waste and Inspect and Adapt, meanwhile implemented 
practices like the Customer Role, Stories, Sprint Planning 
and Release Planning to put focus on value-added activities. 
The experience of Ericsson R&D in the Netherlands 
suggests that agile software development should be 
implemented as a broader “lean” initiative [ER14], which 
will create involvement of neighbouring units, like e.g. 
service and delivery units, product management, market 
units and customers. This foundation will be an incentive for 
neighbouring units to cooperate and optimize as a whole, and 
the resistance to collaborate with agile development will be 
reduced effectively. Their experience also suggests that lean 
can help align management quickly
:  
“
In a bottom-up approach line and project 
management have limited involvement. However, 
line and project managers are a key in making the 
change stick, helping people resolve impediments 
and conflicts, building a learning organization 
and, above all, showing what is meant with Agile 
and lean ways of working. 
Speaking the same 
language and agreeing on principles like ‘build 
quality in’ and many more is highly needed for 
successful cross unit cooperation.
” [ER14] 
[ER13] contains an interesting case of a company 
applying lean thinking and syst
ems thinking on the customer 
business process in order to understand what features the 
developers should develop that really deliver business 
values. Cyrus Innovation is a consulting group in New York 
City specializing in agile software development, usability 
design and operational consulting. One of their customers – a 
restaurant chain - needed to improve aspects of their 
operations that were breaking due to their rapid growth. 
Their main objective was reducing operating expenses by 
cutting down on the food product wasted each day. Cyrus 
Innovation uses XP for development and strongly believes in 
the power of agile development; however they see that agile 
alone is insufficient to make every software project 
successful: 
“
XP customer will tend to drive development 
without regard to how features impact the business 
system from a throughput perspective.… If business 
managers do not adopt analytic techniques that are 
more synergistic with XP, the developers 
themselves simply become a local optimization of 
the software development process. As a result, XP 
by itself cannot drive overall system improvement 
and thus by itself cannot make a company 
sustainable.
” [ER13] 
Projects must be coupled with a complimentary approach 
to strategy in order to achieve the overall business goals. 
Rather than accepting whatever the customer demand to 
deliver, the project team used lean thinking and techniques, 
including eliminating waste, value stream mapping, flow, 
and theory of constraints, to better understand what really 
deliver business value to the customer. Then the 
development team use agile development to build quality 
software that effectively contributes to overall business 
success.  
5  In DTE Energy, a Fortune 300 company, agile software 
development and project management encountered the 
legacy mindset and culture of portfolio management [ER15], 
which means that the annual budgeting cycle drove a 
mindset that scope, budget, and schedule must be established 
up front, often many months before project work begins. 
Success meant delivering on that scope within the budget 
and schedule commitments. As the IT teams successfully 
applied agile methods at the project level, they began to 
address their approach for managing portfolios of projects to 
increase the amount of value they delivered with their 
business partners. Lean training was organised for the 
leadership team, and potential applicable lean techniques 
identified. They also introdu
ced lean term
inology and 
concepts to help better understand the constraints and how 
they could reorganize the way they prioritized their 
commitments and funded their work. As the way forward, 
one overarching strategy in their IT was to leverage a 
existing corporate system which is a combination of lean and 
Six Sigma thinking, seeing, and 
doing tools and techniques 
based upon the Plan-Do-Check-Act cycle.

E.
 
Cobmining agile and lean at the principle level 
The case of [ER16] indicates that agile and lean can be 
combined at the principle level. In Wireless Data Services 
Global, a service provider to wireless companies and mobile 
phone manufacturers, the development teams “
have 
experienced tremendous positive effects from utilizing 
Extreme Programming practices on development teams
”. 
However, they “
have yet to find the agile path to regularly 
providing positive business value
”. Over the time, they have 
found a family of four agile practices that merged the XP 
principles of implementing the “highest value features first”, 
and “don’t do anything extra”, with lean principles such as 
“eliminate waste” to address the highlighted issues. The four 
practices - Value-based Investment Decisions, High 
Confidence Stories First, Incremental Story Delivery, and 
Story Ownership - embody both agile and lean principles and 
are believed to be most effective when applied together.  
F.
 
Combining agile and lean at the practice level 
Agile and lean can be combined at the practice level, 
which is evidenced in several organizations [ER19, ER20, 
ER21, ER22, ER23].  
One way of combining the two is to use lean techniques 
to improve agile software development processes, or it can 
be termed “lean within agile”. [ER19] reports the projects in 
the IT department of ASR Insurance, one of the top 3 
insurance companies in the Netherlands. While most projects 
that used Scrum were successful, other Scrum teams were 
having some difficulties. The major reason was that these 
projects most of the time were involved in operations work 
or small maintenance. The work was hard to distribute 
properly over sprints and often needed to be changed more 
frequently than the 2-week sprints allowed. What the client 
wanted was more flexibility and more control over the 
immediate results. The company
 wanted to keep the agile 
mindset and at the same time do something more appropriate 
for maintenance and operations so that they too can 
cooperate with the rest of the IT departments and projects. 
Kanban technique was adopted, together with the underlying 
principles - make work visible, limit work in progress and 
help work to flow. As a result, much better understanding 
and cooperation between developers from different 
technologies as well as with the testers was observed, even 
though the team encountered different team and 
organisational challenges. 
The story of SEP is a bit different from that of ASR 
Insurance. SEP is a privately held software engineering 
company with more than 70 employees. It offers full 
lifecycle software solutions to clients in the medical, 
aerospace, healthcare and national defense markets. In the 
process of adopting one of the agile methods, Feature Driven 
Development, SEP found that it failed to have the desired 
lasting impact across the entire organization. However, 
things changed when a kanban system was implemented 
later on alongside the agile practices. Kanban provided a 
more effective vehicle to introduce agile practices and 
principles in the company. The culture on project teams 
began to change as they learned the system. And more 
importantly, the attitudes of team members changed. The 
implementation of kanban helped the agile mindsets to stick 
in the company. 
If the experience of ASR Insurance and SEP is the 
example of “lean within agile”, the next three cases [ER20, 
ER21, ER22] show that, starting with the application of lean 
techniques to improve agile processes, the organizations 
ended up in a situation that can be termed as “agile within 
lean” in which lean processes become dominant and agile 
practices play the supporting role. 
Inkubook is an emerging player in the online photobook 
industry. The journey of the Inkubook team to improve their 
software development process is documented in [ER20]. The 
team initially adopted Scrum “by the book”. However, they 
entered into a chaotic no process stage when the mandate 
arrived that a product would be delivered in sixty days. 
When the schedule slowed down again, in order to avoid 
burnout and staff turnover, the team moved back to Scrum, 
but this time it was really a “
flow-based, iterationless 
version
” of Scrum. After three months of being in the same 
“sprint”, the team recognized that flow was working well for 
getting things done and therefore they abandoned estimates, 
implicitly organizing around a WIP (Work In Progress) limit 
of two MMFs (Minimal Marketable Feature Sets). Finally, 
after several more months passed, the team accepted that 
they were using a work-limited, pull-based kanban approach 
and updated the usage and terminology to reflect that fact. 
According to the team, “
the use of a kanban implementation 
survived a round of layoffs, an extreme change in team and 
management composition, and is still being used today
”. 
A similar case is reported in [ER21]. The title “
From 
Chaos to Kanban, via Scrum
” illustrates the evolutionary 
path 
of
 the 
software
 development team in Codeweavers. The 
company is 
a UK business of approximately 20 people, 
delivering motor finance and insurance web services. The 
team comprises 8-10 co-located developers. Using simple 
inspect-and-adapt cycle to adopt one practice a time, the 
team adopted Scrum practices first to tackle the chaos, then 
6 used value stream mapping and adopted kanban board to 
have a better visibility of upstream and downstream activities 
other than work in progress on the story board. Step by step 
following the kanban adoption, the team introduced limit to 
WIP, fine tuned it while the team began batching tasks into 
MMFs. Along the way, the team also adopted automated 
regression test and adapted stand-up meeting to hold it twice 
per day to ensure tasks were worked on as things developed. 
At the end, the development process assembles more a flow-
like lean process rather than a time-boxed Scrum process. 
Meanwhile, as the focus on flow and throughput became 
more deeply ingrained in the development team, the 
developers' view of the value stream gradually increased, 
from focusing only on the "in development" column to 
downstream to ensure the code developed was accepted and 
deployed to customers. Later still they looked further down-
stream, helping customers to adopt the new services, and 
upstream, helping the business to decide what was needed 
and how to prioritise it. The focus was expanding even 
further into the company's sales and marketing functions. 
 
If the transition of the Codeweavers team from agile to 
lean is an incremental, unplanned process, the experience 
documented in [ER22] is a more systemic move. The 
software development team (not named in the report) had run 
a Scrum-based development process for several years. The 
practices included continuous integration, automated, nightly 
build and deployment to QA servers, and suites of automated 
unit and integration tests. In spite of the processes and 
practices in place, the team was still challenged by the issues 
such as frequent mid-iteration changes and non correlated 
work items. That is the reason why the team decided to 
embark on a lean journey. After a careful research, the team 
arrived at a set of core concepts for their flow-based 
development: schedule individual, value-adding work items, 
define a workflow, limit work in process, same-size work 
items, establish holistic key performance indicators, visualize 
all the work and the entire workflow, and improve 
relentlessly. The team found that “
it was fully possible to run 
agile software development without time-boxes by using a 
continuously updated work item priority queue instead
”. The 
team’s experience shows that the WIP limit is a good control 
variable compared to controlling capacity and scope of work 
under high variability, and a single WIP limit (CONWIP) 
works well for the team.
 
V.
 
D
ISCUSSION
 
The cases described in the findings section show that 
there can be different ways to combine agile and lean in 
software development, either non-purposefully, or with 
specific objectives or approaches. Some companies have 
combined agile and lean as described in Table I, others 
illustrate different and new types of combination. One type 
of combination in Table I, top-down implementation of lean 
can create environment where bottom-up agile initiatives can 
thrive, has no corresponding cases in the experience reports 
analysed. 
Built on Table I, Table III provides an overview of the 
different types of agile and lean combination identified in 
this study. 
TABLE III. 
 
D
IFFERENT 
C
OMBINATIONS OF 
A
GILE AND 
L
EAN IN 
S
OFTWARE 
D
EVELOPMENT 
I
DENTIFIED IN THE 
S
TUDY
 
Perception of the 
Difference 
between Agile 
and Lean 
Combination Type 
No perceived 
difference between 
agile and lean 
The combination of both is non-
purposeful 
Agile and lean are 
at the different 
levels. Lean is 
thinking tool, agile 
is prescriptive 
practice 
Use lean  principles to guide 
development and adaptation of agile 
practices 
Use lean principles to facilitate agile 
adoption 
Agile and lean are 
at the similar 
levels, but have 
different scopes 
and focus 
 
Top-down implementation of lean to 
create environment where bottom-up 
agile can thrive 
Use lean to help agile scale up 
Both can be combined at the principle 
level to develop and adapt practices 
Both can be 
combined 
at the 
practice 
level 
 
Use lean techniques to 
improve agile software 
development processes 
(“lean within agile”) 
 
 
Use agile practices to 
support lean software 
development processes 
(“agile within lean”) 
 
As described in the findings section, 10 out of 23 
experience reports contain the evidence of using lean as 
guiding principles to guide the practice of agile software 
development. It is evident from the analysis of these 
experience reports that lean principles are not only guiding 
the development and adaptation of agile practices (as 
described in Table I), but also facilitate agile adoption 
initiatives and can be used as a communication tool within 
agile teams as well as among different stakeholders of the 
organization. Table III adds the additional type of 
combination to reflect what has been learnt from the 
experience reports analysis.  
If agile and lean are regarded at the similar levels, then 
the two can be combined at either the principle level, or the 
practice level. More cases of combining the two at the 
practice level were found. When combined at the practice 
level, depending on the starting point of the organization, 
there can be two different ways of combining agile and lean 
practices. Lean techniques can be applied to improve agile 
software development processes (“lean within agile”). Or 
vice versa, existing agile methods can be used as valid 
supporting practices of lean software development (“agile 
within lean”). What is found from the experience reports 
 
7 analysis is that, when an agile adopting organisation is 
mature enough in using agile and especially lean practices, 
they have tendency to move away from time-boxed agile 
processes and stick to flow-based lean processes, as several 
experience reports have shown ([ER20, ER21, ER22]). That 
is the meaning of the arrow between the two types. It is 
interesting to note that these experience reports were the 
most recently published ones in the collection. This might 
indicate that moving from time-boxed agile processes to 
flow-based lean processes is the most recent tendency in 
agile software development. 
Even though there is no built-in time dimension in Table 
III to denote the timeline for different types of agile and lean 
combination, a discernable pattern across the experience 
reports is that, in the early days, lean was used more as a 
thinking tool, and in a less conscious manner; in more recent 
years instead, more and more concrete lean practices, 
especially kanban, are adopted in software development 
processes, as a conscious choice of the adopting 
organizations. 
VI.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
The recent focus shift from agile methods such as XP and 
Scrum to lean approaches in software development has been 
noticeable and evokes the interests of both research and 
practice alike. The objective of this study was to investigate 
how agile and lean approaches have been combined in 
software development. To explore this phenomenon, a 
secondary data analysis of 23 experience reports containing 
real-world experiences of combining agile and lean in 
software development was conducted. The patterns of 
combining agile and lean in these experience reports were 
identified and categorized in a more systemic way. 
The findings of the study would enrich our understanding 
of how agile and lean can be combined in software 
development. Since the research on the broad topic of lean 
software development is considered a nascent area [18], this 
study can be an important addition to this branch of research 
in general, and on the topic of combining agile to lean in 
specific. The combination types identified in the study can 
serve as a thematic map for the researchers who intend to 
conduct more in-depth study of the phenomenon of agile and 
lean combination. The practical implication of the study is 
that it reveals different ways to combine agile and lean. 
There is no one-type-fits-all solution. Each organization 
should reflect on its own situation and needs before 
embarking on the journey of combining agile and lean 
approaches. Then the potential combinations summarised in 
this study could provide them with some promising 
directions to explore. However, how to effectively tailor the 
combination types to suit the sp
ecific situation and needs of 
the organisation is a challenge yet to be addressed 
satisfyingly and worth further studying.  
One main limitation of the study is related to the 
secondary data analysis method applied. Since the collected 
experience reports represented secondary data, the researcher 
had no control on the quality of data and especially the level 
of details desired. The 23 experience reports included in the 
analysis therefore were not equally informative and 
illuminative. This is a potential threat to the validity of the 
findings. Therefore, one potential venue for future research 
would be to conduct primary case studies to collect more 
specific and in-depth data on different types of agile and lean 
combination, to explore the issues, challenges and 
opportunities associated with the combined use of agile and 
lean in software development. This will help achieve a better 
definition of the combination types presented in the paper, 
and clarification of the distinctions between them. A more 
solid conceptualization of agile and lean will greatly benefit 
the investigation. 
Another interesting study is to bring the analysis 
presented in the paper one step deeper and analyse specific 
agile and lean practices that are possibly disjoint, to reveal 
how and why these practices are related and enacted in 
different organizational contexts. 
A
PPENDIX
:
 
T
HE 
L
IST OF 
E
XPERIENCE 
R
EPORTS 
I
NCLUDED IN 
THE 
S
ECONDARY 
D
ATA 
A
NALYSIS
 
[ER1] K. Long and D. Starr, “Agile Supports Improved 
Culture and Quality for Healthwise,” 
Proceedings of 
Agile 2008. AGILE ’08. Conference
, Toronto, ON: 
IEEE Computer Society, 2008, pp. 160-165. 
[ER2] K. Nottonson and K. DeLong, “Crawl, Walk, Run: 4 
Years of Agile Adoption at BabyCenter.com,” 
Proceedings of Agile 2008. AGILE ’08. Conference
, 
Toronto, ON: IEEE Computer Society, 2008, pp. 
116-120. 
[ER3] F. Kinoshita, “Practices of an Agile Team,” 
Proceedings of Agile 2008. AGILE ’08. Conference
, 
Toronto, ON: IEEE Computer Society, 2008, pp. 
373-377. 
[ER4] P. Hodgetts, “Refactoring the Development Process: 
Experiences with the Incremental Adoption of Agile 
Practices,” 
Proceedings of the Agile Development 
Conference (ADC’04)
, IEEE, 2004, pp. 106-113. 
[ER5] D. Poon, “A Self Funding Agile Transformation,” 
Proceedings of Agile Conference 2006
, Minneapolis, 
MN: IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 342-350. 
[ER6] C. Fry and S. Greene, “Large Scale Agile 
Transformation in an On-Demand World,” 
Proceedings of Agile 2007
, Washington, DC: IEEE 
Computer Society, 2007, pp. 136-142. 
[ER7] J. Packlick, “The Agile Maturity Map A Goal 
Oriented Approach to Agile Improvement,” 
Proceedings of Agile 2007
, Washington, DC: IEEE 
Computer Society, 2007, pp. 266-271. 
[ER8] A. De Ste Croix and A. Easton, “The Product Owner 
Team,” 
Proceedings of Agile 2008. AGILE ’08. 
Conference
, Toronto, ON: IEEE Computer Society, 
2008, pp. 274-279. 
[ER9] A. Geras, “Leading Manual Test Efforts with Agile 
Methods,” 
Proceedings of Agile 2008. AGILE ’08. 
Conference
, Toronto, ON: IEEE Computer Society, 
2008, pp. 245-251. 
[ER10] F.J. Lacoste, “Killing the Gatekeeper: Introducing a 
Continuous Integration System,” 
Proceedings of 
Agile Conference 2009. AGILE ’09.
, Chicago, IL: 
IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 387-392. 
[ER11] E. Parnell-Klabo, “Introducing Lean Principles with 
Agile Practices at a Fortune 500 Company,” 
Proceedings of Agile Conference 2006
, Minneapolis, 
MN: IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 232-242.
 
8 [ER12] K. Weyrauch, “What Are We Arguing About? A 
Framework for Defining Agile in our Organization,” 
Proceedings of Agile Conference 2006
, Minneapolis, 
MN: IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 213-220. 
[ER13] C. Rand and B. Eckfeldt, “Aligning Strategic 
Planning with Agile Development: Extending Agile 
Thinking to Business Improvement,” 
Proceedings of 
the Agile Development Conference (ADC’04)
, Salt 
Lake City, UT: IEEE Computer Society, 2004, pp. 
78-82. 
[ER14] J. Goos and A. Melisse, “An Ericsson Example of 
Enterprise Class Agility,” 
Proceedings of Agile 2008. 
AGILE ’08. Conference
, Toronto, ON: IEEE 
Computer Society, 2008, pp. 154-159. 
[ER15] J.C. Thomas and S.W. Baker, “Establishing an 
Agile Portfolio to Align IT Investments with 
Business Needs,” 
Proceedings of Agile 2008. AGILE 
’08. Conference
, Toronto, ON: IEEE Computer 
Society, 2008, pp. 252-258. 
[ER16] M. Yap, “Value Based Extreme Programming,” 
Proceedings of Agile Conference 2006
, Minneapolis, 
MN: IEEE Computer Society, 2006, pp. 175-184. 
[ER17] J. Sutherland, C.R. Jakobsen, and K. Johnson, 
“Scrum and CMMI Level 5: The Magic Potion for 
Code Warriors,” 
Proceedings of Agile 2007
, 
Washington, DC: IEEE Computer Society, 2007, pp. 
272-278. 
[ER18] C.R. Jakobsen and J. Sutherland, “Scrum and 
CMMI Going from Good to Great,” 
Proceedings of 
Agile Conference 2009. AGILE ’09.
, Chicago, IL: 
IEEE Computer Society, 2009, pp. 333-337. 
[ER19] O. Maassen and J. Sonnevelt, “Kanban at an 
Insurance Company ( Are You Sure ?),” 
Proceedings 
of the 11th International Conference on Agile 
Software Development, XP2010
, Trondheim, 
Norway: Springer Verlag, 2010, pp. 297-306. 
[ER20] E.R. Willeke, “The Inkubook Experience: A Tale of 
Five Processes,” 
Proceedings of Agile Conference 
2009. AGILE ’09.
, Chicago, IL: IEEE, 2009, pp. 156-
161. 
[ER21] K. Rutherford, P. Shannon, C. Judson, and N. Kidd, 
“From Chaos to Kanban, via Scrum,” 
Proceedings of 
the 11th International Conference on Agile Software 
Development, XP2010
, Trondheim, Norway: 
Springer Verlag, 2010, pp. 344-352. 
[ER22] J.O. Birkeland, “From a Timebox Tangle to a More 
Flexible Flow,” 
Proceedings of the 11th International 
Conference on Agile Software Development, XP2010
, 
Trondheim, Norway: Springer Verlag, 2010, pp. 325-
334. 
[ER23] C.M. Shinkle, “Applying the Dreyfus Model of 
Skill Acquisition to the Adoption of Kanban Systems 
at Software Engineering Professionals (SEP),” 
Proceedings of Agile Conference 2009. AGILE ’09.
, 
Chicago, IL: 2009, pp. 186-191. 
A
KNOWLEDGMENT
 
This work is supported, in part, by Science Foundation 
Ireland grant 03/CE2/I303_1. Thanks to Kieran Conboy for 
his valuable suggestions for the revision of the paper. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
S.W. Ambler, “Scaling agile software development through lean 
governance,” 
Proceedings of Software Development Governance 
SDG’09 - ICSE'09 Workshop
, Vancouver, Canada: IEEE Computer 
Society, 2009. 
[2]
 
S.W. Ambler and P. Kroll, “Applying agile and lean principles to the 
governance of software and systems development,” 
IBM Software 
Rational
, 2009. 
[3]
 
D. Anderson, “Business Drivers for Kanban Adoption,” 
Proceedings 
of Lean Software & Systems Conference
, Atlanta: 2010, pp. 7-14. 
[4]
 
B. Barton, “All-Out Organizational Scrum as an Innovation Value 
Chain,” 
the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System 
Sciences - 2009
, Waikoloa.. 
[5]
 
M. Dall’Agnol, A. Janes, G. Succi, and E. Zaninotto, “Lean 
Management – A Metaphor for Extreme Programming?,” 
Proceedings of the 4th International Conference XP2003
, Genova, 
Italy: Springer Verlag, 2003, pp. 26-32. 
[6]
 
C. Hibbs, S. Jewett, and M. Sullivan, 
The Art of Lean Software 
Development: A Practical and Incremental Approach
, O’Reilly 
Media, Inc., 2009. 
[7]
 
J. Highsmith, 
Agile software development ecosystems
, Boston, MA, 
USA: Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc., 2002. 
[8]
 
S. Jalali and C. Wohlin, “Agile Practices in Global Software 
Engineering - A Systematic Map,” 
Proceedings of the 5th 
International Conference on Global Software Engineering (ICGSE 
2010)
, IEEE Computer Society, 2010, pp. 45-54. 
[9]
 
C. Ladas, “Scrum-ban,” 
Lean Software Engineering-Essays on the 
Continuous Delivery of High Quality Information Systems
, 2008. 
[10]
 
C. Ladas, 
Scrumban - Essays on Kanban Systems for Lean Software 
Development
, Modus Cooperandi Press, 2009. 
[11]
 
R. Morien, “Agile management and the toyota way for software 
project management,” 
Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE International 
Conference on Industrial Informatics, (INDIN ’05)
, Perth, Western 
Australia: IEEE Computer Society, 2005, pp. 516-522. 
[12]
 
G.I.U.S. Perera and M.S.D. Fernando, “Enhanced agile software 
development — hybrid paradigm with LEAN practice,” 
Proceedings 
of 2nd International Conference on Industrial and Information 
Systems (ICIIS 2007)
, Peradeniya, Sri Lanka: IEEE Computer 
Society, 2007, pp. 239-244. 
[13]
 
M. Poppendieck and T. Poppendieck, 
Implementing Lean Software 
Development From Concept to Cash
, Addison Wesley Professional, 
2006. 
[14]
 
M. Poppendieck and T. Poppendieck, 
Lean software development: an 
agile toolkit
, Addison Wesley Professional, 2003. 
[15]
 
K. Serignese, “A sprinkle of agile, a dash of lean,” 
SPTechWeb
, 2011. 
[16]
 
H.
 Smits, “The Impact of Scaling on Planning Activities in an Agile 
Software Development Center,” 
Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’07)
, Waikoloa.. 
[17]
 
S. Boslaugh, “An Introduction to Secondary Data Analysis,” 
Secondary Data Sources for Public Health: A Practical Guide
, 
Cambridge University Press, . 
[18]
 
T. Dingsøyr, T. Dybå, and P. Ab
rahamsson, “A Preliminary Roadmap 
for Empirical Research on Agile Software Development,” 
Proceedings of Agile 2008 Conference
, Toronto, 2008, pp. 83-94. 
[19]
 
D. Norton, “Agile 2.0 - The Rise of Enterprise Agile,” 
Proceedings of 
SOA & Application Development and Integration Summit
, London, 
2010.
 
9