  
 
Do you dare to ask your HR Manager to practice KANBAN? 
The experience report of an offshore software company in Sr
i Lanka introducing agile practices into its 
Human Resource (HR) department  
Thushara Wijewardena 
Exilesoft ( Pvt.) Ltd. 
Colombo, Sri Lanka 
e-mail: twi@exilesoft.com 
 
 
Abstract – 
This paper describes how a mid-sized offshore 
software development company in Sri Lanka, introduced 
agile practices to its HR department. The HR team now 
facilitates its own proactive agile project organization, thus 
overcoming most of the impediments often experienced by 
traditional HR departments. 
Keywords: project management; KANBAN; scrum; lean; 
management; Human Resource 
 
I.
 
B
ACKGROUND
 
Exilesoft is an offshore software development 
company in Sri Lanka which caters to the Scandinavian 
and Australian markets.  Eighty percent of its 100+ staff is 
directly involved in software development (referred as 
project organization), while the balance 20% is in support 
functions such as HR, Information Technology (IT) 
infrastructure, Finance and other operational functions.  
 
As with any offshore software service provider, 
Exilesoft faces many challenges on a day to day basis.  
Some of the key issues such as complexities associated 
with understanding user requirements, misunderstanding 
resulting from lack of transparency within the engineering 
phase, “Us against them” approach
1
, longer working hours 
for both parties caused by time-zone and cultural 
differences,  created a stressful environment for Exilesoft 
and its clients.   
 
In order to overcome these issues and to improve its 
quality and productivity, Exilesoft project office 
transformed to agile process in late 2008.  Upon successful 
completion of its first integrated offshore-Scrum project, 
the company scaled its agile practices to all the offshore 
development teams across the project organization.   
 
The result: Within 2½ years Exilesoft increased its 
staff strength from 35 to over 100, improved business 
profitability, and improved the quality of the work climate 
for its employees as well as for its clientele. 
 
With the rapid change from a traditional project culture 
to an agile one and the speedy growth of the project 
organization, supporting functionalities such as HR and 
operations were stressed out.  When the HR department 
was not up to speed to support the demands of the project 
organization, a high degree of negative stress and 
frustration was created throughout the company.  
Engineers started losing respect of the HR Department, its 
services and its processes.  HR started introducing stricter 
processes in order to cope with the situation.  Yet their 
attempts often resulted in delays and a lack of quality in 
every aspect of their work – from deliverables to services. 
The project organization as well as the Chief Executive 
Officer (CEO) of the company had great concerns over 
this worsened situation. The HR manager herself 
understood that there should be a change in the operations 
model. The Project Director of the company, who is quite 
convinced with the success brought about by agile 
practices to the project organization, believed that 
employing the same agile concepts within the HR 
department would also deliver positive results. The CEO 
of the company also agreed that having one work culture 
across the organization will remove many challenges faced 
by Exilesoft. With this idea, Exilesoft senior management 
group launched an initiative to introduce agile concepts to 
its HR department. 
 
This paper explains the issues faced by Exilesoft’s 
agile project organization due to traditional HR department 
practices, the causes for such problems, the agile 
introduction to HR department and complexities faced in 
such endeavor and, of course, the outcome of this exercise. 
 
1 
 
“Us against them” approach – this is quite a common problem 
where you have a supplier-buyer form of relationship.  This is further 
aggravated by distance, time zone, cultural differences and approaches 
used in delivering service. 
2011 Agile Conference978-0-7695-4370-3/11 $26.00 © 2011 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2011.20161  
II.
 
T
HE PROBLEMS
 
Several rounds of discussions were held and a detailed 
analysis was done by a combined team of engineering 
staff, Project Management and HR Management. This 
activity provided insight and clarity about the situation. 
Key impediments – direct and indirect – involving the HR 
department and affecting the agile project organization of 
Exilesoft were identified. A direct, confronting approach 
was used instead of a typical fact finding survey approach. 
Some of the identified problems are as follows: 
A.
 
Inefficient recruitmen
t process 
1.
 
Latency in the recruiting process when sourcing 
Software Engineers for project requirements; 
2.
 
Advertising campaigns launched by the HR 
department failed to attract senior engineers from 
the market, despite the need for engineers of a 
higher caliber for the scrum teams; 
3.
 
Rigid HR interview process; 
4.
 
Rules and policies for new recruit induction 
which creates a “Someone is watching me” 
atmosphere. 
B.
 
Handling staff, attendance and leave process 
1.
 
HR department showed recognition for extra 
hours worked (very traditional and typical in 
software offshore companies).  This created 
frustration in delivery staff because of this non-
productive focus on time and schedules as 
opposed to flexible work hours that are 
customary for agile teams.   
2.
 
Leave notifications of engineers were routed 
directly to the HR department instead of their 
teams. 
3.
 
Policy formalities took leading importance over 
staff management, instead of human interactions 
and face-to-face casual discussions. 
C.
 
Latency in delivery 
1.
 
Offshore agile projects demanded various co-
location requirements in each team.  Handling 
visa processing and other logistics for customers 
visiting Sri Lanka and for teams visiting 
customers was not being done on a timely basis.  
Extending these timelines created chaos in the 
project organization. 
2.
 
Major time-consuming tasks, such as employee 
handbook creation/updating and revamping 
recruitment processes were delivered over several 
months (the reason was due to the burden of day-
to-day tasks). This created organization-wide 
inefficiencies and frustration within the project 
organization.  This imbalance created a sense of 
hyper-productivity in the Development staff and a 
sense of significant inefficiency in the HR staff. 
 
D.
 
Incompatible employee evaluation process 
HR department focused heavily on a traditional, form-
based, 360 degree employee evaluation process which 
was supplemented by individual performance matrixes 
at Exilesoft.  Numerous discussions were conducted 
with the objective of changing this to comply with the 
team culture.  However, all these efforts ended up 
without a clear commitment to changing the process.  
The HR department resisted change, mentioning that 
“Anyway, we do have a process in place.” 
 
III.
 
T
HE CAUSES 
 
The root causes for the problems identified above were 
carefully analyzed by the management team. Fishbone 
diagram technique was used in complex scenarios. Most of 
the findings had similarities to the problems of traditional 
offshore development process, before adapting agile 
practices. Some of the key problems are as follows: 
 
A.
 
The HR department was isolated from the project 
organization, except for a monthly meeting with the 
project director (quite similar to customer and 
offshore-team isolation).  
B.
 
Clearly, what agile meant to the HR department was 
totally different to what it was to the project 
organization. Even the new recruitment 
advertisements, published by HR department, failed to 
reflect company’s agile branding efforts. 
C.
 
Most requests such as recruitment needs were sent to 
HR department over email (note the similarity to a 
traditional onshore-customer sending a requirement 
specification via email to offshore-developers). Due to 
this distant approach, HR department didn’t have an 
appreciation for the needs of the project organization 
– it was merely another task to be performed. 
D.
 
A larger number of tasks were initiated but many 
remained as work-in-progress (WIP), sometimes as 
long as several months, while some were not 
delivered at all. This created a backlog of obsolete 
tasks. 
E.
 
Frustration created by HR staff involving recognition 
(from a lack of transparency) resulted in losing sight 
of progress and an assumed lack of effort on the part 
of HR. 
 
 
162  
IV.
 
P
ROPOSED SOLUTION
 
HR, as a facilitating organization to the project 
organization of Exilesoft, needed to have more integration 
with the project organization practices.  A new strategy to 
increase the productivity of HR operations was essential. 
To achieve this goal, three prerequisites had to be fulfilled. 
A.
 
Improve the knowledge of agile concepts among HR 
staff 
It was understood that Exilesoft could not proceed with 
a traditional and isolated HR department while trying to 
capitalize on agile practice in their sales and development 
processes.  To understand agile practices of project 
organization, HR staff needs to have sufficient knowledge 
on agile concepts which have been embraced by the 
project organization.  This would help the HR department 
to communicate better with the project organization and 
deliver based on common goals and expectations. 
To understand the gap in knowledge, the company 
conducted an anonymous survey among the HR staff. 
Based on the answers given, the knowledge gap was 
understood and a training program was carried out to bring 
all staff up to level ‘C’ as shown in the following diagram. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 1. 
 
Stages of knowledge improvments 
The project director conducted several workshops to 
provide necessary understanding to the HR staff. Instead 
using engineering examples for training, some simple 
examples which they can relate with: Making a toy bird to 
the market using agile concept
s was used to highlight the 
value of timely deliveries and team work. 
 
B.
 
Implement lean concepts to work with HR functions 
To improve the productivity of the HR functions, HR 
department agreed to try out selected agile methods for 
their day-to-day operations. 
 
1.
 
Feasibility of implementing Scrum 
The initial idea was to implement the Scrum process 
for the HR department. However there were many 
foreseen difficulties to implement Scrum in the context of 
their work: 
 
 
 
a)
 
Time boxing 
HR department has difficulties to commit to a specific 
time box and deliver only the committed tasks within the 
time box.  Nature of HR functionalities had a greater 
amount of ad-hoc requests and some of the tasks 
demanded immediate deliveries. 
 
b)
 
Scheduled releases  
Services of the HR function needed all time-based 
deliveries; it’s difficult to achieve any scheduled deliveries 
of group of tasks in every 5 days or 10 days sprints. 
 
c)
 
Story point estimation 
Estimating the story of recruiting a software engineer 
as point 20 or another story of addressing a leave issue as 
point 100 didn’t make much sense. Relative estimation
 [3]
 
was difficult as stories carried functions in different 
context (e.g.: comparing sizes of buildings vs. T-shirt 
sizes). 
 
d)
 
Sprint burn down  
In a sprint, it needs to burn all the tasks to 0 and then 
commit to a different set of tasks in the next sprint.  
Simply put, it is impossible in HR operational activities. 
Activities flow every day and every moment. 
 
e)
 
Involvement of 
multiple teams 
It was discussed to bring multiple teams together from 
the HR department and the project organization to 
facilitate integration.  There were many tasks carried out 
by the HR department which needed support and expertise 
from the project organization. 
 
2.
 
Studying KANBAN 
It’s understood that KANBAN could be a better fit for 
the HR department over Scrum process practiced by 
Exilesoft’s project organization.  Some of the key findings 
were as follows: 
 
a)
 
Flexibility 
      KANBAN supported everyday planning required for 
HR functions.  Planning on a daily basis and discarding 
previous day’s plans was possible with KANBAN 
approach.  Further, KANBAN did not demand stacking 
and delivering of specific block of tasks at a time.  Instead 
it allowed time-based delivery.  Most of the HR tasks 
could not wait for planned releases.  When something was 
done, it was required to be delivered as soon as possible.
 
 
b)
 
Lean thinking 
KANBAN brought more Lean thinking needed for the 
HR Management over Scrum. 
 
 
 
163  
c)
 
Estimation is optional 
Having Story point estimation/ Relative estimation was 
not meaningful for many of the tasks to be carried out by 
HR department. KANBAN did not demand such 
estimation. 
 
d)
 
Cycle time monitoring 
Cycle-time monitoring and transparency of cycle-time 
for each task was required (e.g.: time taken for a new 
employee to sign in with Exilesoft, from the time the 
request for the vacancy was raised by the project 
organization)  
 
e)
 
Limiting Work-In-Process level
[2]
 
This concept could solve one of the biggest issues in 
the HR department.  A huge stack of tasks were initiated 
whenever there was a request. However, most of them 
were never delivered and stayed in WIP stage for long 
periods.  This was a key indicator that made KANBAN a 
better fit for HR.  Limiting 
the WIP level and defining a 
maximum WIP level could prevent the HR department 
from committing to work on various tasks which would 
exceed their capacity.  Selecting the right priority instead, 
focusing on them and delivering them faster could deliver 
better results. 
 
f)
 
Visibility of work via KANBAN board 
KANABAN board allowed all the stakeholders 
involved to create a clear picture about what HR 
department is currently working on and when expected 
deliveries would occur. 
 
g)
 
Purging the backlog 
There would be low priority stories that were not 
delivered.  Delivering these items later than expected 
timelines did not deliver value (e.g.: employee awareness 
program was needed before announcing the upcoming 
acquisition had no value of delivery after the 
announcement was made to the staff).  KANBAN allowed 
purging the backlog periodically to get rid of those 
obsolete items. 
 
 
3.
 
Remove isolation between HR department 
and the project organization 
Bridging the distance between HR department and the 
project organization – two critical components of the 
company – was imperative to achieve better performance 
levels.  A proposal was made for a representative of the 
project organization, such as Project director or the Head 
of Deliveries, to participate in daily KANBAN meetings in 
front of the HR KANBAN board.  The expectation was to 
reduce any dependencies between HR and project 
organization which may create latency.  Further, this 
would avoid “requirements-over-the-wall” approach and 
expected to create better understanding, respect and 
communication between people working in both 
organizations. 
 
V.
 
I
MPLEMENTATION OF KEY 
KANBAN
 VALUES
 
Real implementation was carried out in several stages.  
 
A.
 
Setting up guidelines 
HR department receives requests from various 
stakeholders.  Some of these requests come without 
declaring its purpose.  Eighty percent of the staff at 
Exilesoft was already familiar with the product backlog 
stories and the standard format
 [3]
.  It was agreed to use the 
same to create the backlog for HR functions.  See Table 1 
for a set of sample stories. 
 
When the requests were collected in such improved 
manner, it reduced the level of misunderstandings by the 
HR staff about the requests and tasks.  Especially, when 
the HR team was aware why they needed to do such work, 
it helped them to increase the quality expectation of the 
delivery. 
 
TABLE I. 
 
T
ABLE 
1:
 
S
AMPLE STORIES
: 
IDAs a/an/the I need So that
1CEO of the 
company 
The employee training 
program to contain 
coprorate vision, 
mission and the 
company values 
All the employees 
will have constant 
reminders of 
those values in 
order to pull 
together as one 
corporate body. 
2Operations 
Manager of the 
company 
All the employees to be 
aware of the company 
administration policies  
The day-to-day 
issues to be 
handled with 
regard to 
disciplinary issues 
would be minimal. 
3Team lead of 
star team 
To have an event 
organized for the team 
to celebrate the 
upcoming final release 
of the project 
We can recognize 
the team effort. 
4Staff To produce a letter to 
the Australian Migration 
office before end of 
November 
I can prove my 
work experience 
needed for the PR 
application 
5Project 
director  
5 new recruits in Java 
techlead caliber by 1st 
week of December 2009 
We can initiate 
the new 
Automated 
warehouse 
product 
development. 
 
a)
 
Usage of “Done” 
Defining what it means by “Done” found to be very 
useful on all the tasks.  As an example, in user story ID 2, 
“Done” mean that the employee handbook should cover all 
the administrative policies, they should be discussed with 
164  
the staff and should be posted to the company intranet in 
order to facilitate easy access to it by all employees. 
A strict rule was enforced to keep the stories marked 
with its priority by the HR team based on the 
understanding with the required stakeholders.  
 
b)
 
Team 
Initially, one team was formed with the HR staff. The 
Operations Manager of the company acted as the product 
owner as and when needed, and the HR manager acted as 
the team lead.  However, there were certain tasks which 
they had to work with temporary teams of project 
organization as well.  HR team was given sufficient 
training to convert from traditional management thinking 
to agile leadership and team play thinking during the 
workshop mentioned in section 
 
IV -A. 
 
c)
 
Task board 
HR manager’s office wall was used as the task board. 
Task board was managed by the team. The stories were 
pasted in the stack column.  Based on the priorities the 
stories  were broken in to tasks and pasted in the “To do” 
column.  Sticky notes of the same color were used to 
identify tasks pertaining to a single user story. 
 
TABLE II. 
 
T
HE TASK BOARD COLUMNS
. 
Stac
k
 To do  WIP Done
The stories of 
the backlog 
Valid stories to 
be executed 
based on 
priorities after 
breaking them 
to tasks 
 
Tasks which are 
in WIP status 
 
The user story 
is moved to 
Done when all 
the tasks of 
the story are 
moved to 
Done 
 
A sticky note for a story has following time stamps and 
guidelines as shown in the Figure 2. 
Figure 2. 
 
Story Card 
This approach helped to create visibility of how the 
stories were moving from the Stack to Done column
 [4]
. 
 
 
 
Figure 3. 
 
Cycle time 
Further, it helped to move many HR activities, which 
were stuck in the WIP stage for months, to Done column 
within days.  Any task staying in WIP stage for over a 
week is given special attention and the blockers are 
identified and dealt with in an effective manner to remove 
them. 
 
d)
 
Daily meeting 
HR team conducts daily meetings in front of the 
KANBAN board at 9.30 AM Sri Lanka time.  Project 
director or a delivery manager from project organization 
participates in the HR KANBAN meeting frequently.  The 
meeting is limited to 20 minutes.  When there were other 
teams involved for certain tasks, those teams also 
participated the same meeting to update the HR team about 
their progress and dependencies. 
 
B.
 
Issues and complications 
The HR team initially faced several issues with the 
changes in style of management as well as the process. 
However, the HR team was in a mindset of overcoming 
these issues, instead trying to throw the concept out by 
saying “this does not work for us”.  The key contributor 
for such motivation was the extensive amount of training 
received by them prior to the implementation and the self-
evident benefits within a short time frame. The key 
challenges are as follows: 
 
1.
 
Challenge of making certain tasks 
transparent via the KANBAN board 
 Some tasks contained information possibly sensitive to 
the staff.  To avoid displaying of such tasks on the HR 
manager’s office wall, later on, it was decided to have a 
web-based KANBAN tool.  Exilesoft Project organization 
developed a tool called “Lean Leak”, using HTML 5, 
which is now in use by most of the team. 
 
2.
 
Minor ad-hoc tasks  
There were many smaller tasks flowing in to the HR 
department on a daily basis.  Posting those trivial tasks on 
the KANBAN board was overkill.  A guideline was given 
to the team members how and when a task should be 
165  
posted on to the KANBAN board.  Minor tasks (which do 
not make on to the KANBAN board) were attended by the 
team based on the level of priority and their availability. 
 
3.
 
Dealing with daily routine tasks  
It was decided that, routine tasks, such as checking the 
cleanliness of the office, be handled outside the KANBAN 
board.  The members decided on a six-hour KANBAN day 
instead of the usual eight hours in order to leave room for 
such work. 
 
VI.
 
O
UTCOME
 
The agile implementation delivered visible and 
positive results within a mere six months.  The HR 
department and the project organization of the company 
started to work more closely, with a better understanding 
of each other’s capacity, priorities and the expected level 
of quality.  This created a culture, which is focused more 
on solutions, instead of different entities trying to pass the 
buck.  Some of the key visibilities are as follows: 
 
A.
 
HR department achieved a marked improvement in 
productivity.  The task progress visibility is very high.   
 
B.
 
All members of the HR department work as a team to 
move tasks forward as efficiently as possible.  They 
have a clear understanding of the expected quality by 
different stakeholders. 
 
C.
 
Communication and delegation within the HR 
department is greatly improved.  The HR department 
culture is now closer to what is practiced in the project 
organization. 
 
D.
 
Most the HR related issues with the software 
developers are now handled as casual discussions 
instead issuing formal letters and calling for formal 
meetings.  
 
E.
 
HR department and the project organization together 
has formed a committee to revamp its form-based 
360-degree evaluation process, to a employee 
performance building process, which will facilitate 
more frequent reviews among the teams.  This rapid 
feedback loops are expected to reinforce and energize 
the culture in a positive manner. 
 
F.
 
Company’s agile maturity is more visible in the 
recruitment process, to attract better candidates who 
wanted to work in a different culture against the 
typical offshore software factory culture. 
 
 
G.
 
HR department attaches a high value to team activities 
in the organization, such as arts competitions and 
games among the teams. 
 
H.
 
HR department introduced a new concept to the 
project organization.  This is to identify a key 
recognition factor for each team, so that it creates a 
sense of pride within the team.  Each project was 
recognized with a unique value.  Some examples: one 
team was recognized as the highest revenue 
generation project team of the company; the 
Unstructured Information Management Application 
project team was identified as the team using out-of-
the-box technology; the application support team 
working to client-oriented calendar was recognized as 
the highest committed team; the automated warehouse 
development team was recognized as a team working 
with robots; etc. This created pride within the teams as 
well as individuals for this unique recognition.  It 
helps increasing the self-motivation of the developers 
towards working for their committed projects instead 
of frequent requests to change projects.  
 
I.
 
HR department now has more recognition and respect 
from the project organization due to their genuine 
effort to facilitate the performance of the project 
organization. 
 
 
VII.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
Nowadays, software companies adapt agile concepts 
for their development teams rapidly. However, the lack of 
understanding of such concepts by other facilitating 
entities of the organization, such as HR department, may 
create complexities and slow down the expected return of 
such agile transformation by its production staff.  Further, 
with current dynamic business climate, the entire 
organization – including supporting departments – is 
challenged to deliver more with less.  Unless agile culture 
is introduced not only to the core departments but to all 
facilitating entities, it will be impossible to avoid 
conflicting work cultures within the same organization. 
 
Today, Exilesoft has overcome most the key 
challenges of agile transition of the project organization, 
by standardizing the same concepts across its other 
facilitating entities, such as HR department. This 
transformation has resulted in significant improvement in 
productivity and highly motivated teams across the 
organization. 
 
It would be interesting to observe how this 
transformation continues at Exilesoft.  Further, the 
approach towards a similar situation within a much larger 
organization is also an interesting subject to study. 
 
 
 
166  
  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
 
The author wishes to thank Finn Worm-Petersen, CEO of 
Exilesoft and Sharon Kern, HR manager of Exilesoft for 
their support. Further Ian Savage -shepherd of this paper- 
for all his guidance, Rebecca Wirfs-Brock for constant 
reminders, Jerry Durant, Dave Prior and Supun Perera for 
their vital encouragement and support. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
R
EFERENCES
 
 
 
[1]
 
Mike Cohn, Agile Estimation and Planning, 3rd ed., Robert C 
Martin Series, 2008, pp.35–47. 
[2]
 
Crisp [Article on the Internet]. HenrikKniberg, “Kanban vs Scrum 
– how to make the best of both” [updated 2009 June 29; cited 2010 
May 12]. Available from: 
http://www.crisp.se/henrik.kniberg/Kanban-vs-Scrum.pdf
 
[3]
 
Mike Cohn, User Stories Applied: For agile software development, 
2009, pp.75–83. 
[4]
 
InfoQ [Article on the Internet]. Kenji Hiranabe, “Visualizing Agile 
Projects using Kanban Boards” [updated 2007 Aug 27; cited 2010 
Apil 22]. Available from: 
http://www.infoq.com/articles/agile-
kanban-boards
 
 
 
 
167