 Inkubook.com: A tale of five processes 
Eric R. Willeke 
Inkubook.com 
Indianapolis, USA 
eric.willeke@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract 
Inkubook.com came into existence in March 2008 
when an existing software development and marketing 
organization received a ne
w CEO who immediately 
tasked the team with building an entirely different 
product. This paper describes the sources of pain that 
led to an evolution from the existing Scrum process 
through four major changes as the team's process 
shifted to meet the team's goals and management's 
demands. Then, the ramifications and further changes 
of the resulting kanban approach are explored.
 
1.
 
Who is Inkubook? 
Inkubook is an emerging player in the online 
photobook industry. Using the inkubook.com web site, 
users are able to upload 
their images, utilize those 
images in the creation of a highly personalized book, 
and order high-quality printed copies of those books. 
The entire process from initial contact through ordering 
the printed book is entirely browser-based.  
Inkubook is owned by ASI, Inc. which also owns 
AuthorHouse, iUniverse, Xlibris, and WordClay. ASI 
is the world leader in the self-publishing industry, 
providing a publishing platform with a wide variety of 
options for getting authors™ work into publication. 
The team built the core software using Microsoft 
technologies, including Silverlight, WCF, ASP.NET, 
and SQL Server. It additionally leverages Amazon™s 
cloud storage offerings for providing fast, high-
availability access to the user™s assets. 
1.1.
 
Business context 
Inkubook lives in a different world from the rest of 
the ASI companies. Although it shares office space, 
information technology, human resources, and 
accounting services with the other ASI businesses, 
Inkubook remains remarkably isolated at a cultural 
level. The company maintains its own development 
infrastructure, with only core services being routed 
through the corporate IT group. Only recently has the 
Inkubook development team interacted significantly 
with the rest of the corporation™s development staff. 
The team™s practices and business processes are very 
isolated from the workflows used by the rest of ASI. 
These factors have allowed Inkubook the opportunity 
to display an incredible level of business and process 
agility throughout the product™s life.  
1.2.
 
The Inkubook journey overview  
The team that became the Inkubook team 
assembled between March and August of 2007. The 
team was created as part of a new technology initiative 
drive manuscripts into the various corporate offerings 
for fulfillment. Development on this product continued 
through the end of January 2008. However,  the board 
of directors hired a new CEO to take over all of the 
ASI companies in late 2007. In January the new CEO 
decided to abandon the existing project and enter a new 
market. Thus, on the first day of February 2008, 
Inkubook.com was born. 
At conception, the product consisted of a slide 
deck containing the Director of Information 
Technology™s vision of the product, a full team that had 
already passed through the forming, storming, and 
norming steps on the Falcon project, and an established 
development infrastructure. The CEO decreed that the 
initial product should be ready for release by the end of 
March, giving the team sixty calendar days to create a 
new product and prepare it for initial release. These 
constraints drove many of the decisions the team made 
during that period. 
Despite selection of the very new Microsoft 
Silverlight as the user experience front-end toolset, the 
team hit the deadline with an acceptable set of features 
in the closing days of March. The development and 
releases of Inkubook fell into a consistent rhythm, 
interrupted periodically by Microsoft™s updates to its 
Silverlight platform. Finally, in October 2008, 
Microsoft released its final 2.0 of the Silverlight 
platform and Inkubook released a compatible, final 
version three days later. Inkubook has continued to 
release new features on a weekly basis as it focused 
2009 Agile Conference978-0-7695-3768-9/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2009.34156 and adapted its software to meet the growing 
understanding of the photobook business.  
2.
 
The five processes  
The vast changes in business focus, team size, and 
market understanding have provided a constant stress 
on the ability of any development methodology to cope 
with the needs of the business. Luckily, the Inkubook 
team was not constrained by corporate guidelines, an 
oversized team, or tradition-bound leaders. As a result, 
the team was able to shift its approach to developing 
software rapidly, addressing the specific risks and 
constraints of each phase of the products™ evolutions. 
The initial development effort used nearly 
textbook Scrum. However, when the mandate arrived 
that a product would be delivered in sixty days, the 
team shifted to a methodology best described as ﬁburn-
out inducing chaosﬂ. After the initial release, the 
technical leaders of the team insisted that the schedule 
slow down to avoid burnout and avoid staff turnover. 
As a result, the process moved back to ﬁScrumﬂ, but it 
was really a flow-based, iterationless version of Scrum. 
After three months of being in the same ﬁsprintﬂ, the 
team recognized that flow was working well for getting 
things done and abandoned estimates, implicitly 
organizing around a work in progress (WIP) limit of 
two MMF™s. Finally, after several more months passed, 
the team accepted that they were using a work-limited, 
pull-based Kanban approach and updated the usage and 
terminology to reflect that fact. The use of a kanban 
implementation survived a round of layoffs, an extreme 
change in team and management composition, and is 
still being used today. 
The following sections elaborate on the nature of 
each of these process variants. 
2.1.
 
Scrum 
The team™s leaders had practiced Scrum and were 
experienced with its approaches and intents at the start 
of the Falcon project. Despite the lack of a Certified 
Scrum Master (CSM), the team was able to implement 
Scrum with a reasonable degree of success during the 
Falcon portion of the team™s life. The team of fifteen 
divided into two equal sub-teams. The sub-teams each 
consisted of an analyst, a graphic designer, two 
developers, two testers, and one architect. Each sprint 
the teams would individually commit to some amount 
of functionality and attempt to finish it before the end 
of the sprint. 
The basic approach to Scrum changed a number of 
times during these first eight months. For a long period 
of time we struggled with getting the requirements 
accurate, so we moved the analysts outside of the 
scrum structure and fed in completed screen 
compositions rather than story-level requirements. This 
forced the marketing group to commit to specifics, 
because they desired great control over the results. If 
the details were minor, the changes were not a 
problem. Unfortunately, the changes frequently 
reflected fundamental changes or misunderstandings 
with the nature of the work. As a result, the team™s 
ability to work side-by-side with marketing degraded 
over these first few sprints to where any changes were 
confrontational rather th
an collaborative. These 
experiences caused more reworking of the timings and 
relationships between roles, but none of the versions 
ever felt quite right with our team™s highly specialized 
roles. 
Unfortunately, things didn™t feel quite right during 
this period. There an ongoing sense of pain arose 
within the development team. People™s job enjoyment 
fell because of the various small frictions within the 
process and between the teams. This friction grew 
fastest between the business analysts and the marketing 
group. The marketing team knew what they wanted, 
and desired to be heavily involved in the development 
of the product they would have to market. On the other 
hand, the designers and analysts felt it was their 
responsibility to create and design the product, leading 
to resentment as each group tried to achieve their 
vision for the product. This lack of shared vision led to 
a continual back and forth between the two teams. The 
resulting ﬁdesign by committeeﬂ effect resulted in a 
product inferior to either initial design. 
Another source of stress arose as the team 
struggled to find the proper balance of documentation 
for new features. The marketing group desired to see 
high resolution visuals of what the screens would look 
like. The developers wanted simple wireframe screen 
flows and enough of a design guide that they could 
work out the proper HTML without having to count 
pixels in a PNG file. The testers wanted complete use 
cases and behavior response lists. This contributed to a 
lot of useless discussions and the perceived need for 
more people writing the documentation. Fortunately, 
the team didn™t fall too far into this trap, and managed 
to work out a marginally acceptable requirements 
document that everybody could use to work. 
Unfortunately, it would be many months before the 
team found a way that greatly decreased the costs 
associated with documentation. 
On the good side, the structure of Scrum was easy 
to manage, and the results were consistent and 
predictable. Everybody did their best to help other roles 
throughout the process to keep work moving, and the 
team gelled well within each role. Additionally, the 
leaders among the developers and architects learned to 
work very effectively with marketing, creating the 
157 desired product despite the challenges in defining the 
goals and vision. 
2.2.
 
Ad hoc, called ﬁkanbanﬂ 
As 2007 drew to a close, and especially through 
January of 2008, the team leadership began seriously 
considering a change away from Scrum. As discussed 
previously, management effectively cancelled the 
Falcon project and assigned the team a new product on 
February 1, 2008. Along with this new project, they 
dictated that the product woul
d be ready to release with 
minimal functionality on March 31, 2008. This threw 
the team into major state of panic. The deadline of 60 
calendar days also ruled our existing version of Scrum 
out; the team believed it would need an order of 
magnitude better lead-time than the existing 30 day 
iterations could provide.  
The team moved seamlessly into pure chaos. The 
four architects looked at the presentation deck 
describing the concept, sketched out a data model, a 
screen flow, a technology list, and split it into a few 
high-level areas of focus. The developers picked out 
areas they wanted to focus on, and then grabbed 
whatever bit of work they could handle next and dove 
into it. In a strange way, the team divided into silos in 
ways counter to expectations. People did not talk or 
collaborate within their role; instead, marketing would 
often be the only unifying force as each architect and 
developer dug into their own vertical slice of the 
application. The test team would take builds as they 
came and find things to test, providing guidance and 
feedback on what felt right and what was clunky and 
buggy. The team still gathered for 10 minutes every 
morning, but conversation would stop after that. This 
pattern continued, with massive overtime, for the next 
two months. 
Remarkably, this was the most productive two 
months of any team that I worked with in my career. 
The team not only hit its deadline, it managed to 
include a few extra features than were expected in the 
first release and do so at a reasonably high level of 
quality. The product was not ready for the market, but 
it was ready for the critical decision to continue 
funding it, and restored a great deal of confidence in 
the team among the management layers. 
Unfortunately, the cost of this effort was a great 
deal of burnout within the team. The pace for those 
sixty days was extremely demanding, and the 
emotional makeup of the team would not allow this 
behavior to continue long term. Team members™ 
families were constantly angry with long hours and 
emotional frustration with the work to be done. Both of 
the architects conveyed their intent to leave if this were 
to continue. The analyst group continued to feel 
increasing friction with the rest of the team because 
they had been relegated to the role of note takers and 
history writers.  
Worse, there was no way for the team™s leadership 
to understand the team™s progress. Each developer was 
able to explain the status of the current task, but there 
was no high level view of what tasks remained, and 
nobody took the time to build that task list. The team 
existed in a perpetual state of done vs. not done with no 
incremental reporting available. 
If this had been limited to sixty days, I think the 
team would have been fine with the situation. 
However, we spent another four months in a state of 
perpetually ﬁalmost ready to releaseﬂ. Oddly, it was the 
marketing team making this decision, determining that 
the market would not accept the product in the current 
form and asking for another handful of key features. 
Each time, everybody agreed it was the right decision, 
and the team moved into another wave of pushing 
features out as quickly as possible. Use of the task 
board for visual control waned and slowly died as the 
team decided that storing the task info in Team 
Foundation was just as useful. The chaos continued, 
and both accountability and manageability suffered 
greatly. 
2.3.
 
Basic flow, called ﬁScrumﬂ 
The team managed to push the initial release to 
production, along with a number of follow-on releases 
containing additional features. The team was more than 
ready for a change, and the marketing team was ready 
to start marketing instead of helping build a product. 
There were still many more features to build, but the 
application could start earning its own keep. The 
team™s work mix at this point was half new features 
and half marketing support. The marketing support 
items were things that would directly assist with 
imminent marketing campaigns, reporting, seasonal 
HTML redesign and other low-effort, high payoff 
tasks.  
The features tended towards longer, strategic 
features aimed at countering the specific strengths of 
various competitors. As a result, the team started doing 
sprint-based development again, intending to return to 
our previous Scrum implementation. The analysts had 
the first major feature set ready for development, 
marketing was on board, and the technical team had 
already provided the capability feedback. The team 
estimated the work, shared it at sprint kickoff, and 
realized there was only enough work to fill half the 
sprint! The analysts went back to start the feature set 
after that and development went off to build the well 
designed feature. About the time the analysts 
completed the next feature set™s requirements, the 
158 developers were ready to receive it. This continued for 
a month or two, and production levels were high.  
However, what the team did definitely was not 
Scrum. First, iterations were forgotten, and the team 
did not do any kickoffs or wrap-ups. The sprint titled 
ﬁSprint 15ﬂ went on for two and a half months, 
defining features, adding to the backlog, working, and 
releasing without any attention to the boundaries. The 
team estimated each feature, and management held the 
team to those estimates, but the overall feeling and 
efficiency was much higher than it was in our original 
Scrum implementation. 
The team™s morale was growing higher, the team 
increasingly gelled more effectively across all roles, 
and the software continued releasing at a rate that kept 
management happy with the progress. The value 
stream did not change, but nobody coerced it into an 
arbitrary release framework. Management found it 
easier to track each group™s developments, and 
marketing found that their lead-time reduced 
significantly.  
This carried costs to the team, though. The team 
still struggled with some individual tasks taking much 
longer than they ought to. Testing suffered trying to 
plan around the random arrival patterns for different 
features. Worse, the seemingly random selection of 
features to implement left the developers feeling 
distracted and aimless, because they could not see the 
future path of the product. The business analysts sat on 
an ever growing pile of completed requirements, with 
the expected effect that many of them were no longer 
entirely accurate by the time they were ready to 
implement. As the analysts stopped feeling pressure to 
have more features prepared immediately, they began 
spending more time discussing the ideal form of the 
features. Unfortunately, this focus led to analysis 
paralysis on the front end, and the resulting meetings 
consumed a lot of marketing and architect time that 
could have been spent focused on improving the 
product. 
2.4.
 
Advanced flow, implicit WIP 
The team continued working with a similar 
approach into autumn 2008. However, two important 
changes occurred that caused a distinct change in the 
feel of the process. First, management stopped asking 
for specific estimates on most tasks after the team 
released calendars in time for the U.S. Thanksgiving 
holiday. Second, the team settled into an implicit 
limiting of features to two at a time. Through trial and 
error, the team arrived at an understanding that ﬁmore 
isn™t betterﬂ, and that limiting how many tasks were 
floating around at once helped all levels within the 
team focus on what needed done.  
Nothing else really changed, but overall output 
went up again, people tended to be more pleased with 
their output, and marketing™s lead-time reduced again. 
For most features, the total lead-time from request to 
release was 20-25 days, unless a higher priority feature 
pushed a feature out. Development abandoned or 
deferred very few features once they made it into 
engineering. The only oversized queue continued to be 
the set of features with requirements written and 
screens drawn, but without any engineering effort. The 
stale feature requirements continued occurring.  
Marketing worked very well with many of the 
roles. Unfortunately, the friction between marketing 
Figure 1 - The Inkubook kanban board
159 and analysts grew worse by the week. The screen 
designers were angry and felt diminished by 
marketing™s insistence of a great deal of control over 
the process. Marketing doubted the ability and focus of 
the designers, and grew incredibly frustrated when 
every minor feature request seemed to involve a 
complete rework of the interface. Neither group was 
effectively looking forward at the needs of future 
expansion, which led to a lot of unneeded rework that 
could have been reduced. The results of this frustration 
begin to spill over into other groups as marketing 
began ignoring the requirements and working through 
the actual desired implementation with the developers, 
leaving the testers to figure out what to test. The test 
team was used to working from very detailed 
requirements, but was no longer receiving them, and 
had to find a better way to work. This led to the 
analysts spending more time updating documents for 
work that had been effectively completed. It also 
increased the visibility of the costs incurred by the test 
team™s insistence on receiving fully details 
documentation. The team was realizing it really cared 
about validation, but cared surprisingly little about 
verification. 
2.5.
 
Full kanban with WIP limits. 
Finally, in early 2009, the team™s leadership 
decided to embrace fully the approaches known as 
kanban software development. The team chose to 
enforce a hard limit on work in progress (WIP) for 
each station, determined that each individual and group 
would be free from having more work assigned before 
they were finished with the previous work, and planned 
that the team would attempt to swarm on any given 
feature as much as possible. As a result, the WIP limit 
was set to two for each stage, with an overall WIP limit 
of six. However, the team rarely reaches this overall 
limit, as the test group usually only has one feature in 
their area. The team also introduced a class of service 
known as ﬁthe easy buttonﬂ to allow short, 1-2 day 
tasks to slip past the bigger ones when there was a 
momentary blockage or inefficiency around one of the 
larger tasks. 
Error! Reference source not found.
 
demonstrates the physical board™s layout. 
People were initially very skeptical, but the overall 
feeling about the system was high as the weeks went 
on and the team™s productivity continued to rise. The 
lead-time on specific feature sets settled to 10-14 days 
for average feature sets, with some coming in much 
lower. The biggest deviation to this was the one time 
when we allowed our WIP to rise to three major 
features in development, causing a bit of a train wreck 
at integration time. Since this pain, with its week of 
lost time integrating, occurred less than a month after 
switching into kanban, it provided a strong and early 
reinforcement of the value of limiting WIP. Marketing 
continues to gain value from the ﬁeasy buttonﬂ, 
allowing the team to respond with great agility to 
specific customer needs and market opportunities. 
The biggest issue the team experiences with 
kanban is that much of the clean up and refactoring 
work that used to happen in the down times isn™t being 
done as consistently. As a result, the team maintains a 
backlog of these items and matches them with new 
work that occurs in the same area. This limits 
marketing to paying for previous technical debt only 
when they request features affecting that area of the 
architecture. As a result, the team can somewhat 
quantify the cost to maintenance caused by earlier 
shortcuts. The list also serves to remind the team of 
areas demanding additional care and prevents 
compounding of the debt. Unfortunately, friction 
remained between marketing and the analysts over the 
details of the screens. 
The development team became incredibly 
confident in their ability to deliver the right value 
quickly, and began to enjoy their job significantly more 
as a result. The features began to be selected based on 
user and partner requests rather than arbitrary selection, 
leading to a powerful emotional feedback loop between 
the developers and marketing. The response time for 
most requests dropped to where marketing never felt 
like they were having to wait unduly long for any 
feature. Best yet, the architects were able to spend part 
of their time working with other groups in the parent 
company, which would lead to interesting effects in 
upcoming months. 
2.6.
 
Kanban stress test 
Two months into the kanban incarnation of our 
process, the team suffered layoffs of 60% across all 
roles as the executives sought to bring costs in line 
with revenue expectations. The cuts left a team of 26 
people with only 10 people, and 20% time of 2 other 
individuals. After the layoffs, the team™s composition 
was two marketing team members, two developers, one 
tester, one graphic designer, one graphic asset 
specialist, one architect, and a development manager 
who also spends about 50% time writing code. The 
flow slowed, but did not stop. In hindsight, the results 
were easily predictable: double the remaining SLA 
allowance on all WIP, and then reduce the WIP limit 
by half to maintain the existing SLA.  
With the reduced team size, the Inkubook team 
found that the visual control is less important than it 
was previously. The entire team sits within easy 
conversational distance, and everybody is hyper-aware 
of the current marketing and development goals 
160 through the daily stand up meetings. As a result, the 
discipline on the board is slipping, and the team is 
considering a test run of the board not existing at all. 
The team may discover the visual control is just a 
crutch that for smaller teams, especially since Team 
Foundation duplicates the information with much 
higher fidelity. 
Many other useful results emerged. The decreased 
number of communications paths caused the overall 
team to remain nearly as productive as before the 
layoffs. The removal of most of the analyst team 
instantly removed the friction with marketing. The 
removal of most of the test team left a single member 
who was incredibly adept at working with whatever 
inputs she was given to provide meaningful test results. 
The remaining tester and designer began reporting 
directly to the development lead, who had been a 
senior developer before the layoffs. The smaller team 
also changed the tone and feeling of the morning 
meeting to more of a fireside chat than a status report 
or formal meeting, yet still allowed all individuals 
(including marketing) to have a part within a ten 
minute session. The remaining architect only had two 
developers to support, and was able to provide a lot of 
directed design training and help share several 
powerful thinking tools for understanding the current 
and future architecture of the system. This had the 
effect of further freeing the architect to do more active 
development work and help other teams more 
frequently. The developers spent more of their time 
working as a pair, and there were very few challenges 
they couldn™t handle with this arrangement. 
3.
 
Kanban goes to Bloomington (Indiana) 
Other groups within AuthorHouse adopted a very 
similar kanban process as individuals previously 
assigned to Inkubook assumed leadership positions 
within their teams. These changes were initially very 
much imposed by management, but the impact was 
reduced by the seeding of individuals across several 
levels, including the CIO, architecture lead, a software 
architect working within the team, and a data architect. 
This allowed the changes to be led by example within 
the team rather than feeling completely imposed. Each 
of the roles learned from a member of their own team, 
and the outside stakeholders were kept at bay by a 
rather powerful new CIO. 
The first new team to adopt the kanban process 
found a great deal of immediate benefit from the raised 
visibility available via the kanban board, which 
allowed the many stakeholders to see what their 
individual requests had to compete against. The 
visibility around the larger corporate initiatives allowed 
the team to justify periods of ignoring other 
stakeholders, but also permitted a very clear and open 
discussion around priorities and the occasional 
introduction of other work to support opportunities in 
the market.  
This degree of flexibility led quickly to a portfolio 
based approach for allocation of development time 
between the various initiatives and maintenance efforts. 
This allows the team to make the decision to address 
cost saving measures for recurring development 
processes, freeing the developers to address new 
features after that initial investment is complete. Prior 
to adopting the process, their 10 developers spread 
themselves across 10 different projects. Now, the entire 
team of developers is focused onto two or three 
projects. 
The process tends to change every two or three 
days in some minor way, always pushing to eliminate 
waste within the process and focus the team on the 
efficient delivery of the right value. This led to 
organizational changes, with the database experts being 
pulled out to their own sub-team with their own class 
of service for meeting the reporting needs of the 
organization, saving the development team from the 
distraction of the steady stream of requests. Worldwide 
application development has been pulled into a single 
distributed functional group, allowing requests to go 
through a single routing path and be compared 
appropriately with other outstanding requests. This has 
steadily improved both the overall release rate of new 
features and the overall capability level of the 
development staff. 
4.
 
Afterword 
Both Inkubook and the core AuthorHouse team 
found a great deal of value in the explicit recognition 
that their processes are 
indeed an asset to the 
development team. Acknowledging the ability to 
change the process to fit th
e current context led to a 
great deal of value and cost savings as the different 
teams adapted quickly to achieve their goals. 
It is important to recognize that none of the 
processes that the teams used were inherently bad; 
instead, they were contextually appropriate until the 
context changed. These lessons are key when 
considering decisions about how much change to take 
on, and how often to accept that change.  
161