 Explaining Agility with a Process Theory of Change 
Michael Wufka 
Department of Computing Scie
nce and Information Systems 
Douglas College
 
New Westminster, Canada 
 
wufkam@douglascollege.ca
 
Paul Ralph 
Department of Computer Science 
University of Auckland
 
Auckland, New Zealand 
 
paul@paulralph.name
 
 
 
Abstract
—While agile approaches have been widely adopted, our 
theoretical understanding of their foundations and impacts 
remains limited. This is due to conflating two entirely different 
meanings of “agile.” We therefore unpack these two meanings 
and present our tentative understanding as a process theory. The 
theory posits that agility emerges from a dialectic interplay 
between recognizing and respondi
ng to needs for changes. 
Meanwhile, rather than directly affecting success, agility 
moderates the negative effects of need for change on success. 
Viewing agility this way helps address the research-practice gap 
by highlighting the need for skepticism of methods and practices, 
and by suggesting practically relevant research questions. 
 
Keywords
-process theory, agile development, agility.  
 
I.
 
      
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Agility refers to two fundament
ally different things. In 
everyday English, 
agile 
means 

able to move 

 quickly and 
easily

 (nimble) and 

able to change or be changed rapidly

 
(responsive) [1]. In
 Software Engineering (SE), however, 
agile
 
refers to an anti-bureaucracy sociotechnical movement and its 
associated development methods 
(e.g. [2]-[4]), practices (cf. 
[5]) and values (cf. [6]). Overloading of the term 
agile
 is 
problematic in at least three ways:  
1.
 
Labeling as 

agile

 every method, practice and value 
that is 
intended
 to increase agility undermines the 
responsibility to empirically evaluate whether these 
things actually 
cause
 nimbleness and responsiveness to 
increase. While it is plausible that daily stand-up 
meetings, for example, increase agility, little empirical 
data supports these causal relationships and many 
plausible hypotheses turn out to be false. 
2.
 
 It obscures differences and contradictions between the 
individual methods, practices and values, as well as 
variance in their levels of empirical support. 
3.
 
It exacerbates the gap between software engineers and 
scientists who understa
nd agility differently. 
Clearly distinguishing between
 agile the anti-bureaucracy 
movement and agile the nimbleness and responsiveness of a 
team raises many questions. How does agility (nimbleness and 
responsiveness) emerge in SE projects? How is it related to 
specific practices, tools and t
echnologies? How does it affect 
developers, processes and project outcomes
? What impacts do 
anti-bureaucratic values and principles have on software 
projects? How do they affect developers, processes and 
outcomes? And how do we measure any of this?  
Finding little theory about agile software development, 
Dings

yr et al. [7] urged 

agile researchers to embrace a 
theory-based approach in their scholarship.

 As agility 
fundamentally concerns responding to change, and the above 
questions concern 
how
 people, technologies and practices 
interact, a process theory approach is particularly appropriate 
[8], [9]. Consequently, the purpos
e of this paper is as follows: 
Purpose
: To formulate an initial process theory that 
explains the role of agility
 in software projects. 
We proceed by reviewing existing research on process 
theories in SE and related di
sciplines (Section II). We then 
develop a series of insights concerning how a process theory 
could explain agility (Section III). Section IV presents our 
preliminary theory and Section 
V discusses its implications. 
II.
 
P
ROCESS 
T
HEORY IN 
S
OFTWARE 
E
NGINEERING
 
Some researchers distinguish between 
variance theories
 
and 
process theories
. Variance theories attempt to explain and 
predict changes in dependent variables based on changes in 
independent variables. For example, Senapathi and Srinivasan 
[10] use variance in
 innovation as well as sociological, 
technological and organizational f
actors to predict variance in 
agile usage and consequently effectiveness. Similarly, 
Maruping et al. [11] relate va
riance in agile methodology use 
to variance in software pr
oject quality, with moderating 
variables requirements change, outcome control and self 
control. Variance theories ar
e important for differentiating 
important factors from coincide
ntal correlates, predicting 
important phenomena and determin
ing what empirical studies 
should measure. 
Process theories, contrastingly, attempt to explain and 
describe how entities change over time. For example, the 
Problem-Design Exploration Mode
l [12] explains how genetic 
algorithms can design systems 
by evolving a population of 
solution candidates. Allison and Merali [13] developed a 
theory that explains how software processes are improved 
through a dialectic interplay 
with software development. 
Sensemaking-Coevolution-Implementation Theory explains 
how developers create software artifacts by alternating 
between making sense of an ambiguous context, oscillating 
between a context schema and a design space schema, and 
translating the latter into artifact
s [14], [15]. Process theories 
allow for generalizations and predictions in situations with 
very complex causal relationships. They are important for 
understanding and communicating processes, organizing 
empirical observations of co
mplex phenomena and providing 
dispassionate knowledge to 
counterbalance the prescriptive 
knowledge conveyed by methods [9], [14], [16], [17]. 
2015 Agile Conference978-1-4673-7153-7/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/Agile.2015.1060 Surprisingly, our literature review did not uncover any 
process theories of agility. Since process theories are 
concerned with how entities change, and agile software 
development is concerned with 
how teams, artifacts, process 
and project environments change and how those changes 
affect each other, process theories seem particularly 
appropriate for understanding agility.  
For example, suppose we want to study the relationship 
between risk and agility. Adopting a variance theory approach, 
we can hypothesize that increases in risk lead to increases in 
bureaucracy, which decrease agility. In contrast, adopting a 
process theory approach, we can hypothesize that development 
processes are governed by a dialectic interplay between 
development and management, where development uses its 
political capital to decrease bureaucracy while management 
uses its political capital to increase bureaucracy. Identifying 
new risks gives management more political capital and fuels 
its pro-bureaucracy rhetoric. This change in the balance of 
power leads to imposition of new rules, which in turn prevent 
developers from effectively responding to environmental 
changes. The variance theory predicts changes in numerical 
variables (i.e. overall risk, 
bureaucracy, agility), while the 
process theory explains the so
ciotechnical process underlying 
these changes. 
III.
 
I
NSIGHTS 
T
OWARD A 
P
ROCESS 
T
HEORY OF 
A
GILITY
 
This section describes three core insights underlying our 
view of agility. 
A.
 
The Core Phenomenon of Interest is Change 
While our purpose here is to develop a process theory that 
explains agility, agility is not a process. Agility (i.e. 
nimbleness and responsiveness) is a property of a developer, 
team or organization. Therefore,
 we pursue a theory of some 
closely related process, wherein we can explore how agility 
emerges and affects other phenomena. Similarly, 

fitness for 
survival

 is an attribute of a species rather than a process, so 
we have a theory of evolution rather than a theory of fitness. 
However, the theory of evolution helps us understand fitness 
and how it relates to other phe
nomena including mutation and 
adaptation. 
Agility, meanwhile, is principally concerned with 
responding to changing circumst
ances in software projects. 
Consequently, a theory of how software teams respond to 
change may help us understand agility and how it relates to 
developers, change, artifacts and stakeholders. Moreover, it 
seems reasonable to begin with 
teams rather than individuals 
or organisations as software is
 predominately developed by 
teams. A theory of team agility could later be adapted to 
individuals or multiple teams. 
B.
 
A Dialectical Approach 
 Process theories come in four ideal types: lifecycle, 
evolutionary, dialectic and teleological [8]. Some phenomena 
are particularly compatible with a particular type while other 
phenomena are conducive to multiple types. For instance, 
teleological theories particular
ly apply where a goal-oriented 
agent can choose its own actions (e.g. ship navigation). 
Lifecycle theories, in contrast, apply when an entity proceeds 
through a pre-figured, determinis
tic sequence of phases that it 
cannot control (e.g. a caterpillar

s transformation into a 
butterfly). If a large population of entities changes over time, 
evolutionary theories may be us
eful. Dialectic theories apply 
where several entities with differing degrees of power conflict.  
To explain how software teams respond to change, a 
dialectical approach app
ears promising. Numerous 
stakeholders including mana
gement, users, clients and 
developers likely affect how a software team responds to 
change. These stakeholders may vary in power and have 
conflicting needs, goals and values (cf. [18]). For example, 
introducing new information systems causes some 
stakeholders to gain power, wh
ile others lose power [19]. 
Some agile proponents similarly posit a fundamental conflict 
between 
Business
 and 
Development
 (e.g
. [4]).  
Sabherwal and Newman [20] ar
gue for a dialectical view 
of system development projects.
 In this view, organizational 
actions are based on specific theses; for instance, the use of 
relational databases may be based on the thesis that relational 
databases are the best approach for most day-to-day 
applications. Over time, an opposing view (antithesis) may 
emerge; for instance, the belief that NoSQL databases 
consistently outperform relational databases. The resulting 
tension between the thesis and antithesis may be resolved by 
persistence 
of the status quo, 
change
 toward a new approach, 
or 
a combination of persistence and change
 (a synthesis). For 
example, the organization might continue with relational 
databases, completely switch to NoSQL databases or begin 
experimenting with NoSQL databases in some areas.  
A teleological approach could 
also be useful. Software 
developers choose actions to achieve goals, as in teleological 
theories. Design is intrinsically teleological [21], [22] and 
software teams have previously 
been theorized as teleological 
agents [14], [15]. However, dialectal theories better capture 
conflict between different agents. 
In contrast, evolutionary and 
lifecycle theories seem less 
applicable. Evolutionary theori
es are more appropriate for 
understanding changes in populations (e.g. open 
source 
projects, unit tests, software 
companies). Lifecycle theories 
assum
e that activity sequen
ces are immutable; however, 
sociotechnical processes are rarely if ever immutable because 
human actors can and do wilfully
 deviate from prescribed 
activities [23]. Lifecycle theories, therefore, simply do not 
apply to human activities.  
It is also possible to combine two or more ideal types (e.g. 
dialectical and teleological) to create a multiple-motor process 
[24] and to combine a process theo
ry with a variance theory to 
create a hybrid variance/process theory (cf. [24], [25]).  
C.
 
Software Project Dialectics 
Software development may 
involve many different 
dialectical interactions. For example, conflicts may arise 
between different types of stak
eholders such as developers, 
users and management. Users may want more features to 
increase usefulness while custom
ers may want fewer features 
to minimize costs. Similarly,
 developers may want a later 
release to reduce stress and overtime while project managers 
may want an earlier release to accelerate return on investment. 
Another dialectic conflict concerns the processes and 
products of development. There is a constant oscillation 
between the development process and the software product 
61 under development [13]. Meanwhile, the structure of the 
development team may mirror th
e software architecture; for 
instance, if a system has four independent subsystems than 
four teams can develop it si
multaneously. If, however, two 
subsystems are merged, two of the teams may also have to 
merge, or at least coordinate, to avoid interference.  
Other dialectics include schema coevolution [14], [26] 
(where developers

 mental representations of the project 
context and design space inform each other), code-test 
coevolution (simultaneously improving the code base and test 
suite) and prototyping (where changes to a software artefact 
trigger changes in its environment and vice versa). These 
dialectics all involve multiple, conflicting entities.  
IV.
 
T
HEORIZING 
S
OFTWARE 
P
ROJECT 
C
HANGE
 
The insights above suggest examining agility through a 
dialectical process theory of 
how software teams cope with 
change (Figure 1). Specifically, we posit that: 1) need for 
change emerges from interacting stakeholders; 2) software 
teams iteratively recognize and respond to these needs. Agility 
(nimbleness and responsiven
ess) emerges from these 
recognition-response cycles. The team, software artifacts and 
development process all continually evolve throughout.  
 
FIGURE 1.
 
A Preliminary Process Theory of Software Project Change 
While this paper focuses on process theory, Figure 1 also 
shows a simplified variance theory to further elucidate the key 
propositions. Specifically, we posit that need for change is 
negatively related to SE success. This proposition is based on 
the common belief that more unstable, unpredictable 
environments increase project di
fficulty. Rather than directly 
affecting success, agility moderates the negative relationship 
between need for change and success. That is, the benefits of 
responsiveness are only realized in the presence of changes 
that need responding to. While, including causal relationships 
complicates the emerging theory
, the process would not make 
sense without the 
Need for Change 
and 
Agility
 constructs, and 
linking these to success clarifies the theory

s context.  
The proposed theory includes three dialectics 

 1) the 
interplay between stakeholders, which produces the need for 
change; 2) the iteration between recognition and response, 
which produces change; 3) the 
interaction between the team, 
the develpment process and the software artifacts wherein 
changes take place. The core propositions of the proposed 
theory are as follows. 
1.
 
Software projects have stakeholders (e.g. developers, 
management, users), which have varying degrees of 
influence and experience conflict.  
2.
 
Stakeholders and their conflicts drive
 the need for 
change. While some changes are related to factors 
outside of a project, the 
proximate 
cause of a need for 
change is stakeholder reaction.  
3.
 
The need for a specific change and the need for 
change in general are quantifiable constructs in 
principle.  
4.
 
Prolonged, high need for change is negatively related 
to software project success.  
5.
 
Agility is a quantifiable construct in principle.  
6.
 
Agility moderates the relationship between the need 
for change and software project success. The higher 
the agility of a development team, the weaker the 
negative impact of need for change on project success, 
because higher agility entails more effective and 
efficient reaction to change. 
7.
 
High need for change triggers recognition and 
response cycles in the development team.  
8.
 
When a team recognizes the need for change, it may 
respond by changing itself, its development process or 
its software artifacts. It may take many recognition-
response cycles to reduce the need for change. 
Recognizing the need for change creates pressure for 
change but does not guarantee that human actors will 
respond effectively or at all to this pressure.  
9.
 
Recognition of and response to
 needed changes is an 
ongoing interaction rather than a linear process. A 
specific response may not fully address the needed 
change or may demand further changes. Multiple 
responses on the team, process or software levels may 
be necessary and multiple (potentially conflicting) 
needs for change may emerge simultaneously. 
10.
 
The development team, the 
development process and 
the software under development coevolve, i.e., 
interdependently change over time. For example, 
dividing a system into three subsystems may lead to 
dividing the team into three subteams. This 
coevolution is affected by recognition-response cycles.  
V.
 
P
OTENTIAL 
U
SES OF THE 
P
ROPOSED 
T
HEORY
 
The research-practice gap around agility simultaneously 
stems from scientists

 unwillingness to study practically 
relevant problems, practitioners

 unwillingness to apply 
research results and a failure on both sides to demand evidence 
for the effectiveness of methods and techniques. The proposed 
theory addresses this in at least three ways: 
1.
 
Unpacking two different meani
ngs of agile highlights the 
need to demand evidence that specific methods and 
practices increase the nimbleness and responsiveness of 
teams. Ostensibly agile practices may be empirically 
evaluated by analyzing their effect on recognition-
response cycles. 
Variance Theory
Process Theory
–
–
–
Need For 
Change
Recognition
Response
SE 
Success
Agility
(Changing Over Time)     
Process
Software
Team
Stakeholders
Management
Users
Devs
62 2.
 
Reframing research on agility as a process theory of 
change in software projects suggests research questions 
that are both practically relevant and scientifically 
tractable; for example, how 
do daily stand-up meetings 
affect recognition-response cycles? This is crucial because 
method evaluation is not scientifically tractable [27]. 
3.
 
Presenting agility in terms of three relatable dialectics 
may help managers and developers better understand how 
to apply research results. For example, inconsistent 
findings around the effects of 
pair programming (cf. [28]) 
may be explained by differing levels of need for change 
between studies. The benefits of pair programming may 
only manifest in high need
-for-change environments; 
consequently, experimental studies with different needs 
for change may produce conflicting results. 
In addition, the proposed theory highlights the need for 
practices and technologies for ma
naging stakeholder conflicts. 
It furthermore reveals how ex
isting methods and theories 
oversimplify and over-rationalize change. For example, Zand 
and Sorensen [29] describe a simple process theory of 
organizational change where change consists of 

unfreezing

, 

moving

 and 

refreezing

. This over-rationalizes change, i.e., 
presents a chaotic reality in a lawful, organized manner [30]. 
Both software
 teams and organizations are in constant flux 
rather than frozen in static
 equilibria. By representing 
dialectical actors in a state of
 constant change, the proposed 
theory avoids and highlights such over-rationalizations. 
VI.
 
C
ONCLUSION
 
This paper makes two core contributions. It first clarified 
how the denotational overloading of 
agility
 obscures the 
responsibility to demonstrate empirically that ostensibly 
agile 
practices actually increase teams

 nimbleness and 
responsiveness. It then explored a preliminary process theory 
of change in software development to explain how team 
agility emerges. The proposed theory specifically posits that 1) 
stakeholders and their conflicts produce needs for changes; 2) 
teams recognize and respond to needs for changes by altering 
themselves and their processes and artifacts; 3) agility emerges 
from the recognition-response dialectic; 4) agility moderates 
the negative impact of high need for change on success.  
The proposed theory is limited in several ways. It does not 
attempt to explain agility at the organizational level or across 
projects. It includes only a smal
l selection of elements and 
does not attempt to model how specific practices (e.g. 
continuous integration) affect
 agility. While agility entails 
both nimbleness and responsiveness, the proposed theory 
focuses
 on responsiveness. Moreover, the proposed theory is a 
work-in-progress and has not b
een empirically evaluated. 
Indeed, the purpose of this paper is to solicit feedback on the 
theory

s face validity prior to testing. 
These limitations suggest several implications and avenues 
for future research. First, we in
tend to test the proposed theory 
empirically. Existing guidance on process theory evaluation 
suggests that the process half of the theory may be evaluated 
using longitude field studies 
and questionnaire studies [31]. 
Meanwhile, the variance half may be evaluated using 
randomized control trials. It furt
her suggests that to reveal the 
effects of agile methods or pr
actices, studies may require high 
need-for-change environments or (better) directly manipulate 
need for change. 
We hope that this paper and the proposed theory spur 
meaningful conversations about theorizing agility and 
rigorously scrutinizing ostensibly agile practices and 
technologies. We believe that good process theories are 
essential in addressing the re
search-practice gap around agility 
and development.  
R
EFERENCES
 
[1] Oxford English Dictionary, Oxford University Press, 2013. 
[2] K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, 
Agile Software Development with Scrum
. 
Prentice Hall, 2001. 
[3] M. Poppendieck and T. Poppendieck, 
Lean Software
 Development: An 
Agile Toolkit
. Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
[4] K. Beck, 
Extreme programming eXplained: Embrace change
, 2nd ed. 
Boston, MA, USA: Addison-Wesley, 2005. 
[5] P. Kruchten, “Contextualizing agile software development,” 
Journal of 
Software: Evolution and Process
, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 351–361, Apr. 2013. 
[6] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. van 
Bennekum, A. Cockburn, W. Cunningham, 
M. Fowler et al., “Manifesto for agile software development,” 2001. 
Available: http://www.agilemanifesto.org/. 
[7] T. Dingsøyr, S. Nerur, V. Balijepally, and N. B. Moe, “A decade of agile 
methodologies: Towards explaining agile software development,” 
Journal of Systems and Software
, vol. 85, no. 6, pp. 1213–1221, Jun. 
2012. 
[8] A. H. Van de Ven and M. S. Poole, “Explaining development and 
change in organizations,” 
The Academy of Management Review
, vol. 20, 
no. 3, pp. 510–540, 1995. 
[9] A. H. Van de Ven, 
Engaged scholarship: a guide for organizational and 
social research
. Oxford University Press, 2007. 
[10] M. Senapathi and A. Srinivasan, “Understanding Post-Adoptive Agile 
Usage -- An Exploratory Cross-Case Analysis,” in 
Proceedings of 
AGILE
, IEEE, 2011, pp. 117–126. 
[11] L. M. Maruping, V. Venkatesh, and R. Agarwal, “A Control Theory 
Perspective on Agile 
Methodology Use and Changing User 
Requirements,” 
Information Systems Research
, vol. 20, no. 3, pp. 377–
399, 2009. 
[12] M. Maher, J. Poon, and S. B
oulanger, “Formalising design exploration 
as co-evolution: A combined gene approach,” 
Preprints of the Second 
IFIP WG5.2 Workshop on Advances in Formal Design Methods for 
CAD
, pp. 1–28, 1995. 
[13] I. Allison and Y. Merali, “Softw
are process improvement as emergent 
change: A structurational analysis,” 
Information and Software 
Technology
, vol. 49, no. 6, pp. 668–681, Jun. 2007. 
[14] P. Ralph, “The Sensemaking-C
oevolution-Implementation Theory of 
Software Design,” 
Science of Computer Programming
, vol. 101, pp. 21–
41, 2015. 
[15] P. Ralph, “Software Engineering Process Theory: A Multi-Method 
Comparison of Sensemaking-Coevol
ution-Implementation Theory and 
Function-Behavior-Structure Theory,” 
Information and Software 
Technology
, in press. 
[16] M. L. Markus and D. R
obey, “Information technology and 
organizational change: causal structure in theory and research,” 
Management Science
, vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 583–599, 1988. 
[17] M. Poole, A. H. Van de Ve
n, K. Dooley, and M. E. Holmes, 
Organizational change and innovation processes theory and methods for 
research
. Oxford University Press, 2000. 
[18] P. Checkland, 
Systems Thinking, Systems Practice
.
 Wiley, 1999. 
[19] T. DeMarco, 
Why Does Software Cost So Much?
 Dorset House, 1995. 
[20] R. Sabherwal and M. Newman, “Persistence and change in system 
development: a dialectical view,” 
Journal of Information Technology
, 
vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 69–92, 2003. 
[21] C. W. Churchman, 
The design of inquiring systems: Basic concepts of 
systems and organization
. Basic Books, 1971. 
[22] E. A. Singer, 
Experience and Reflection
. University of Pennsylvania 
Press, 1959. 
[23] 
Y. Zheng, W. Venters, and T. Cornford, “Collective agility, paradox and 
organizational improvisation: the development of a particle physics 
grid,” 
Information Systems Journal
, vol. 21, no. 4, pp. 303–333, 2011. 
63 [24] M. S. Poole and A. H. Van de 
Ven, “Empirical Methods for Research on 
Organizational Decision-Making Processes,” in 
The Blackwell 
Handbook of Decision Making
, Nutt, P. C. and D. Wilson, Eds. Oxford: 
Blackwell, 2010, pp. 543–580. 
[25] M. S. Poole, “On the Study of Process in Communication Research,” in 
Communication Yearbook 36
, C. T. Salmon, Ed. New York, USA: 
Routledge, 2012, pp. 371–409. 
[26] K. Dorst and N. Cross, “Creativity in the design process: co-evolution of 
problem–solution,” 
Design Studies
, vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 425–437, Sep. 
2001. 
[27] P. Ralph, 
Fundamentals of Software Design Science
. PhD Dissertation. 
University of British Columbia, 2010.   
[28] J. Hannay, T. Dyba, E. Arisholm and D. Sjøberg. The effectiveness of 
pair programming: A meta-analysis. 
Information and Software 
Technology
. 51, 7, 1110–1122, 2009. 
[29] D. E. Zand and R. E. Sorensen, “Theory of change and the effective use 
of management science,” 
Administrative Science Quarterly
, 1975. 
[30] M. W. Lewis, “Exploring Paradox: Toward a More Comprehensive 
Guide,” 
The Academy of Management Review
, vol. 25, no. 4, pp. 760–
776, Jan. 2000. 
[31] P. Ralph, “Developing and evaluating software engineering
 process 
theories,” in 
Proceedings of ICSE
, Florence, Italy, 2015. 
 
64