 Beyond Requirements Dictator 
How Agile Helped a Business Analyst Discover Her Real Value
 
 
Diane Zajac-Woodie 
Business Analyst/Agent of Change 
Erie Insurance Group 
Erie, Pennsylvania, United States 
diane.zajacwoodie@gmail.com 
 
 
Abstract
—This is my personal journey of discovering how to 
provide value as a business analyst on an agile team. I will share 
some things that smoothed my path and some obstacles that 
slowed me down.  
And for the many BAs struggling with how they fit into this 
new world, I will also redefine the role of a business analyst as 
more than a requirements dictator. In closing, I will illustrate 
how BAs, as well as the rest of the team, can reap the benefits of 
broadening their roles and stepping outside of their role 
boundaries.  
Keywords—component; software development; agile; business 
analysis; teams; collaboration; crossing role boundaries; 
continuous learning; value; coaching; obstacles; testing; 
facilitation; requirements; documentation; culture change 
 
I.
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
I spent many years blissfully unaware of technology except 
when I needed to reboot my pc. Then, at a time when I was 
looking for a career change, I stumbled onto a job description 
for a “Business Analyst.” I had never heard of this position, but 
I was intrigued enough to apply. 
When I started as a BA, I would obsess over every task that 
I learned. I submitted in depth requirement plans, created 
detailed meeting minutes, and precisely documented complex 
requirements. I colored within the lines. I was new to IT and I 
thought these tasks were a reflection of my value to the 
organization. 
After a few years, I was placed on one of the few agile 
teams at my large company. Our first agile coach started 
challenging our team’s assumptions and teaching us a different 
approach to our work. It was exciting to me, but equally 
unsettling. I began to question my own worth. If no one needed 
my checklists and documentation, then what was I supposed to 
do?  
II.
 
T
HE 
P
ATH
 
I fretted over this question. On the one hand, I was 
enthusiastic about getting rid of excessive process. 
Requirements changed frequently and I knew that no one read 
the documentation. It was clearly wasteful to me. But on the 
other hand, the traditional BA tasks that I recently learned 
seemed to disappear on an agile team. 
Our coach was instrumental in helping me realize that I had 
a lot more to offer. He suggested that:  
Our value is not in the tasks that we do.  
Hmmm. Up until that point, my self-worth was wrapped up 
completely in my tasks. I had lots of ideas, but pushed them 
aside in favor of a checklist of deliverables that someone else 
deemed important. 
To be honest, when he first told me that I should write 
“tokens of conversations” on index cards, I thought he was a 
little crazy. My contribution to a project had always been 
creating detailed spreadsheets. He wanted me to make a few 
notes on the back of an index card? I was eager for a better 
way of working, but I was more than a little skeptical. 
Through many, sometimes heated, discussions, he showed 
me that our team could produce more valuable software if we 
communicated and collaborated. He also taught us core 
practices like pair programming and acceptance test driven 
development. But more than being knowledgeable, he was 
patient, supportive and encouraged challenging questions. He 
taught everything he knew to anyone who wanted to learn.  
Several people on the initial team were vocal about not 
wanting to learn this open, iterative way of working. The team 
had been assembled based on project needs and staff 
availability. Let’s just say that no one was given a choice. 
Eventually management realized the importance of having 
willing participants and the resistors were transferred off the 
team. This was essential to creating a more open, collaborative 
environment.  
I also personally benefited from attending agile conferences 
and joining local agile groups. It was encouraging to meet 
people who survived their own organizational transformations! 
And once our coach left, I could reach out to a supportive 
community of practitioners for advice or just a healthy debate 
on a topic. My knowledge and confidence grew in large part to 
these interactions. 
III.
 
T
HE 
O
BSTACLES
 
There are many things that would have smoothed my path 
to agility. The first step would have been formal training earlier 
2013 Agile Conference978-0-7695-5076-3/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2013.14882013 Agile Conference978-0-7695-5076-3/13 $26.00 © 2013 IEEEDOI 10.1109/AGILE.2013.1488 in the journey. One of the developers on our t
e
agile experience. Initially, the expectation wa
s
the rest of us as we worked on delivering proj
e
knowledgeable, but could not teach us t
h
addressing our unique questions and concern
s
pressure to deliver was too great. 
Even once we hired a full-time coach, so
m
were reluctant to embrace working in this typ
e
As I mentioned before, no one was given a ch
o
us to spend a lot of time debating every sugg
e
Getting team consensus to try something wa
s
Thankfully, as our team membership cha
n
progress improved. 
Another challenge for me personally 
w
information available for non-development 
teams. I would search for websites and 
understanding of my new responsibilities. 
endless information around coding practices 
a
Most references to business analysis stated 
newly formed agile team should choose be
t
master or product owner roles. I persevered. 
But perhaps the most frustrating challenge
the corporate culture that surrounded me. 
organizations, my company encourages and r
e
efforts. And when people view themselv
e
contributors with individual goals, it is diffic
u
a shared team vision. This solo mindset f
u
silos within the team.  
Another factor that adversely affected us 
roles were matrixed to our team. That meant, 
our QA team member reported to the QA 
d
than to the rest of the team’s Software Del
i
(see Fig. 1). This created a subtle sense of 
attended different section meetings and Christ
m
 
Fig. 1. Sample of a matrix organization chart. 
 
 
e
am had previous 
s
 for him to teach 
e
cts. He was very 
h
e basics while 
s
. In addition, the 
m
e team members 
e
 of environment. 
oice. This caused 
e
stion for change. 
s
 slow and tiring. 
n
ged, the team’s 
w
as the lack of 
t
 roles on agile 
books to gain 
Instead I found 
a
nd QA methods. 
that a BA on a 
t
ween the scrum 
e
 was coping with 
Like most large 
e
wards individual 
e
s as individual 
u
lt to rally around 
u
rthe
r
 encourages 
was that several 
for example, that 
d
epartment rather 
i
very department 
separation as we 
m
as parties.  
 
More troubling was that these t
e
their time and energy amongst mult
i
matters, the projects external to ou
r
methodologies. So our “standing t
e
on delivering the highest busine
s
partners in the leanest way pos
s
individuals were struggling to kee
p
switching forced upon them. 
A lot of these challenges 
w
intelligent, well-meaning individ
u
immense impact that culture pl
a
mindset. I faced many dif
f
conversations with co-workers w
h
embrace a different way of working
I know that changing the cult
u
insurance company will be a sl
o
process. But I also know that c
u
continues to evolve. I take solace i
n
influence the direction that it goes b
challenge the people around me. 
 
IV.
 
W
HAT 
S
TAY
So despite the obstacles, I 
r
b
ecoming obsolete were unwarran
t
analyst can certainly survive and 
environment. “What” a BA provi
d
same, but “when” and “how” thi
n
change. 
The most common descriptio
n
facilitator between the business a
n
quality com
munication 
between t
h
groups. These facilitation skills can 
and after an agile transformation.  
In most companies, it is the I
T
concepts. Our business partners 
c
since they don’t know what it 
m
established relationships that a B
A
help alleviate any apprehension o
u
BA is in a unique position to hi
g
entire organization.  
In addition, I am still charged 
w
just no longer produce a large, 
b
eginning of a project. I now guid
e
elaborate features. At the very start 
dozen high-level stories to help de
f
the work, we break those down fu
r
focusing on small pieces of demons
t
While details are essential, cre
a
p
roject is equally important. One 
helping to develop business proces
s
group that specializes in BPMs so 
create the workflows for any ne
w
p
lanning. We share these with stak
e
with anyone who is contributing to 
t
e
am members were splitting 
i
ple projects. To complicate 
r
 team were using waterfall 
e
am” was learning to focus 
s
s value for our business 
s
ible. And these matrixed 
p
 up given all the context 
w
ere the direct result of 
u
als. This underlines the 
a
ys on adopting an agile 
f
icult and disappointing 
h
o were just not ready to 
.  
u
re at a large, conservative 
o
w, sometimes frustrating, 
u
lture, by its very nature,  
n
 knowing that I can help to 
y conti
n
uing to educate and 
S THE SAME
 
r
ealized that my fears of 
t
ed. The role of a business 
even thrive in an iterative 
d
es will stay somewhat the 
n
gs are accomplished will 
n
 of the BA role is as a 
n
d IT. We help to ensure 
h
ese, sometimes opposing, 
be even more useful during 
T
 side that introduces agile 
c
an sometimes be hesitant 
m
eans to “go agile.”  The 
A
 has with the business can 
u
tside of IT. And a trusted 
g
hlight the benefi
t
s for the 
w
ith eliciting requirements. I 
detailed document at the 
e
 the team to progressively 
of a project we may have a 
f
ine scope. As we dive into 
r
ther to capture the details, 
t
rable software.  
a
ting an overall vision of a 
practice that I continue is 
 models (BPM). We have a 
I collaborate with them to 
w
 functionality that we are 
e
holders, with our team and 
t
he projec
t
 (see Fig. 2).  
8989  
Fig. 2. Team members discussing a Business Process Model 
for a complex workflow.  
 
For a complex workflow with a lot of exceptions, they may 
contain a lot of detail. Despite this, we try to keep the models 
as flexible as possible. When new information is discovered or 
a change is needed, we simply put post-its on the model itself. 
We keep them hanging near our team space so we can refer to 
them as we discuss stories. When enough changes are needed, 
our partners update them to a new version and re-print them. 
It is a given that the BA is charged with reaching out to 
various people, from stakeholders to SMEs, from developers to 
quality assurance. In my pre-agile days, I remember having 3-5 
meetings a day with different groups trying to gain and share 
understanding in 60-minute windows of time. I took this 
knowledge back to my functional silo, where I would create a 
requirements document in isolation. 
I still regularly communicate with anyone and everyone, 
but with a minimum need for formal meetings. I invite 
stakeholders to our team space where we have focused 
conversations on their specific expectations for an upcoming 
feature. I work with our product owner to ensure our story 
cards stay prioritized. I spell out acceptance criteria with our 
QA teammate. These are just a few examples of focused 
collaboration which is more engaging and therefore, more 
productive. 
Documentation of these conversations is still important. If 
there is a need to record some of these interactions, I try to 
keep it as lightweight as possible. For example, I still articulate 
an agenda to the person or group, because defining the purpose 
of meeting helps to provide focus. But I may just write our 
problem statement on a whiteboard and capture the 
conversation below as it unfolds.  
And I still produce and share meeting summaries for 
important decisions. This may include a snapshot of the 
whiteboard and a few sentences for clarification. The key is 
that I do not produce documentation without questioning what 
value it adds. 
 
V.
 
W
HAT 
C
HANGES 
 
There are a lot of BA tasks that appear to disappear on an 
agile team. And some of those have disappeared for good 
reason because they were not adding real value. In reality, the 
important tasks have evolved so even better outcomes are 
achieved. 
In the past, when there were multiple alternatives to solve a 
problem, I would generate documentation to describe the pros 
and cons of each. Now I partner with user interaction 
specialists to map out and prototype solutions that we can 
discuss and tweak with our product owners. I have found that 
comparing mock-ups is a much more effective means for 
sharing options.  
I am also a huge proponent of story mapping - a technique 
made popular by Jeff Patton that helps us discover, visualize, 
and plan desired features [1]. In the past, our project teams 
might have read a project initiation document when they were 
first assigned to a project. From this, they gained a high level 
understanding of the goals. Then they went back to their 
current project while they waited for requirements. 
Now at the start of a project, I invite all the stakeholders to 
participate, along with the development team, in a story 
mapping session. The group discusses the business goals and 
the possible user activities and tasks needed to achieve it. This 
generates a common understanding of what the project hopes 
to deliver.  
Building this initial story map really opens the dialogue 
between all parties involved. In the past, the development team 
may not have ever spoken to any stakeholders. It was generally 
expected that, as the BA, I was the go-between. Before story 
maps, I did not have a lightweight, visual technique that 
fostered such collaborative communication. 
Because of its simplicity, a story map is easy to keep 
current. Once it is created, I transfer the map to Excel, with 
each cell representing a post-it (see Fig. 3). This makes it easier 
to share and easier to insert tasks or stories if we discover that 
we missed something
1
. We typically reference it on the shared 
big-screen television in our common workspace. And if 
needed, I can print it to take to a meeting. 
 
                                                          
 
1
 
There is a promising new tool called CardBoard [2] that allows for 
story map creation along with saving release “slices.” I was a beta-
tester and I would highly recommend checking it out. I have no 
financial or legal connection with the product.
 
9090  
Fig. 3. Sample of a story map saved in Excel. 
 
One of my favorite differences in this new environment is 
around testing. I remember creating requirements that were 
“testable,” that our quality assurance engineers could trace to 
their test scripts. Now I work side-by-side with QA to write 
executable test scenarios. Using Behavior-Driven Development 
(BDD), we spell out requirements in a ubiquitous language that 
literally becomes our automated tests. 
More important than how any specific task has changed is 
the change in timing of the tasks. The requirements phase is at 
the front end of a traditional project. While the BA typically 
stays involved throughout the lifecycle, the majority of their 
effort is spent up front, eliciting, gathering and documenting.  
This is based on the myth that requirements will not change 
so you can capture them all at the start if you ask the right 
questions. Asking good questions is still an essential skill for a 
BA. But on an agile team, the BA, along with the team, focuses 
on one story at a time. This allows for “just-in-time” 
elaboration of the details.  
When requirements are uncovered throughout 
development, they do not have the chance to become stale. 
And the team does not waste time refreshing their memories 
about decisions that occurred months ago. There is an ongoing 
dialogue with stakeholders so information is always current. 
 
VI.
 
BA
 
S
KILLS 
E
VEN 
M
ORE 
V
ALUABLE
 
So what about BA skills other than requirements elicitation, 
facilitation and documentation? Is there a place for creativity, 
consensus-building and problem solving skills on an agile 
team? I firmly believe that these skills and many other BA 
assets are even more valuable. 
In a highly collaborative environment, being able to steer a 
conversation toward an agreement is a vital skill to possess. 
“Agile” or not, when you get a group of people with different 
ideas together, it helps to have a referee in one form or another. 
They make sure all perspectives are heard and that realistic 
solutions are actually discovered. 
Another aspect of business analysis that thrives in this 
environment is getting to the root cause of a problem. Our goal 
is to develop the simplest thing that will solve a business 
problem. So I help to prioritize our work in order of most 
important to least. As we develop and demonstrate the working 
software, I challenge the project sponsors to consider whether 
the intent of the project has been fulfilled. Do we really need 
the remaining stories to solve the original problem? 
This has been met with mixed results. One of the biggest 
surprises for me has been the resistance on the business side to 
embrace an agile philosophy. Because the entire project is 
approved at the onset, the mindset seems to be, “We want it 
all.” Even with open dialogue, it can be difficult to convince 
stakeholders to break up bigger features and deliver less than 
originally scoped.  
This requires teaching the stakeholders how to think 
differently. They can’t imagine the value of X without Y and 
Z. My job is to educate them about the benefits of delivering 
the most valuable item, X, as quickly as possible. Then we can 
gain feedback that can inform whether they even need Y or Z. 
The project sponsors may agree in theory, but struggle with 
breaking free from the prevailing mindset of an “all or 
nothing” release.  
On a positive note, with its transparency and flexibility, 
agile relieves the BA of being the “scope police.” The product 
owner polices his or her own scope decisions, so instead of 
saying “no,” I have become a sort of accountability partner. I 
show them options for slicing features and help them to see the 
trade-offs of business value versus development effort. 
Creativity and good communication skills have been essential 
for this shift. 
An essential part of my partnership is openness and 
honesty. As a BA, I am in a perfect position to glean and share 
information because I work with all the roles on the team in 
some form or another. The project manager might get the status 
of everyone’s work, but the BA actually works with everyone. 
From PM to QA to developer, the BA understands the specific 
challenges the team is facing. 
Because of this central role, the BA is usually a key driver 
to creating visual tools, or information radiators. Also called 
“Big Visible Charts,” these can include anything the team 
deems important enough to track and share, such as number of 
tests written, code coverage, or build status [3]. 
One of the common types of information radiators is a burn 
chart
2
. I work with our project manager to create burnup charts 
that reflect changes in scope and velocity (see Fig. 4). As the 
BA, I also shepherd the story card writing so that our work-in-
progress is transparent. On my last team, I worked with 
developers to configure a tool so that the BAs and QA could 
run the automated test suite on demand and see results for 
failing tests. 
 
                                                          
 
2
 
I prefer burn up charts because they reflect changes to scope, along 
with velocity. Burn down charts simply show how much work is left 
to complete. They can obfuscate changes to scope because work is 
being completed at the same time that scope changes.
 
9191  
Fig. 4. Sample burn up chart. 
 
In addition to information radiators, everyone on the team 
should care about retrospectives. But a lot of teams get caught 
up in delivery work and need someone to remind them to 
inspect and adapt. I am the biggest proponent of regularly 
focusing the team to identify what is working and where we 
can improve. A BAs continuous improvement mentality and 
facilitation skills are very useful to encourage active 
participation from all team members. 
 
VII.
 
E
RASING 
R
OLE 
B
OUNDARIES
 
Most business analysts have found themselves crossing 
role-lines in some form, from helping business sponsors write 
business cases to performing some functional testing at the end 
of a project. In fact, most people who care about the success of 
a project will lend a hand when needed to get a project across 
the finish line. 
This attitude should define a high performing team. When 
the team has a shared vision of success and a narrow slice of 
work to focus on, role boundaries disappear. The BA can write 
test scenarios and a developer can ask the product owner what 
an error message should say. All that matters is keeping work, 
which is ultimately business value, flowing across the board. 
This usually happens over time if given the right 
conditions. My first team started by sitting together and 
focusing on smaller pieces of work. In effect, we shrank the 
development cycle to the time it took to complete one card. We 
used to have hour-long meetings to officially hand-off work 
between phases, like requirements to design or development to 
testing. These were replaced with frequent ten-minute 
conversations throughout the iteration.  
To further encourage teammates to cross roles, we 
implemented work-in-progress (WIP) limits. On our 
storyboard, each activity related to delivery, such as analysis, 
development or testing, had a story card limit. Everyone agreed 
to the limits, which were based on the team’s size. The idea 
was that if any WIP limit was reached, then the team would 
have to help with that activity in order to move a story. 
For example, if the testing WIP limit was one and one story 
was undergoing testing, then the WIP limit for testing was 
reached. If the developers completed two more stories which 
were then ready to be tested, then the developers had to help 
test. They could not just move the stories to testing and start  
development on more stories.  
When our team respected WIP limits, it focused the whole 
team on getting a few stories to ‘Done’ at a time. This focus on 
completion caused team members to frequently step into other 
roles to remove roadblocks. To be successful, it was important 
to have a team agreement that the stories closest to ‘Done’ 
were the highest business value and therefore the highest 
priority.  
Even so, we are human and it was tempting to pick up work 
that we felt was interesting or easy or without obstacles. Not 
many people want to hunt down answers or come up with 
solutions to roadblocks. This is especially true if there is other 
work available. So it was important for us to hold each other 
accountable with friendly reminders to stay focued on the 
highest priority work. 
At the onset of our team formation, most members stayed 
in their safe zone, their specialty. I did the same. So much was 
changing around me that I wanted to hold onto at least one 
thing that was comfortable. Then I started helping our PM with 
burn charts and release planning. It was a small step outside 
my realm of expertise. As I learned more, I appreciated being 
able to contribute to these conversations. 
Soon the whole team was discussing testing strategies and 
automated approaches. While I could not contribute technical 
details, I gained an understanding about our testing goals and 
our plan to get there. Then, as I mentioned previously, I started 
pairing with our tester and developers to write executable 
requirements (see Fig. 5).  
 
 
Fig. 5. Sample of executable test scenario. 
 
Writing requirements as testing specifications has been one 
of the biggest adjustments for our team. It required shifting our 
mindset from “I know everything that I need.” to “What can I 
learn from you?” We needed to embrace that each person 
brings a different and valuable perspective.  
9292 This mindset affected everyone on the team. It opened up 
learning opportunities for each person. Our project manager 
paired with the developers to help talk through technical 
solutions from a different angle. The developers worked 
through scenarios with our business sponsors to gain insight. 
Our tester and I even learned a little Ruby so we could tweak 
our regression tests if needed.  
With each collaboration, each person benefited by 
expanding their knowledge. Those learning new skills were 
stretched beyond their area of expertise. And those doing the 
teaching were given the opportunity to deepen their 
understanding since a proven way to master a skill is to teach it 
to someone else. And perhaps the biggest benefit is that the 
resulting solutions were better than what they would have been 
if we had worked solo. 
 
VIII.
 
T
HE 
J
OURNEY 
C
ONTINUES
 
As I ask people about their experiences with business 
analysts, I find that there is no such thing as a typical BA. That 
is because one of our strengths is to adjust our actions based on 
the context of a given project. The BA helps define the 
business problem and guides the team to the best solution. And 
these problems and solutions are different every time.  
Even so, I have learned that my real value does not come 
from my actions. My real value comes from bringing the best 
out of every person with which I work. Sometimes this is 
achieved by pushing a person beyond their assumptions. 
Sometimes it involves encouraging lively debates. Other times 
it requires listening beyond the words being spoken.  
This journey of discovering my real value has been one of 
continuous questioning, continuous sharing, continuous 
adjustment. I have learned from the frustrations as much as 
from the celebrations. With an attitude of lifelong learning, I 
plan on continuing to push boundaries and to stretch my 
knowledge. This continual metamorphosis is what “being 
agile” has meant to me. 
 
 
A
CKNOWLEDGMENT
 
Endless thanks goes to my first coach, Michael “Doc” 
Norton, for opening the door for me and for his continued 
friendship. I am also grateful to Matt Barcomb for seeing more 
in me than I could see in myself. In addition, I would like to 
thank Kathy Grignol and Dave Soule for giving me space to 
grow and explore. I might have given up without it. 
Many people have influenced, supported and put up with 
me along my journey. And no one has put up with more than 
my husband, Shawn. Thank you for your unending patience 
and encouragement. 

 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
http://www.agileproductdesign.com/blog/the_new_backlog.html  
[2]
 
https://www.cardboardit.com/ 
[3]
 
http://alistair.cockburn.us/Information+radiator
 
 
9393