 Scrutinizing Agile Practices or Shoot-out  at the Process Corral!   Steve Adolph Electrical and Computer Engineering University of British Columbia Vancouver, British Columbia Canada stevea@ece.ubc.ca Philippe Kruchten Electrical and Computer Engineering University of British Columbia Vancouver, British Columbia Canada pbk@ece.ubc.ca    ABSTRACT Agile methods and practices are ga
ining momentum in industry, and 
are also slowly making their way in academia bringing fresh air  and 

funny new jargon. Some practitioners consider them as the ultimate 

advance in software engineering.
 But what do we know about this? 
Where is the evidence? Do they scale? Do they solve real issues or 

just substitute new issues to old one
s? Are the benefits tangible, or 
just acts of faith? Aren't we all agile? Are they no agile failures? 

Isn't the ﬁwaterfall processﬂ - that 
piñata of agilistas--the real holy 
grail of software engineering, 
and agile processes only a Band-Aid 
to compensate for our deficiencies? This workshop aims at 

challenging the ready-made ideas, the fluff, the hype, putting things 

into context, and examining th
ese with fresh and open eyes.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.9 Management, Software process models (e.g., CMM, ISO, 
PSP); Productivity General Terms Design, Human Factors, Management Keywords
 lAgile, software process, software methods, software tools 1. Workshop Overview 
During a ski vacation a group of software methodologists 
signed the agile manifesto dramatically boosting interest in 

what were then known as ﬁlight weightﬂ methods and 

launched the agile movement. Seven years later, agile 

methods and practices are gaining momentum in industry, 

and are slowly making their wa
y in academia bringing with 
them fresh air and funny ne
w jargon. Some practitioners 
consider them as the ultimate advance in software 

engineering and others find them wanting.  But what do we 

really know about this? Where is the evidence? Do they 

scale? Do they solve real issues or just substitute new issues 

to old ones? Are the benefits tangible, or just acts of faith?  
If agile is to grow beyond what some view as feel good 
backlash against documentation driven processes then it must 

be subject to critical examination. This workshop aims at 

challenging the ready-made ideas, the fluff, the hype, putting 

things into context, and examining these with fresh and open 

eyes.  Our critical examination of agile begins with David 
Gelperin™s deconstruction of the agile manifesto and 

principles. 
Exploring Agile
 chronicles fictional everyday 
software developer Bob™s attempts to make sense of the agile 

manifesto and principles. How 
literally should he interpret 
these and what are the limits for agile methods?  
One impediment to someone like Bob making sense of agile 
are the numerous misperceptions and myths that seem to 

swirl around agile; agile is documentation free, there is no 

design in agile,  agility is for free. Hochmüller and 

Mittermier attempt to defuse and rebut these myths in 
Agile 
Process Myths.  An unfortunate fallout from the myths, vagueness, and 
enthusiasm surrounding agile is some choose to define agile 

by placing it at the opposing end of some continuum to 

traditional methods creating what has sometimes been 

referred to as methodology wars. In these methodology wars, 

an oversimplified caricature of the waterfall often becomes 

the favourite piñata of some 
agilistas in their attempt to 
demonstrate the superiority of their favourite method. In their 

paper Towards a Framework for Understanding the 
Relationships Between Classical Software Engineering and 

Agile Methodologies,
 Jiang and Eberlien attempt to tone 
down the rhetoric and bring clarity to the debate by 

proposing a five dimensional framework to examine the 

concepts and practices of traditional and agile methods. We 

may discover we are more alike than we are different. 
Delivering value is the very core of agile which means 
delivering those features which are most highly valued by the 

customer.  Most agile methods assume the existence of a near 

omniscient and empowered customer capable of prioritizing 

requirements with no assistance other than a regularly 
 Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

ICSE™08
, May 10Œ18, 2008, Leipzig, Germany. 
ACM 978-1-60558-079-1/08/05. 
 scheduled system demonstration. Somehow we have 
absolved ourselves of the 
responsibility of helping the 
customer make those decisions. In their paper 
Using 
Measurements to Support Real-Option Thinking in Agile 

Software Development, Racheva and Daneva propose taking 
a real option theory persp
ective to agile software 
development. Viewing decisions as options helps decision-

makers to become aware of a
lternatives, to compare them 
and, consequently, to make the decision that insures best fit 

between the business goals and the current software 

functionality 
Improving communications between stake holders and 
developers enables a quicker development tempo. In this 

context, 
In Pursuit of Multi-Modal
 Executable Acceptance 
Testing Tool
 Park and Maurer argue Executable Acceptance 
Test Driven Development (E
ATDD) allows for tighter 
integration between and software requirements and 

implementation and improves communications between all 

project stakeholders.  
Agile methods have practical origins. As one well known 
agilest once quipped ﬁsomeone tried something, it worked, 

and so they wrote a book about itﬂ No other method  

exemplifies this statement more
 than XP. Born as a ﬁHail 
Maryﬂ attempt to save a failing project, XP is synonymous 

with agile.  Many are surprised to discover XP is rigorously 

defined by a set of synergistic practices from which the 

excitement and wonder of XP 
emerge. But inflexibility can 
be the flip side of rigor which can limit XP™s applicability. In 

RDP Technique: a Practice to Customize XP 
Mirakhorli et. 
al. propose a method for tailoring XP using a set of rules 

rather than practices. They de
monstrate their approach on a 
project to link distributed library catalogues.   
Failure is the dark family secret in our industry and agile 
projects are no different. This is unfortunate because 
understanding what did not work is a more powerful learning 

experience than understanding what worked. In 
Adopting 
and Agile Methodology: Why it Didn™t Work
, Krasteva and 
Ilieva present a case study of three teams attempting their 

first agile project and unlike ma
ny case studies, reveal to the 
community why it didn™t work. 
Finally with a manifesto declaring ﬁindividual and 
interactions over process and toolsﬂ agile software 

development research must take a greater interest in 

behavioral research. In 
Video Analysis of Pair Programming
, Hofer provides an example of behvioural research using 

video analysis, the results of which challenge some strongly 

held beliefs. 
2. Workshop Goals This workshop puts in the same room the converts, the 
enthusiasts, the researchers, the skeptics, the proponents of 
more ﬁtraditionalﬂ approaches, those coming from more 
delicate areas (safety-critical syst
ems, large legacy code), and 
have an honest debate, behind the hype and the funny lingo. 

Ultimately the workshop should id
entify what is established 
knowledge, what is dubious knowledge, where research 

could potentially help validate or invalidate some of the agile 

practices, and some strategies to get there. Converts wanting 

to play the role of the devil'
s advocate are welcome, too. One 
outcome of the workshop could be a research agenda on 

agile practices in software engineering.   3. Workshop Format The accepted papers will be put online before the workshop 
takes place, and the prospective pa
rticipants will be invited to 
read them as preparation for 
the workshop. This will save 
time and will allow the workshop not to have long paper 

presentations. There will be only one presentation session 

consisting of short position statements by some of the 

authors whose papers have been selected. This session will 

provide a number of potential topics to be further discussed. 

The participants will select the most controversial topics to 

be discussed in the rest of the workshop. A few working 

groups (3-5) will then be formed, trying to blend opponents 

and proponents, where each group will undertake some 

closer analysis. The working groups will reconvene in a short 

plenary session for the concluding discussions. 
4. Organization 
4.1 Chairs Philippe Kruchten, University of British Columbia 
Steve Adolph, WSA Consulting Inc 
4.2 Program Committee  Pekka Abrahamsson, VTT, Finland  
 Muhammad Ali Babar, LERO, Ireland  
 Robert Biddle, Carleton University, Ottawa, Canada  
 Torgeir Dingsøyr, SINTEF, Trondheim, Norway  
 Hakan Erdogmus, NRC, Canada  
 Li Jiang, University of Adelaide, Australia  
 Jonathan Kohl, Calgary  
 Frank Maurer, University of Calgary, Canada  
 Grigori Melnik, Microsoft, Redmond, USA  
 Eugene Nizker, Evident Point, Canada  
 James Noble, Victoria University of Wellington, New 
Zealand   Linda Rising, Phoenix, AZ  
 Laurie Williams, North Carolina State University, USA 
 