 Scaling Agile Software Development Through Lean Governance
Scott W. Ambler
IBM Canada
scott_ambler@ca.ibm.com
Abstract
Agile project teams are potentially easy to govern 
than traditional project teams due to the greater
visibility andopportunities to steer provided to
stakeholders.  Unfortunately, traditional IT
governance strategies prove to be at odds to agile™s

collaborative, value-focused strategies.  As a result a

lean approach based on enablement, collaboration,

and motivation is required to effectively govern agile 
teams.
1. Introduction
Governance isn™t something that is commonly
associated with agile software development projects.
Yet agile projects, like all other projects, can and
should be governed.  Unfortunately the agile literature 
rarely mentions governance and when it does it has

little good to say about the topic, likely a reflection of

the current state of maturityofthe agile mainstream.

Recently I have worked to define a three level agile
process maturity model to help distinguish the various 

agile methodologies so as to make their strengths and 

weaknesses explicit.
Level 1 includesagileprocesses such as Scrum,
Extreme Programming (XP), and my own Agile

Modeling (AM) which addressonlya portion of the
development lifecycle.The focus of Scrum is project 

leadership and requirements management, XP is on

construction, and AM is on modeling and

documentationŒ all important parts of the overall

system development lifecycle (SDLC), but nowhere

near a complete picture.
Level 2processes go further by covering the full
agile system development lifecycle (SDLC) [1]. This

includesdisciplined agilesoftwaredevelopment

processessuch as Dynamic System Development

Method (DSDM), Open Unified Process (OpenUP),

and agile instantiations of the IBM Rational Unified

Process (RUP) process framework.DSDM is an agile 
development process often used to developer user
interface intensive application; OpenUP combines

Scrum, XP, and strategies from RUP for co-located

agile teams, and RUP is a comprehensive process

framework for iterative software development.
Level 3 addresses disciplined agile development
processes applied at scale, which include tailored
forms oflevel 2 processes as well as Enterprise

Unified Process (EUP).  It is important to recognize

thatteam size is only one of several issues that agile

teams face at scale.At IBM we haveexpanded upon

thescaling factors identified by Eckstein [2] which an 
agile team may face to a lesser or greater extent, to

includeteam size, physical distribution, organizational 

distribution, regulatory compliance, cultural or

organizational entrenchment, system complexity,and
enterprise disciplines (such as enterprise architecture, 

strategic reuse, and portfolio management).  Our

experience is that your approach to governance is one 

of several factors which impact your ability to scale

agile software development techniques.
2.Agile and Governance
There are two aspects ofagile software
development that promote superior levels of
governance when compared to traditional software
development [3].First is greater stakeholder visibility 
into the project.  Theagilestrategy of producing

working, potentially shippable software on a regular

basis provides stakeholdersexplicitly revealsthe

actual accomplishments of the project team.
Stakeholders don't have to rely on the promises made 

in traditional status reports, or in comprehensive

specifications, but instead candetermine if the team is 

actually delivering value by examining working

software.Furthermore, disciplined agile development

processes, the level 2processes, often include explicit 
decision gatesn the form of milestones.Effective

milestonesare based on reducing project risks, such as 

coming to stakeholder agreementon project goalsor
SDG™09, May 17, 2009, Vancouver, Canada978-1-4244-3736-8/09/$25.00  2009 IEEEICSE™09 Workshop1 proving the architectural strategy through a working
end-to-end skeleton of the system, as opposed to

delivery of documentation.In short, the level 1

strategy of delivering working software on a regular

basis and the level 2 strategy risk-based milestones

greatly increases stakeholder visibility.
The second governance enabler ismore
opportunities for stakeholders to steer the project,

potentiallymaking them accountable for the scope,

budget, andevenschedule of agile project teams.

Stakeholderscan be made responsible for the scope

because agile teams adopt flexible requirements

management techniques which enable stakeholders to

modify, add, remove, or reprioritize their requirements 

at any time throughout the project.Stakeholderscan

be made responsible for the budget because 
eachiteration agile teams ask them how much they want to 

invest that iteration, effectively putting them in control 

of the budget.Stakeholderscan be made responsible

for the schedulebecausea side effect of producing

potentially shippable working software each iteration, 

thereby giving them the option to choose when enough 

functionality exists for deployment.
3.Lean Development Governance
The opportunity to govern agile projects is clearly
present, but that begs the questionhow to do so

effectively.  In 2006 through 2007 Per Kroll and I

developed a development governance framework

which is basedon the philosophical foundation

provided by theseven principlesof lean software

development [4].These principles are to eliminate

waste, buildqualityin, createknowledge, defer

commitment, deliver fast, respect people, and optimize 

the whole.  Our experience was that these lean

principles provided the insight required for effective

governance of agile project teams, and potentially

traditional project teams as well.  Traditional

governance is outside the scope of this paper.
The heart of the Lean Development Governance
framework [5]is that good governance should

motivate, and then enable, IT professionals to do what

your organization believes to be the correctbehaviors.

The frameworkidentifies 18 practiceswhichsupport

this strategy. These practicesare:Promote Self-

Organizing Teams,Align Team Structure With

Architecture,Align HR Policies With IT Values,

Align Stakeholder Policies With IT Values,Adapt the 
Process,Continuous Improvement,Embedded

Compliance,Iterative Development,Risk-Based

Milestones, Simple and Relevant Metrics,Continuous

Project Monitoring,Business-Driven Project Pipeline,

Pragmatic Governance Body,Staged Program

Delivery,Scenario-Driven Development, Valued

Corporate Assets,Flexible Architectures, and

Integrated Lifecycle Environment.
4. Lean GovernanceEnables Agility at
Scale
Agile processes, like traditional ones, can
breakdown when one or more scaling factors is
present.   Lean governance practices such as aligning 

the team structure with the architecture, risk-based

milestones, and staged program delivery address

complexities inherent in large or distributed teams.

Aligning IT values with stakeholder policies and a

pragmatic governance body can alleviate cultural and

organizational entrenchment.  Practices such as

continuous project monitoring, integrated lifecycle

environment, and embedded compliance help to

address the additional complexity of regulated

environments.Scenario driven-development, staged

program delivery, continuous improvement, and

valued corporate assets address the complexities

inherent in supporting effective enterprise disciplines.

In short, a new governance approachis needed to

effectively support a new development paradigm. 
5. References
[1] S.W. Ambler,ﬁTheAgile SystemDevelopment
Lifecycle (SDLC)ﬂ,

www.ambysoft.com/essays/agileLifecycle.html, last

accessed March 1, 2009.

[2] J. Eckstein,ﬁAgile Software Development in the Large -
Diving Into the Deepﬂ,Dorset House, New York, 2004.

[3]S.W. Ambler,ﬁGoverning Agile Software

Developmentﬂ, Dr. Dobb™s Journal, San Francisco,

November 2007.

[4]M.Poppendieck and T.Poppendieck,ﬁImplementing

LeanSoftware Development: From Concept to Cashﬂ,

Addison Wesley, 2006.

[5]S.W. Ambler and P. Kroll, ﬁLean Development

Governanceﬂ,
www14.software.ibm.com/webapp/iwm/web/preLogin.do?la
ng=en_US&source=swg-ldg, last accessed March 1, 2009.
2