 New Processes for Ne
w Horizons: The Incremental 
Commitment Model Barry Boehm 
University of Southern California 
941 W. 37
th Street SAL 326 
Los Angeles, CA  90089 
1-213-740-8163 
boehm at usc.edu Jo Ann Lane University of Southern California 
941 W. 37
th Street SAL 318 
Los Angeles, CA  90089 
1-858-945-0099 
jolane at usc.edu 
  ABSTRACT The wide variety of software-in
tensive systems n
eeded to support 
the new horizons of evolving technology, system and software 
complexity, high dependability, global interoperability, emergent 
requirements, and adaptability to rapid change make traditional 

and current one-size-fits-all process models infeasible.  This 

tutorial presents the process framework, principles, practices, and 

case studies for a new model developed and being used to address 

these challenges. It has a series of risk-driven decision points that 

enable projects to converge on whatever combination of agile, 

plan-driven, formal, legacy-oriented
, reuse-oriented, or adaptive 
processes that best fit a project’s s
ituation.  The tutorial discusses 
the decision table for common special cases; exit ramps for 

terminating non-viable projec
ts; support of concurrent 
engineering of requirements, solutions and plans; and evidence-

based commitment milestones for synchronizing the concurrent 

engineering.  The tutorial will include case studies and exercises 

for participants’ practice and discussion
.   Categories and Subject Descriptors
 D.2.9 [
Software Engineering
]: Management 
– life cycle 
H.1.1 [
Information Systems
]: Models and Principles 
– value of 
information
  K.6.1 [
Computing Milieux
]: Management of Computing and 
Information Systems 
– project and people management (systems 
analysis and design)
 General Terms
 Management, Economics, Experimentation, Verification. 
Keywords
 Incremental Commitment Model, hardware-software-human 

factors integration, feasibility evidence, risk management. 
1. TUTORIAL SUMMARY 
One of the top recommendations to emerge from a major U.S. 

government Software Strategy Summit was to find ways of better 

integrating software engineering into the systems engineering and 

acquisition process.  Concurrently, a U.S. National Research 

Council (NRC) study was addressi
ng the problem of better 
integrating human factors into the systems engineering and 

acquisition process.  This tutorial presents a model that emerged 

from these and related efforts that shows promise of improving 

these integrations.  This model, called the Incremental 
Commitment Model (ICM), organizes systems engineering, 
software engineering, and acquisition processes in ways that 

better accommodate the different strengths and difficulties of 

hardware, software, and human factors engineering approaches.  It 

also provides points at which they can synchronize and stabilize, 

and at which their risks of going 
forward can be better assessed 
and fitted into a risk-driven stakeholder resource commitment 

process. 
This tutorial focuses on a process framework that addresses the 
development and evolution of small relatively independent 

systems to large, complex systems that are often part of one or 

more system of systems (SoS). The tutorial presents the 

background on the development of the ICM, what the ICM is, and 

how to apply the ICM from the small single system to the global 

SoS perspective.  It begins by summarizing trends that have 
caused difficulties for current systems engineering, software 
engineering, and acquisition processes (complex multi-owner 

systems of systems (SoS), emergent requirements, rapid change, 

reused components, high assurance of qualities) and principles 

underlying the ICM that better 
address these trends (stakeholder 
satisficing, incremental and evolutionary growth of system 

definition and stakeholder commitment, iterative development, 

concurrent definition and development, and risk management).  It 

then presents several complementary views of the ICM, discusses 

their implications with respect
 to acquisition and engineering 
practices and personnel career paths, and assesses project 

performance with respect to use of the principles.  The principles 

can also be used to avoid the negative effects of common 

misinterpretations of other current 
models such as the V, spiral, 
and Rational Unified Process (RUP) models. 
If hardware-software-human factors integration problems are 
difficult today, they will present formidable problems for the 
future if not adequately addressed.  Some trends that will 

exacerbate such integration prob
lems are complex multi-owner 
SoSs that are part of global enterprises, emergent requirements, 

rapid changes, reused components, and high assurance of 

qualities.  We have performed several analyses to determine the 

kind of process that would satisfactorily address these challenges.  

As part of a U.S. NRC study, we analyzed the strengths and 

difficulties of current process models.  Each had strengths, but 

needed further refinements to address all of the five challenges 

above.  The most important conclusion, though, was that there 
 Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
ICSE ’10, May 2
-8 2010, Cape Town, South Africa 
978-1-60558-719-6/10/05 
 501 were key process principles that address the challenges, and that 
forms of the models were less impo
rtant than their ab
ility to adopt 
the principles.  These key principles are: 1) commitment and 
accountability of success-critical 
stakeholders, 2) stakeholder 
satisficing based on success-based 
negotiations and tradeoffs, 3) 
incremental and evolutionary growth of system definition and 

stakeholder commitment, 4) iterative system development and 

definition, 5) concurrent system definition and development 

allowing early fielding of core capabilities, continual adaptation to 

change, and timely growth of complex systems without waiting 

for every requirement and subsystem to be defined, and 6) risk 

management 
– risk driven anchor point milestones which are key 
to synchronizing and stabilizing all of this concurrent activity. 
The ICM builds on the strengths of current process models:  early 
verification and validation concepts in the V-model, concurrency 

concepts in the Concurrent Engineering model, lighter-weight 

concepts in the Agile and Lean models, risk-driven concepts in 
the spiral model, the phases and anchor points in the Rational 
Unified Process (RUP), and recent extensions of the spiral model 

to address SoS acquisition. 
In comparison to the software-intensive RUP, the ICM also 
addresses hardware and human factors integration.  It extends the 

RUP phases to cover the full system life cycle.  And in 

comparison to the sequential waterfall and V-model, the ICM 

explicitly emphasizes concurrent engineering of requirements and 

solutions; establishes F
easibility Rationales as
 pass/fail milestone 
criteria; enables risk-d
riven avoidance of 
unnecessary 
documents, 
phases, and reviews; and provides support for a stabilized current-

increment development concurrently with a separate change 

processing and rebaselining activity to prepare for appropriate and 

stabilized development of the next increment.   
It also shows how projects can be organized into stabilized build-
to-specification increments that fit current legacy contracting 
methods, along with concurrent agile change-adaptation and 

verification and validation (V&V) functions that need to use 

alternative contracting methods. Addressing changes of this nature 

will be important, particularly if 
organizations are to realize the 

large potential value offered by investments in future network-

centric SoSs and global enterprises. 
As part of the analysis done to 
support the development of the 
ICM, several excellent case studies that applied versions of the 
ICM process were identified. 
 These case studies include a 
remotely piloted vehicle, a port security system, and a commercial 

medical infusion pump development and are highlighted in the 

tutorial.   
Another set of successful projects 
that have applied the critical 
success factor principles is the 
annual series of 
Top-5 software-
intensive systems projects published in CrossTalk.  The “Top
-5 
Quality Software Projects” were chosen annually by panels of 
leading experts as role models of best practices and successful 

outcomes.  The tutorial shows how the ICM principles were 

applied in these successful software projects. 
2. REFERENCES 
The tutorial builds upon th
e following references. 
[1]
 Boehm, B. (July 1996). Anchoring the Software Process. 

Software. pp. 73-82. 
[2]
 Boehm, B. (2000) “Unifying Software Engineering and 
Systems Engineering”, Computer, March 2000, pp. 114
-116. 
[3]
 Boehm, B., (2008) Making a Difference in the Software 
Century, IEEE Computer, March 2008, pp. 32-38. 
[4]
 Boehm, B., and Bhuta, J. (2008)
 Balancing Opportunities 
and Risks in Component-Based Software Development, 

IEEE Software, November/D
ecember 
2008, pp. 56-63. 
[5]
 Boehm, B., Egyed, A., Kwan, J., Port, D., Shah, A., and 

Madachy, R. (July 1998). Usin
g the WinWin Spiral Model: 
A Case Study. Computer.  pp.33-44. 
[6]
 Boehm, B., and Lane, J. (May 2006). 21st Century Processes 

for Acquiring 21st Century Sy
stems of Systems. CrossTalk. 
pp. 4-9. 
[7]
 Boehm, B., and Lane, J.(2
007) Using the Incremental 
Commitment Model to Integrate System acquisition, Systems 
Engineering, and Software En
gineering, CrossTalk, October 
2007, pp. 4-9. 
[8]
 Boehm, B., Valerdi, R., and Honour, E. (2008) The ROI of 
Systems Engineering: Some 
Quantitative Results for 
Software-Intensive Systems, Systems Engineering, Vol. 11, 

No.3, pp. 221-234. 
[9]
 Clements, P. et al. (2002). Evaluating Software 

Architectures, Addison Wesley. 
[10]
 CrossTalk (2002-
2005), “Top Five Qua
lity Software 
Projects,” Jan
 2002, July 2003, July 2004, Sept 2005. 
[11]
 Dahmann, J., Lane, J., Rebovich, G., and Baldwin, K. 

(2008); A Model of Systems Engineering in a System of 

Systems Context, Proceedings of the Sixth Conference on 

Systems Engineering Research. 
[12]
 Hopkins, R., and Jenkins, K. (
2008) Eating the IT Elephant: 
Moving from Greenfield Development to Brownfield, IBM 

Press. 
[13]
 Kruchten, P. (1999). The Rational Unified Process, Addison 

Wesley. 
[14]
 Lane, J and Boehm, B. (2008); System of Systems Lead 

System Integrators:  Where do They Spend Their Time and 

What Makes Them More or
 Less Efficient, Systems 
Engineering Journal, Vol. 11, No. 1. 
[15]
 Lane, L. and Boehm, B. (2007); Modern Tools to Support 

DoD Software Intensive System of Systems Cost Estimation, 

Data and Analysis Center for Software, a Department of 

Defense Information Clearinghouse. 
[16]
 Maranzano, J. et al. (2005) Architecture reviews: Practice 

and experience. IEEE Software, March/April 2005. 
[17]
 Pew, R. W., and Mavor, A. S., (2007). Human-System 

Integration in the System Development Process:  A New 

Look, National Academy Press. 
[18]
 Rechtin, E. (1991). Systems Architecting, Prentice Hall. 
[19]
 Royce, W. E. (1998) Software Project Management. Addison 

Wesley. 
[20]
 Royce, W. W. (1970). Managing the development of large 

software systems: concepts 
and techniques, Proceedings, 
Wescon 1970. 
502