 Balancing Agility and Discipline: Evaluating and Integrating Agile and Plan-Driven MethodsBarry Boehm 
University of Southern California,United States boehm@sunset.usc.eduRichard Turner George Washington University, United States rich.turner.ctr@osd.milABSTRACTRapid change and increasing software criticality drive 
successful development and acquisition organizations to balance 
the agility and discipline of their key processes. The emergence 
of agile methods in the software community is raising the 
expectations of customers and management, but the methods 

have shortfalls and their compatibility with traditional plan-
driven methods such as those represented by CMMI, ISO-
15288, and UK-DefStan-00-55 is largely unexplored.  
This tutorial pragmatically examines the aspects of agile 
and plan-driven methods and provides an approach to balancing through examples and case studies Categories and Subject DescriptorsD.2 [Software Engineering
]: Management 
1.INTRODUCTION
Agile development methodologies (such as XP, Scrum, and 
ASD) promise higher customer satisfaction, lower defect rates, faster development times and a solution to rapidly changing 
requirements. Plan-driven approaches (such as Cleanroom, PSP, 
or CMM-based methods) promise predictability, stability, and 
high assurance. However, both approaches have situation-

dependent shortcomings that, if left unaddressed, can lead to 

project failure. 2.This tutorial pragmatically examines the aspects of agile 
and plan-driven methods through examples and case studies. We 
characterize "home grounds" where the approaches are most 

likely to succeed, identifying five critical dimensions that 
describe the agile/plan-driven spectrum. We present a risk-based 
method for developing balanced strategies that take advantage 

of the strengths and mitigate the weaknesses of both agile and 
plan-driven approaches, and that fit the objectives, constraints, 
and priorities of a particular project or organization. Step-by-

step walkthroughs of several example projects show how the 
method is applied. Finally, we involve participants in an 
exercise involving hands-on evaluation of their current 

organizational balance of agility and discipline, identification of 
likely directions of change, and development of strategies for 
balancing their agility and discipline to meet future objectives 

and challenges. 2.DISCIPLINE, AGILITY AND 
PERPLEXITYDiscipline is the foundation for any successful endeavor. 
Athletes train, musicians practice, craftsmen perfect techniques, 
and engineers apply processes. Without these basic skills there 
may be an occasional success using natural talent, but 

professional consistency and long term prospects are limited. 
The strength and comfort which come from discipline support 

the endeavor when things are difficult, when the body or mind is 

under the weather, or when something new or unexpected arises 
and a response is required. Discipline creates well-organized 
memories, history, and experience. 
Agility is the counterpart of discipline. Where discipline 
ingrains and strengthens, agility releases and invents. It allows 
the athlete to make the unexpected play, musicians to improvise 
and ornament, craftsmen to evolve their style, and engineers to 

adjust to changing technology and needs. Agility applies 
memory and history to adjust to new environments, react and 
adapt, take advantage of unexpected opportunities, and update 

the experience base for the future. Every successful venture in a changing world requires both 
agility and discipline. This is as true in business and software 
development as it is in sports and art. In his bestseller Good to 

Great [3], Jim Collins presents a two dimensional scale that 
describes the characteristics of successful businesses. One 
dimension is a culture of discipline and the other, an ethic of 
entrepreneurship. In our context, we equate entrepreneurship 
with agility. If one has strong discipline without agility, the 
result is inflexible hierarchy and stagnation. Agility without 
discipline leads to the heady, unencumbered enthusiasm of a 
start-up company–before it has to turn a profit. Great 
companies, and great software projects, have both in measures 

appropriate to their goals and environment. 3.Agile and plan-driven development approaches have 
generally been seen as opposing viewpoints, and the rhetoric on 
both sides still remains essentially confrontational. The claims 

and counter-claims, misrepresentations and salesmanship create 
a sense of perplexity in those of us who simply want to 

successfully complete our projects and please our customers. 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
ICSE ’04
, May 23-28, 2004, Edinburgh,Scotland. 
Copyright 2004 ACM 1-58113-472-X/02/0005…$5.00. 
Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’04) 
0270-5257/04 $20.00 © 2004 
IEEE 
 3.A DAY IN THE LIFE OF TWO 
PROJECTSIn this module of the course, we allow the participants to sit in 
during a typical day with two development teams: one using 
Extreme Programming and the other SEI’s PSP/TSP. We then 
compare and contrast their activities. 
4.TWO CASE STUDIES 
Having seen how the “pure” methods are applied, we examine 

two cases where creative project managers mix the approaches – 
one from an agile base and the other a plan-driven base – to 
form successful hybrid approaches. 
5.FIVE CRITICAL DIMENSIONS
In this module we compare the methods in four areas: 

Application, management, technical and personnel to identify 
their strengths, weaknesses and the home grounds where they 
naturally fit and are most likely to succeed.  
Based on the comparisons, we identify 5 critical 
dimensions (size, criticality, dynamism, personnel, and culture) 
that can be used to graphically describe an organization or a 
project in terms of its agile and plan-driven characteristics.  
6.BALANCING AGILITY AND 
DISCIPLINEOur method, summarized in Table 1, uses risk analysis and a 
unified process framework to tailor risk-based processes into an 
overall development strategy.  The method relies heavily on the 
ability of key development team members to understand their 

environment and organizational capabilities, and to identify and 
collaborate with the project stakeholders. Risk analysis is used to define and address a set of defined 
risks we see as specifically associated with agile and plan-

driven methods. The process framework is based on the Risk-
based Spiral Model Anchor Points developed by Boehm [2]. 
These anchor points are essentially an integrated set of decision 

criteria for stakeholder commitment at specific points in the 
development process.Table 1. Summary of risk-based method
Step 1.  Rate the project’s environmental, agile, and plan-
driven risks. If uncertain about ratings, buy information 
via prototyping, data collection, and analysis. Step 2a.  If agility risks dominate plan-driven risks, go Risk-
based Plan-driven.Step 2b.  If plan-driven risks dominate agility risks, go Risk-
based Agile. Step 3.  If parts of the application satisfy 2a and others 2b, 
architect the application to encapsulate the agile parts. 
Go Risk-based Agile in the agile parts, and Risk-
based Plan-driven elsewhere. Step 4.   Establish an overall project strategy by integrating 
individual risk mitigation plans Step 5.  Monitor progress and risks/opportunities, readjust 
balance and process as appropriate. 7.USING THE APPROACH ON YOUR 
WORKIn this module, each participant uses the five critical 
dimensions to characterize their environment and then applies 
our risk-based approach to develop a balanced development 
strategy. 
8.REFERENCES
[1] Boehm B. and R. Turner, 
Balancing Agility and Discipline: 
A Guide for the Perplexed, Addison Wesley, Boston, 2004. 
[2] B. Boehm, “Anchoring the Software Process,” IEEE 
Software, July 1996, pp. 73-82. 
[3] Collins, J., 
Good To Great, Harper Collins, New York, 2001.Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’04) 
0270-5257/04 $20.00 © 2004 
IEEE 
