 Assessing Undergraduate Experience of Continuous 
Integration and Test-Driven Development 
Jon Bowyer 
Applied Computing 
University of Dundee 
Dundee DD1 4HN, UK +44 1382 385195 jbowyer@computing.dundee.ac.uk 
Janet Hughes 
Applied Computing 
University of Dundee 
Dundee DD1 4HN, UK +44 1382 385195 jhughes@computing.dundee.ac.uk 
  ABSTRACT
 A number of agile practices are included in software engineering 
curricula, including test-driven development.  Continuous 

integration often is not included, despite it becoming 

increasingly common in industry to code, test, and integrate at 

the same time.  This paper describes a study whereby software 

engineering undergraduates were given a short intensive 

experience of test-driven development with continuous 

integration using an environment that imitated a typical 

industrial circumstance.  Assessment was made of students™ 

agile experience rather than of project deliverables, using a 

novel set of process measures that examined students™ 

participation and performance in 
agile testing.  Results showed 
good participation by student pairs, and clear understanding of 

agile processes and configuration management.  Future work 

will investigate automation of the assessment of continuous 

integration and configuration management server data. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors
 K.3.2 [
Computers & Education
]: Computer and Information 
Science Education - 
Computer science education 
General Terms
 Design, Measurement, Verification, Human Factors. 
Keywords
 Agile practices; test driven development; JUnit; continuous 
integration; software engineering education; assessment process. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Extreme Programming (XP) is a key component of the set of 
ﬁrelatively lightﬂ adaptive software development methods 

known as agile practices.  Agile practices have prompted an 

amount of excitement and debate in industry and education 

recently, e.g., [6]. The component practice advocated most 

frequently is pair programming, whereby code is co-authored by 

two programmers who work side-by-side at the same machine. 

Other practices have been given somewhat less attention, 

notably test-driven development (TDD) with continuous 

integration (CI). Continuous integration is used in most 

industrial projects that are developed using agile methods.  
In such a system, developers keep their code and accompanying 
unit tests in a version control server, which is continuously 

monitored for changes by a continuous integration server. When 

changes are detected, the continuous integration server executes 

a build script for the project. Typi
cally the build script retrieves 
the latest versions of all the code and test classes, compiles the 

code and tests, then runs the tests. If code fails to compile or a 

test fails, the build is 
said to have failed, otherwise it is said to 
have succeeded. This build result is then 
published to the 
developers Œ usually sent by email and/or via a build results 

intranet webpage. 
TDD and pair programming were introduced into a software 
engineering module at the University of Dundee in 2004 but 

without student assessment.  In 2005 and 2006 the experience 

was revised: (a) continuous integration was included; (b) the 

three agile practices (CI, TDD, and pair programming) were 

made the focus of an assessed project that contributed to a 

student™s degree award; and (c) a reflective component was 

introduced.  To maximize the real-world relevance of the 

project, the lab environment was set to mimic the use of agile 

practices in industry.  To maximize the use of agile practices, the 

project was designed to assess the 
process
 of TDD and CI. 
Students were to be given credit for taking an agile testing 

approach, and reflecting upon that approach, rather than for 

production of a deliverable.  A key question to be addressed was 

how to assess their approach
: how can (i) participation and (ii) 
performance
 in agile testing be measured?  The remainder of 
this paper describes related work (section 2), the agile testing 

project (section 3), the assessment scheme adopted (section 4), 

lessons learned (section 5), and future work (section 6). 
2. RELATED WORK 
A number of positive and enthusia
stic experience reports over 
several years have encouraged academics to apply agile 

practices to education e.g., [16].  Extreme programming by 

student teams has been found to produce as good results, in 

terms of external and internal quality, as those of teams 

following a design-led approach [13].  Various 

recommendations have been made to make the agile experience 

as valuable and as real as possible.   These include keeping 

courses short and providing adequate amounts of lab time for 

students [5].  One attempt to simulate production programming 

in the classroom using XP [1] was judged successful, although 

improvements may have resulted from a less flexible attitude to 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
ICSE™06
, May 20-28, 2006, Shanghai, China. 
ACM 1-59593-085-X/06/0005. 
  deadlines, and the requirement to spend a minimum amount of 
time per week on the assignment.   
Pair programming has featured most regularly and positively: 
relative to that, continuous integration has been given less 

attention.  Some reports have described problems implementing 

test-driven development, for example as a result of technical 

issues [12].  Where a suite of XP practices was applied, test-

driven development was identified as the most difficult for 

students to adopt [14].  However, there is incentive for 

researchers to persevere: a study by [4] suggests that integrating 

software testing (not specifically
 XP) with software design can 
be beneficial for students, for example enhancing learning in 

design quality, test planning, and testing & quality assurance.  

Similarly and more recently, integration of testing and the JUnit 

framework across the curriculum was found to increase 

students™ understanding and appreciation of the overall value of 

testing in software development [15].  One review of the use of 

a test-driven approach in the classroom that summarised four 

experience reports and three experimental design studies [10] 

indicates a number of potential benefits, with improvements in 

collaboration, software quality, programmer productivity, 

student enthusiasm and completion rates for assignments.   
An interesting development was to combine test-driven 
development experiences for students with an automated 

assessment tool that provides them with immediate feedback [2]. 

The ﬁWeb-CAT Graderﬂ tool assess students™ tests on the basis 

of validity (accurate and consistent with the problem 

assignment), completeness (coverage of the problem), and 

correctness (how many of a student™s own tests his or her code 

will pass).  Edwards reports a comparison of the programs 

produced by a 2003 student cohort, which had experienced the 

test-driven development with automated assessment, with those 

produced by a 2001 student cohort that had 
not used a test-
driven development approach.  The former were found to have 

fewer test case failures than the latter, and fewer defects per 

thousand lines of code [2].  Edwards speculates that it would be 

possible to ﬁinfuse continual practice and development of 

comprehension, analysis and hy
pothesis-testing skillsﬂ via the 
use of test-driven development across programming assignments 

in the computer science curriculum [3], and suggests that testing 

can promote a ﬁReflection in actionﬂ approach by students.  This 

report examines how work such as [14] can be progressed by 

including another agile practice Œ continuous integration Œ in the 

curriculum.  The approach taken is detailed in the next section.
 3. AGILE TESTING PROJECT 
3.1 Tools A pedagogic aim of the work was to give students practical 
experience of agile practices, particularly test-driven 

development and continuous integration. It was judged that the 

students™ effort should be focused on the experience of TDD 

within a CI environment, rather than on background technical 

procedures to set up a continuous integration server. The 

configuration of the continuous integration system was therefore 

carried out for the students prior to the start of their assignment.  

Java was selected as the programming language with which the 

students had greatest familiarity and most recent experience. The 

toolset used for the assignment was chosen to closely 

approximate that used in an industrial setting employing agile 
practices. The most commonly used continuous integration 
servers are CruiseControl [8] an
d Anthill [9] Œ both use the 
Java-based tool Apache Ant [7] for build scripts, and both 

support a variety of version control servers. CruiseControl was 

used in this instance, with Microsoft™s Visual SourceSafe as the 

configuration management (CM) version control server holding 

the code repositories which Cru
iseControl was to monitor. 
For each pair of students, the configuration required the creation 
of a CruiseControl project, a SourceSafe repository and an Ant 

build file, and the linking of th
ese together.  The CruiseControl 
project configuration regularly scanned each pair™s SourceSafe 

repository for code changes. If changes were detected, 

CruiseControl invoked the corresponding Ant build file. The 

build file (i) retrieved the latest
 versions of all files from the 
pair™s SourceSafe repository and stored them in a temporary 

local directory; (ii) executed the Java compiler to compile any 

Java classes; then (iii) launched the JUnit test runner to execute 

any Java unit tests. The CruiseControl project configuration then 

emailed the build results to each student in the pair, and also 

sent copies to the module tutors.  Principal information in the 

email was identification of the student pair, the build ID, its date 

and time, when it was last changed, the result of unit tests run, 

and a summary of the modifications made since the last build.  

Results were also automatica
lly posted to an internal 
CruiseControl website running on a Tomcat web server. 

Students were given an overview of the system and its 

processes, and then instructed to devote their practical time to 

writing their unit tests and code. 
3.2 Instruction Participants were two cohorts of students taking a third year 
module in software engineering as part of their undergraduate 

degree program in 2005 and 2006.  The sixty nine students 

received a small number of lectures on the principles and 

experiences of test driven development and continuous 

integration.  They were given two laboratory classes to gain 

practice (a) writing unit tests for 
Java classes and (b) with the 
operation of the continuous integration server. The assignment 

was to develop a simple application for the storage and 

management of information.  The 2005 version was to manage a 

DVD library. The 2006 version was to manage an e-commerce 

system. Requirements were intentionally limited to encourage 

the students to concentrate on the development process rather 

than to focus on achieving specific functionality. The students 

were required to adopt a test-driven development and pair 

programming approach.   
Following the recommendation in [5], the time for the 
assignment was strictly limited: students were required to stop 

working upon the assignment seven working days later, with a 

recommended development time of twenty hours per person.  

Each student was asked to record at the end of each session what 

his or her pair had done for that session™s development work, 

including: (i) what work had been intended; (ii) what was 

checked in to SourceSafe; (iii) wh
at the result of the work was; 
(iv) what each person did individually during the work; (v) a 

personal reflection upon the value of the session test-driven 

development work; (vi) any other observations about the 

learning achieved or personal development made during the 

assignment period. This information was recorded using e-

portfolios, an electronic log book system provided via the 
 University™s virtual learning environment.  The students were 
advised that there were no ﬁfinalﬂ deliverables: assessment of 

their work would be on the basis of the development performed, 

not the final product.  Work performed was to be examined via 

the CruiseControl electronic log of what was submitted and its 

success or otherwise, the SourceSafe information (such as code, 

configuration management comments, and history), and the e-

portfolio. Students organized themselv
es into self-selected pairs.   
4. ASSESSMENT MEASURES 
This section outlines the meas
ures selected to assess the 
students™ (i) participation, (ii) 
ability to perform agile testing, 
and (iii) their reflection upon the process. Data was collected 

from three sources: CruiseControl (by examination of a pair™s 

electronic log of build attempts),
 e-portfolios (by examination of 
each student™s record of work 
done), and SourceSafe (by 
examination of the version control history of a pair™s code). 
4.1 Participation 
Participation was assessed by the number of builds per session 
of work, and the number of hours of development work. The 

former provided a measure of the regularity associated with 

good CI practice.  The latter measured the extent of participation 

in terms of number of hours of effort, as indicated by the 

CruiseControl logs.  Both were confirmed by examination of 

each student™s e-portfolio, which record also provided evidence 

of pair programming.   
4.2 Performance 
A number of items were identified as indirect measures of 
students™ ability to perform TDD using CI.  Most measures of 

performance were quantitative, the data being directly and 

reliably obtained from the electronic artifacts of the CI and CM 

environment.  These included the proportion of development 

time with a failed build; number of overnight failures, i.e. when 

the students left their project in a ﬁfailed buildﬂ state from one 

day to the next; use of the JUnit setUp and tearDown methods; 

number of instances of deletion of tests, i.e. when the students 

chose to delete a test rather than to improve their code and make 

it pass; number of types of assertions used; attempt to use stub 

classes and mock objects; number of requirements implemented 

that had corresponding tests; number of methods not tested.  
Where qualitative measures were required, nominal scales were 
used to encode items, e.g. ﬁabsentﬂ, ﬁpresent but very limitedﬂ, 

ﬁsatisfactoryﬂ, or ﬁgoodﬂ.    These included quality of test and 

method naming; suitability of version control comments; quality 

of assertion explanations; quality of refactoring; and quality of 

tests.  Samples of these measures were double-marked to 

confirm reliability.   Baseline va
lues or acceptable ranges were 
established for the majority of quantitative measures.  As an 

example, for the number of builds per session the expected 

range was 1 Œ 5, and tutor feedback to the students described the 

good practice in industry of regular builds. In some instances, 

student work was sampled for assessment in preference to 

complete but time-consuming examination of every component 

of their work.  As an example, for instances of test deletion, only 

the deletions of entire tests were noted; ideally there would be 

examination of all tests to uncover any instances of partial 

deletions, such as portions being commented out. Interestingly, 
items requiring qualitative judgments prompted tutors to give 
the most detailed and informative feedback to students.   
4.3 Reflection 
E-portfolios were examined for evidence of reflection upon 
TDD and CI, with respect to personal experience, the context of 

the given problem, and the wider context of systems 

development.  These were assessed on a nominal scale, and a 

sample re-marked to confirm the stability of the measure. 
5. LESSONS LEARNED 
Did the approach achieve the goals of integrating CI and TDD 
into the software engineering module? 
- Yes, all pairs successfully performed TDD and CI using the 
industry-styled environment.  All students obtained pass marks 

for the assignment, with about one quarter obtaining a first-class 

mark. A guest lecturer from the software engineering industry 

endorsed the project, and student appraisals of the project were 

extremely positive. 
Was there considered or deep reflection about agile practices? 

 - Not always: reflection was often superficial, with many 
students scoring second-class marks for this component.  The 

majority of attempts to reflect upon agile processes were 

cursory, self-centered, and limited to the present project.  

Generally students did not consider
 wider issues or contemplate 
its use in large-scale developments. This may reflect strategic 

behavior, whereby students put most effort into work that is 

credited with most marks or work that has industrial relevance, 

which they appreciate will enhance interview prospects.  If 

reflection upon learning is deemed by tutors to be important, 

perhaps it needs to be given credit 
equal to practical work in the 
assessment scheme.  Alternatively,
 it may reflect students™ poor 
time management, whereby they left insufficient time to reflect 

upon extreme programming at the end of the project. However 

students did reflect well upon the assignment process itself, and 

made helpful suggestions to make the assignment more realistic 

and valuable.  For example, there were suggestions that for 

2007, student pairs should work in small groups of six or eight 

to integrate their user story 
developments; this would better 
simulate an industrial project team. 
What did the students learn? 

- Students learned about the pro
cess of continuous integration 
and the test-driven approach.  Their work demonstrated 

understanding of the use of the CI server (regular check-ins, few 

overnight failures, and suitable 
ratios of successful builds to 
failed builds). Students™ code showed evidence of TDD good 

practice: appropriate use of assertions, setUp and tearDown, 

refactoring, suitable choice of tests, and meaningful naming. 
- Students obtained a deep understanding of configuration 
management.  In previous years, configuration management had 

been taught, rather than learned.  Students™ appreciation of CM 

issues was raised enormously by the use of the CI server to 

detect code changes.  Their CM comments were meaningful, and 

they made responsible and regular use of the CM server.  A 

number of e-portfolio comments confirmed this observation. 
What did the tutors learn? 
 - Firstly, to set a suitably challenging task.  The too-trivial 
nature of the 2005 task produced a number of implementations 

that were so simplistic that th
ere was insufficient incentive or 
opportunity to master refactoring and use mock objects. 
- Secondly, that the metrics selected 
did provide a suitable basis 
for assessing students™ participation and performance.  In 2006 

the students were involved with 
the design of the assessment, 
and negotiated with the tutors the final choice of metrics, which 

further confirmed their appropriateness. The data gathering was 

very time-consuming, however: - automated analysis of the 

SourceSafe repositories and CruiseControl logs data would be 

essential if the assessment process 
is to be efficient in terms of 
tutor time.  Furthermore, a number of additional but desirable 

measures had to be excluded, and some sampling of data was 

necessary, for reasons of practicality: automated analysis would 

provide for a more thorough assessment. 
- Thirdly, to support students in their choice of partner for the 
pair-programming process.  Students™ e-portfolios reflected their 

appreciation of the pair-programming process: almost all found 

it to be a valuable experience and/or could discern the benefits.  

However in 2005 five students did 
not have a good experience, 
as a result of the operation of the pairs. One pair in particular 

was dysfunctional, evidently because of a mismatch of abilities.  

The student whose programming ability was less good found the 

pair programming experience to be a particularly unhappy one: 

ﬁMy self esteem is very low –I f
eel like a total failure, as if I 
have let down both myself and my team mate.ﬂ
  This appears to 
concur with recent findings [11] a
bout compatibility in pair 
programming.  In 2006 students were urged to consider this 

when agreeing pairs, and the problem of dysfunctional pairs did 

not recur. 
- Fourthly, to build into the assignment schedule a period of 
post-project reflection time that would encourage students to 

review the agile processes in greater depth. 
- Finally, to involve students in 
the design of the assessment™s 
marking scheme.  In 2006 the 
identification of assessment 
measures was a class exercise in which discussion led to 

agreement about which measures should attract credit.  As an 

illustration of this process, the 2006 class voted NOT to give 

credit for meaningful comments, agreeing that code should be 

self-documenting: ﬁif you feel the need to write a comment, 

return to the code to see if it deserves to be refactored insteadﬂ. 
6. FURTHER WORK 
A number of the measures of performance were identified as 
desirable but impractical: a disproportionate amount of time 

would have been required to gather and process the data by 

hand, particularly with a large student cohort.  Plans have been 

made to extend this work by devising ways in which the 

essential data is extracted from the CruiseControl and 

SourceSafe log files and processed automatically.  This will 

significantly reduce the asse
ssment effort for tutors. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1]
 Allen, E., Cartwright R., and Reis, C.  Production 
programming in the classroom.  In 
Proceedings of the 34
th SIGCSE Technical Symposium Computer Science 

Education 
(Reno, NV, February 19-23, 2003). 
[2]
 Edwards, S.H.  Improving Student Performance by 
Evaluating How Well Students Test Their Own Programs.  
ACM Journal of Educational Resources in Computing, 3, 
3 (Sept. 2003), 1-24. 
[3]
 Edwards, S.H.  Using Softwa
re Testing to Move Students 
from Trial-and-Error to Reflection-in-Action.  In 

Proceedings of the 35
th SIGCSE Technical Symposium 
Computer Science Education 
(Norfolk, Virginia, March 3-
7, 2004). 
[4]
 Frezza, S.  Integrating Testing and Design Met
hods for 
Undergraduates: Teaching Software Testing in the Context 

of Software Design.  In 
Proceedings of the 32
nd ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference 
(Boston, 
MA, November 6-9, 2002). 
[5]
 Goldman, A., Kon F., Silva P.J.S., and Yoder J.W., Being 
Extreme in the Classroom: Experiences Teaching XP.  
Journal of the Brazilian Computer Society, 10, 
2 (2004), 1-
17. [6]
 Gotterburn, D. UML and Agile Methods: In support of 
Irresponsible Development.  
Inroads Œ The SIGCSE 
Bulletin, 36, 
2 (June 2004), 11-13. 
[7]
 http://ant.apache.org/ 
[8]
 http://cruisecontrol.sourceforge.net 
[9]
 http://www.urbancode.com/projects/anth
ill/default.jsp 
[10]
 Jones, C.G.  Test-Driven development goes to school. 
Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges, 20, 
1 (2004)
, 220-231. 
[11]
 Katira, N., Williams, L., and Osborne, J.  Towards 
Increasing the Compatibility of Student Pair Programmers.  

27th International Conference of Software Engineering 
(ICSE 2005) 
(St Louis, Missouri, 15-21 May 2005). 
[12]
 Keefe K. and Dick M. Using Extreme Programming in a 
Capstone Project.  In 
Proceedings of Sixth Australasian 
Computing Education Conference (ACE 2004)
 (Dunedin, 
New Zealand, January 18-22, 2004). 
[13]
 Macias, F., Holcolmbe, M., and Gheorghe, M. Design-led 
& Design-less: One Experiment and Two Approaches. 

Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 2675, 
(2003), 394-
401. [14]
 Muller, M.M., Link J., Sand R., and Mahlpohl, G.  Extreme 
Programming in Curriculum: Experiences from Academia 

and Industry. In 
International Conference on Extreme 
Programming and Agile Processes in Software 

Engineering (XP2004) 
(Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, 
June 2004).   
[15]
 Wick, M., Stevenson D., and Wagner, P. Using Testing and 
JUnit Across the Curriculum. In 
Proceedings of the 
SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science 

Education 
(St Louis, Missouri, February 23-27, 2005). 
[16]
 Williams, L. and Upchurch, R.  Extreme Programming for 
Software Engineering Education? In 
Proceedings of the 
31st ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference 

(Reno, NV, October 10-13, 2001). 
