 Journey of Enlightenment:  
The Evolution of Development at Microsoft 
Eric Brechner, Ph.D. 
Director, Microsoft Development Excellence 
One Microsoft Way 
Redmond, WA 98052 
ericbrec@microsoft.com 
 
 ABSTRACT
 Like many software companies, Microsoft has been doing 
distributed application development for many years. However, 

recent changes in the market have altered the rules, both in terms 

of customer expectations and programming models for ubiquitous 

interconnected smart devices. These changes have provoked two 

dramatic shifts in the way we develop software. The first is the 

creation and use of the .NET Framework as a simple, secure, and 

robust platform for device-independent software development, 

data manipulation, and communications. The second is an agile 

yet highly disciplined approach to designing, testing, 

implementing, and verifying our software which presumes all 

bugs are unacceptable and must be found and fixed early before 

they impact internal groups, external partners, and eventually our 

customers. This paper discusses the nature and impact of these 

two dramatic shifts to the development practices at Microsoft. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors
 D.2.9 [
Software Engineering
]: Management Œ 
life cycle; 
productivity; programming teams; software process models; 

software quality assurance. 
General Terms
 Management, documentation, design, reliability, security, human 
factors, standardization, languages, verification. 
Keywords
 Agile, design, scrum, test driven development, lean, refactoring, 
Microsoft, .NET, quality, XML, SOAP, WSDL, versioning, 

interfaces, coordination, collaboration, contracts, security, 

reliability. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Like many software companies, Microsoft has been doing 

distributed application development for years. However, changes 
in the market over the past five or six years have altered the rules, 
both in terms of customer expectations and programming models. 

Key market changes include smarter devices; wider variation in 

devices; ubiquitous connectivity; proliferation of malicious 

computer viruses, worms, and spyware; and the broad reliance of 

businesses and consumers on software for their livelihoods and 

well-being.  
These changes have provoked two dramatic shifts in the way we 
develop software. The first is the creation and use of the .NET 

Framework to provide a simple, secure, and robust platform for 

device-independent software development, data manipulation, and 

communications that supports a wide variety of programming 

languages. The second is an agile yet highly disciplined approach 

to designing, testing, implementing, and verifying our software 

which presumes no bugs are acceptable so all must be f
ound and 
fixed at the earliest possible time before code gets checked in and 

impacts internal groups, external partners, and eventually our 

customers. 
These two changes to how we develop software can be thought of 
in terms of tools and process. Naturally, they meet together with 

the people who use the tools and follow the process. The people 

aspects of the problem are the most critical for successful projects, 

and the most interesting in their impact on the way the tools and 

processes are used in practice.  
In addition to discussing the .NET Framework and changing 
Microsoft development practices in more detail, this paper will 

focus on the subtle parallels between tools and processes that 

were driven by human factors to make distributed development of 

distributed systems more practical. 
2. THE EMERGENCE OF .NET 
The .NET Framework was driven by changes in the market, so an 

overview of the design decisions is bound to sound like 

marketing. This I regret and will try to stick to the technical side 

of decisions. 
It is a common misconception that .NET is purely focused on 
device-independent development to compete with a language like 

Java. To support a wide variety of smart devices, you do need a 

device-independent way of controlling them and describing a user 

interface which adapts its presentation and interaction to the 

device. But this is not nearly enough to support ubiquitous 

interconnected smart devices. You still need to address ubiquity 

and interconnectivity. 
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 

personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 

not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies 

bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or 

republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior 

specific permission and/or a fee. 

ICSE™05
, May 15Œ21, 2005, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 
Copyright 2005 ACM 1-58113-963-2/05/0005...$5.00. 
 2.1 Interconnectivity 
Interconnectivity in today™s world presents significant challenges: 
Data manipulation: 
You need a standard means of describing 
and serializing data. XML was a clear choice for .NET. It is a 

well-established standard with broad Internet adoption, can 

represent complex data types, and is easily serialized in a 

processor-independent manner. 
Communications: 
You need standard protocols for messaging. 
SOAP was another clear choice for .NET. It is based on XML 

with enough flexibility and adaptability to implement simple 

request/reply protocols like HTTP as well as arbitrary exchange 

patterns found in enterprise integration scenarios. 
Security:
 You need the devices, their communications, and their 
data to be secure. Once those devices are interconnected, they 

become vulnerable to attack and their private data may be 

compromised. The .NET Framework protects applications and 

data from the most common threats, by managing memory to 

prevent buffer overflows, using verifiable type safety to prevent 

data corruption, driving least privilege throughout the system to 

shield assets, and integrating encryption support for easier 

protection of data integrity and privacy. 
Reliability:
 You need the devices and the services they depend on 
to be robust and reliable so the devices stay connected and data is 

preserved. The .NET Framework uses managed code and 

exceptions throughout to trap and prevent the most common 

failures while providing a standard lossless mechanism to capture 

error conditions. Exceptions are only as effective as their proper 

use. But choosing a uniform mechanism prevents the disasters of 

conflicting error handling, and exceptions make it easy to pass 

information far up the stack without data loss or special handling. 
2.2 Ubiquity Ubiquity requires adoption. Adoption requires simplicity of 

transition from old models, simplicity of development and 

deployment, and simplicity and consistency of interface. Modern 

methods make simplicity and consistency of user interf
ace tractable, though still difficult. 
Simple transition from old models is a far more serious problem. 
Naturally, the user interface, communication, and data models 

require a shared library of objects and interfaces. However, 

making access to those services simple, reliable, and secure 

requires language support. 
But which language? C++ is notoriously insecure. Adding 
features to Java has proven challenging for non-technical reasons. 

Visual Basic has never quite gotten the respect it arguably 

deserves. Even if one of those languages was a good choice, 

you™d still have adoption problems for all the others. 
So the .NET Framework chose all the above. By creating a 
common language runtime (CLR), the .NET Framework can 

support the constructs of almost any language (over 20 languages 

are available). A new language, C#, was designed to construct the 

library of objects and interfaces in the most simple, secure, and 

robust way possible. But any CLR-supported language can 

leverage those libraries without crossing an insecure boundary. 
In addition, the CLR adds attributing to all the languages, which 
simplifies messaging and serialization, and the Visual Studio 
.NET environment provides a common build, deployment, and 
debugging platform, which vastly simplifies development. 
3. AGILITY WITH DISCIPLINE 
Having a simple, secure, and robust framework for writing 

interconnected applications allows developers to quickly construct 

oodles of powerful new code. That™s a big problem, especially for 

large development teams, like the ones at Microsoft. Customers 

can easily get lost in a sea of features, assuming they first don™t 

drown in unchecked defects. Some controls are necessary. 
3.1 Old school Microsoft 
When Microsoft was very small, developers did everything. They 

switched from one project to the next sometimes on the same day. 

As the company grew larger, devs formed into focused small 

teams.  
Two new roles were created: program managers (PMs) who 
coordinate with marketing, user research, and packaging to 

specify what features are in the product and when certain 

milestones need to be hit; and testers who test the software, verify 

it matches the specification, and greenlight release. 
A mix of perhaps 30Œ60 PMs, devs, and testers form an individual 
product unit responsible for a product offering or significant 

component. Today, Microsoft has over 400 product groups, 
each 
independently managed with significant autonomy. 
Traditionally, each pr
oduct group determined and followed its 
own practices and processes. In the past, most have followed a 

modified waterfall model with daily or weekly integrated builds 

and six to twelve week design-implement-stabilize cycles. Use of 

unit tests, code reviews, and design inspections varied widely 

across groups. 
However, over the past seven years our teams have become 
increasingly randomized. Products have matured, so new feature 

requirements aren™t clear and change rapidly. Expectations of 

secure and reliable products have risen along with the threats of 

viruses, worms, and spyware, so our teams are frequently 

correcting past errors or redesigning old components. 
You could say we are victims of our own success or victims of our 
own carelessness or lack of foresight. Regardless, our product 

groups are struggling to take back control in a sea of constant 

change. This has led us to a number of adjustments in how we 

work, many grounded in agile methods. 
3.2 Agile influence 
The agile software movement has gained a great deal of 

momentum, and for good reason. You focus on the customer, 

respond to change, and deliver value instead of documentation, 

plans, and wrangling. Developers can target their rapid 

development on satisfying customer needs with constant feedback 

and an uninterrupted value stream. 
Unfortunately, when you are serving a wide variety of customers 
and working with a large number of partners, it™s tough to get 

them all in a room once a year, let alone once a week or month.  
This problem is inherent with integrated services. While a single 
service or application may have a manageable number of primary 

customers and partners, integrated services provide higher value 
 at the cost of a wider variety of customers and a larger number of 
partners. This is especially true for platform development. 
Integrated services can be built up bit by bit over time, to provide 
better focus. But when large numbers of teams are working 

simultaneously on an integrated offering, everything gets 

dysfunctional quickly. Microsoft™s approach has been to add just 

enough process and documentation to keep trust boundaries in 

sync and the value stream flowing. To be clear, this is still a work 

in progress, but many teams are seeing positive results. 
3.3 Just enough process 
With over one hundred product groups working on Windows 

alone, your customers and partners are both outside and inside the 

company. They are both down the hall and across the globe. This 

can make daily builds anywhere from exciting to impossible. 
The first step we™ve taken has been to isolate components as much 
as possible. This doesn™t mean the system can function without all 

the components; it just means that 
each com
ponent can be built 
independentlyŠthat is, as long as you don™t change the interf
ace between components. I™ll get back to that central problem in a 

moment. 
The second step we™ve taken is to institute standard build systems 
for our major product lines and a significant quality bar for 

submitting code into the build. Before we had these standards, 

anyone could and would frequently break the build. Sometimes 

builds would take weeks, crippling continuous integration and the 

value stream. 
Now, product lines have minimum standards before check-in for 
unit test coverage, code and security reviews, advanced code 

analysis (targeting security holes and other defects), and passage 

of all automated tests. These gates provide just enough to ensure a 

functional and clean build, without being too burdensome. 
The idea is to enable teams to have the latest builds available 
quickly so that they can validate and adjust direction frequently 

with customers and partners. Many teams are employing scrum 

[5], lean development [4], test-driven development (TDD) [3], 

and refactoring [2] to make themselves more responsive to 

change, drive better design, minimize work in progress, and 

provide the required level of code quality. 
3.4 Just enough documentation 
Of course, integrated systems are only as good as their points of 

integration. This is as true of an integrated operating system as it 

is of integrated distributed services across devices. In both cases, 

the system can™t stop for any one component; it must always be 

running. 
Because an interface change can be so disruptive, extra controls 
must be put in place to minimize the impact: 
The interface must be designed well upfront. 
The interface requirements and interaction must be well 
understood and documented with buyoff from all key 

customers and partners. 
The interface must be carefully version-controlled so that 
changes do not adversely impact currently running 

components. 
With such a diverse and broad population of developers, just 
about every design methodology is in use somewhere at 

Microsoft. While strong upfront design is essential for 

coordination across large projects, many projects have failed by 

doing too much upfront design instead of just enough. Design 

continues to be a journey of discovery, not a destination. 
Versioning of interfaces is just as important as versioning of 
source code and binaries. Versions must be well-managed and 

maintained to keep the entire enterprise up and running without 

interruption or failure. This means integrating versioning into the 

depths of our serialization and messaging engines. The problem is 

a continuing source of interest and research for the company [2]. 
3.5 More than a handshake 
While designing and versioning interfaces present many 

difficulties, the broadest challenge is documenting the 

requirements and interactions of interfaces with buyoff from all 

key customers and partners. What™s particularly interesting about 

this problem is that it happens on two levels: between groups of 

people and between groups of services. 
Between groups of services, the .NET Framework is relying on 
the Web Services Description Language (WSDL, 

http://www.w3.org/TR/wsdl). This XML description is made 

available by service providers through a simple protocol. The 

WSDL specifies expectations around data and communication, 

and forms a rudimentary contract between the interacting services. 
Like a contract between people, the WSDL contract lies outside of 
the interactions themselves. It merely guides them when needed or 

desired. Intermediaries can be inserted anywhere along the 

message route to validate and enforce the contract at the 

appropriate level. This flexibility allows the server and client to 

use only as much control as they need over time without forcing 

the validation code to be shared, versioned, or originate from one 

source. 
Without a contract in pl
ace, interfaces could change or pr
oduce 
unexpected behaviors, causing illegitimate results or catastrophic 

failures. With a contract in place, each side can know what to 

expect, reject inappropriate requests, and when properly 

constructed can robustly recover to a stable state if the contract is 

not kept. 
As it happens, this is precisely the behavior you want between 
groups of people who rely on 
each other. At Microsoft, informal 
contracts exist between many teams with dependencies. Again, the 

ﬁjust enoughﬂ rule applies. 
The contract states the expectations and requirements of each 
team (delivery dates, languages, platforms); the ownership and 

responsibilities of 
each team (source code, testing, bug databases, 
build, setup, drop points, localization, service operations); and the 

fallback positions for both sides if the contract is broken. Teams 

also often share automated build verification tests to ensure 

interfaces continue to match expectations. 
The fallback position is the most interesting. It is what makes the 
interaction between groups possible, be they services or people. 

Without a fallback position, the system is not stable and will 

likely fail. With a fallback position, the system keeps running and 

resolves issues.  
For people, the fallback position simply diffuses tension because 
everyone knows there is a way out so they can completely focus 
 on the problem at hand. That doesn™t always make it easy or 
pretty, but it does remove uncertainty and allows participants to 

compare the current situation and solutions against the fallback. 

The result is clearer thinking, better prioritization, and less 

apprehension. 
4. CONCLUSION 
Agility and change don™t come easily for large companies of any 

kind. In the past, Microsoft has leveraged its corporate structure 

of hundreds of small independent product units and open network 

communications to quickly adapt to changes in the marketplace. 
Now the market for ubiquitous interconnected devices and 
increased expectations of ﬁalways on, always workingﬂ have 

driven Microsoft to make dramatic shifts in its platform, 

development environment, and development process. We created 

the .NET Framework, standardized build systems and quality 

gates before check-in, and are devising schemes to manage our 

interfaces between services and the teams that build them. 
All these efforts together foster an environment in which each 
small product unit can adopt agile development strategies which 

minimize work in progress and deliver continuous customer value 

throughout the development cycle. A key aspect of this strategy is 

ﬁjust enoughﬂ documentation and process to enable continuous 

integration across groups. 
Even with the new framework and standards in place, the large 
collection of product units still have wide latitude to try 

innovative ideas in both their products and process. Some groups 

embrace change more aggressively than others, and some groups 
fail to adapt. Some groups are making great progress, and some 
groups are dealing with pain and dysfunction. But autonomy 

brings out originality, and many radical ideas from the past are 

now common practice at the company. Just enough structure 

coupled with a flexible approach keeps Microsoft agile and 

customer-focused. 
5. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The author would like to thank Wolfgang Emmerich for inviting 

this paper, Don Box for enlightening me about our latest efforts in 

Web services, Linda Caputo for her editing assistance, and 

Clemens Szyperski for once again harassing me to do it. 
6. REFERENCES 
[1] Fowler, Martin, et al. 
Refactoring: Improving the Design of 
Existing Code.
 Addison-Wesley Pub Co, 1999. 
[2] Meijer, Erik, and Szyperski, Clemens. 
Overcoming 
Independent Extensibility Challenges.
 Communications of 
the ACM. Vol. 45, No. 10, pp. 41Œ44, October 2002. 
[3] Newkirk, James, and Vorontsov, Alexei. 
Test-driven 
development in Microsoft .NET
. Microsoft Press, 2004. 
[4] Poppendieck, Mary, and Poppendieck, Tom. 
Lean Software 
Development: An Agile Toolkit for Software Development 

Managers
. Addison-Wesley Professional, 2003. 
[5]  Schwaber, Ken. 
Agile Project Management with Scrum.
 Microsoft Press, 2004. 
 