 Controlling and Monitoring Agile Software Development in Three Dutch 
Product Software Companies 
 Tjan-Hien Cheng1, Slinger Jansen
1, Marc Remmers
2  Utrecht University
1 Information and Computer Sciences  
Padualaan 14  
3584 CH Utrecht, the Netherlands 
Tcheng@cs.uu.nl
, S.jansen@cs.uu.nl  Business Base
2  Kobaltweg 48 
3542 CE Utrecht, the Netherlands 
Marc.remmers@businessbase.com
  Abstract  Agile software development governance depends on 
successful monitoring and control mechanisms. 
Software development managers generally are 
unaware of the complete set of
 monitoring and control 
mechanisms that are availab
le to them, leading to 
uninformed decisions with 
unsuccessful outcomes. This 
paper presents a list of key process indicators and a 
list of interventions that
 software development 
managers require for successful governance of agile 
development processes. The lis
t is based on three case 
studies of product softwar
e companies that have successfully developed and sold software for several 
decades.  1. Agile Development Governance 
 Software development managers within a product 
software company (PSC) struggle with controlling and 
managing the development process such that a product 
is finished and delivered within budget and on time. 
Traditionally, software developers would release their 
software infrequently, work in large increments, 
according to well-defined structures and 
documentation. Technological, market or customer 
requirement changes are detr
imental to the success of a 
project when developing software this traditional way. 
Adopting agile software de
velopment methods enables 
a software developer to
 be more flexible and 
responsive to changing en
vironments and customer 
demands. Numerous agile 
software development 
methods used in practice ar
e empirically reviewed and 
the agility of the methods has 
been measured [1, 4, 5]. 
Agile methods proved to ha
ve a far higher agility 
and flexibility than traditio
nal software development 
[1]. Agile processes of 
various agile methods are 
described in both scientific and practical literature [5, 
6]. Many of these methods are described dogmatically, 
i.e., the described method is
 considered the best and 
only method. In earlier research [1] was concluded that 
software vendors generally do not accept such a 
dogmatic approach but use best of breed approaches to 
their development processes. 
This research focuses on 
the aspects that unite agile software development 
practices, through the concept of software development 
governance. This paper in particular describes what 
needs to be measured and wh
at actions can be taken to 
steer the development proc
ess successfully. Successful 
steering is reached by monitoring and controlling agile 
governance in PSCs by the development of Key 
Performance Indicators (KPI) & Interventions.  
The following section continues with a discussion of 
the position of KPIs and inter
ventions in development 
governance frameworks. Section 3 describes the 
approach used in the case studies that explore the KPIs 
and the interventions. Sectio
n 4 provides a list and a 
description of the encountered
 KPIs and section 5 does 
the same for the interventions. Finally, section 6 
concludes with lessons learned from this research. 
 2. Monitoring and Controlling Governance 
 Governance models generally focus on IT. IT 
Governance focuses on aligning the IT function with 
the business, based on thre
e perspectives: structures, 
processes and relational mechan
isms [6]. The aim of IT 
governance is to sustain 
and extend the 
strategy and 
objectives of an organization regarding to the IT 
function [8, 9].  
Different types of governance based on IT 
Governance recently emerged, being ‘a
gile governance
’ [2] and ‘s
oftware development 
governance
’ [7]. Qumer’s agile governance model 
SDG™09, May 17, 2009, Vancouver, Canada978-1-4244-3736-8/09/$25.00  2009 IEEEICSE™09 Workshop29 focuses on maximizing busin
ess value by the business 
alignment and application of agile software 
development methods. 
Software Development 
Governance (SDG) helps software development 
organizations to achieve their strategic goals by 

establishing the structural co
mponent and measurement 
component of governance. Th
e structural component is 
setting up the responsibilities 
and authorities of people. 
The measurement component is concerned with 

establishing measurement an
d control mechanisms 
which let people execute their roles and 

responsibilities. The definition of agile governance we 

follow is “
the accountability and responsibility of 
management, adopting agile 
software development 
methods, and establishing measurement and control 
mechanisms in an agile environment”. 
 Development managers of PS
Cs are responsible and 
accountable for managing, measuring and controlling 
the software development pr
ocess. This research aims 
to provide software develo
pment managers with KPIs 
and Interventions that can be
 employed across different 
agile development 
methods. KPIs ar
e numbers or 
values that indicate the performance of a process or 

activity. These KPIs show whether organizational goals 

are going to be reached with the current methods. 

Provided with KPIs management can take action 

whenever the KPIs go out of bounds or when goal 

satisfaction is in danger
. These actions are termed 
interventions. Figure 1 shows the relation between the 
concepts described in the 
work of Chulani et al [7]. 
This research focuses on
 Chulani’s concept ‘
Control 
and measurement mechanisms
’ in agile environments. 
Furthermore, KPIs are part of the arrow ‘
Control and 
monitor
’ and interventions are part of the arrow 
‘Process controls
’. 
   Figure 1. Governance, Management and 
Processes 
 3. Research Method and Case Studies  
 The field of agile software
 development regarding 
KPIs and Intervention is no
t yet explored. Hence it is 
almost impossible to create 
a comprehensive list that 
will be complete. Creation and design of KPIs and 
Interventions require constant adjustments in order to 

be practical and useful. The agile world assumes a 
changing and dynamic envi
ronment [1, 6]. KPIs and 
interventions should also be dynamic and constantly 
refined. The design cycle [3] enables us to solve the 

problem through an iterative lo
gical process. Solving a 
single problem by the construction of concepts and 

choosing the best concepts 
that fit best. During the 
design process, evaluation and refinement of the 
concepts consequently increasing the suitability and 
usability of KPIs and in
terventions. First, a literature 
study is performed to gath
er information and explore 
the field of agile software
 development, governance, 
KPIs and interventions.  
A case study at a PSC was performed to have a first 
impression of an adopted 
agile software development 
method in practice. The company has adopted SCRUM 

since 2004 and therefore has many years of experience 

with agile software development. Interviews and 

document reviews were used to gather information 

about their agile development process. The goal was to 

uncover KPIs and interventions used within this 

company to manage the process. Scientific literature 
also served as the knowledge base for deriving KPIs 
and interventions.  
A list of KPIs and a lis
t of Interventions were 
constructed. These lists are validated with three case 

studies. The case study subjects are three PSCs. Two of 

them adopt the agile dev
elopment method Scrum and 
the third company follows the “best of breed” agil
e software development m
ethod. Managers, project 
leaders and Scrum masters (team leader of 

development team) were interviewed. Background 

information about the three case study companies can 

be found in table 1. 
Reliability of the study refers to obtaining the same 
results, should the study be repeated. Internal validity 
prescribes that the research
 variable has a causal 
relationship with the dependent variable. To acquire a 
complete list of KPIs and Interventions, interviews are 

divided in two parts. The first part of the interview 

starts with discovering us
ed KPIs and Interventions 
within the case study subject. The second part of the 

interview is the presentation of
 the standard 
list of KPIs 
and Interventions. The inter
viewee validates the lists 
and judges usefulness of th
e KPIs and interventions in 
practice. Dividing the interview this way, prevents the 
30 influence of the lists on the interviewees. Interviewing 
the persons individually is
 another measure to get 
unbiased data.  
External validity is the generalization of the results 
to the population, which in this research is achieved by 
validating the list at sever
al companies through expert 
interviews and case studies. The case studies are 

performed at Dutch PSCs. These companies have 

adopted an agile software 
development method. They 
have several years of exper
ience with developing agile 
and are thus suitable for th
is research. Used KPIs and 
interventions within these companies are therefore 

valid and can be generalized.  
 Table 1. Case study information 
  Case 1 
Case 2 
Case 3 
Name 
ERPPSC GDPSC 
FMPSC 
Software 
Product 
ERP 
Graphic 
design 

plug-in 
Facility 
management 
Dev. 
Method 
Best of 
breed 
Scrum 
Scrum 
Years of 
experience 
0,5 years 
1,5 years 
4 years 
Company 
size 240 70 325 # teams 
 9 7 5 # devs in 
team 
2-10 
2-7 
4-8 
 After validation, the list of KP
Is is adjusted to avoid 
ambiguous meaning. KPIs and interventions that were 
unclear or not marked as relevant by any of the 
interviewees were removed. 
The lists are also extended 
with new KPIs and interventions, suggested by the 

interviewees, to provide development managers a 
comprehensive list. We ca
nnot guarantee completeness 
of the lists, since new items were added to the list up 
until the last case study. The list items are divided into 

four categories; Team, Pe
rson, Task and Quality. 
Examples of the case studies are used to clarify these 

aspects.   4. KPIs  
 Measuring several aspects of the software 
development process enab
les software development 
managers to control, manage
 and steer the development 
process. The aspects are divided in team, people, task 
and quality. The validated list of
 KPIs is shown in table 
2. Team aspects focus on the capabilities and 
productivity of software de
velopment teams. Knowing 
the availability of teams enable
s development managers 
to do accurate planning. As time goes by, more 
experience is gain
ed and better insight in the team’s 
capability is acquired. In 
practice, a person is not 
spending their whole working time on planned tasks. 

Part of the working time is used for socializing, 

meetings, writing emails and so on. Thus, the real 

effective availability is a factor
 to take into account. By 
using this factor, more accurate estimations can be 

made and provides a better view of reality. The person 

aspect focuses around individuals. Getting insight of 

each person’s work and ca
pability enhances problem 
detection and makes task ass
ignments easier. When 
someone is underperforming compared to their usual 

productivity, he or she might have problems. The 
development manager can immediately detect this by 
looking at the KPIs and can try to find out the problem.    
 Table 2. List of KPIs 
 Aspect 
Key Performance Indicator 
Team 
 Team total available hours 
Team total effective available hours 
Team effort remaining 
Team effectiveness 
Team velocity 
Total available capacity 
Person  Individual available hours 
Individual effective available hours 
Individual effectiveness 
Individual effort remaining 
Weekly working hours of individual 
Task 
 Number of completed tasks 
Number of remaining tasks 
Remaining task effort 
Hours spent on task 
Working software delivery success rate 
Quality 
 Total reported bugs 
Number of critical bugs 
Outstanding bugs 
Fixed/solved bugs 
Bugs coming from previous release 
Hours spent on bug 
Test success rate 
Test failure rate 
  31 KPIs related to the task aspects show the progress of  
planned tasks and how much
 time is being spent. 
Continuously measuring progress provides software 
development managers with 
an overview of business 
goal achievability and in-d
evelopment requirements 
planning. Within agile softwa
re development, software 
is developed and delivered in iterations. Measuring the 

rate of working software d
elivery indicates whether the 
planning was realizable, if estimations were right and if 

development teams were working as intended. 

Spending more time than estimated can be a waste of 

time if the task’s business value is low. 
 Quality aspects focus on software quality. To 
improve software quality, bugs have to be tracked and 
fixed. Especially critical bugs send by customers, have 
to be fixed in time or the company might lose them. 
The customers are the main 
source of providing and 
encountering bugs. Each of the case study subjects has 

a test team to enhance softwa
re quality. Error and faults 
in the software can be found and fixed before they are 

released. One of the case
 study companies even has 
monitors of the tests and bugs in the hallway, among 

traditional other overviews, so that everyone can see 

them. The number of bugs per development team is 

shown and in this way motivates development teams to 

reduce the number of bugs.  
 5. Interventions 
 Measuring aspects of the development process only 
indicates if goals can be reached and alerts if goals are 
in danger. Whenever KPIs
 indicate the goals are in 
danger, the management should intervene. 

Interventions are related to 
KPIs in such a way that 
they are triggered by the KPIs. Furthermore, 

interventions can by organ
ized into the same categories 
as KPIs. A validated list of interventions is presented in 

table 3. 
Interventions in the team category focus on the 
control and improvement of team productivity, 

collaboration and capability. 
For example, when KPIs 
indicate that the productivity of team A is not high 
enough to finish tasks, another team with spare 
capacity can be assigned to help. Another intervention 
is to delete some tasks of team A or let them work 

overtime to finish the tasks on time. Meetings can 

improve productivity and capabilities of teams. 

Meetings are useful to discuss progress, encountered 

problems of team members and evaluation of past 

iteration/project.  
The second and third case study subjects have daily 
Scrum meetings and an ev
aluation meeting at the end 
of iteration. During daily meetings, a team comes 
together to talk about their
 progress and encountered 
problems. Problems are solv
ed together and mostly 
solved fast, because of daily encounters. As a result, 

time is saved and thus improving the productivity. At 

the end of iteration, an evalu
ation meeting is held to 
discuss the past iteration. Members discuss the good 

and bad things with the aim of improvements for next 

iterations, resulting into increa
se of team’s capability. 
Organizations can arrang
e trips to enhance 
collaboration between team members and managers. 

The first case study subject organizes a yearly trip for 

the whole organization for teambuilding. Hence 

improves the relationships and communication between 

people.  
 Table 3. List of interventions 
 Aspect 
Intervention Team 
 Assign extra team 
Delete task of team 
Add task to team 
Hold a meeting 
Hold evaluation meeting of past project 
Let team work overtime 
Organize day-out/trip 
Person  Add task to individual 
Delete task of individual 
Remove team member 
Order individual to take days off 
Send individual on training course 
Assign person with 
more experience and 
expertise for support 
Arrange replacement 
Provide  additional guidance throughout the 
process 
Weekly visit 
Task 
 Move task to next sprint/iteration 
Stop tasks temporary 
Delete task 
Delete current task and start over 
Assign more tasks than estimated 
End the project 
Report to higher management for planning 
and decision making 
Quality 
Set criteria for working software 
Let customers test the software 
Make visible chart 
for whole organization 
32 Person aspects focus on an
 individual’s welfare and 
capability. When KPIs in
dicate a developer has too 
many tasks, is working long hours and shows signs of 
stress or burnout, their welfare is in jeopardy. An 

employee of ERPPSC was working long hours and also 

showed signs of stress. Th
e stress of this person 
influenced the team negatively and a manager ordered 

the employee to take some
 days off to reload.  
If KPIs indicate there are still many tasks with many 
hours to complete at the end of iteration, this might 

indicate that employees are lacking knowledge or skill. 

They can be sent on training courses to improve their 

capabilities. Another person 
with more expertise and 
knowledge can also be assigned to them as a support. 
Managers can also provide guidance if needed. 
ERPPSC is focused around 
the people and is oriented 
around the development of 
their capabilities. A person 
with more experience and 
expertise is assigned to 
support and guide an employee who just started. An 
interviewee of the company 
mentioned he often visits 
his team and talk to them. In this way you get involved 

with their work, know what they are doing and help 

them if needed. This interviewee was really important 

to the team he was leading according to another 

intervi
ewee. “The team will do everything for that 
man” others said. 
 The task category concerns tasks management. For 
example, unfinished tasks w
ithin a sprint or iteration 
are moved to the next one.
 Tasks that are too complex 
or impossible to realize ar
e stopped or restarted. In 
FMPSC, tasks were temporarily stopped when critical 

bugs arose. These bugs we
re so critical for customers 
that they needed to be solved immediately or the 

company might lose the customer. Tasks were resumed 

when these bugs were solved.  
Creating awareness of the quality of software is the 
goal of interventions in the quality category. By making 

a chart visible to the wh
ole organization showing the 
success or failure rate of tests and number of reported 

bugs, everyone knows the quality of the software. One 

interviewee highlighted the fact that some teams do not 

want to have bad results, because everyone in the 

organization will see them. They will do their best to 
avoid problems in the future and solve problems fast. 
Another way to improve quality is by getting a small 

group of customers to test the software first, before 

releasing it to a wider public. Case study subject one 

has a room where customer
s can test the software.  
Setting criteria for working software will let the teams 

know what is needed, before it is presented and 

released to customers. One 
of the interviewees issued 
four criteria for working software. Teams must satisfy 
all four criteria before they 
are allowed to deliver and 
present the software.  
 6. Conclusions and Lessons Learned  
 This section presents the conclusions and lessons 
learned about KPIs and Interve
ntions. In this paper we 
present a list of measuremen
t and control aspects in 
agile governance and validate 
this with three case 
studies. Measurements should be set up around teams 
and people. They are responsible for developing the 
software and are the most 
important aspect to monitor. 
Knowing the capabilities an
d capacities of the teams 
leads to more accurate 
estimations and accurate 
planning.  
A lesson learned is that KPIs should not only be 
visible for the management, but also available for the 
whole organization. For example, the total number of 
reported bugs and the number of fixed/solved bugs. 

The reporting of bugs tells the organization that the 

software is of a certain quality level. ERPPSC, for 

instance, has a briefing with all departments to inform 

them about the software development process in the 

upcoming period. Test plans 
are already created before 
the software is developed. Th
is was required in order to 
preserve the quality of software.  
Furthermore, during a sprint or iteration the number 
of completed tasks and tasks effort remaining indicates 

if planned tasks can be realized on time. All 
departments will know the progress of the current 
project and can properly give the right information to 

the customers. Promising certain functionalities that 
can not be finished on time will damage the 
relationship between the comp
any and its customers. 
FMPSC avoids this problem by preparing the sales, 

marketing, support and training departments, before the 

release of software. These departments are trained and 

updated with the relevant information about the release, 

so that they will be able to 
serve and provide customers 
with the right information.  
The second lesson is that having a fixed 
composition of software 
development manager and 
team, who are specialized and accountable in a certain 
area of software. In this 
way expertise an
d experience is build up. All case study su
bjects are organized in this 
way. FMPSC used to have a different set up. There 
were no fixed combination of teams and managers. 

Furthermore, they were not specialized in a specific 

area or module of the software. A team can be 

developing pieces of software for module A and B in 

one iteration and developing for module C in another. 

Before any iteration, a kind of auction system was used 
for assigning tasks/requirements. Teams could bid on 
33 the requirements they wanted to develop. FMPSC 
emphasized this was not working, due to no 
specialization leading to lack of expertise and 
responsibility. For examp
le, when there are bugs 
reported by customers that originate in relatively old 

code, it could be a problem if the organization does not 

know which team is responsi
ble. When a development 
team does have a fixed set up of team and manager 

their relationship will strengthen, because of facing 

problems together and the 
tight collaboration. They 
will know each other’s capabilities, knowledge and 

personalities. Assignment of 
tasks will be easier and 
making the planning will be more accurate.  
The third lesson is holding short daily meetings. The 
two case study companies that follow the Scrum 
method have daily Scrum meetings. The progress, 
performed tasks and problems of the team members are 

discussed. During Scrum meetings the cause of the 

problem becomes clear and a lo
ok at KPIs is taken. By 
monitoring measurements every day, software 

development managers can intervene on time. One 

interviewee points out the fact that you face problems 

every day and will be confronted with the reality. You 

are forced to take actio
n. For example when 
measurements indicate the ef
fort remaining for tasks is 
unchanged for the past week, something might be 

wrong and management can take action to do 

something about it. Some tasks may be too complex 

and should be moved to th
e next sprint/iteration or 
even stopped and deleted. 
Another possibility is the 
lack of knowledge and skills of an individual. This 

person can be sent on a training course and in some 

extreme measures removed. This is the case with 

people who do not fit in. One of the case study subjects 

had a case where someone really was not fitting within 

the company. There was a personality conflict and was 

unable to collaborate with others. This was negatively 

affecting the motivation and spirit of the team. In the 

end this person was relocated. Consequently, daily 

meetings allow management follow daily progress and 

intervene when necessary.  

 7. Future Work 
 The model of Chulani et al. [7] (Figure 1) 
encompasses monitoring (through KPIs) and providing 
intervention mechanisms to the management and 
enable control of the software development process 

into SDG. This paper suggests
 a further detailed model, 
where KPI 
boundaries 
and combinations 
are established to trigger (combinations of) interventions. 

We coin the 
intervention trigger model
 to provide lists 
of possible interventions when KPIs outrun preset 
boundaries. The intervention trigger model requires the 
PSC’s strategy and goals, KPIs
 and their values, and all 
possible and acceptable interventions as inputs. The 
intervention trigger model can be used at any point in 

the software development 
process to establish which 
interventions must be executed to correct any extreme 

KPI values or value combinations. We consider further 

development of the intervention trigger model as future 

work, since this paper does not claim to provide a 

complete set of interventions and KPIs, nor does it 

provide a method for establis
hing KPI boundaries and 
trigger values. 
 More work is required
 on the extension and 
validation of the list of KP
Is and interventions to 
achieve comprehensiven
ess and completeness. For 
instance, soon we noticed th
at there exist relationships 
between negative and positive 
interventions (fire/hire a 
person). Furthermore, r
elationships exist between 
specific interventions and KPIs. A limitation of this 

research is the fact that two of the three case study 

subjects adopt the Scrum 
agile development method. 
Future PSCs adopting othe
r agile methods such as XP, 
Feature-Driven Development, Dynamic Systems 

Development Method, and Crystal Methods are 

required to further enhance the validity of the lists. 

Further research is needed 
on general aspects of agile 
governance regarding to 
the relation of agile methods 
with measurement and cont
rol mechanisms and study 
of the relationship between KPIs and interventions. 
  10. References 
 [1] A. Qumer, and B. Henderson-Sellers, 
“A framework to 
support the evaluation, adoption and improvement of agile 
methods in practice
”, 
Journal of Software Systems
, 81(11), 
Elsevier Sciencedirect, November 2008, pp. 1899-1919. 
 
[2] A. Qumer, 
“Defining an Integrated Agile Governance for 
Large Agile Software Development Environments
”, 
Lecture 
notes in Computer Science, 
Agile Processes in Software 
Engineering and Extreme Programming
, Springer Berlin / 
Heidelberg, 2007, pp. 157-160. 
 [3] H. Takeda, P. Veerkamp, T. Tomiyama, and H.  
Yoshikawa, “Modeling Design Processes”, 
American 
Association for Artificial Intelligence, 
volume 11 issue 4, AI 
Magazine, 1990, pp. 37-48.
   [4] K. Conboy, and B. Fitzgerald, 
“Toward a Conceptual 
Framework of Agile Methods: a stu
dy of agility in different 
disciplines
”, Proceedings of the 
2004 ACM workshop on 
Interdisciplinary software engineering research
, ACM, 
Newport Beach CA USA
, 2004, pp. 37-44. 
  34 [5] P. Abrahamsson, J. Warsta, 
T. Siponen, and R. Jussi, 
“New directions on agile methods: A comparative analysis
”, Proceedings of the 25
th International Conference on 
Software Engineering (ICSE’03),
 IEEE Computer Society
, May 2003, pp.
 244-254. 
 [6] P. Abrahamsson, O. Salo
, J. Ronkainen, and J. Warsta, 
“Agile software development methods: Review and 
analysis
”, VTT Publications 478
, Elsevier Sciencedirect, 
Finland, September 2002, pp. 1-107. 
 
[7] S. Chulani, C. Williams, and A. Yaeli, 
“Software 
development governance and its concerns
”, Proceedings of 
the 1st international worksh
op on Software 
development 
governance,
 ACM, Leipzig Germany, May 2008, pp.
 3-6.
   [8] S.D. Haes, and W.V. Grembergen, 
“Analyzing the 
relationship between IT governance and business it 
alig
nment maturity”, 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 
IEEE Computer Society, January 2008,
 pp. 428.  [9] W.V. Grembergen, S.D. Haes, and E. Guldentops, 

“Structures, Processes and Relational mechanisms for IT 
Governanc
e”, 
Strategies for IT
, 2004, pp. 1-36.  
35