 The Role of Asynchronous Discussions in Increasing  
the Effectiveness of Remote Synchronous Requirements 
Negotiations 
Daniela Damian 
University of Victoria 
Engineering Department  
BC, Canada danielad@cs.uvic.ca 
Filippo Lanubile 
University of Bari 
Dipartimento di Informatica  
Bari, Italy 
lanubile@di.uniba.it 
 Teresa Mallardo 
University of Bari 
Dipartimento di Informatica 
Bari, Italy 
mallardo@di.uniba.it 
 ABSTRACT
 Important and yet very difficult process in software development, 
requirements engineering is plagued with additional challenges in 

the emergent dynamics of geographically distributed software 

teams. Our hypothesis is that a mix of lean and rich 

communication media are needed towards increasing the 

effectiveness of meetings in reaching mutual agreement when 

stakeholders are geographically dispersed. 
We studied tool-supported remote inspections in six educational 
global project teams in a multicultural software development 

environment. In this paper we pr
esent the preliminary results from 
comparing the effectiveness of the requirements negotiations 

when preceded by the asynchr
onous discussions to those 
negotiations with no prior asynchronous discussions. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
D.2.1 [
Software Engineering
]: Requirements/Specifications Œ 
methodologies, tools; 
K.4.3 [
Computers and Society
]: 
Organizational Impacts Œ 
computer-supported collaborative work
. General Terms 
Experimentation, Theory, Measurement. 
Keywords 
Software inspection, requirements negotiation, asynchronous 
communication, common ground, computer-mediated 

communication. 
1. THE PROBLEM OF COMMON 
GROUND IN SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 
Software development is a collaborative problem-solving activity 
where success depends on the ability to create, share, and 

integrate information [19]. Defining and specifying the large set 

of functional and non-functional system properties is an intense 

collaborative process that requires the development of a common 

understanding of the problem and solution sp
aces. The process of 
achieving an agreement with respect to system requirements is 

however as difficult as important in software engineering. 

Research in requirements engineering reports on the 

communication gap between the different groups of stakeholders 

[12].  
 Common ground is the knowledge that participants have in 
common when communicating and the awareness of it [4]. 

Decision making tasks, prevalent in software development and 

particularly in requirements engineering, are more efficient when 

participants share common grounds b
ecause finding or 
establishing common ground between people facilitates 

interpersonal relationships and mutual understanding. Common 

ground is not n
ecessarily based on previous knowledge but it is 
usually dynamically established while interpreting cues obtained 

during social interaction.  
One cannot assume common ground at the inception of a software 
project, given the differences in professional backgrounds of 

software clients and developers, as well as goals and priorities for 

the software system. Software inspections and requirements 

workshops are among the methods recommended for establishing 

common ground in software development. They aim at removing 

misunderstandings and clarifying the meaning of requirements 

early in software development, and both rely on collaborative 

activities between different stakeholders. While requirements 

inspections [10], [18], [15] are validation techniques that aim at 

assuring that the system requirements capture the stakeholders™ 

intent, requirements workshops are means of including the 

relevant stakeholders in focused meetings where requirements are 

elicited, modeled and negotiated [14]. 
2. CHALLENGES OF GLOBAL 
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT AND THE 

TASK-TECHNOLOGY FIT THEORY 
The problem is, however, that traditionally these methods largely 
rely on same-time, same-place interactions as people get together 

in a meeting room. As companie
s turn to outs
ourcing as a 
business model, there is a drama
tically increasing trend towards 
distributed software development and co-located meetings are 

becoming problematic. The access to skilled technical staff at 

remote locations, lowered costs 
as well as possibilities for around 
the clock development increase the demand for distributed 

software engineering efforts. However, focused investigations of 

collaboration and requirements management processes in multi-

site organizations reveal significant challenges faced by 

distributed teams [7]. Specifically, the distributed communication 

between clients and developers is problematic because of 

differences in software processes, professional backgrounds, and 

culture across sites. Failure to achieve a common understanding 
 Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

ICSE'06
, May 20-28, 2006, Shanghai, China. 
ACM 1-59593-085-X/06/0005. 
 of system features, combined with reduced trust and the inability 
to effectively resolve conflicts results in budget and schedule 

overruns and, ultimately, in dama
ged client-supplier relationships. 
Computer-mediated tools however, promise to provide support to 
distributed development groups. Studies on media capacity 

theories [8] and its application to software development tasks [2] 

reveal some patterns of tool usage to overcome the challenges of 

distance. While asynchronous communication such as email was 

found better suited for conveyance of information (as when 

communicating project information that related to planning 

activities), real-time communication media such as 

teleconferencing or videoconferencing sessions were found as 

more appropriate for convergence to decisions (as when 

negotiating common understanding with respect to project scope 

and implementation). 
Whenever engaged in group work, the communication medium 
which we use to exchange information must be able to reduce 

uncertainty as well as equivocality [2]. The former is reduced by 

eliminating information omission while the latter by removing 

information ambiguity. Translating this theory of media richness 

more closely to the area of computer-mediated communication, 

research [2] suggests that uncertainty reduction is better addressed 

by lean media (i.e., email and more generally asynchronous 

communication tools) that focus on factual information rather 

than emotional cues, while equivocality reduction is better 

handled by rich media (videoconferencing, F2F meetings and 

more generally synchronous tools) that provide immediate 

feedback. With respect to grounding processes, a number of 

studies show a positive relations
hip between the richness of 
communication technology and the ability to establish common 

ground (e.g., [16]). 
The task-technology fit theory thus proves appropriate and 
potentially critical in understanding how computer-mediated 

communication supports collaborative tasks of software 

engineering and in particular geographically distributed software 

projects. To explore this further, the global aspect of distributed 

software teams adds an interesting yet largely overlooked 

dimension that may influence the perception of ﬁtask-technologyﬂ 

fit in software development: Cultu
re. Empirical studies of joint 
decision-making provide evidence that cultural factors have an 

impact on the ability to support construction of common ground 

([11], [16]). In [11], participants from high-context cultures (e.g., 

Asian) showed a preference for text-based asynchronous 

communication tools because they had more time to compose and 

revise messages before sent, while participants from 

individualistic low-context cultures (e.g., American) preferred 

talking because they could control the conversation. In [16] 

asynchronous text-based communication was repl
aced by instant 
messaging and the effects of culture were reduced but not 

removed. Further, culture plays an important role in requirements 

management activities and how remote stakeholders used 

communication tools in trying to reach mutual 
understanding of 
features and project constraints [6]. 
Reaching common gr
ound and shared understanding in software 
requirements is a complex process 
that involves both uncertainty 
and equivocality reduction, and our
 position is that the task 
technology fit theories are useful in studying the design of 

improved processes and tools that support multicultural and 

distributed computer-mediated software teams. 
3. ASYNCHRONOUS COMMUNICATION 
IN SUPPORT OF MORE EFFECTIVE 

SYNCHRONOUS REQUIREMENTS 

NEGOTIATIONS 
Communicating and agreeing on requirements involves a constant 
interplay between uncertainty reduction and ambiguity reduction 

in requirements. Activities of requirements gathering are typically 

followed by modeling and inspection activities, which trigger the 

need to further collect information about requirements and their 

context (reducing uncertainty) and resolve misunderstandings or 

conflicts (reducing equivocality). Agreeing on requirements 

however is a fundamental problem in RE [12] as the result of the 

many (and often conflicting) goals and priorities that stakeholders 

have. Process models that support collaborative software 

engineering such as WinWin [3] include iterative cycles of 

identification of stakeholders™ win conditions followed by an 

exploration and negotiation of mutual agreements. 
Our hypothesis is that multiple channels of communication (a mix 
of lean and rich media) are needed to improve requirements 

engineering activities when stakeholders are geographically 

dispersed. While synchronous meetings are needed for 

requirements negotiation sessions, asynchronous tools are 

valuable in providing a mechanis
m to structure the discussion of 
requirement issues before synchronous negotiations. 
In the area of synchronous communication, while a large body of 
literature debates the usefulness of videoconferencing over audio 

conferencing for distributed group work, there is some consensus 

that the addition of video is valu
able in negotiation situations and 
relationship building (e.g. [1]). A study of distributed 

requirements negotiations found videoconferencing-supported 

meetings as conducive to win-win situations as face-to-face 

meetings [5]. The comparison of group performance and behavior 

patterns in face-to-face and videoconferencing negotiation 

sessions indicated not only the feasibility of computer-mediated 

interaction when a rich enough medium is provided, but that 

certain elements in the less rich medium (videoconferencing) 

facilitated a more rational approach in equivocality reduction 

processes. 
Despite the ability to create the useful rich communication 
medium for negotiation meetings, synchronous interaction and in 

particular videoconferencing sessions come with additional 

overhead. The necessary infrastructure is expensive to setup and 

maintain at remote sites, and its coordination across 

organizational boundaries is often problematic. We thus posit that 

while there has to exist support for rich synchronous requirements 

negotiations in distributed teams,
 research is needed towards 
increasing the effectiveness of synchronous meetings in r
eaching 
mutual agreement. We believe that most of the uncertainties can 

be reduced prior to the expensive synchronous communication; 

synchronous negotiation meetings will thus be more effectively 

used to reduce ambiguities in requirements. The design of a tool 

set to support effective requirements negotiations in distributed 

software teams needs to include computer-supported 

asynchronous communication tools that structure the discussion 

of requirements issues (and enable groups to develop some 

common ground) in addition to 
synchronous communication tools 
that allow groups to converge on issues that require equivocality 

reduction and were not resolved asynchronously. 
 4. EMPIRICAL INVESTIGATION 
To validate the usefulness of asynchronous discussions in support 
of more productive synchronous requirements negotiation 

meetings, we conducted a first case study that investigated the use 

of an internet-based tool for asynchronous discussion of 

requirements issues prior to synchronous requirements 

negotiations. 
IBIS [9] is a web-based inspection tool that supports dispersed 
inspection teams through sequential stages of requirements issue 

Discovery, Collection, and Discrimination. During the Discovery 

stage, inspectors review individu
ally the document with the help 
of checklists or scenarios, and records issues. In the Collection 

stage the inspection leader or the document™s author collate 

recorded issues and eliminate duplicates. In the Discrimination 

stage the inspection team makes decisions about collated issues. 

The Discrimination stage is designed as a structured asynchronous 

discussion with two mechanisms: posting of messages for each 

issue under discussion and voting as to whether an issue is a true 

issue or not (false positives). 
The research setting was an instructional distributed environment 
that involved students in an authentic global development task, 

with the inherent characteristics of geographical distance and 

multiculturalism. The GSD experience was offered as part of a 

software engineering course, held in Spring 2005, in collaboration 

of three universities: Univ. of Victoria (Canada), Univ. of 

Technology, Sydney (Australia), and Univ. of Bari (Italy). The 

students in all three sites were assi
gned to six international project 
teams, each involving two c
ountries. The projects were structured 
as outsourcing projects in which work was allocated to a 

geographically distributed software group in a different 

organization. The project outcome was a software requirements 

specification (SRS) as a negotiated software contract between the 

software group and the outsourcing company. The project finished 

at the point where the developer group would start writing the 

code for the system called for by the project. 
Teamwork was critical in completing the software project as the 
software group had to interact with a group of clients from 

another country to understand the required software features. This 

shared understanding was developed through a series of scheduled 

activities of requirements elicitation, analysis, inspection, 

negotiation, prototype design and evaluation. Weekly 

videoconference meetings that also supported shared 
access to 
applications were scheduled on a weekly basis for requirements 

elicitation, requirements negotiation and prototype demonstration. 
The requirements inspection was performed after the developers 
delivered a first draft of the SRS. The clients had a week to 

identify gaps in understanding of requirements. This inspection 

was entirely performed online through the use of IBIS. With the 

developer team considered as the authors of the requirements 

document, the inspection was carried out by the client team. Each 

member of the client team, individually, participated in the 

Discovery stage and read the SRS available in the system and 

recorded issues. The issue information contained a description of 

the issue found, as well as a number of issue attributes such as 

type severity. A course assistant collected all issues and merged 

duplicate issues, found by more than one client, into a list of 

collated issues. 
For three projects out of six, the individual discovery of issues 
was followed by the scheduled negotiation meeting, with the 
entire list of collated issues in 
the agenda. For the other three 
projects, we planned a process variant which consisted of a four-

day asynchronous discussion before the synchronous negotiation 

meeting. The entire project team, clients and developers, 

participated in this discussion using IBIS (i.e. in the 

Discrimination stage). The purpose of the asynchronous 

discussion was to reach an 
understanding of 
each issue and 
identify those issues that could be closed online (i.e. where 

resolution could be reached wit
hout further negotiation) or 
remained open issues (everything else, and which had to be 

further negotiated in real-time discussion). The process of closing 

issues used two mechanisms in IBIS: a discussion thread 

consisting of messages with respect to a certain issue was created, 

and voting as to whether it is still 
an open issue or is resolved and 
thus could be closed. Only those issues that could not be resolved 

during the asynchronous discussion in IBIS (i.e. and which 

remained open issues) were then discussed during the 

requirements negotiation, which was held in a videoconference 

meeting between the remote developers and clients. 
To assess the impact of asynchronous discussions on the 
synchronous negotiation meetings, we looked at the variation 

across projects in terms of the number of open issues resolved 

during the asynchronous discussions, as well as during the 

synchronous negotiation. We assessed the effectiveness of the 

synchronous negotiation sessions as the ration of closed issues 

during negotiation relative to th
e total open issues at the 
beginning of the negotiation. Here, we present the results from a 

preliminary analysis of the quantitative data we collected from the 

IBIS database. 
Figure 1 shows the trajectory of open issues throughout the three 
stages in each of the six projects, as an indication of how 

asynchronous discussions (AD) improved the effectiveness of 

remote requirements negotiations. The three teams that performed 

AD in IBIS were: Australian-Cana
dian, Australian-Canadian and 
Italian-Canadian. It can be seen that all three dotted lines, 

representing projects with AD, finished below the three 

continuous lines (which correspond to projects with no AD). To 

note is project B2 which started with the highest number of 

collated issues (112) but which ends with a significantly lower 

number of open issues (3). We have obtained preliminary 

feedback from the participants
 that this was due to the 
asynchronous discussion. 
To obtain a more comprehensive understanding of the processes 
of achieving common ground in requirements and the support 

given by the asynchronous discussions prior to the synchronous 

negotiations, our current efforts are in a more in-depth analysis of 

the group communication throughout the projects under study. 

We are applying content analysis methods to the asynchronous 

discussion records in IBIS, as well as qualitative analysis of the 

videotaped videoconferencing negotiation sessions. We are 

interested in identifying evidence of common ground established 

as a result of asynchronous discussions and which directly 

contributed to solving issues during the synchronous requirements 

negotiations. Information on the severity of each requirements 

issue, the depth of analysis for each issue, the number of 

discussants in each issue discussion, as well as the terms/language 

used in resolving discrepancies 
in requirements will inform our 
understanding of the extent to which the mix of lean and rich 

media, in this case synchronous negotiations pr
eceded by 
asynchronous discussions was beneficial in a team separated by 
 language, time zones and cultural/professional backgrounds and, 
more importantly, different initial understanding of the problem at 

hand. 
   no asynchronous discussion
 with asynchronous discussion
02040
6080100
120number of open issues
402312121330112100617414C1B2B1A1C2A2after
discovery
after asynchronous
discussion
after
negotiation
 Figure 1. Open issues at the end of three process stages 
5. SIGNIFICANCE OF RESULTS 
Developing common ground is one of the most challenging 
problems of distributed teams, 
due to inherent communication 
gaps among multi-cultural geographically distributed 

stakeholders. The usefulness of asynchronous discussions prior to 

requirements negotiations consists in focusing the synchronous 

negotiation meeting on the issues that could not be resolved 

during the asynchronous discussion and the preliminary results in 

our research confirm this thesis. The task-technology fit provides 

us with tools to understand the appropriateness of asynchronous 

media for reducing missing information in requirements, as well 

as of synchronous media for negotiating mutual agreement on 

those issues that require more than uncertainty reduction. 
Today™s synchronous technologies for distributed groups are still 
limited in the quality of communication and ease of use. Even if 

forthcoming advances in technologies will increase the chances of 

successful adoption of synchronous communication such as 

videoconferencing and shared access to applications, yet 

coordinating meetings and technology infrastructures across 

multiple sites in distributed development is likely to stay 

problematic. Working towards in
creasing the effectiveness of 
synchronous requirements negotiations is thus an endeavour with 

long term impact. 
An understanding of factors that contributed to synchronous 
requirements negotiations to be more effective when preceded by 

the asynchronous discussions in IBIS has the potential to inform 

tool as well as process design for distributed requirements 

management activities. This addresses an emerging need of 

multicultural and distributed softwa
re teams: the ability to use a 
computer mediated environment that integrates asynchronous and 

synchronous capabilities in a manner that fosters effective 

requirements negotiations. This is the focus of our research and 

we hope to report on specific details of such tool and process 

design in the near future. 
6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
We thank to Dr. Ban Al-Ani, Luis Izquierdo, Fabio Calefato and 
to all the students who participated to the remote projects. 
7. REFERENCES 
[1] Abel, M. Experiences in an exploratory distributed organization, in 
Galegher et al. (eds.). 
Intellectual Teamwork
, (1990), 489-501. 
[2] Andres, H.P. A Comparison of Face-to-Face and Virtual Software 
Development Teams. 
Team Performance Management: An 
International Journal
, 8, 1/2 (2002), 39-48. 
[3] Boehm, B., Bose, P., Horowitz, E., and Lee, M.J. Software 
Requirements as Negotiated Win Conditions. In 
Proc. of the ICRE
, (Colorado, 1994). 
[4] Clark, H.H., and Brennan, S.E. Grounding in Communication. In 
L.B. Resnick, R.M. Levine and S.D. Teasley (eds.). 
Perspectives on 
Socially Shared Cognition
. American Psychological Association, 
Washington, DC. 1991. 
[5] Damian, D.E., Eberlein, A., Shaw, M.L.G., and Gaines, B.R. The 
effects of communication media on group performance in 

requirements engineering. 
IEEE Software
, (2000), 28-36. 
[6] Damian, D., and Zowghi, D. An insight into the interplay between 
culture, conflict and distance in globally distributed requirements 

negotiations, In 
Proc. of the HICSS
, (January 2003). 
[7] Damian, D., and Zowghi, D. Requirements Engineering challenges 
in multi-site software development organizations. 
Requirements 
Engineering Journal
, 8 (2003), 149-160. 
[8] Dennis, A.R., and Valacich, J.S. Rethinking Media Richness: 
Towards a Theory of Media Synchronicity. In 
Proc. of the HICSS
, (January 1999). 
[9] Lanubile, F., Mallardo, T., and Calefato, F. Tool Support for 
Geographically Dispersed Inspection Teams. 
Software Process: 
Improvement and Practice
, 8, 4 (2003), 217-231. 
[10] Lanubile, F., Shull, F., and Basili, V.R. Experimenting with Error 
Abstraction in Requirements Documents, In 
Proc. of the METRICS
, (March 1998), 114-121. 
[11] Massey, A.P., Hung, Y.C., Montoya-Weiss, M., and Ramesh, V. 
When culture and style aren™t about clothes: perceptions of task-

technology ﬁfitﬂ in global virtual teams. In 
Proc. of the GROUP 
conference
, (September 2001). 
[12] Nuseibeh, B., and Easterbrook, S. Requirements engineering: a 
roadmap. In 
Proc. of the ICSE
, (May 2000), 35-46. 
[13] Olson, G.M., and Olson, J.S. Distance matters. 
Human-Computer 
Interaction
, 15 (2000), 139-179. 
[14] Macaulay, L. 
Requirements Engineering
, Springer, 1996. 
[15] Parnas, D.L., and Lawford, M. Guest eds. Introduction: The Role of 
Inspection in Software Quality Assurance.
 IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering
, 29, 8 (2003), 674-676. 
[16] Setlock, L.D., Fussell, S.R., and Neuwirth, C. Taking it out of 
context: collaborating within and across cultures in face-to-face 

settings and via instant messaging. In 
Proc. of the CSCW
, (November 2004). 
[17] Short, J., Williams, E., and Christie, B. 
The social psychology of 
telecommunications
, Wiley&Sons, New York, 1976. 
[18] Shull, F., Rus, I., and Basili, V.R. How Perspective-Based Reading 
Can Improve Requirements Inspections. 
Computer
, 33, 7 (2000), 
73-79. 
[19] Walz, D.B., Elam, J.J., and Curtis, B. Inside a software design team: 
knowledge acquisition, sharing, and integration. 
Communications of 
the ACM 36, 10 (1993), 63-77. 
 