 GridUnit: Software Testing on the Grid
Alexandre Duarte, Walfredo Cirne, Francisco Brasileiro, Patrícia Machado 
Departamento de Sistemas e Computação 
Universidade Federal de Campina Grande 
Campina Grande, Brazil 
+55-83-3310-1365 
{alex, walfredo, fubica, patricia}@dsc.ufcg.edu.br}
 ABSTRACT
 Software testing is a fundamental part of system development. As 
software grows, its test suite becomes larger and its execution 

time may become a problem to software developers. This is 

especially the case for agile methodologies, which pr
each a short 
develop/test cycle. Moreover, due to the increasing complexity of 

systems, there is the need to test software in a variety of 

environments. In this paper, we
 introduce GridUnit, an extension 
of the widely adopted JUnit testing framework, able to 

automatically distribute the execution of software tests on a 

computational grid with minimum user intervention. Experiments 

conducted with this solution have showed a speed-up of almost 

70x, reducing the duration of the test phase of a synthetic 

application from 24 hours to less than 30 minutes. The solution 

does not require any source-code modification, hides the grid 

complexity from the user and provides a cost-effectiveness 

improvement to the software testing experience. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors
 D.2.5 [
Software Engineering
]: Testing and Debugging Œ 
Testing 
tools, Distributed debugging
.  General Terms
 Verification, Performance, Reliability  
Keywords
 Distributed Testing, Unit Testin
g, Computational Grid, JUnit 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Software testing is a fundamental part of system development. 
Examples of disasters caused by poorly tested software are widely 

available in the literature [1][2]. 
Therefore, there is an increasing 
demand for better support in the process of testing software. 
Test cases are important artifacts since their execution usually 
provides useful information from a system under test. Automated 

testing adds power by helping gather and disseminate information 

quickly, to give programmers fast feedback.  
Automated test suites are more beneficial in large software 
projects, which usually involve several development teams. In 

these situations, a test suite can be used by a development team to 

check if a software module provided by another team has the 

intended behavior, hiding the implementation details [4].  
This way, large software projects usually have large test suites. 
There are industry reports showing that a complete regression test 

session of a 20.000 lines software could take as much as seven 

weeks of continuous execution [5].  
Even software with fast running automated test suites may take a 
long time to be tested. That is the case of applications that need to 

be tested with varied environment configurations. Although 

software components may be extensively tested in the 

development environment before going into production, having 

the test run in a variety of environments can be very useful. This 

is because the pr
oduction environment can be very different from 
the development environment, avoiding the detection of several 

failures. In these situ
ations, the same test suite must be executed 
several times, multiplying the execution time by the number of 

target environments.  
In the two situations above, th
e automated test suites may not 
accomplish the two main objectives of automated testing: 
quick
 detection of destabilizing changes in new builds and 
quick
 exposure of regression defects [3].  Therefore, we should deal 

with time consuming test suites.  
Several different methods have been used to reduce the cost of 
time consuming test phases. Selection approaches are used to 

reduce the cost of testing by selecting a representative subset of 

the existing test suite [16][17]. A
nother approach is based in the 
prioritization of some tests among others, ordering the test suite 

and executing test cases with higher priority earlier than lower 

priority ones [17][18]. These approaches aim at revealing 

important defects in software earlie
r in the testing stage. Finally, 
there are distributed testing attempts. They hope to speed up the 

test stage by simultaneously executing a test suite over a set of 

machines [6][7][8].  However, until now, these solutions do not 

explore the parallelism and environment heterogeneity provided 

by computational grids [9][10], which, in our opinion, can be 

used to improve software testability. 
In this paper, we discuss wh
y grids are inte
resting testing 
execution platforms due to their heterogeneity and massive 

parallelism and describe the solution we have developed for 

testing software using the grid
. The GridUnit tool aims at 
executing automated software tests 
on the Grid by distributing the 
execution of JUnit [11] test suites on a grid, without requiring 

modification in the application and hiding the grid complexity 

from the user. 
2. TESTING ON THE GRID 
The computational grid, or simply grid, is the computing and data 

management infrastructure that will provide the electronic 

underpinning for a global society in business, government, 

research, science and entertainment [9].  Grid computing offers a 
 Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

ICSE'06
, May 20-28, 2006, Shanghai, China. 
ACM 1-59593-085-X/06/0005. 
 model for solving massive computational problems by making use 
of the unused resources (CPU cycles and/or disk storage) of large 

numbers of disparate, often desktop, computers treated as a virtual 

cluster embedded in a distributed telecommunications 

infrastructure. Grid computing's 
focus on the ability to support 
computation across administrative domains sets it apart from 

traditional computer clusters or traditional distributed computing. 
The very high levels of parallelism provided by a grid can be used 
to speed up the test execution, increasing productivity and making 

the testing process of very tim
e consuming test suites a less 
expensive task. Imagine as an example an open source project 

with a very time consuming test suite and several individual 

contributors distributed over th
e world. These contributors may 
decide to create a grid, combining the computational power of 

their own PCs, to speed up the execution of the project™s test 

suite. 
The grid can also lower the costs of acquisition and maintenance 
of the test environment. For instance, a multi-national company, 

with several small software factories distributed over the world, 

working on different time zones, can create a grid to share its idle 

resources among its factories. By creating enterprise grids, 

companies do not need to buy additional machines to improve test 

speed.  
Finally, by being a highly heterogeneous environment, the grid 
can be used to improve the reliability and coverage of the test 

suite. By using a grid as test execution platform, we can test 

software in several different environments, composed by varied 

software and hardware configurations and personalized to specific 

user profiles. This can practically eliminate test result 

contamination by specific development configurations and 

increase the test suite coverage since the application can be tested 

on a set of different target environments. Additionally, the grid 

provides resource virtualizations for its nodes, creating isolated 

playpens on which the tests can be executed. This bounded 

environment impedes that the execution of test alters the normal 

outcome of other tests, avoiding test case contamination. 
3. THE GRIDUNIT DISTRIBUTED 
TESTING SOLUTION 
Based on the previous observations, we decided to develop a tool 
to explore the intrinsic characteristic
s of grids for software testing. 
We called this tool GridUnit. It 
is a grid-based testing execution 
solution able to distribute the execu
tion of JUnit [11] test suites in 
a grid with minimum user intervention.  GridUnit is an open-

source project, licensed under the GNU LGPL license terms, and 

can be freely downloaded from 
http://gridunit.sourceforge.net. 
GridUnit was developed on top of the OurGrid solution [12], 

although it can be easily adapted to use other grid flavors, such as 

Globus [13], for example.  
OurGrid is an open, free-to-join, cooperative grid in which users 
donate their idle computational resources in exchange for 

accessing other users™ idle resources when needed. It uses the 

Network of Favors [14], a peer-to-peer technology that makes it in 

each user™s best interest to collaborate with the system by 

donating its idle resources. OurGrid leverages from the fact that 

people do not use their computers all the time. OurGrid is 

composed by workstations and some dedicated clusters.  
OurGrid is in production since D
ecember 
2004 and now 
encompasses around 500 machines in 30 sites distributed over 
Brazil and United States.  A fresh snapshot of the running system 
can be seen at http://status.ourgrid.org. 
3.1 GridUnit Architecture 
GridUnit can be seen as an intermediary agent between the 

user/developer, who wants to run a JUnit test suite, and the 

computational resources needed to run the tests, in this case, the 

OurGrid. This brokering process 
involves four main tasks: i) 
creation of a job description from the JUnit 
TestSuite
; ii) scheduling of the job™s tasks for execution on the grid; iii) 

monitoring of the execution; and iv) presentation of the execution 

results to the user. 
Figure 1 summarizes the GridUnit high level architecture showing 
how it is constructed on top of OurGrid and how it uses JUnit 

components. 
 Figure 1: GridUnit High Level Architecture 
The 
GridTestRunner
 is responsible for the creation of the job 
description from the 
TestSuite
 and for the scheduling of the job for 
execution on OurGrid.  
A JUnit 
TestSuite
 specifies a set of independent 
TestCases
 that 
should be executed with no pre-determined order. An OurGrid job 

description specifies a parallel application composed by one or 

more independent tasks in which each task may be executed in 

any order and at any time. We call this kind of parallel application 

a Bag-of-Task. Due to this similar
ity of concerns, in fact a JUnit 
TestSuite
 is already a Bag-of-Tasks (or a Bag-of-Tests), the 
conversion from a JUnit 
TestSuite
 to an OurGrid job description is 
straightforward. We simply create a job describing the 
TestSuite
 and a task for each 
TestCase
 in the 
TestSuite
. After the conversion, the 
GridTestRunner
 schedules the execution 
of the job on the grid using the WQR [15] scheduling heuristic 

provided by OurGrid. 
Another component of GridUnit, the 
GridTestMonitor
, is 
responsible for monitoring the execution of the tests on OurGrid 

and for converting the data resulted from the execution into a 
JUnit TestResult
. This is not a trivial task due to the nature of the 
grid. There is no predefined order in the execution of the tests, 

and therefore, any test can end at anytime. Moreover, the new set 
 of failures that can occur due to grid faults further complicates 
this task. So, the 
GridTestMonitor
 must be able to distinguish 
between test failures and grid failu
res in order to provide reliable 
results to the user. 
The last component of GridUnit is its graphical user interface, 
showed in Figure 2. This interface presents to the user all 

information about the execution of tests as if they were being 

executed in the local machine. In fact, to the GUI there is no 

difference in remote or local execution at all. 
Figure 2 shows an example of the execution of a test suite on 
OurGrid. In this example, the test
 suite is composed by 288 test 
cases. The status bar, in the lower corner of the window, shows 

that at that moment 75% (or 217) of the 288 test cases were 

executed and seven of them have failed due to unsatisfied 

assertions. The progress bar is red because there are test cases that 

failed due to these unsatisfied assertions. It would be gray if some 

test case failed due to unanticipated
 errors (e. g. due to the grid 
platform) and green if no test case failed at all. The tree at the left 

corner represents the test case hierarchy and shows the 

status of the execution of each test case using tiny colored 

icons. It provides an overview of the execution process. 

The GridUnit GUI provides the same amount of detail 

about the execution of a test case as the traditional JUnit 

test runners along with some additional information about 

the environment where the tests were executed. 
3.2 Main Features 
The main features of GridUnit are those pointed by 

Kapfhammer [6] as important aspects that a test 

distribution tool must consider in order to improve the 

cost effectiveness of the testing process: 
Transparent and Automatic Distribution
: The GridUnit 
considers each JUnit test as an independent task, 

scheduling its execution on the grid without any user 

intervention. Moreover, GridUnit does not require any 

modification in the application source code. 
Test Case Contamination Avoidance
: Each test is 
executed using the resource virtualization provided by 

OurGrid preventing that the execution of a test alters the 

normal outcome of other tests. 
Test Load Distribution
: The WQR scheduler provided by 
OurGrid achieves load distribution by allocating each test for 

execution in the first available grid machine. So, each grid 

machine receives a slice of the work pr
oportional to its 
computational power. 
Test Suite Integrity
: The default JUnit test runner runs 
each unit 
test as an independent task. For each test, it creates an instance of 
the 
TestCase
 class, calls the 
setUp()
 method, calls the 
testMethod()
, calls the 
tearDown() method and then destroys the instance. The 
GridUnit reproduces the same behavior with the difference that 

each test is potentially executed in a different location on the grid. 
Test Execution Control
: The 
GridTestRunner
 and 
GridTestMonitor
 modules provide a mechanism to build a centralized test execution 

and monitoring point. The GridUnit graphical user interface 

provides controls to start and stop the execution of the tests of a 

given test suite. It also monito
rs the execution of the tests and 
presents the result of the execution of each test as s
oon as it is 
available. 
4. PRELIMINARY RESULTS 
We consider that there are two classes of applications that would 

benefit from being tested with Gr
idUnit: an applica
tion that needs 
to be tested faster and an application that needs to be tested in a 

variety of environments. Note that these classes overlap since 

testing software in a variety of environments may be also a time 

consuming task and, therefore, the user may desire to execute it 

faster. 
Since faster execution is useful to both classes of applications we 
decided to start the development and validation of GridUnit 

focusing on speeding up test execution. 
To have clear evidences of the benefits of GridUnit we conducted 
several experiments using it to distribute the execution of a very 

time consuming test suite. We create a synthetic application that 

has a test suite composed of 288 test cases, 
each one taking 
exactly 5 minutes to be executed. The overall run time is 24 hours 

when executed using the normal JUnit test runners.  
Figure 2: GridUnit Graphical User Interface 
It is important to note that typical JUnit test cases can take much 
less than 5 minutes. In such s
ituations, the network overhead 
caused by file transferences can be considerable. GridUnit solves 

this problem by allowing the distribution of clusters of test cases. 

The user can specify, for example, that her test suite should be 

divided into clusters of 10 test cases each. Since the system 
under 
test files need to be transferred only a single time per cluster this 

dramatically reduces the network overhead. 
We conducted 162 experiments in a period of 15 days. This was 
necessary to alleviate the effects of network fluctuations during 

the testing process since OurGrid is composed of nodes 

geographically dispersed over Brazil and United States, connected 

through the Internet.  
The application under test has a file size of approximately 5 MB. 
This was the medium of the sizes of the five most popular 

Sourceforge projects in 01/09/2005.  File size is worth mentioning 

since the tests are executed in remote grid machines, GridUnit 
 must transfer all the application 
files prior to the execution, and 
therefore, there is an overhead involved in this file transfer phase.  
Figure 3 presents the evaluation results. As can be seen, 
approximately 25% of the experiments took less than 30 minutes 

to be concluded, 85% of the experiments took less than one hour 

and less than 8% of the experiments took more than 2 hour to be 

concluded. The combined time of all experiments was 152 hours. 

This is only 3.9% of the 3888 hours that a normal JUnit test 

runner would take to run 162 times the same test suite. 
The fastest execution observed was carried in approximately 20 
minutes using 111 grid machines (speed-up of 71.11x) while the 

worst execution took about 9 hours using 29 grid machines 

(speed-up of 2.68x).  
0%10%

20%

30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%

90%
100%
153045607590105120More
Run Time (minutes)
Acumulated Percentage
 Figure 3: GridUnit Performance Evaluation 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
We have showed that the computational power provided by 
Computational Grids can be used to parallelize the execution of 

tests, speeding up the process of
 testing software. Additionally, 
we discussed how grids can bring the software testing process a 

step closer to the software production environment. 
We created an open source Java-based tool, called GridUnit, able 
to distribute the execution of a JUnit test suite over a grid without 

requiring any source-code modification, providing a cost-effective 

improvement to the testing processes. 
Our current work is focused on improve GridUnit to add support 
for specifying and deploying test scenarios in order to better 

explore the environment heterogeneity of the grids. We are 

currently studying techniques to sp
ecify test scenarios and metrics 
to quantify how the test coverage is influenced by running the 

tests on the grid. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work has been partially developed in collaboration with HP 

Brazil R&D. Authors would also like to thank the financial 

support from CNPq/Brazil and the helpful comments and 

suggestions from the anonymous reviewers. 
REFERENCES 
[1] M. Ben-Ari. The bug that destroyed a rocket. Journal of 
Computer Science Education, 13(2):15Œ16, 1999. 
[2] P. Mellor, CAD: Computer-Aided Disaster, High. Integr. 
Syst., 1(2):101-156, 1994. 
[3] C. Kaner, J. Bach and B. Pettichord. Lessons Learned in 
Software Testing: A Context-Driven Approach. John Wiley 

& Sons Inc., 2001.  
[4] R. E. Jeffries, A. Anderson and C. Hendrickson, Extreme 
Programming Installed. Addison-Wesley, 2000. 
[5] G. Rothermel, R. H. Untch and C. Chu. Prioritizing test cases 
for regression testing, IEEE Transactions on Software 

Engineering, 27(10):929-948, 2001. 
[6] G. M. Kapfhammer, Automatically and Transparently 
Distributing the Execution of Regression Test Suites, in: 

Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Testing 

Computer Software, 2001. 
[7] D. Hughes, P. Greenwood,G. Coulson. A Framework for 
Testing Distributed Systems. Proceedings of the 4th IEEE 

International Conference on Peer-to-Peer computing 

(P2P™04), 2004. 
[8] SpiritSoft, SysUnit, http://sysunit.org, 2005. 

[9] F. Berman, G. Fox, A. J. G. Hey, Grid Computing: Making 
the Global Infrastructure a Reality, John Wiley & Sons Inc., 

2003. [10] Foster and C. Kesselman. The Grid: Blueprint for a New 
Computing Infrastructure, 2nd Ed, Morgan Kaufmann, 2004. 
[11] E. Gamma, K. Beck. JUnit: A cook's tour. Java Report, 
4(5):27-38, May 1999 
[12] W. Cirne, F. Brasileiro, N. Andrade, R. Santos, A. Andrade, 
R. Novaes and M. Mowbray, Labs of the World, Unite!!!, 

Submitted for publication in May 2005. 

http://www.ourgrid.org/twiki-

public/bin/view/OurGri
d/OurPublications 
[13] The Globus Alliance, Globus. http://
www.gl
obus.org, 2005. 
[14] Andrade, N., Brasileiro, F., Cirne, W., Mowbray, M. 
Discouraging Free-riding in a Peer-to-Peer CPU-Sharing 

Grid. Proceedings of the 13th High Performance Distributed 

Computing Symposium, June 2004. 
[15] D. Paranhos, W. Cirne and F. Brasileiro, Trading 
Information for Cycles: Using Replication to Schedule Bag 

of Tasks Applications on Computational Grids, in: 

Proceedings of the Euro-Par 
2003: International Conference 
on Parallel and Distributed Computing, 2003. 
[16] T. Graves, M. Harrold, J. Kim, A. Porter and G. Rothermel, 
An empirical study of regression test selection techniques. 

ACM Transactions on Software Engineering and 

Methodology, 10(2): 184-208, 2001. 
[17] W. Wong, J. Horgan, S. London,and H. Agrawal, A study of 
effective regression testing in practice. Proceedings of the 

Eight International Symposium on Software Reliability 

Engineering. 1997. 
[18] J. Kim, A. Porter, A history-based test prioritization 
technique for regression testing in resource constrained 

environments. Proceedings of the 24th International 

Conference on Software Engineering. 2002.
 