 The Role of a Project-Based Capstone Course 
 Yael Dubinsky 
Department of Computer Science 
Technion Œ Israel Institute of Technology 
yael@cs.technion.ac.il 
Orit Hazzan 
Department of Education in Technology and Science 
Technion Œ Israel Institute of Technology
 oritha@tx.technion.ac.il
 ABSTRACT
 A project-based capstone course aims at using software 
development skills while performing a project in the course 

domain. One of our main challenges is to simulate a real world 

environment so to provide our students with the experience they 

need. Planning this experience we should consider 
academic 
constraints as well as the students™ schedule and skills. In this 

paper we describe how we implement an agile software 

development method in a project-based capstone course in the 

domain of operating systems. We elaborate on how we simulate a 

real world environment and present a role scheme that is used by 

the students to manage the process. We suggest a discussion on 

how to use the role scheme as an assessment tool to measure the 

development process in general and students™ contribution in 

particular. We expect to extend and refine the comprehension 

regarding process measurement in students™ teams at the 

academia. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors
 D.2.9 [
Management
]: Software process models, Programming 
teams
, Productivity
.  D.2.8 [
Metrics
]: Process metrics. K.3.2 
[Computer and Information Science Education
]: Computer 
science education.
   General Terms
 Management, Measurement, Human Factors. 
Keywords
 Roles scheme, project metrics, project-based course. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Since Summer 2002 we use Extreme Programming (XP) [1] as 
the development method for the operating systems projects 

developed as part of the ‚Projects in Operating Systems™ course 

taught at the Department of Computer Science at Technion. A 

team of four academic coaches guide the students in both 

operating systems and software engineering domains. Till today 

27 such projects were performed by about 300 students in 8 
semesters. During this period we have built and constantly refine 
a teaching and coaching framework to s
upport the course.  
In addition to the introduction of XP into the course, some studio 
elements were also introduced to support learning processes. The 

Studio is the basic learning method used in architecture schools 

and it has been adopted as a training environment by some other 

design disciplines. In such studios, students, guided closely by 

tutors, develop projects and are engaged in an on-going reflection 

process, both on what they are creating and on the creation 

process itself. An XP studio includes computers, tables and white 

boards, and is used by 12 students and one academic coach for the 

entire semester, only for the project development purposes. This 

way the Computer Science Department at the Technion has 

successfully managed to provide a simulation of a real world 

environment for the sake of the course students. The combination 

of the use of the studio and XP in the course creates a 

conceptually-physically stimulating software development 

environment. It turns out that although the format of the 

‚Operating Systems Projects™ course includes also the teaching of 

a software development method, the operating systems-related 

material traditionally taught in the course was not changed or 

reduced. Rather, the introduction of XP into the course was found 

to enrich the development environments with respect to topics 

such as customer needs and testing issues. 
In [2] we suggest and detailed a role scheme to be used in 
software development teams. This role scheme is based on the 

idea that software development is a complicated task and so does 

its management. Therefore, the role scheme suggests a 

management distribution among teammates in a way that every 

teammate plays the role of a developer as well as a special role 

which is part of the project management. This way we have many 

aspects that are managed in parallel and we gain accountability 

among all teammates. We have defined four groups of roles. The 

first is the leading group which consists of the roles as a coach 

and a tracker as defined in XP. The second is the customer group 

which consists of the roles of the customer, the end user, and the 

in charge of acceptance tests. The third gr
oup is the code group 
which consists of the roles of in charge of design, of continuous 

integration, of unit testing, of algorithms and effectiveness, and of 

code control. The fourth last group is the maintenance group 

which consists of the roles of in charge of documentation, of 

presentations, and of installation shield. Using this role scheme 

we have a representative for each of the main practices of the 

software development process who is involved and most 

accountable of this practice. Moreover, every student gain 

managing skills and experience an extensive team work. 

     
 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

ICSE™05,
 May 15Œ21, 2005, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 
ACM 1-58113-963-2/05/0005. 
   2. MEASUREMENT AND ASSESMENT 
Implementing the role scheme we have defined a grading policy 
that grants 65% for the group part of grade and 35% for the 

personal part. The group part consists of meeting the requirements 

and time tables in both releases of the project (there are two 

releases with one iteration in the first release and two in the 

second release). It is also consists of the project documentation 

and the group evaluation of 
academic coach. The personal part 
consists of the role performance, the test-first exercise, the 

presence in the project meetings, and the personal evaluation of 

academic coach. 

 
There exist measurement quantitative approaches which support 

the management of software projects ([3], [4]). Using the grading 

policy, our goal is to refine it by deriving quantitative metrics 

during development. We have defined 3 main measures. The first 

is the Role Time Measure (RTM). It measures the ratio 

development/role-performance; that is, the time invested in 

development tasks relative to the time invested in role activities. 

The second measure is the Role Communication Measure (RCM) 

that measures the level of communication in the team at each 

development stage. This measure evolves since each role holder 

needs to communicate with the other team members in order to 

perform the individual role more efficiently. The third measure is 

the Role Management Measure (RMM) that measures the level of 

the project management. Since the role scheme aim at covering all 

management aspects, maximal level is obtained when all role 

holders provide maximum role performance. 

 
An example of data that is gathered from an electronic forum of 

one of the course teams shows averaged RTM ratio of 

70%(development)-30%(role), and highest level (49.2%) of RCM 

in the leading group in contrast with the lowest level (6.5%) of 

RCM in the customer group. Note that this data is of one project 

in one course and does not imply on other projects. 

  
Due to space limitations we cannot provide with full quantitative 

data for measures illustration; still the measures and some data to 
support them are our discussion object. We are in the process of 
refining these measures and we expect collaboration of theoretical 

and practical ideas.  
3. SUMMARY AND DISCUSSION   
In this paper we present an implementation of an agile software 

development method in a project-based capstone course. We 

provide the students with hands-on experience in team work and 

in management aspects. Using XP values and practices together 

with studio elements we create a real world environment to run 

the project. XP encourages social interactions while tight planning 

of time and resources is being done. We implement a role scheme 

that fits XP spirit, increase accountability of teammates, and 

simplify the project management. We have defined measures to 

control the process. 

 
We would like to raise a discussion in the matter of the 

significance of projects in general and the role scheme in 

particular as an experiencing framework for teams in the 

academia.  
4. REFERENCES 
[1] Beck K., Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change, Addison-Wesley, 2000. 
[2] Dubinsky Y. and Hazzan O. (
2004). Roles in agile software 
development teamsﬂ, 5th International Conf. on eXtreme 

Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering. 
[3] Pulford, K. and Combelles, K.A. and Shirlaw, S. (1996). A 
quantitative Approach to Software Management Œ The ami 

Handbook, Addison-Wesley. 
[4]  Putnam, L.H. and Myers, W. (1997). Industrial Strength 
Software Œ Effective Management Using Measurement, IEEE 

Computer Society Press. 
 
  