 5th International Workshop on the Twin Peaks of 
Requirements and Architecture (TwinPeaks 2015) 
 Matthias Galster 
University of Canterbury 
Christchurch, New Zealand 
mgalster@ieee.org 
Mehdi Mirakhorli 
Rochester Institute of Technology 
Rochester, NY, USA 
mehdi@se.rit.edu
  Abstract
The relationships and interdependencies between 
software requirements and the architectures of software-
intensive systems are described in the Twin Peaks model. The 
fundamental idea of the Twin Peaks model is that Requirements 
Engineering and Software Architecture should not be treated in 

isolation. Instead, we need to progressively discover and specify 

requirements while concurrently exploring alternative 
architectural solutions. However, bridging the gap between 
Requirements Engineering and Software Architecture has mainly 

been discussed independently in the respective communities. 

Therefore, this ICSE workshop aims at bringing together 
researchers, practitioners and educators from the Requirements 
Engineering and Software Architecture fields to jointly explore 

the strong interdependencies between requirements and 

architecture. Based on the results from previous editions of the 
workshop, this edition focuses on agile software development 
contexts and on exploring lightweight techniques for integrating 

requirements and architectural thinking.
 Index Terms
Twin peaks, requirements engineering, software 
architecture, agile. 
I. INTRODUCTION
 Activities for Requirements Engineering and Software 
Architecture are often considered and performed separately
. However, drawing a line between them is not desirable since 
requirements and architecture impact each other. Architecting 

usually starts as soon as an initial understanding of 

requirements is achieved. Requirements discovery and 

architectural design therefore need to be interwoven. This 
synergistic relationship is described in the Twin Peaks Model 
[1]. The Twin Peaks model is the theoretical foundation for 

TwinPeaks 2015. 
Based on the outcomes of previous editions of the 
workshop (which were mostly exploratory in nature) and the 






[2, 3], the main theme for TwinPeaks 2015 is 

t has been 
adopted widely in the software industry [4] since designing and 

implementing large-scale and complex software systems 

requires a balance between fast development and delivering 

customer value. 
The agile software development paradigm breaks with the 
idea of linear development in which either the requirements are 

specified and frozen without considering the implications on 
architectural design, or the architecture is designed without 

negotiating and resolving emerged conflicts and trade-offs. 

This iterative and incremental approach towards software 
development is also reflected in Twin Peaks model. Therefore, 
TwinPeaks 2015 explores lightweight techniques for 

integrating requirements and architectural thinking into the 

agile process, when to engage in upfront requirements analysis 

and architectural design, and techniques for incremental 

delivery. 
II. WORKSHOP 
GOALS
 The goal of TwinPeaks 2015 is to provide a venue for 
researchers, practitioners and educators from the areas of 
Requirements Engineering and Software Architecture, as well 
as from general software engineering to discuss their 

experiences, forge new collaborations, and explore innovative 

solutions that address the challenges of the Twin Peaks model. 
The workshop offers an opportunity to become familiar with 
the relationship between Requirements Engineering and 
Software Architecture in the greater context of software 
engineering, rather than in an isolated context of either 

Requirements Engineering or Software Architecture. The 

outcomes of the workshop are an improved understanding of 

key issues and challenges at the intersection of Requirements 
Engineering and Software Architecture, an understanding of 
the state of the art in research and practice, and a list of 

directions towards addressing open issues that we have 

identified in previous editions of the workshop. This will help 

us further refine a research agenda by adding a list of concrete 

actions for future work. Furthermore, we aim at strengthen and 
expanding the community around the topic that has been 
growing since previous editions of the workshop. 
III. WORKSHOP 
PARTICIPATION AND 
ACCEPTED 
PAPERS
 The target audience of TwinPeaks 2015 includes 
researchers who are developing methods, techniques and tools. 

We also target practitioners who face the challenge of 

intertwining requirements and architectures. Furthermore, our 

target audience includes Requirements Engineering and 

Software Architecture educators who provide academic or 
professional training. The workshop is open to all ICSE 2015 
attendees, but presentations were selected based on reviewing 
submitted papers. The topics of accepted papers cover a broad 
2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.33010172015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.3301017 range of issues related to the relationship between requirements 
and architecture. We included thought-provoking position 
papers as well as industrial studies. The following papers were 
accepted for presentation at the workshop (listed in alphabetical 
order, based on the last name of the first author): 
 Preethu Rose Anish, Balaji Balasubramaniam, Jane 
Cleland-Huang, Roel Wieringa, Maya Daneva and 
Smita Ghaisas: Identifying Architecturally Significant 

Functional Requirements 
 Erik Hebisch, Matthias Book, Volker Gruhn: Scenario-

based Architecting with Architecture Trace Diagrams 
 Garm Lucassen, Fabiano Dalpiaz, Jan Martijn van der 
Werf, Sjaak Brinkkemper: Bridging the Twin Peaks: 
the Case of the Software Industry 
 Paul Ralph, Rahul Mohanani: Is Requirements 

Engineering Inherently Counterproductive?  
 Dimitri van Landuyt, Wouter Joosen: On the Role of 
Early Architectural Assumptions in Quality Attribute 
Scenarios: a Qualitative and Quantitative Study 
IV.
 STRUCTURE
 We aim at allowing interactive discussions and fostering 
brainstorming and community building. Therefore, the 

workshop featured paper presentations which provided the 

foundations for the participants to investigate open research 

challenges and practical problems. In addition to the paper 

presentations based on a review process, the workshop includes 
a keynote. We are grateful to Jan Bosch from Chalmers 
University of Technology who agreed to deliver a keynote on 


 V. PROGRAM 
COMMITTEE
 In addition to the two workshop organizers, the program 
committee consisted of the following: 
 Pekka Abrahamsson, University of Bolzano, Italy 
 Muhammad Ali Babar, University of Adelaide, 
Australia 
  
   
      
   
     Jan Bosch, Chalmers University of Technology, 
Sweden 
 Sjaak Brinkkemper, University of Utrecht, Netherlands 
 Oliver Creigthon, Siemens, Germany 
 Maya Daneva, University of Twente, Netherlands 
 Christof Ebert, Vector Consulting, Germany 
 Neil Ernst, Software Engineering Institute, USA 
 Smita Ghaisas, Tata Consulting Services, R&D, India 
 Scott Hawker, Rochester Institute of Technology, USA 
 Rashina Hoda, University of Auckland, New Zealand 
 Anne Koziolek, KIT, Germany 
 Patrick Maeder, Technische Universitaet Ilmenau, 

Germany 
 Nenad Medvidovic, University of Southern California, 

USA 
 Eltjo Poort, CGI, Netherlands 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 We thank all authors for submitting their work to 
TwinPeaks@ICSE2015. We also thank the members of the 

program committee and the additional reviewers for their 

valuable reviews. Furthermore, we thank the ICSE organizers 

and workshop chairs for supporting this workshop. Finally, we 
thank Maya Daneva, Xavier Franch and Jane Cleland-Huang 
for their support. 
REFERENCES
 [1]
 B. Nuseibeh. Weaving together requirements and architectures. 
IEEE Computer, 34:115
117, 2001. 
[2]
 M. Galster
 et al.

ws on software engineering from the 
twin 
p
ACM Software 
Engineering Notes, vol. 38, pp. 40
-42, 
September 2013.
 [3]
 
Towards bridging the twin peaks of 
requirements and arc

Notes, vol. 39, pp. 30
-31, September 2014
 [4]
 
 
 10181018