 Keynote Talk
   Agile, Open Source, Distributed,  
and On-Time Œ Inside the Eclipse  
Development Process
  Erich Gamma  
IBM  Zurich, Switzerland 
 Abstract 
Eclipse is a widely recognized open source project dedicated to providing a platform for developing 
integrated tools. Throughout the history of Eclipse the development team was successful in hitting 
projected delivery dates with precision and quality. This isn't possible without a team strongly 
committed to ship quality software. How is this really done? How does Eclipse achieve quality and 

just-in-time delivery?  
This talk sheds light on the key practices of the Eclipse development process - from the 
development mantras "Always Beta", "Milestones First", "API First", and "Performance First" to 
practices such as ensuring quality through multiple feedback loops. Erich will reflect on proven 
practices for managing a large project performed by geographically dispersed teams and open 

source contributors in a highly competitive market. Most of these practices have evolved in the 
open source project, but they are equally applicable to closed source projects and will help to 
improve quality, timeliness and reduce development stress in both types of environments. 
 Bio Erich Gamma is a member of the Eclipse project management committee and leads the Eclipse 
Java Development tools project. He is also a member of the Gang of Four, which is known for their 
book: Design Patterns - Elements of Reusable Object-Oriented Software. Erich has paired with 

Kent Beck to develop JUnit, the de-facto standard testing tool for Java. Erich also paired with Kent 
Beck to write the book "Contributing to Eclipse:  Principles, Patterns, and Plug-ins". Before joining 
IBM OTI he was working at Taligent on a never shipped C++ development environment. Erich 

started with object-oriented programming over 20 years ago as the co-author of ET++ one of the 
first large scale C++ application frameworks. Erich Gamma is an IBM Distinguished Engineer and 
the site lead of the IBM OTI Lab in Zurich, Switzerland. He has a doctorate in computer science 

from the University of Zurich. 
  Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
ICSE™05,
 May 15-21, 2005, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 
ACM 1-58113-963-2/05/0005. 
 