 Agility and Experimentation:  Practical Techniques for Resolving Architectural Tradeoffs   T.C. Nicholas Graham1, Rick Kazman
2 and Chris Walmsley 
Namzak Labs 16A-303 Bagot St., Kingston, Ontario Canada K7K 5W7 {graham,kazman,walmsley}@namzak.com                                                    1 Also: School of Computing, Queen™s University, Kingston, Canada. 
2 Also: Department of Information Technology Management, University of Hawaii, and Software Engineering 
Institute, Carnegie Mellon University. 
Abstract This paper outlines our experiences with making 
architectural tradeoffs between performance, 
availability, security, and usability, in light of 
stringent cost and time-to-market constraints, in an 

industrial web-conferencing system. We highlight the 
difficulties in anticipating future architectural 
requirements and tradeoffs and the value of using 

agility
 and 
experiments
 as a tool for mitigating 
architectural risks in situations when up front pen-

and-paper analysis is simply impossible.  
 1. Introduction For the past five years Namzak Labs has 
developed architectures for a family of web-based 
remote collaboration systems, collectively called 

WebArrow 
[16[15].  The 
WebArrow platform offers a 
set of pluggable commercial web conferencing 

technologies, available in multiple languages, in 
multiple countries, and in multiple configurations. 
These components must meet stringent usability, 

performance, integrability, 
availability and security 
requirements. 
WebArrow
™s users range from 
individuals to Fortune 500 companies. 
Web-conferencing systems are necessarily 
complex and demanding: they must work on a wide 

variety of platforms, the details of which are not 

under control of the architect; they must be reliable 
and provide low latency response times, particularly 
for real-time functionality such as voice over IP 

(VoIP) and screen sharing; they must provide high 
security, but provide this over an unknown network 
topology and an unknown set of firewalls and 

firewall policies; they must be easily modified and 
easily integrated into a wide variety of desktop 
environments and applications; and they must be 

highly usable and easily learned by users with widely 
varying skills.  Furthermore, the market for remote 
collaboration is highly competitive and rapidly 
evolving, and so new features in such systems must 
be brought to market rapidly and delivered at a 
reasonable cost. Adding to these challenges is the fact 
that many of the above-
mentioned goals trade off 
against each other.  Typically
 security (in the form of 
encryption) comes at the e
xpense of performance.  
Modifiability comes at the expense of time-to-

market.  Availability and performance often come at 
the expense of modifiability and cost. 
Finally, traditional requirements elicitation 
techniquesŠquestionnaires, surveys, observation, 

focus groups, and so forthŠare of limited help in this 
domain.  In many cases, because web conferencing 

systems are unprecedented, end users and integrators 
do not know what it is that they want. In addition the 
space of possible uses of 
a web-collaboration system 
is too large, particularly since we focus on integration 
with third party products, rather than selling the web-
conferencing system as a standalone product. As 
Augustine 
et al.
 have pointed out [3], ﬁEven 
seemingly minor changes can produce unanticipated 
effects, as systems become more complex and their 
components more interdependentﬂ. But the current 
market will not accept failure
 to adapt to changing 
requirements and market conditions, so responding to 
these changes is a business necessity [9,12]. 
 As a consequence, even if we could collect and 
analyze all relevant data
 and requirements, our 
stringent time-to-market constraints would prevent us 
from doing so. Trying to support all possible uses is 

intractable, and the users th
emselves cannot envision 
all possible potential future uses.  This results in a 

classic ﬁagility versus disciplineﬂ problem [5,14].  On 

the one hand we want to provide new capabilities 
quickly, and respond to customer needs rapidly. On 
the other hand, long-term survival necessitates that 

we design for extensibility and modifiability, 
emphasizing a simple conceptual model. We are 
 faced with the problem of determining the ﬁsweet 
spotﬂ between these opposing forces. 
In our environment it is virtually impossible to do 
purely top-down architectural design; there are too 
many considerations to weigh at once and it is too 
hard to predict all of the relevant technological 
barriers. For example, we have had cases where we 

discovered that a vendor-provided API did not work 
as specified, or that an
 API exposing a critical 
function was simply missing. In such cases, these 
problems rippled up to 
the architecture, where a 
workaround needed to be fashioned.  To address the 

complexity of this domain, we found that in practice 
we needed to concurrently work both top-down 
(designing architectural st
ructures that meet our 
quality attribute goals) and bottom-up (determining a 
host of implementation-specific and environment-
specific settings and constraints).   
Finding the sweet spot within the enormous 
architectural design space of such systems is not 

feasible by reflection and analysis alone, despite the 

well-known successes of analytic techniques [7]; 
there are too many unknowns and too many 
uncontrollable factorsŠsuch as third-party hardware 

and software in a multitude of versionsŠover which 
we have no control. These technological and 
environmental constraints can outweigh design 

principles. To compensate for the difficulty in 
analyzing architectural trad
eoffs with any precision, 
we have adopted an 
agile
 architecture discipline 
combined with a ri
gorous program of 
experiments
 aimed at answering specific tradeoff questions.  
These experiments have proven invaluable in 
resolving tradeoffs, by helping to turn unknown 
architectural parameters into constants or ranges. 
The remainder of this paper will introduce the 
architecture of WebArrow
, and will present three 
specific architectural design problems that we have 

faced. We will show how agility and experimentation 
helped us to locate satisfactory solutions from the 
enormous landscape of potential solutions. 
 2. Overview of WebArrow
 WebArrow 
has been developed by a team of four 
to fourteen developers over the last five years. The 
team leads had 5-15 years of development 
experience, and the teams themselves balanced fresh 
computing science graduates with more experience 
developers. 
WebArrow™s
 product-line architecture was designed to provide five basic collaborative 

servicesŠdesktop sharing, application sharing, VoIP, 
file sharing, and chatŠalo
ng with a large number of 
supporting services. Some of these supporting 

services are real-time, 
augmenting the collaborative 
experienceŠsuch as shared document annotation, 
remote cut/copy/paste, moderation and ﬁhand-
raisingﬂŠand some are administrative, supporting 
billing, auditing, monitoring, and communication and 
coordination with other systems.  
A WebArrow
 session involves two or more users, 
who might be talking, sharing their desktop or a 

single application, sharing files or chatting. The 

Meeting Control Window of a typical session is 
shown in Figure 1, where Ralph is sharing his 
desktop (as indicated by the 
icon) and Nick is 
talking (as indicated by the 
 icon).  The other 
participants are viewing Ralph™s desktop (as 
indicated by the  icon) and all have a chat 
window available (as indicated by the 
 icon).   
Although this is a typical usage of 
WebArrow
, it is by no means the only way that it is employed.  As 
stated above, 
WebArrow™s
 focus is on integrationŠ
being used as a customer support tool accessed from 

a web-site, or as a complement to a teleconferencing, 

video-conferencing or instant messaging system. 
Integrators may choose to
 use a different meeting 
control window, or perhaps no meeting control 
window at all, and may choose to reveal only a subset 
of the available collaboration technologies. For 
example, a teleconferencing system typically does 

not reveal the VoIP functionality, and a customer- 
support application typically provides no meeting 
control options to the customer being supported.  
   Figure 1: WebArrow
 Meeting Control Window 
 But in all cases the users and integrators of 
WebArrow
 want the system to be high performance, 
highly reliable, secure, and intuitive. These usage 
scenarios provide the c
ontext for the tradeoff 
challenges discussed in Section 4. 
 3. WebArrow Architecture A deployment view of the 
WebArrow
 architecture 
is shown in Figure 2.  Two of the driving 
architectural requirements for the 
WebArrow
 system 
architecture are ease of scalability and availability.   

In this architecture clients (web clients and 

WebArrow
 clients) connect to a farm of MMS 
(Meeting Management System) servers via a server 

load balancer (SLB). The SLB is used to distribute 

incoming HTTP requests amongst a pool of MMS 
Servers. The SLB can be 
configured to allocate 
requests in a round-robin fashion, or based on MMS 
server load. The SLB monitors the MMS servers, and 
removes them from the pool in case of failure, and 
the SLB itself has a backup (slave) in case of failure. 

The use of the SLB thus promotes availability, but it 
also promotes scalability, by making it easy to add 
new servers without impacting any system 

components beyond the SLB.
  In addition, all MMS 
servers are stateless, meanin
g that any server can take 
over from any other server in case of a failure. 
Conference Servers implement the communication 
for individual meetings: screen sharing, VoIP, file 

and chat data. A pool of conference servers is 

available for scheduling meetings. The MMS Server 
makes the decision as to what conference server is to 
be used for a given meeting. MMS Servers load 

balance conference servers, and remove conference 
servers from their available pool should conference 
servers become unavailable. This provides both 

scalability in the number of meetings that can be 
hosted, and failover capability should a conference 
server cease to operate correctly. Finally, conference 

data (such as account information, schedule 
information, meeting status and billing data) is stored 
on a database server. To provide failover capability, a 

slave database server mirrors the database server in 
real time. 
The architecture shown in Figure 2 is the end 
result of more than five years of development. In the 
next section, we will discuss the evolution of the 

WebArrow
 architecture as business needs, 
requirements, and tradeoffs in quality attributes 
changed over time. 
 4. Architectural Tradeoffs Any architecture embodies tradeoffs.  In 
WebArrow
 we have many tradeoffs forced upon us 
by our business model (offering pluggable services, 
rather than a standalone product), by the realities of 
the competitive marketplace (t
he need to keep costs 
and time-to-market low) and the user expectations 
that this generates, and by using the Internet with all 
its vagaries as our underlying communications 
infrastructure.  In this paper we will discuss three of 
the most important tradeoffs, and how we have 
reacted to each of them via architectural strategies. 
In designing and building 
an architecture there are 
three practical strategies for managing change:  
 1. Plan to build one to throw away, following 
Brooks™ advice [6], 
2. Focus on responding to change rather than 
Figure 2: Deployment View of WebArrow Architecture
  extensive up-front planning, following the 
precepts of the agile community [1], and 
3. Anticipate decisions that are likely to change 
and modularize them, limiting impact of 
eventual changes to a sm
all part of the overall 
system. 
 Option 1 was simply not possible for our 
company; we did not have the resources for the 
luxury of planning to throw one away.  Option 3 was 
similarly impossibleŠwe had to respond to change 
rapidly and incrementally, and we had to be able to 
provide a stream of gradually improving releases to 
our customers. 
Option 2 provided a realistic approach allowing us 
to combine timely releases of the product with quick 
adaptation to new requiremen
ts as they arose. While 
we did not rigidly follow any codified agile process 
[1], [2] we did follow their core principals of 
incremental development, refactoring in the face of 

new requirements or better understanding of the 
problem domain, and continuous empirical 
evaluation. An important distinction is that agile 

methods normally advocate empirical evaluation to 
ensure that the process is on track. In our case, 
experimentation
 was critical for resolving 
architectural design decisions. 
The examples presented in 
the rest of this section 
show our experience with this approach in the 

development of 
WebArrow/Conference
.   4.1. Scalability and Availability 
Over the five years of development of 
WebArrow/Conference
, we have expended significant 
effort to increase the scalability and fault tolerance of 
the system. This work in scalability has been 
motivated by changing and emerging requirements. 
The types of changes that we encountered illustrate 

the impossibility of initially designing an architecture 
for a commercial system that accounts for all possible 
evolutions in the system™s requirements. The changes 
that we carried out were supported by a continuing 
regimen of experimentation. When working with 
complex systems involving a variety of third party 
(commercial and, increas
ingly, open-source) 
components, there is no practical way of predicting 
the results of architectural changes on scalability, and 
so constant experimentation must drive development. 
There are simply too many unknowns and too many 

forces not under the designer™s control. This leads to 
a development process guided by top-down 
requirements and design, but ultimately driven by 

bottom-up experimentation and refactoring to address 
emerging and changing requirements. This is a 
picture of architectural design that is not often 
described or discussed. 
4.1.1  Initial Requirements.
 Initially, 
WebArrow/Conference
 was targeted towards local 
deployment in small installations. In the Japanese 
market, the product was licensed as a ﬁconference in 

a boxﬂ solution in which 
an MMS, conference server 
and Web server are packaged in a single computer 

hosted at the customer™s site. While capable of higher 

load, this solution was targeted towards customers 
holding conferences of up to 10 participants. With 
this deployment, scalability was not a concern since 

even our initial prototype of 
WebArrow
 conference 
could easily handle the required load on inexpensive 

stock hardware. The possibilities for fault tolerance 

were limited, since there was no redundancy in 
hardware or network connectivity. Failover 
requirements were limited to ensuring that the 

various services (web server and conference server) 
automatically restarted after failure. The main initial 
requirements therefore focu
sed on ease of installation 
and upgrade, provision of simple off-site monitoring, 

low expense in deployment, and rapid time to market. 
To meet these requirements, we deployed the 
initial 
WebArrow/Conference
 architecture (Figure 3). 
Our small size meant that ti
me to market was critical, 
and so we extended a prototype version of the tool 
rather than re-architecting from scratch. The 
conference sever and 
WebArrow
 client were 
programmed in C++; the web component of the 
Figure 3: Original WebArrow Architecture
 system was programmed mainly in Perl with 
performance-critical compon
ents programmed in C, 
and the conference data was represented in flat files. 
This prototype architecture met our initial 

requirements: 
 Performance and scalability requirements were 
not stringent in the ﬁconference in a boxﬂ 

deployment. Failover requirements were met 
using the standard service architecture facilities 
of Windows 2000/XP. 
 Deployment was inexpensive, since no for-pay 

COTS were used (e.g., commercial databases or 

web development frameworks) 
 Monitoring support was easily added via a web-
based status reporting tool. 
4.1.2  Scalability and Failover.
 Over time, 
particularly in the North American market, the 

company moved towards offering web conferencing 

as a hosted service, where customers subscribe to the 
use of conferencing facilities without requiring an 
installation at their own site. Even large enterprise 

customers and development partners embedding 
WebArrow
 conferencing within their own products 
have preferred this model, following the industry 

trend of outsourcing both software development and 
software services. This shift had a significant impact 

on 
WebArrow/Conference
™s requirements, in turn 
impacting the system™s architecture.  In particular, 
 Scalability became a significant issue, as the cost 
of hosting was no longer borne by individual 
customers, but instead by 
the centralized service. 
 Failover became highly important, as service 
users, particularly our development partners, 
require high availability. 
 Security became far more important, as 
companies perceive risks in entrusting their 
sensitive business communication to an 
externally hosted service. 
 The cost of COTS used in deployment became 

less important, as these costs could now be 

amortized over much larger numbers of users 
sharing a single facility. 
To address these changing requirements, the new 
architecture of Figure 2 was developed. In this new 

version, the original architecture was refactored in 
the following ways: 
 The flat files used to 
represent the MMS state 
were replaced by a third-party database. The 
database was set up in a cluster, supporting 

scalable, fault-tolerant operation. 
 mod_perl [14] was used to dramatically improve 

the performance of the 
server-side MMS code. 
 Multiple MMS servers were deployed in a farm 
behind a redundant pair of third-party SLBs. 
 Conference servers use a load polling 
mechanism to support availability monitoring 
and load balancing by the MMS server. 
This set of changes was carried out progressively, 
allowing us to incrementally improve scalability and 
fault-tolerance while maintaining an uninterrupted 
service to our client companies. 
The primary lessons from this experience are the 
enormous difficulty of anticipating required changes 

to a system™s architecture during the initial design 

phase, and the benefits of using an incremental, agile 
approach to change. While we could have initially 
architected the system for scalability and fault 

tolerance, these were not strong requirements at the 
time, and addressing them would have significantly 
increased our time to 
market and development 
expense (in addition to which we might have been 
wrong about the ways in which the system needed to 
grow and change). The appr
oach of progressively and 
incrementally changing th
e current architecture was 
invaluable. Building a new system from scratch 

(following Brooks™ recommendation of ﬁplan to 

throw one awayﬂ [6]) would have led to a long period 
before any scalability improvements were delivered. 
Additionally, building a new system would have been 
risky, as new features introduced in the production 
system would also have to be migrated to the new 

system before its deployment, providing a moving 
target for development. A new system would have 
had benefits; for example, rather than the 
cumbersome mod_perl approach, we could have used 
an enterprise web platform; but on balance, the 
known risks and costs of developing a new system 
strongly outweighed the potential benefits. 
4.1.3  Experimentation.
 The incremental 
improvement in the scalability and fault-tolerance of 
WebArrow/Conference
 was guided by significant 
experimentation. Our experience shows the 

importance of driving architectural decisions by low-
level experiments rather than the ﬁby the bookﬂ 
approach of top-down arch
itectural design followed 
by coding. The sorts of questions experiments were 
required to answer were: 
 Would moving to a distributed database from 
local flat files negatively impact feedback time 
(latency) for users? 
 What (if any) scalability improvement would 
result from using mod_perl versus standard Perl? 
How difficult would the development and quality 
assurance effort be to convert to mod_perl? 
 How many participants could be hosted by a 
 single MMS server? 
 What was the correct ratio between database 
servers and MMS servers? 
These sorts of questions 
are difficult to answer 
analytically. The answers to
 these questions rely on 
behaviour and interaction of third-party components, 
and on performance character
istics of software for 
which no standard analytical models exist. Our 

approach was to build an extensive testing 
infrastructure, and use it to
 compare the performance 
of each incremental modification to the code base. 
This allowed us to determine the effect of each form 
of improvement before committing to including it in 

the final system. The testing infrastructure includes: 
 A client simulator that allows tens of thousands 
of clients to simultaneously interact with an 

MMS server. 
 Instrumentation to measure load on the MMS 

server and database server with differing 

numbers of clients. 
The lesson from this experience is that 
experimentation is a critical pre-cursor to making 

significant architectural decisions. Experimentation 
must be built into the development process: building 
experimental infrastructure can be time-consuming, 
possibly requiring the development of custom tools. 
Carrying out the experiments and analyzing their 

results can require significant time. These costs must 
be recognized in project schedules.  
 4.2. Third Party Integration API 
Our second example of how changes in 
requirements affected our architecture in 
unpredictable ways is centered around the evolution 
of the 
WebArrow/Conference
 API framework. These 
APIs are used by third party companies to integrate 
web conferencing into 
their own applications. 
Figure 4 shows the architecture of a third party 
application integrated with 
WebArrow/Conference
. The core feature of this ar
chitecture is that external 
applications can make API calls to 
WebArrow/Conference
 to schedule, initiate, join and 
terminate conferences, and to
 obtain data (primarily 
used for billing) on past conferences. The 

architecture allows third party programs written in 
any language to make API calls to the MMS using 
HTTPS, with results returned in XML. This is a 
lightweight form of web service that does not require 

API users to master the full framework of SOAP and 
enveloping. The use of HTTPS for communication 
provides strong security by encrypting the data in the 

API calls and allowing the API user to reside behind 
a firewall. 
The API framework is divided into two parts:  a 
server-side API, used for meeting scheduling and 
reporting, and a client-side API, used for meeting 
entry and runtime meeting control. An overriding 

requirement in the design of
 the API was ease of use. 
Integration partners vary widely in their technical 

expertise, from large corporations with sophisticated 

development departments to small businesses with a 
single programmer on staff. Uniformly, the ability to 
perform integrations quickly with minimal learning 

curve was cited as key to working with Namzak 
Labs. One integration partner required that a 
complete integration take no more than one week of 
local development time. The API architecture allows 
integration partners to perform integrations using the 

language of their choice, using their own 
environment. Connecting to Namzak Labs™ 
infrastructure over the internet relieves them of the 
Apache Web 
Server
Server-
Side APIConference 
Server
WebArrow Server
MMS
Client Web 
Browser
WebArrow 
ActiveX Control
WebArrow 
Client
ClientClient-
Side API
Web Server
3d Party 
Application
OEM Server
Figure 4: Deployment View of WebArrow™s API Architecture
  time-consuming, highly technical local installation, 
configuration, and tuning of 
WebArrow/Conference
. The challenge in the design of the API itself was 
to keep the operations high-level and powerful 
enough that integration partners had a low learning 
curve and development cy
cle, while providing 
sufficient flexibility so that new integration partners 
were able to meet unanticipated requirements. This 
tension between flexibility and ease of use has led to 
continual refinement of the API in the years since its 

initial release. We now discuss two examples that 
illustrate the forms of architectural change that have 
been required: meeting en
d callbacks and the client-side library. 
Integration partners typically require a reporting 
mechanism to determine wh
at chargeable services 
were used in each web-conf
erence so that they can 
generate a bill for their own (typically external) 
customers. Our early partners all had similar 
requirements; each 
provided a monthly bill to their 
customers, and so needed AP
I calls allowing them to 
request usage information for a given billing period. 

To meet this need, we developed a simple, powerful 
query language allowing integration partners to 

request a wide range of usage information over 
arbitrary time periods. 
Problems arose with a new integration partner 
whose requirements were slightly different. Here, 

customers were billed via a credit call 
each time they 
used the system. A bill was presented in the 
customer™s web browser immediately following the 
call.  In the initial implementation of this integration, 
the API was called each time a web conference was 
completed to determine the cost of that session. 
While technically the existing API met this 

requirement, in practice, 
as call volumes rose, the 
load on Namzak Lab™s serv
ers became untenable. An 
alternative architecture was developed, where a much 

lighter-weight callback me
chanism was used to 
report call termination to the integration partner. This 

approach required more effort on the part of the 

integration partner as they had to provide the 
mechanism for handling the 
callbacks, but provided 
the scalability necessary
 for production use. 
A second issue is the library provided to support 
client-side API integration. As was shown in Figure 
2, the 
WebArrow/Conference
 client is launched via 
the web. Therefore, it is natural that facilities for 
client-side runtime control of meetings would be 
presented as high-level JavaScript routines that could 

be called from within the integration partner™s own 
web page. More recently, however, we have worked 
with integration partners whose products are 
not web 
based, and thus have not been able to use the client-

side API without launching an otherwise unnecessary 

web page (for example, an instant messaging tool 
augmented with web conferencing). Given the 
problems of multiple browser versions and the 
security issues involved in client-side browser 
programming, this would have been a cumbersome 

solution. We thus are in the process of creating a 
version of the client-side library specifically for use 
in non-web-based applications that replicates the 

function of the JavaScript library, but is callable from 
within a standard progra
mming language such as C 
or Java. 
These examples illustrate the difficulties in 
attempting to predict the ways in which an API will 
be used. In theory it might be possible to design an 
API to be so general that any foreseeable future use is 
possible, by avoiding aggregation of operations and 
liberally parameterizing operations. However, the 
cost of this generality is ease of learning and ease of 
useŠsuch an API would be large and complexŠ

which in turn compromises its adoption.  
This experience lends weight to our contention 
that it is better to architect for flexibility than to 

attempt to anticipate all possible future changes. 
 4.3. Changing Security Environment 
Security is an area of great
 interest to users of web 
conferencing systems. User
s worry about the danger 
of their meetings being intercepted by third parties, 
about the danger of their computers™ being made 
vulnerable to outside attack due to the installation of 
the web conferencing soft
ware and, in corporate 
environments, about the danger of employees using 
an externally hosted web conferencing tool to 
transmit sensitive information in a way that cannot be 

easily monitored.  
While tools like 
WebArrow
 must provide air-tight 
security to their users, the development of 
WebArrow
 has also faced the challenges of increasing 
restrictions in the deployment of internet-based 
applications, both from increasingly secure corporate 
environments and from the inevitable tightening of 
security in the Windows op
erating system. The effect 
on WebArrow™s development of this changing 
security environment compellingly illustrates the 
importance of experimentation in architectural design 

and the value of agility over a more front-heavy 
architectural design process. 
4.3.1 Evolving Distribution Architecture.
 Over the 
five year lifetime of the 
WebArrow
 architecture, changes in the security environment in which 
WebArrow
 is deployed have had several significant 
impacts on its architecture. The following chronology 
illustrates these changes. Initially, 
WebArrow
 was 
developed to support remote customer service. The 
architecture was peer-to-peer, where customers made 
direct connections to operator machines. This 
 required operator machines 
to have an external IP 
address usable by the customer. While initially 
acceptable, over time, increasing numbers of 
customers were unwilling to open their firewalls to 

permit inbound connection to their operators, even 
just to support the proprietary 
WebArrow protocol. 
This required us to modify the product to a 
centralized architecture, where all meeting 
participants make outbound connections to servers 

hosted by Namzak Labs. This represented a 

fundamental architectural
 change resulting from 
changes in our clients™ perceptions of what was an 

acceptable security risk. This change from peer-to-
peer to centralized operatio
n led to new architectural 
challenges in fault tolerance (dealing with failure of 
conference servers) and sc
alability (ensuring that 
meetings are allocated to conference servers in a way 
that ensures timely service). Agility and 

experimentation was again required to perform 
architectural changes of 
this sweeping scope. 
4.3.2 Evolving Firewall Technology.
 Initially, this 
centralized architecture was successful, as it 
permitted all meeting participants to connect 
out
 through their firewalls to the Namzak Labs™ 
conference server. Most environments place fewer 
restrictions on outbound connections than inbound 
ones. Over time, however, firewalls have become 

increasingly sophisticated, restricting outbound 
connections either by port, by protocol, or by other 
forms of traffic analysis.  
Firewalls are made to keep
 the external world out; 
web conferencing requires th
at the external world be 
allowed in. This is a fundamental tension in 
requirements that will never go away. Not 
surprisingly, firewall manufacturers and corporate IT 

departments do not reveal detailed information on 
how their firewalls work, making it difficult to 
develop techniques that reliably bypass them. 

Namzak Labs™ quality assurance department has 
assembled a collection of all popular firewalls for 
testing, in order to reverse engineer the techniques 

that are used to detect ﬁund
esirableﬂ outbound traffic. 
Over time, these experiments have led to accrued 

knowledge allowing the creation of a sophisticated 

firewall traversal library that combines techniques of 
port scanning, proxy identification and navigation, 
and protocol emulation. This library is successful in 

making connections over all but the most restrictive 
firewalls, but requires continuous work in reaction to 
new techniques deployed by firewall manufacturers 

and new configurations deployed by our customers. 
This firewall traversal library could not have been 
built top-down (since we could never have predicted 
what mechanisms and policies would be employed by 
the entire array of firewall manufacturers), but rather 
required an agile process where new techniques could 
be added and existing techniques refined as they 
became better understood. Each encounter with a 
difficult firewall that is repo
rted by a customer leads 
to new insights into how the library should function. 
Experimentation leading to new understanding, 
leading to refactoring is a critical part of this agility, 

as otherwise the complexity of the code will quickly 
become unmanageable. 
4.3.3 Evolving Platform.
 As the market leader, 
Microsoft™s Windows operating system and its 
Internet Explorer web browser are primary targets for 
security attacks. In reaction, Microsoft has made 
security a primary focus in
 recent years. Microsoft 
released significant security enhancements as part of 
its Windows XP service pack 2, and even more 
extensive enhancements are a key feature of the 
newly-released Windows Vista operating system. 
While welcome to Windows™ users, these 
enhancements have increased the difficulty of web-

based delivery of applications. In the case of 

WebArrow
, Microsoft™s changes have required, once 
again, significant change
s in our architectural 
approach.  Additionally, the way in which Microsoft 

has released such changes has required extensive 
experimentation to determine correct architectural 
choices. 
For example, in its Wind
ows XP service pack 2 
release, Microsoft severely 
restricted the function of 
ActiveX controls, requiring users to go through a 

two-step validation process before an ActiveX 
control could be executed. Usability tests and support 
call logs at Namzak Labs indicated that many users 
have had difficulty navigating this processŠthe 
majority of our end users are technically naive. The 

result is that applications requiring an ActiveX 
component, such as 
WebArrow
, are significantly 
more difficult for users to launch. When it was 
released, the documentation 
provided by Microsoft 
for this new feature was minimal, requiring us to 

perform experiments on beta versions of the service 
pack to determine its exact behaviour. For example 
we needed to conduct experiments to understand how 
the feature interacted with different web browser 

security settings and different operating system 
privileges. Numerous companies have moved away 
from ActiveX delivery of their products, instead 

using Java or simply streaming an executable directly 
to their users. The fact that these two approaches 
allowed applications to ob
tain the same access to the 
user™s computer as Activ
eX, without the onerous 
validation process, provided a workaround, but one 

which could easily have been broken by Microsoft™s 
next critical update. 
 Windows XP service pack 2 turned out to be a 
dress rehearsal for the upcoming release of Windows 
Vista. Vista introduces th
e concept of an execution 
sandbox, a restricted area in which child processes of 
Internet Explorer must run. For browser-based 
applications to gain access to, for example, the main 
file system, users must respond to a pop-up dialog 

box requesting an administrator password. This 
extends the validation process from two steps to 
three, further increasing the difficulty for a user. In 

the case of WebArrow
, this has led to a change in the 
delivery architecture, moving 
away from the decision 
to rely solely on ActiveX controls. 
To determine the best de
livery architecture, we evaluated several technologies to determine their 
behaviour under Vista. These included Java applets, 
Java WebStart, Flash, browser plug-ins, direct 
execution of a streamed app
lication, and of course, 
ActiveX. This investigation was performed in the 
absence of clear documentation (most of which was 
provided in developer blogs), and therefore was 

experimental. The experime
nts were complicated by 
changing behaviours in each release of Vista. 
This example illustrates once again the practical 
necessity of being agile and basing architectural 
design on experiments, rather than following a top-
down design approach. The properties of the platform 

so completely influence the ultimate success of the 
architecture that experime
ntal investigation was 
critical.  Of course, up-fron
t architecture work is still 
important, but this example once again illustrates the 

need for an agile process. External events, in this case 
changes in the security environment, required 
significant architectural change on our part. 
 5. Reflections 
In the previous section we enumerated a set of 
three practical options for 
dealing with architectural 
change: 1) plan to throw one away, 2) be agile, or 3) 
modularize decisions that are likely to change.  
Given the above discussion it is revealing to 
consider why option 3 was not practical. We found 

that it was impossible for us to know, in advance, 
what significant changes would occur in the 
architecture, making it difficult to identify the 

articulation points around which modularization 
should be performed. Furthermore, we found that 
there were few predictive tools that were able to 

guide us. Let us briefly examine why this is the case. 
Consider architecting with performance in mind: 
typical performance prediction models such as Rate 
Monotonic Analysis [12] or queuing models require 
as inputs variables representing execution time and 
blocking time for various threads of execution, as 
well as a characterization of the arrival rates and 
distributions of service requests.  This information 
was not available to us.  We were unable to predict 

execution and blocking times until we first built a 
conference server or a MMS.  And, as discussed in 
Section 4.2, we did not understand the rates or 

distributions of service requests because our business 
models were constantly evolving.  
Similarly we had no way of knowing, when we 
decided to experiment with switching from flat files 

to a database, whether this would improve or hurt 
performance.  It was not known whether, for our 

specific workload, the overhead of running a 
database and retrieving data over the network would 
drown out the performance improvements that a 
database normally offers over files.  Other unknowns 
made this profound architectural change difficult to 

analyze in advance.  For example, for a given 
hardware configuration, wh
at was the maximum load 
that the database could support? There were many 
dimensions of this problem: how many servers 
should we allocate to the database, how powerful 
should those servers be, with how much memory? 

Such questions are typically not addressed by 
analytic models, but are crucial to a commercial 
operation.  As we learned, via experimentation, the 

database can handle a vast load, but we were not 
confident of this until we applied representative 
simulated workloads in a controlled experiment. 
However, despite this seemingly bleak situation, 
when faced with these challenges, we were able to 

make progress.  What allowed us to make these 

changes successfully in the absence of the ability to 
predict was: 
 A constant program of small experiments aimed 
at systematically removing unknowns, 
 An incremental agile appr
oach to architecture; 
we never made an ambitious ﬁbig bangﬂ rework 

of the architecture, 
opting instead for an 
evolutionary approach, continuously moving 
towards a desired state via a series of working 
versions, 
 Doing the obvious: encapsulating where 
possible, and building a clean architecture with 
good interfaces.   
Effectively, we were employing the scientific 
methodŠisolating unknowns one at a time and 

performing experiments to 
increase our knowledge in 
a controlled fashion. Juristo and Moreno urge the use 

of experimentation in software engineering [10, p. 
15] (as does Basili [4]), but it is important to 

recognize that our approa
ch differs from theirs. 
While Juristo and Moreno view experimentation as 
being done by researchers and ﬁinnovative 

developersﬂ for publication and eventual use by 
ﬁroutine developersﬂ, we have used experiments as a 
focused tool allowing developers of all stripes to gain 
 answers to their own questions. Experiments of this 
form are typically too specific to the product and 
environment to be of interest to the broader research 
community. 
Our approach is consistent with Dybå™s advice, 
that ﬁpredictability is a property of small systemsﬂ, 

and conversely, the behaviour of large systems is 

very difficult to predict [8]. Dybå recommends that 
companies must combine 
exploration
 and exploitation
, which in our context means 
experimentation to determine the best direction, and 

incremental refinement of existing assets to achieve 
product requirements. 
But even this approach has its limitations Œ when 
experimenting, one has to know the right questions to 
ask. As a result we did not always architect 
WebArrow
 properly. For example, when we moved 
from a file-centric to a da
tabase-centric approach, the 
changes were ubiquitous Œ there was no abstraction 
or modularization of the file system and hence every 
module that wrote or read file data needed to be 

modified. 
 6. Conclusions This paper has tried to show that up-front 
architectural design is difficult, particularly when 
working in an environment in which there are many 
variables: unpredictable marketplace forces, 

constantly changing COTS and open-source products 
and platforms, and evolving customer requirements. 
Unfortunately, this description covers much of the 
modern world of software development. 
Clearly we are not oppos
ed to architectural 
designŠthe authors of this paper have built their 

careers on it. What we are ar
guing for is a view of the 
architectural life-cycle that leans more towards 
agility and which advocates a disciplined program of 

scientific experimentation to shed light on 
architectural tradeoffs that are not amenable to purely 
analytic methods and tools. In this way one can still 
reap the many benefits of software architecture while 
remaining responsive to the needs of the marketplace. 
 7. Acknowledgements 
WebArrow
 was developed by a team at Namzak 
Labs in Kingston, Ontario. We would particularly 
like to acknowledge the key efforts of Jason 
Reynolds, Darren Cousineau and Nicholas Eliot. 
 8. References [1] P. Abrahamsson, J. Warsta, M.T. Siponen and J. 
Ronkainen, New Directions on Agile Methods: a 
Comparative Analysis, in 
Proc. ICSE 25,
 244-254, 
2003. 
[2] AgileManifesto, 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org
, 2006. 
[3] S. Augustine, B. Payne, F. Sencindiver and S. 
Woodcock, Agile Project
 Management: Steering 
from the Edges, 
CACM. 48:(12), 85-89, Dec. 2005. 
[4] V.R. Basili, The Role of Experimentation in 
Software Engineering: Past, Current and Future, in 
Proc. ICSE 18,
  442-449, 1996. 
[5] B. Boehm, R. Turner, 
Balancing Agility and 
Discipline
, Addison-Wesley, 2005. 
[6] F. Brooks, 
The Mythical Man Month, Addison-
Wesley, 1995. 
[7] P. Clements, R. Kazman, M. Klein, 
Evaluating 
Software Architectures: Methods and Case Studies
, Addison-Wesley, 2002. 
[8] T. Dybå, Improvisation in Small Software 
Organizations, 
IEEE Software,
 82-87, Sept./Oct. 
2000. 

[9] J. Highsmith and A. Cockburn, Agile Software 
Development: the Business of Innovation, 
Computer. 
34:(9):120-127, Sept. 2001. 

[10]
 N. Juristo and A.M. Moreno, Basics of Software 
Engineering Experimentation, 
Springer, 2006. 
[11]
 R. Kazman, M. Barbacci, M. Klein, S. J. 
Carriere, S. G. Woods, ﬁE
xperience with Performing 
Architecture Tradeoff Analysisﬂ, in 
Proc. ICSE 21
, May 1999, 54-63. 
[12]
 M. Klein, T. Ralya, B. Pollak, R. Obenza, M. 
Gonzalez Harbour, A Practitioner™s Handbook for 
Real-Time Analysis
, Kluwer Academic, 1993. 
[13]
 P. Manhart and K. Schneider, Breaking the Ice 
for Agile Development of Embedded Software: An 
Industry Experience Report, in 
Proc. ICSE 26,
 378-
386, 2004. 
[14]
 mod_perl, 
http://perl.apache.org/
, 2006. 
[15]
 J.R. Nawrocki, B. Walter and A. Wojciechowski, 
Comparison of CMM Level 2 and eXtreme 
Programming, in 
Proc. 7th International Conference 
on Software Quality, 
299-297, LNCS, 2002. 
[16]
 WebArrow
, http://www.
WebArrow
.com
, 2006. 