 Coaching Agile Software Projects 
Tutorial proposal 
– ICSE 2010 
 Orit Hazzan  
Department of Education in
 Technology and Science 
Technion 
– Israel Institute of Technology 
Haifa 32000, Israel 
oritha@tx.technion.ac.il
 Yael Dubinsky 
IBM Haifa Research Lab 
Mount Carmel 
Haifa 31905, Israel 
dubinsky@il.ibm.com 
 ABSTRACT Our tutorial for ICSE 2010 focuses on coaching agile software 
teams.  
Based on eight years of experience guiding 
agile
 software projects 
in the academia and industry, we focus in the tutorial on a 
coaching framework for agile software projects. The tutorial 
participants become familiar with coaching practices and gain 
experience with some of the practices.  
The tutorial has two main parts. In the first part, we present the 
coaching framework, including the goals, structure, and guiding 
principles. In the second part, we focus on the following central 
themes in agile development 
processes which, we suggest, are 
appropriate to be included in such a coaching framework: 

Teamwork and collaboration, time and measures, learning and 
reflection, and change and leadership. 
  Since 2003, we have facilitated this tutorial and similar ones in 
different settings (industry, academia, conferences).  
The coaching framework, as well as the themes, case studies, and 
analysis approach presented in the tutorial, are summarized in our 
book 
Agile Software Engineering
 published by Springer in 2008 
(Hazzan and Dubinsky, 
2008). 
Categories and Subject Descriptors
 D.2.9 [
Software
]: Software Engineering 
– management. 
General Terms
 Management, Measurement, Hu
man Factors, Standardization, 
Languages, Legal Aspects. 
Keywords
 Software engineering, coaching, agile software development, 

software project management, retrospective, learning processes.  
  1. PRESENTES  
Orit Hazzan
 oritha@tx.technion.ac.il 
Department of Education in Technology and Science 
Technion 
– Israel Institute of Technology  
Haifa 32000, Israel  
Homepage: http://edu.technion.
ac.il/Faculty/OritH/HomePage/ 
Dr. Orit Hazzan is an associate professor at the Department of 
Education in Technology and Science of the Technion 
– Israel 
Institute of Technology. In May 2004, she published her first book 
Human Aspects of Software Engineering
, co-authored with the 
late Jim Tomayko. Her second book 
– Agile Software Engineering 
– co-authored with Yael Dubinsky, was published by Springer in 
2008. She is also a consultant for several software projects in the 

Israeli software industry. She presents her research at computer 

science and software engineering education conferences, and 
conferences on software engineerin
g in general and agile software 
development in particular. 
Yael Dubinsky 
dubinsky@il.ibm.com
 IBM Haifa Research Lab
 Mount Carmel  
Haifa 31905, Israel  

Homepage: http://www.cs.technion.ac.il/~yael/  
Dr. Yael Dubinsky is affiliated with the Software and Services 
group in IBM Haifa Research Lab. For more than ten years she is 
also the instructor of project-based courses in the Department of 
Computer Science, Technion - IIT. Her research interests involve 
aspects in software engineering and information systems. Yael has 
a significant experience with guiding agile implementation 
processes in the industry and academia. She has experience in 

organizing workshops and tu
torials since 2005. Her book on 
Agile 
Software Engineering, 
which she co-author with Orit Hazzan, was 
published by Springer at 2008. 
2. DURATION  Half day  
3. GOAL AND OBJECTIVES  
The overall goal of the tutorial is to introduce and practice a 

coaching approach and practices for agile project development. 

Specifically, the objectives of the tutorial are: 
- The tutorial participants learn how to initiate and organize 
the development process of agile projects; 
- The tutorial participants realize how to inspire the agile 

approach while coaching software teams,; 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial 
advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
 ICSE '10, 
May 2
-8, 2010, Cape Town, South Africa
 Copyright © 2010 ACM 978
-1-
60558-719-6/10/05 ... $10.00
. 
** contact person 481 - The tutorial participants apprehend how to improve the 
professional skills of software engineers.  
This tutorial would be of interest and benefit to ICSE 2010 
attendees since it is important, su
itable and timely to introduce 
agile software development into software engineering projects. 
Further, though there are books and tutorials about what agile is, 
our tutorial (based on our book) provides a framework to learn the 

agile approach along the development process.   
4. SCOPE 
Intended audience:
 This tutorial is relevant for team leaders and 
software practitioners who are interested in coaching agile 

software projects. It is also relev
ant for instructors and coaches in 
academia who are interested in implementing agile practices as 
part of their teaching. 
Level:
 From the coaching perspective, the tutorial is basic; 
however, basic acquaintance with agile software development is 
recommended.   
5. TEACHING METHOD 
We use a hybrid approach of lectures and interactive sessions. The 

interactive parts are based on group work, guided discussions and 
reflections.  
6. SUMMARY AND CONTENTS 
The agile approach for software development has been applied 
more and more extensively since the mid nineties of the 20th 

century. Though there 
are only about ten 
years of accumulated 
experience using the agile approach
, it is currently conceived as 
one of the mainstream approaches for software development.   
In the tutorial we examine and experience the following coaching 
principles we employ in different coaching frameworks of agile 
projects: 
1. Inspire the nature of the agile software development  
2. Let the learners experience the principles of agile 
software development  
3. Explain while doing  
4. Elicit reflection on experience  
5. Elicit communication  
6. Establish diverse teams  
7. Assign roles to team members  
8. Manage time  
9. Be aware of abstraction levels  
10. Inspire a process of an on-going and gradual 
improvement  
11. Use metaphors or "other world's concepts" 
12. Increase cognitive and social awareness needed for the 

implementation of agile software development 
13. Listen to participants' feelings towards agile software 

development  
14. Emphasize the relevance of agile software development 

in the context of the software world 
These coaching guidelines are examined based on the active 

participation of the participants in different activities related to 
coaching software teams in the agile approach. The activities 

focus on the following themes:  
 Teamwork and collaboration.
 We analyze situations and 
conditions in software development environments that 
promote teamwork and collaboration and examine how they 
support agile software development processes.   
 Time and measures.
 We describe how measures can be 
integrated in agile projects, as
 well as time management 
techniques derived from the agile approach.     
 Learning and reflection
. We analyze software development 
processes as learning processes and illustrate how reflection 
can be used as one vehicle supporting these learning 

processes.   
 Change and leadership.
 We describe ways to cope with 
changes in software projects and how leadership is related to 

change management in agile software development 

environments.  
Table 1: Tutorial Timetable 
Each of the discussed agile ideas and themes is reviewed in the 

tutorial through the following three perspectives: 
 The 
Human perspective, which incl
udes cognitive and social 
aspects, and refers to learnin
g and interpersonal processes 
between teammates, customers, and management.   
 The 
Organizational perspective, which includes managerial 
and cultural aspects, and refers to software project 
management and control. 
 The 
Technological perspective, which includes practical and 
technical aspects, and refers to design, testing, and coding, as 
well as to integration, delivery, and maintenance of software 

products.  
Specifically, we explain and analyze how the explicit attention 
that agile software development 
gives these three perspectives and 
their inter-connections, helps it cope with challenges of software 
projects.   
7. REFERENCES  
[1]
 Hazzan, O. and Dubinsky, Y. (2008). 
Agile Software 
Engineering
, Springer.  
 Duration 
 Theme 
5 minutes 
Tutorial introduction 
15 minutes 
Coaching framework and principles  
1.5 hours 
Activities will be facilitated with respect to 

the following themes. 
 Roles Assessment
 Metaphors 
15 minutes 
Break 
1.5 hours  
Activities will be facilitated with respect to 

the following themes. 
 Time management: 
 Change management
 Reflection:  
10 minutes 
Tutorial summary 
482