 A HOT 
– Human, Organizational and Technological 
–Framework for a Software Engineering Course   
Orit Hazzan 
Department of Educ
ation in Technology and Science 
Technion 
– Israel Institute of Technology 
Haifa 32000, Israel   
oritha@techunix.technion.ac.il
                              Yael Dubinsky 
IBM Haifa Research Lab 
Mount Carmel
 Haifa 31905, Israel 
dubinsky@il.ibm.com 
 ABSTRACT In this paper, we present a HOT 
– Human, Organizational and 
Technological 
– framework for software engineering and describe 
its application in a full one-seme
ster software engineering course 
on agile software development. We suggest and illustrate how this 
framework has the potential to widen and deepen the students' 

understanding of software engineering processes.    
Categories and Subject Descriptors
 K.3.2 [
Computing Milieux]: 
Computers and Education - 
Computer and Information Science Education  
General Terms
 Management, Measurement, Performance, Human Factors. 
Keywords
 Software engineering education, HOT 
– Human, Organizational 
and Technological 
– framework, software engineering course, 
agile software development.  
1. INTRODUCTION The contents of many Software Engineering  

(SE) books highlight the activities performed during a software 

development process, e.g., requirements gathering, requirements 
analysis, design, coding, testing, 
deployments, etc. (e.g., Jalote, 
2005; Hamlet and Maybee, 2001; Peters and Pedrycz, 2000; 
Sommerville, 2006). In the paper we present an alternative 

approach for an introductory SE course. This course examines the 
discipline of SE through a three-facet framework, namely, the 
HOT 
– Human, Organizational and Technological 
– framework.    
We suggest that such a perspective 
at SE should be reflected in a 
SE course by a different set of topics than the activities performed 

in a typical software development process. These topics should 

highlight topics of concern in software development processes, 

such as time, quality, learning, and change 
– all are basic and 
central factors in any software de
velopment process; in addition, 
they are relevant for more than one SE activity. 
In the rest of the paper we describe the HOT framework, present 
the structure of a full semester course that illustrates the 
appropriateness of this framework for an introductory SE course, 
and outline 14 main topics addr
essed in such a course.    
2. HOT – HUMAN, ORGANIZATIONAL 
AND TECHNOLOGICAL 
– FRAMEWORK  
It is widely accepted today that SE should not address only 

technological aspects, but rather, it should refer also to the work 

environment and to the professional framework. Accordingly, we 
suggest examining the field of SE through the following three 
perspectives: 
 The 
Human perspective, which incl
udes cognitive and social 
aspects, and refers to learn
ing and interpersonal (teammates, 
customers, management) processes;   
 The 
Organizational perspective, which includes managerial 
and cultural aspects, and refe
rs to the workspace and issues 
that extend beyond the team; 
 The 
Technological perspective, which includes practical and 
technical aspects, and refers to
 how-to and code-related issues.  
Figure 1 presents a schematic view of the 
HOT
 framework. 
        Figure 1. The 
HOT Framework for Software Engineering 
3. COURSE DESCRIPTION  
3.1 Course Structure  
The SE course described in this paper, which employs the HOT 
framework, includes fourteen lessons, organized in three 

iterations. This structure enables to revisit the different subjects 
addressed in the course several times during the course as well as 
to guide the development of one-release software product (see 
below). Table 1 presents the course structure and the topic of each 
lesson.  
Technological perspective 
Human perspective 
Software 
Engineering
 Organizational perspective 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
 ICSE '10, 
May 2
-8, 2010, Cape Town, South Africa
 Copyright © 2010 ACM 978
-1-
60558-719-6/10/05 ... $10.00
 559 Table 1. Course Structure 
Iteration 
Lesson # 
Topic 
I 1 Introduction to Agile Software 
Development  
2 Teamwork 
3 Customers and Users 
4 Time  
5 Measures  
6 Quality 7 Learning  
II 8 Abstraction   
9 Trust 
10 
Globalization  
11 
Reflection  
III 12 
Change 
13 
Leadership  
14 
Delivery and Cyclicality  
 It is recommended that the course is based on two main 
components that progress in parallel and are closely correlated to 

each other. The first com
ponent is theoretical 
and can be delivered 
in the lecture hall or the class; the second component is based on 

the development of a software project and it takes place in a 
physical learning environment that we call a studio or lab.  Such a 
course structure enables learners become familiar with software 
development concepts both from a theoretical perspective (in the 
lectures) and from the practical perspective (in the studio).   
In more details, the studio is a learning environment in which an 
intensive student-student and student
–academic coach interaction 
accompanies the software development process (Kuhn, 1998; 

Tomayko, 1996; Hazzan 2002). It is the basic learning method 

used in architecture schools and has been central to architectural 

training for most of the twentieth century. In the architectural 
studio, a group of students meet their academic coach in the studio 
three times each week. Such an intensive schedule puts pressure 

on the students and, as a result, th
ey devote themselves to the art 
of design: students learn the skills, the professional language and 
the discipline ways of thinking. In addition, the studio is the place 
where students reveal their perso
nalities and can express their 
professional skills. Moreover, this learning environment exposes 

students to different kinds of soc
ial interactions such as, work on 
team projects, contribution to class discussions, and presentation 

of their products in front of their classmates.  
Based on the suitability of the 
studio approach to architecture 
education, it is suggested applying this teaching approach to other 
disciplines, mainly to professions in which design considerations 
are inherent, there is more than one approach to tackle a given 

problem, and usually a solution to a given problem is not unique. 

It seems clearly that SE fits perfectly for the adoption of the studio 

as a learning environment. For a boarder discussion of this 
suitability see Hazzan, 2002.   
3.2 Teaching Principles 
The course teaching is based on principles which support gradual 
and meaningful learning of the course (See Table 2, based on 

Hazzan and Dubinsky, 2008). For example, Principle 4 - Elicit 
reflection on experience 
– leads learners to keep improving their 
understanding of the learned concepts; Principle 7 - Assign roles 
to team members 
– not only further the students' involvement in 
the course and their responsibility in the development process, but 
in addition, enables them to deepen their understanding of the 
topic on which their role concentrates; Principle 11 - Emphasize 

the software development approach in the context of the world of 

software development 
– specifically tells us to connect the taught 
material to software development environments in the real world.  
Table 2. Teaching Principles 
Principle # 
Description 
1 Inspire the nature of the software development 

approach 
2 Let the learners experience the software development 

approach 
3 Explain while doing 
4 Elicit reflection on experience 
5 Elicit communication 
6 Establish diverse teams 
7 Assign roles to team members 
8 Manage time 
9 Be aware of abstraction levels 
10 
Use metaphors or "other world's concepts" 
11 Emphasize the software development approach in the 

context of the world of software development 
3.3 Course Topics  The HOT framework is illustrated in what follows by an 

introductory SE course that emphasizes the agile approach 
(Hazzan and Dubinsky, 2008).  
The rational for teaching agile software development is presented 
in our 2007 paper 
– Why Software Engineering Programs Should 
Teach Agile Software Development 
– published in 
SIGSOFT/Software Engineering Notes 
(Hazzan and Dubinsky, 
2007). Specifically, we propose ten reasons why it is important, 
suitable and timely to introduce agile software development into 
SE programs (see Table 3). We mention them here to highlight the 
appropriateness of applying the HOT framework for a full SE 

course on agile software development. 
For example, Reason #3 explicitly 
mentions the Human aspects of 
the HOT framework; Reason #7 explicitly addresses the 
Organizational aspects of the HOT framework; Reason #1 refers 

mainly to the Technological aspect of the HOT framework. 
In what follows we briefly descri
be the contents of each lesson. In 
addition, for each lesson, we present one or two examples of 
tasks, presented to the students in the said lesson, in which the 
students analyze the topic of the lesson within the HOT 
framework, and explain how such an analysis may contribute to 

the students' understanding of SE concepts.   
560 Table 3. Reasons for Introducing Agile Software Development 
into SE programs 
Reason # 
 1 Agile development was evolved and is applied in the 
industry  
2 Agile development educates for teamwork  
3 Agile development deals with human aspects  
4 Agile development encourages diversity  
5 Agile development supports learning processes  
6 Agile development improves habits of mind  
7 Agile development emphasizes management skills  
8 Agile development enhances ethical norms  
9 Agile development highlights a comprehensive image 
of software engineering  
10 Agile development provides one possible teachable 
framework  
 3.4 The HOT Analysis Fram
ework in Practice: 
A Full Semester Course Description 
Lesson 
1: Introduction to Agile Software Development
. In this introductory lesson of th
e course, questions such as the 
following ones are addressed: What is agile software 
development?
 Why is an agile approach for software engineering 
needed? What are the main characteristics of agile software 
development? What can be achieved by agile software 
development processes? Does agile software development form a 
pleasant and professional software development environment? At 

the end of the lesson, in addition to several insights about agile 

software development in general, 
the students also conceive of the 
nature of agile software development and are able to clarify how it 

establishes a professional softwa
re development environment in 
which software engineers are able 
to express their skills and, at 
the same time, to produce software products on high quality.  
 Examples of HOT tasks: 
 1. Describe the development process you used for the 

development of the last soft
ware project you developed. 
Analyze the process benefits and pitfalls according to the HOT 

framework. 
In this task the students are asked first to describe the 
development process they employed in their last software 

project. At the second stage, they are asked to analyze it within 

the HOT framework. Such an analysis encourage them, first, to 
identify on which aspect(s) they
 focused in their description, 
and second, to complete their description by addressing also 
the aspect(s) they did not address in their first description. The 

motivation of this task is to let the students feel the relevance 
and applicability of the HOT framework from the very early 
stages of the course, and with respect to their own experience 

in project development.   
2. Specify how the HOT perspectives are expressed in each of the 
four principles of the Agile Manifesto and in the Manifesto as a 
whole. 

In this task the students should examine the Agile Manifesto 

(see Table 4), which on the one hand, its formulation is very 
short and conceptual, and on the other hand, it encapsulates the 
essence of the agile paradigm for software development. 
Students' challenge is to elicit 
the multi-faceted essence of the 
Agile Manifesto by its examination within the HOT 
framework.    
Table 4. Manifesto for Agile Software Development
1 We are uncovering better ways of developing  
software by doing it and helping others do it.  
Through this work we have come to value:  
Individuals and interactions
 over processes and tools 
Working software
 over comprehensive documentation  
Customer collaboration over contract negotiation  
Responding to change
 over following a plan 
 That is, while there is value in the items on  
the right, we value the items on the left more. 
    
Lesson 2: Teamwork. 
This lesson presents one of the basic 
elements of software projects 
– teamwork. It addresses how to 
build teams in a way that promotes team members' accountability 
and responsibility, as well as
 fosters communication between 
teammates. One of the basic ways to start team building is by 

assigning roles to team members. For this purpose a role scheme 
is presented in this lesson (Dubinsky and Hazzan, 2006), 
according to it each team member is in charge of a specific 

managerial aspect of the developmen
t process, such as design and 
continuous integration, in addition to his or her development 
tasks.  
It is not always simple to reach fruitful teamwork and sometimes 
it raises dilemmas and conflic
ts between team members. This 
aspect of teamwork is not neglected
 in agile teams and, when a 
conflict emerges, it is addressed openly by all the team members. 

Agile mechanisms to overcome such conflicts are discussed in 

this lesson as well.  
Example of a HOT task: 
 How does the role scheme reflect the three aspects of the HOT 
framework? 
In this task, students should take the individual perspective and 
examine the role scheme by considering his or her involvement in 
the development process. The HOT framework encourages them 
to consider not only mere Technical work, but also the 
individual's place within the team (the Human aspect) and within 

the organization (the Organizational aspect).     
Lesson 3:  Customers and Users.
 Customers have a key role is 
agile software development processes. The Agile Manifesto 
statement ‘customer collaboration
 over contract negotiation’ 
(see 
Table 4) explicitly suggests alternative work relationships with the 

customer, in which the customer 
is part of the team and not an 
entity with which team members and management argue what 

should be developed and when, and what should not be developed 

at all. This lesson describes
 the customer role in agile 
development environments and how to enhance communication 
with the customer.  
                                                                 1 The Agile Manifesto website 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org/
 561 In many cases, it is expected to evaluate the software product also 
from the user perspective and th
e customer represents also the 
user group. This, however, turns out to be an ineffective 
mechanism in many cases. Accordingly, this lesson also describes 
the users’ role and presents a mechanism which enables to 

increase the users' involvement and feedback during the 

development process. Specifically, data obtained from user 
evaluation enable to refine the user interface design, to increase 
product usability, and, consequently, to increase the product 

quality. 
  Example of a HOT task: 
 What are the main characteristics 
of the Business Day? For each 
characteristic, specify which HOT 
– Human, Organizational and 
Technological 
– perspective you use. 
In agile software development 
processes, a Business Day takes 
place between each two consequent it
erations of the release: at the 
end of each iteration and at the beginning of the next one. The rest 

of the iteration days are development days. In addition to the team 

and the customer, other project stake holders are invited to 
participate in the Business Day, 
including managers and external 
parties, such as customer associates and users. In the first part of 
the Business Day the previous it
eration is summarized; in its 
second part, after a reflective se
ssion takes place, the next 
iteration planning starts.   
This task, in which the students 
should examine the Business Day 
by the HOT framework, boarders their perspective at this event 
(especially if they participate in such an event in their 
development processes). It is, therefore, reasonable to assume that 

such a task increases the studen
ts' awareness to the centrality of 
the Business Day and to its crucial 
impact on the entire software 
development process.       
Lesson 4: Time. 
Time plays a special role in SE: the project 
schedule should be met, the product should be delivered on time, 
teammates should complete their tasks on time, and so on. This 
lesson deals with how the time concept is expressed in SE in 

general and in agile software development environments in 

particular. Specifically, in agile software development time is 
boxed by short iterations of 
about 2-3 weeks 
each, and when 
needed, instead of ‘moving’ deadlines,
 the scope is changed 
accordingly to the customer priorities. This conception is 
supported by agile software de
velopment methods in different 
ways that not only enable to work in a sustainable pace, but also 
result in high quality products.
  Example of a HOT task: 
 Analyze the concept of time as it
 is manifested in agile software 
development processes from the HOT perspectives. 
Time is addressed differently by different people and cultures; for 
example, in western culture, time is mainly associated with 

financial profit, i.e., "Time is money". As mentioned in the above 
lesson description, this lesson high
lights how time plays a special 
role also in SE. This perspective at
 time is further enforces in 
agile development environments. The aim of this task, which asks 
students to examine the concept of time within the HOT 
framework, is to lead students feel the special meaning of time as 
it is manifested in agile software development environments, to 

understand the source and reason
s of this meaning, and to 
comprehend how the way time is considered in agile software 
development environments eventually improves the product 

quality.  
Lesson 5: Measures. 
One way to improve the control and 
management of product development processes is by using 
measures to monitor the different aspects of such processes. In 

general, SE is a discipline that acknowledges product measures as 

well as the measuring of the de
velopment process; specifically, 
the agile approach adopts this appr
oach by promoting a constant 
tracking during the entire software development process. For 

example, the team velocity explained in Lesson 4 
– Time 
– is one 
of the important ways by which agile processes control the project 
progress; the tracker role, presented in Lesson 2 as one role of the 
role scheme, is responsible for the ex
act definition and refinement 
of the team measures, for the collection of the required data, and 
for the measure presentation in the Business Day.  
In agile software development processes, some measures are 
presented on a daily basis, like the daily progress within the 

iteration; some measures are pres
ented each iteration, like code 
coverage or iteration progress within the release; yet, other 

measures are presented every release, like customer satisfaction or 

level of product testability. 
 Example of a HOT task: 
 Within the HOT framework, analyze the main ideas presented 
with respect to measures as they 
are manifested in agile software 
development environments.  
This general question about measure is presented after one third of 
the course is learned. It is expected that at this stage of the course 
students are familiar with the HOT framework, which is kept 

being presented in the course, and therefore, quite naturally, are 

able to apply it to any SE concept presented to them; in this case 
– the concept of measure as it is 
manifested in agile software 
development processes.  
Specifically, the importance of 
measures in agile software 
development processes is highlighted by the HOT perspectives 
because when measures are taken on a regular basis, all 
teammates and stakeholders can view them, give feedback, and 

suggest measure refinements. Naturally, human, organizational 

and technical aspects can be elicited when the approach towards 
measures in agile software development processes is analyzed. 
 Lesson 6: Quality. 
High quality
 assurance is a fundamental 
element of every engineering process and is considered to be one 
of the difficult things to achieve and sustain. Since high quality is 
also a basic concern of SE, there are values and practices that 
support the assurance of high quality software products and 

processes. However, it is not su
fficient and, in many cases, 
software products lack the required quality. In this lesson, among 

others issues, the reasons for this situation are analyzed.  
In addition, it is also described how quality is perceived by the 
agile approach, by presenting agile values and practices that 
support and control the process quality, such as, customer 
collaboration, the planning activity of a typical agile software 

development process, refactoring, and the feedback gained by 

exhaustive testing and test automation. Finally, the focus is placed 
on the practice of Test Driven Development (TDD).
 Example of a HOT task: 
 Represent the analysis of the TDD 
activity presented in the course 
within the HOT framework.  
562 TDD is a programming technique that aims to provide clean and 
fault-free code (Beck, 2003). TDD means that, first, we write a 

test case that fails and then we write the simplest possible code 
that enables the test to pass successfully. TDD implies that new 
code is added to the software system only after an automated test 

has passed. In addition, in order to improve the code readability, 

design and maintenance, refactoring activities are performed 
(Fowler, 1999), among other reasons, to eliminate duplications.  
TDD can help overcome some of the common problems 
associated with traditional testing as they are apparent in 

traditional software projects. 
Based on Dubinsky and Hazzan 
(2007), TDD is analyzed in the course, addressing cognitive, 

social, affective and managerial themes. The analysis is structured 

around arguments frequently offered to explain why, despite the 
benefits attributed to testing, in many cases, traditional testing is 
skipped. Such arguments are accompanied by an explanation of 
how TDD might help overcome these obstacles. To illustrate how 

the HOT aspects are reflected in this discussion on TDD, we 

present several such arguments: 
Not enough time to test; Testing 
provides negative feedback
; Responsibility for testing is 
transferred
; Testing is a low-status 
job; Testing is hard to 
manage
; Testing is hard
.  Based on the analysis presented in the lesson, the given task asks 
the students to specifically indicate HOT aspects expressed in the 
TDD activity.  
Lesson 7: Learning. 
This lesson illuminates the perspective 
according to which software development process is a learning 
process. This statement can be explained both from the customers' 
and team members' perspectives. At the beginning of the 

development process, customers do not know explicitly and 

entirely the requirements of their developed product and, 
gradually, during the development process, they improve their 
understanding with respect to these requirements. The team 

members, in parallel, keep improving their understanding of the 

customer requirements as well as of the developed product.  
From this perspective, if a software development process is a 
learning process, an appropriate learning environment should be 
provided to all project stake holders. Indeed, this is another 

characteristic of agile software development environments 
– they 
support leaning processes. This aspect is explored in this lesson 
by an examination of agile software development environments 
from the constructivist perspect
ive  (Piaget, 1977), which is a 
cognitive theory of learning processes.  
 Example of a HOT task: 
 Analyze the practice of short re
leases within the HOT framework.  
In this task, the students are requested not only to view the 
practice of short releases as a work allocation mechanism, but also 

to consider all the project stakeholders whose participation in the 
development process is influenced by the practice of short 
releases. Specifically, the main stakeholders, whose working 

procedure and involvement in the development process are 

affected directly by and shaped 
according to this practice, are the 
managers, customer, developers, and end users. The specific 
consideration of these stakeholders naturally reveals the relevance 
of the HOT framework for the analysis of the practice of short 

releases. It is reasonable to assume, though, that since the task is 
presented after a lesson about learning, cognitive processes of the 
different project stakeholders will be mainly addressed by the 
students.  
Lesson 8: Abstraction. 
This lesson continues the previous lesson, 
by exploring agile software development processes mainly from 
the cognitive perspective. Based 
on the working assumption that 
software development is a complex task also from the cognitive 

perspective, abstraction is introduce
d in this lesson as one means 
used for reducing the cognitive complexity involved in software 

product development processes.  
Though abstraction is a useful tool, it is not always used. 
Sometimes it is just difficult to think abstractly; in other cases, 
abstraction is not utilized due to lack of awareness to its 
significance and to its potential contribution to cognitive 
processes. In this lesson, it 
is described how abstraction is 
expressed in agile software development environments. 
Specifically, software design and architecture are abstractions 
presented in this lesson to discuss the concepts of simple design 

and refactoring. In addition, subjects that have been introduced in 

earlier lessons of the course are 
revisited by analyzing them from 
the perspective of abstraction.   
 Example of a HOT task: 
 Analyze the concept of abstraction and the practice of refactoring 

within the HOT analysis framework. 
The challenge in this task is to consider concepts, which are 
salient with respect to one aspects of the HOT framework, also 

from the other two perspectives. In other words, abstraction can 
be analyzed naturally
 from the cognitive perspective; students' 
efforts, however, to analyze it also from the technical and the 
organizational perspective furth
er their understanding of SE 
processes. Similarly, while the practice of refactoring can be 

examined straight forward from the technical perspective, the aim 
of the task is to let th
e students realize that their understanding of 
additional aspects of this activity, can enhance their performances 
(at least) with respect to refactoring. 
Lesson 9: Trust.
 Software is an intangible product. Therefore, it 
is difficult to sense its development processes by our regular 
senses, the exact status of the development process is not always 
clear, and misunderstandings may emerge. Consequently, it is 
sometimes difficult to establish trustful professional relationships 
and team members may tend not to trust each other. This lesson 
focuses on how agile software development fosters trust among 
team members. It first explains how agile software development 

processes turn the development process into a transparent process,  

making the process and the developed product more sensible. 
Then, within the prisoner's dilemma framework, taken from game 
theory, it is explained why and how a transparent process indeed 

fosters trust among team members. Based on this working 

assumption, i.e., that the transpar
ent nature of agile software 
development process fosters trust among team members, the focus 

is placed on how agile software development enhances ethical 

behavior and diversity in a way that improves process and product 

quality.   
Examples of HOT tasks: 
 1. Within the HOT framework, suggest connections between the 
fact that software is an intang
ible product and its development 
process.   
563 This task expands the discussion of the topic presented in class, 
which focuses on the social (that is,
 human) aspects of the fact 
that software is an intangible pro
duct, by asking the students to 
address the topic also from the technical and organizational 

perspectives. Such an examination widens the students' 

perspective at software developm
ent processes with respect to 
one of the very basic facts with which any software engineer 
faces in any software development process 
– the fact that 
software is an intangible product. The important of such an 
examination cannot be neglected, of course.   
2. How is diversity reflected in 
the HOT aspects of software 
development processes in general and agile software 

development in particular?  
Similarly to the previous task, this task asks the students to 
examine a topic whose human asp
ect is very clear, also from 
organizational and technical perspective. We emphasize this 

kind of expansion since in the an
alysis of SE situations it is 
more common to focus on the technical aspect. 
Lesson 10: Globalization. 
In this lesson, the concept of agility in 
a wider (than software) context is addressed. One topic on which 

the focus is placed is globalization in terms of distributed teams; 

the second idea discussed in this lesson is the application of the 

agile approach for the management of non software projects.  
Agile software development has evolved significantly during the 
last decade. In parallel to the evolvement of agile software 

development, globalization in software development has also 
emerged, and software is developed in many cases by teams 
which are spread across different geographical areas, cultures and 
nationalities. This reality, named global software development, 

has advantages as well as disadvantages. The most blatant 

advantage is the business aspect of cost reduction; the most 
problematic issues are communication and team synchronization. 
In this lesson the notion of global software development is 

described and it is explained how several agile practices help cope 

with the challenges involved in such situations. Specifically, it is 

illuminated how the fact that the 
agile approach guides towards a 
transparent global software development process increases 

information flow and project visibility and assists in solving 

communication and synchronization problems.  
In addition, in this lesson, the notion of agility beyond the 
software world is also examined, and its usefulness in such 
projects is explored. 
 Example of a HOT task: 
 Analyze how the aspects of the HOT framework are expressed in 
global software development environments.  
This task asks the students to spec
ifically describe the expressions 
of human, organizational and technical factors in situations with 
which (most probably) they are not familiar at this early stage of 
their professional development. 
However, since many of them are 
familiar with other (mainly, on-line) distributed environments, 
they can bring this experience into this exploration. If the students 

use another world of concepts to explore the phenomenon of 
global software development, the cognitive idea of metaphor for 
the understanding of an unfamiliar topic can be highlighted, 
explained and connected to Lesson 
3, in which its application to 
software development processes was discussed mainly with 
respect to the customer and users.   
Lesson 11: Reflection.
 This lesson focuses on the notions of 
reflection and retrospective: reflection usually refers to the 
individual's thinking about what he or she has accomplished; 
retrospective is usually conducted in teams, and is partially based 
on the individuals' reflections performed before or during the 

retrospective sessions. This lesson, which closes the second 

iteration of the course, serves as an opportunity to understand the 
theory behind these concepts as well as to add practical details 
about their actual performance.  
Examples of HOT tasks: 
 1. What HOT aspects might elicit reflective thinking? Illustrate 
your answer.  
2. Analyze the reflection and retro
spective activities within the 
HOT framework.  
While the first task asks the stude
nts to share personal experiences 
with respect to reflective pro
cesses, the second task directs the 
students to apply more theoretical analysis. The rationale for the 
order of these two questions
 is similar to the rationale attributed to 
other topics discussed previously in the course (e.g., short 
releases); that is, it aims to lead 
the students gradually, from a 
concrete examination to a more global one, in other words, to let 
the students increase the level of
 abstraction step by step. Such 
guidance is important especially while working on complex topic, 
such as software development processes in general and reflective 
processes, discussed in th
is lesson, in particular.  
Lesson 12: Change. 
Coping with change is one of the main 
challenges in SE processes. In
 this spirit, and as the fourth 
principle of the Agile Manifesto 
– Responding to change
 over 
following a plan 
– reflects (see Table 4), agile software 
development methods establish a development process that 

enables to cope successfully with changes introduced during the 
development process, while keeping the high quality of the 
developed product. This lesson widens the discussion on change 

in software development environments and discusses also on 

change introduction into organizations that plan to transit, or in 

the transition process, to agile software development. Specifically, 
an evolutionary framework for coping with change is presented, 
using it for the understanding of a transition process to agile 

development process.   
Example of a HOT task: 
 Analyze the notion of change in
 software requirements within the 
HOT framework.   

At this stage of the course, the students are familiar with the HOT 
framework and are trained to explore sophisticated topics through 
its lens. The examination that this question refers to, however, is 
not a simple one and it should be expected that the students would 

not know how to tackle it. In such a case, it can be suggested to 

the students to focus first on one instance in their development 
process in which a change has been introduced and to analyze this 
case first within the HOT framework. Then, gradually, the 

discussion can be elicited to the notion of change in software 

requirements in general, as the question asks for.    
Lesson 13: Leadership. 
Leadership is the ability to influence 
people, leading them to behave in a certain way in order to 
achieve the group’s goals
. Leadership is independent of job titles 
and descriptions. Usually, however, in order to lead, leaders need 
the power derived from their organizational position. There are 
564 different leadership styles, li
ke task-oriented versus people-
oriented, directive versus permissiv
e, autocrat versus democrat. 
While leaders can shape their leadership style according to 
circumstances, followers might prefer a different leadership style 
pending on their situation and personality. In this lesson, the 

leadership style advocated by the agile approach is discussed, 

namely, a leadership style that empowers the people involved in 
the product development process. For example, instead of 
promoting the idea that ‘Leaders should keep the power to 

themselves in order not to loose it’, the agile approach fosters the 

idea that ‘Leaders gains power from its sharing’. This idea is 
expressed, among other ways, by the transparency expressed in 
agile software development pro
cess that makes the information 
accessible to everyone and enables each team member to be 
accountable and fully involved in the development process.     
    
Example of a HOT task: 
 Analyze the coach role within the HOT analysis framework. 
The aim of this task is to let the students feel the meaning 
associated to team leaders (coaches) in agile software 
development environments. By focusing on this leadership role, 
its position, attitudes and specific responsibilities, the students 

become familiar with the idea that in agile software development 

environments coaching encompasses much more than technical 
activities and responsibilities; sp
ecifically, this task highlights the 
potential influences of the coaching style on human and 
organizational aspects of software development processes.   
Lesson 14: Delivery and Cyclicality. 
This
 lesson inspires the 
cyclic nature of an agile software development process, which is 
composed of releases, each of 
which first, ends with a product 
delivery to the customer and a reflective process, and second, 

signals the beginning of the next release. Specifically, the focused 
is placed on the delivery of a product that the entire release has 
been dedicated for its development, describing what happens in 

agile software development processes at the end of the release 
– the delivery, as well as just before and after it. Specifically, prior 

to the delivery, the customer examines the product and checks its 
fitness to his or her expectations; then, the product release is 
celebrated; finally, after the deli
very, a reflective session is 
facilitated to exploit the lessons learned during the release for the 

improvement of future developments.   
Examples of HOT tasks: 
 1. Analyze the Release Celebration event within the HOT analysis 
framework.  
If the students develop a software product in parallel to the 
course, it is recommended to let them experience such a 
celebration in order to help them grasp its essence. 

Specifically, on the team level, during the last week of the 

semester, the students made the needed preparations for this 
celebration meeting. In this meeting, all students from all 
teams gather for a real celebra
tion with light refreshments. 
Each team reports on its main achievements with respect to its 

project, and then a tour is conducted between the different 
studios to enable students to visit and examine the projects 
developed by the other teams. After the tour, each group meets 
its customer and academic coach for the presentation of the 

first release that was developed in three iterations during the 
fourteen weeks of the semester. The academic coach facilitates 
a feedback and reflective session and guides a summary 
session of the project.  

Table 5 presents an example for a timetable of such a release 
celebration in the academia for a course with 4 teams (Hazzan 
and Dubinsky, 2008).  
Table 5. Example for Celebration Timetable at the End of the 
Semester 
Schedule 
Activity 
14:30-15:30 
Project presentations (15 minute for each team) 
15:30-16:00 
Open tour in projects' studios 
16:00
-17:00 
Presentation and discussion in the team studio
s. This 
includes present
ation to the customer, feedback, 
reflection and summary session 
 
Such a personal experience at the end-of-the-release 
celebration inspires, at least partially, the feelings of the end of 
the release as it happens in the real world of software 

development. The need to address human, organizational and 

technological aspects with respect to this period in the 
development process, as the question asks for, further 
highlights the richness of this ev
ent and its importance for the 
project success.  
2. Analyze the cyclic nature of agile software development 
processes within the HOT framework.  
This task encapsulates many ideas explored so far in the course 
from the three HOT perspectives. This is because the cyclic 

nature of agile software development touches a variety of 
complicated topics, such as cognitive processes, feelings, 
organizational culture, change pr
ocesses, leadership styles, and 
more. The focus placed in this task on one specific 

characteristic of agile software development processes, 

encourages the students to express many of the ideas that they 
previously learned, on the one hand, and one the other hand to 
specify the uniqueness of this 
particular characteristic of agile 
software development processes.  
4. DISCUSSION  
The above course agenda, with its special emphasis on the HOT 
– Human, Organizational and Technological 
– framework, 
illustrates several ideas about th
e nature of SE and of SE 
education.  
First, different HOT aspects are 
highlighted with respect to 
different SE topics; nevertheless, 
in (almost) all SE topics we can 
find the three perspectives and, therefore, these three perspectives 
should not be neglected, even when their relevance is not 
immediately observed.  
Second, the HOT analysis framework can be applied on different 
levels of abstraction with respect 
to different SE topics; since 
abstraction is considered as a main theme in SE processes and 
environments, this attributes of the HOT framework further 

highlights its suitability for the ex
amination of the field of SE.  
Third, students' awareness to the HOT perspectives should be 
elevated from a very early stage of their exposure to the discipline 
of SE; if students' awareness to this multi-faceted nature of SE 
starts to be constructed too late, the students may have already 
constructed a narrow image of the discipline. This assertion is 

especially implied to topics with 
respect to which one aspect is 
565 dominant (for example, with respect to reflection, the human 
aspects is dominant; with respect to leadership, the organizational 

aspect is dominant; and with respect to testing, the technological 
aspect is dominant). If the three aspects are considered with 
respect to each topic, the students get the message that these 

aspects are interconnected and none of the aspects should be 

neglected.  
Fourth, the HOT analysis framework serves here as a course 
framework on agile software development; it is suggested, 
however, that this framework can be used also for other SE 
courses. In practice, when a course is redesign within the HOT 

framework, the curse instructor should examine first what 

aspect(s) is/are highlighted with resp
ect to each topic addressed in 
the course, and then to explor
e the expression of the other 
aspect(s) with respect to the said 
topic. It is suggested that such a 
presentation of SE topics, not only enriches students' 

understanding of SE, but also helps change the image of SE as it 

is widely convinced today.  
Fifth, the same course can be taught both in academia (as it is 
described in this paper) and in industry. The focus will be, 
naturally, on different topics. The reason for these differences is 
the different personal experiences brought into the course by 

students (before graduation) and pr
actitioner software engineers. 
Appropriate adjustments should be made accordingly for the two 

populations; nevertheless, the spirit of the HOT framework 
remains and it can keep guiding the course flow and main 
messages.   
5. REFERENCES 
[1] Beck, K. (2003). 
Test-Driven Development by Example
, Addison Wesley. 
[2] Dubinsky, Y. and Hazzan, O. (2006). Using a role scheme to 

derive software project quality, 
Journal of System 
Architecture
 52(11), 693-699. 
[3] Dubinsky, Y. and Hazzan, O. (2007). Measured test-driven 

development: Using measures to monitor and control the unit 
development, 
Journal of Computer Science
, Science Publication 
3(5), pp. 335-344. 
[4]
 Fowler, M. (1999). 
Refactoring: Improving the Design of 
Existing Code
, Addison-Wesley Professional.  
[5]
 Hamelt, D. and Maybee, J. (2001). 
The Engineering of 
Software
, Addison Wesley.  
[6]
 Hazzan, O. (2002). The reflective practitioner perspective in 
software engineering education, 
The Journal of Systems and 
Software 
63(3), 161-171.  
[7]
 Hazzan, O. and Dubinsky, Y. (2007). Why software 
engineering programs should teach agile software 

development, 
SIGSOFT/Software Engineering Notes
 32(2), 
1-3.       
[8]
 Hazzan, O. and Dubinsky, Y. (2008). 
Agile Software 
Engineering
, Springer.  
[9]
 Jalote, P. (2005). 
An Integrated Approach to Software 
Engineering
, Springer.  
[10]
 Kuhn, S. (1998). The software design studio: An exploration, 
IEEE Software
 15 (2), 65-71. 
[11]
 Peters, J. F. and Pedrycz, W. (2000). 
Software Engineering 
– An Engineering Approach
, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.  
[12]
 Piaget, J. (1977). Problems of equilibration. In Appel MH, 
Goldberg, L.S. 
Topics in Cognitive Development
, Volume 1: 
Equilibration: Theory, Research and Application, Plenum 

Press, N, 3-13. 
[13]
 Sommerville, I. (2006). 
Software Engineering
, 8th Edition, 
Addison Wesley. 
[14]
 Tomayko, J.E. (1996). Carnegie-Mellon's software 

development studio: A five-year retrospective, 
SEI 
Conference on Software Engineering Education
. http://www.contrib.andrew.cmu.edu/usr/emile/studio/coach.h
tm. 
   566