 The Art of Testing Less without Sacrificing Quality 
 Kim Herzig
i 
kimh@microsoft.com
 Michaela Greiler
ii  mgreiler@microsoft.com  
Jacek Czerwonka
ii 
jacekcz@microsoft.com 
Brendan Murphy
i 
bmurphy@microsoft.com 
 i Microsoft Research, United Kingdom 
ii Microsoft Corporation, Redmond, United States 
 Abstract
Testing is a key element of software development 
processes for the management and assessment of product quality. 
In most development environments, the software engineers are 
responsible for ensuring the 
functional correctness of code
. However, for large complex software products
, there is an 
additional need to check that changes do not negatively impact 
other parts of the software and they comply with system 
constraints such as backward compatibility, performance, security 
etc. Ensuring these system constraints may require complex 

verification infrastructure and test procedures. Although such 

tests are time consuming and expensive and rarely find defects 
they act as an insurance process to ensure the softwar
e is 
compliant
. However, long lasting tests increasingly conflict with 
strategic aims to shorten release cycles. To decrease production 
costs and to improve development agility, we created 
a generic test 
selection strategy called 
THEO that accelerates test processes 
without sacrificing product quality. THEO is based on a cost 

model, which dynamically skips tests when the expected cost of 

running the test exceeds the expected cost of removing it. We 
replayed past development periods of three major Microsoft 
products resulting in a reduction of 50% of test executions, saving 

millions of dollars per year
, while maintaining product quality. 
Index Terms
measurement, cost estimation, test improvement.
  I. INTRODUCTION
 Software testing is a key element of software development 
processes. The purpose of testing is to ensure that code changes 
applied to a software product do not compromise product 

quality. Often, testing is associated with checking for functional 

correctness. However, for large complex software systems, it is 

also important to verify system constraints such as backward 
compatibility, performance, security etc. Complex systems like 
Microsoft Windows and Office are developed by thousands of 

engineers that simultaneous
ly apply code changes, which may 
interfere with each other. In such environments, testing may be 

seen as an insurance process verifying that the software product 
complies with all necessary system constraints at all times. By 
nature, system and compliance tests are complex and time-
consuming although they rarely find a defect. Large complex 

software products tend to run on millions of configuration in the 

field and emulating these configurations requires multiple test 

infrastructures and procedures that are expensive to run in terms 
of cost and 
time. Making tests faster is desirable but usually 
requires enormous development efforts. Simply removing tests 
increases the risk of expensive bugs being shipped as part of the 

final product. This is a generic issue for developing large 
 1 Theo stands for: 
Test 
Effectiveness 
Optimization using 
Historic data.
 complex software systems [1]. At the same time, long running 

test processes increasingly conflict with the need to deliver 

software products in shorter periods of time while maintaining 
or increasing product quality and reliability. Increasing 
productivity through running less tests is desirable but threatens 
product quality, as code defects may remain undetected. 
The goal of this work is to develop a cost based test selection 
strategy (called 
THEO
1) 
to improve development processes
. THEO is a dynamic, self-adaptive test selection strategy, which 
does not sacrifice product quality
. THEO automatically skip
s test executions when the expected cost of running a test exceeds 

the expected cost of not running 
it. We designed THEO to ensure 
that all tests will execute on all code changes at least on
ce before 
shipping the software product. Executing all tests at least once 

ensures that we eventually find all code defects. Thus, THEO 

does not sacrifice product quality but may dela
y defect detection 
to later development phases. THEO and its underlying cost 

model are based on historic test measurements to estimate future 
test execution costs and causes no test runtime overhead
. Additional dynamic or static test analysis data, such as coverage 
or dependency graphs are not required. 
We evaluated the effects of THEO by simulating historic 
development processes f
or three major Microsoft products: 
Windows, Office, and Dynamics. Combined, our simulation 
results cover more than 26 month of industrial product 

development and more than 
37 million test executions.  
We make the following contributions in this paper: 
 We develop a cost model for test executions based on 

historic test execution results that causes no test 

execution runtime overhead, and is capable of 

readjusting its cost estimations based on execution 

contexts (e.g., configurations of the test environment)
.  We develop THEO
, a self-adapting test selection 
strategy to accelerate test processes without sacrificing 
code quality. 
 We evaluate THEO by simulating its impact on historic 
Windows, Office, and Dynamics developments. 
 We briefly discuss expected secondary improvements 

such as developer satisfaction. 
In Section 
II, we provide background information about 
development and verification processes to explain the context of 

this work
, motivation and methodology are described in  
Section III. We 
define the historic data feeds in Section 
IV. 2015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.664832015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.664832015 IEEE/ACM 37th IEEE International Conference on Software Engineering978-1-4799-1934-5/15 $31.00 © 2015 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE.2015.66483 Based on this input, we derive failure probability functions 
(Section V
) used in our cost model (Section 
VI). Section VII 
contains a description on simulating THEO on past development 
processes. Sections VIII and 
IX discuss simulation 
measurements and results. Secondary improvements are briefly 

discussed in Section X. We close the paper with threats to 

validity (Section 
XI), related work (Section XII) and a 
conclusion (Section XIII). 
II.  DEVELOPMENT AND 
VERIFICATION 
PROCESSES
 In this section, we provide a brief overview of the complex 
subject of software development methodologies. The process for 

developing large software products is predominantly through 
developing a single component across multiple code branches 
(e.g. Microsoft Windows) or through developing independent 

components (e.g. Microsoft Office) which form the product.  
When developing code across multiple code branches, a 
code 
branch
 is a forked version of the code base that allows parallel 
modifications without interference (for more details we refer to 

Bird and Zimmermann [2] and Murphy et al. [3]). The 

alternative is to design the product into multiple independent 

components. Each component can be developed independently 
on a single code branch [4]. 
Independent from the development methodology, 
development teams are often responsible for verifying functional 

correctness of any code change. Where system constraints exist 
on the product, additional test infrastructure is required to ensure 

all code meets those constraints. Since product constraints are 

system properties, they often need to be verified at system level
. The complexity of the verification requirements is dependent 

upon system size and the number of system constraints. For 
example, Windows uses multiple development branches that 
integrate into a single trunk branch (see Fig. 1. ). Developer 
commit their code changes to development branches (Branch B1 
in Fig. 1. ) and integrate these code changes through multiple 
integration branches (B2 and B3 in Fig. 1. ) into the trunk branch, 

which contains the current stable version of the next Windows 
release. Each integration path between any two branches is 
guarded by so-called 
quality gates
 checking for various 
constraints, e.g. backward compatibility requirements, both in 
terms of the hardware it runs on and in terms of supported 

applications. To verify that Windows meets these constraints 

requires the emulation of millions of different execution setups 

at each branch level. The lower the level of branches a quality 
gate fails, the higher the number of affected engineers and the 
more expensive a defect becomes. 
At the same time, any complex test infrastructure evolves 
over time. New test are added, older tests might get less 

important or even deprecated. Maintaining tests and preventing 

test infrastructures from decay can be an enormous effort. For 

older products, there may be a lack of ownership for some of the 

older tests. These tests can affect development speed as the mor
e tests are executed and the longer the runtime of tests, the longer 
the verification process and the slower the development speed
, e.g. the time required to integrate code changes into the trunk 
branch. Additionally, verification time depends on the number 

of test failures. Most test failures require human effort to inspect 

and to fix the underlying issue. Note that test failures may 
be due 
to code defects 
or due to test reliability issues and that running 
and analyzing these failures is a time consuming task, especially 

at system and integration level. System tests 
can run for minutes 
or hours as they often require entire systems to be set-up and 

tore-down. At the same time, developing large complex software 

systems usually implies large development teams developing 
code changes in parallel that need to be tested also in parallel. 
Consequently, increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of 
test processes has an immediate effect on product development. 

Running less tests might help to improve test performance
. However
, reducing testing imposes the risk of elapsing defects 
to later development stages and unnecessary involving or 
affecting more developers.  
III. MOTIVATION 
& METHODOLOGY
 The goal of this work is to decrease development costs and 
to increase productivity without sacrificing product quality. 
As we discussed in Section 
II, achieving this goal requires a careful 
balance between conservative test strategies to minimize the 

number of defects elapsing into later development stages, and 

reducing test time to allow faster integration processes and 
higher productivity
. Any test optimization strategies should not 
compromise the quality of the code 
shipped to customers. It may 
be acceptable to find defects later than possible, but it remains 
unacceptable to weaken overall product quality
. Our 
optimization strategy ensures that all test scenarios are executed 

at least once for each code change before integrating the code 
change into the main product code base, e.g. the trunk branch. 
From the example shown in Fig. 1. , it is acceptable to skip a test 

scenario on branch B2 if and only if the very same test scenario 

will be executed on branch B3 for the very same code change.  
The basic assumption behind this work and most other test 
optimization and test selection approaches is that for given 

scenarios, not all tests are equally well suited. Some tests are 
   Fig. 1. 
 Integration path example. The integration path of change 
C applied 
to branch 
B1 lists the branches 
B1, B2, B3,
 and 
trunk
 including the 
timestamps of the corresponding succ
essful merge operations.
 484484484 more effective than 
others are. However, deciding the 
effectiveness of tests and when to execute them is not trivial.  
The approach presented in this paper uses historic test 
execution data and development process cost factors to perform 
test selection. Each test execution is considered an investment 

and the expected test result considered as return of investment. 
Using a cost model, our goal is to create a dynamic, self-adaptive 
test selection strategy, which readjusts its cost estimations based 

on test execution context. To provide an actionable solution that 

fits into the Microsoft development processes, we considered 

only solutions that cause no runtime overhead and that required 

no additional data collection. THEO only uses historic test data 
collected by standard testing frameworks and excludes code 
coverage data as collecting code coverage can increase the 

runtime overhead. Later, we will show that THEO ensures all 

tests are executed at least once for each code change. Therefore, 

it does not affect the overall code coverage of the test process. 
IV.
 HISTORIC 
TEST 
PERFORMANCE 
DATA 
FEEDS
 The process collects the results of prior test executions; this 
data 
is already collected by most test execution frameworks. T
he individual data sources we use to select test cases are depict in 

TABLE I. . The main data collection categories are:  
A. General Test Execution Information  
The name of the executed test (
TestName
) and the unique 
identifier of the test execution instance (
TestExecID
) are 
collected. This data allows us to bind and group test execution 
results to the according test case.  
B. Test Runtime 
We use the time taken for the test to run, i.e. the test 
execution time (
TestExecDuration
) for each test execution as 
recorded by the test framework. 
C. Test Results 
Further, we collect the results of all tests being run within the 
development process. A test failure is where the expected result 
of a test could not be produced (i.e., assertion failed), or the 
whole test execution terminated with an error. Usually, we 
assume that a failing test indicates a code defect, caused by 

introducing a defect (e.g. through side effects) when merging 

multiple parallel-developed code changes. However, it might 

also be that the test case reporting the test failure is not reliable. 

We call test failures due to test reliability issues 
false alarms
.  Categorizing the test result as 
passing
 or 
failing
 is implicitly 
given by the testing framework. However, it is also important to 
further distinguish test failures into 
code defects
 and 
false 
alarms
. To do so, we need additional information. Using links 
between test failures and bug reports, we can distinguish test 
failures due to 
code defects
 from 
false alarms
 [5]. If the failure 
led to a bug report that was later fixed by applying a code change 

we mark it as a 
code defect
. Otherwise, the failed test execution 
is marked as a 
false alarm
. To identify their cause, test failures 
always need to be manually inspected to either fix the problem 

or identify the test failure a
s false alarm
. Due to resource 
restrictions, not all test failures can be investigated. Therefore, 
test failures that were not manually investigated are marked as 

undecided
 and ignored, as their cause is indeterminable. 
D. Execution Context 
Modern software systems tend to be multi-platform 
applications running on different processor architectures, e.g. 

x64
 and 
arm
, different machines, and different configurations. 
We define an execution context as a set of properties used to 
distinguish between different test environments. In this paper, 
we use the execution context properties 
BuildType
, Architecture
, Language
, Branch 
(see TABLE I. for
 detailed description). 
However, the concept of execution contexts is variable. Adding 

or removing properties will influence the number of different 
execution contexts but requires no modification of the general 
approach. This is a crucial point as a test may show different 
execution behaviors for different execution contexts. For 

example, a test might find more issues on code of one branch 

than another depending on the type of changes performed on that 

branch. For example, tests cases testing core functionality might 
find more defects on a branch containing kernel changes than on 
a branch managing media changes. Thus, our approach will not 

only differentiate between test cases, but also bind historic defect 

detection capabilities of a test to its execution context. 
V. TEST 
FAILURE 
PROBABILITIES
 Given a planned test execution and given the corresponding 
execution context, we can use past test executions of the same 

test in the same execution context and derive the number of 
reported defects and the number of false test alarm that the test 
reported. From these past observations, we can derive two 
failure probabilities: 
 as the probability that the combination 
of test and execution context will detect a defect (true positive) 

and 
 as the probability that the combination of test and 
execution context will report a 
false alarm
 (false positive). These 
probabilities are defined as: 





 


 TABLE I. 
 TEST EXECUTION DATA U
SED FOR TEST SE
LECTION
. Data point
 Description
 General test execution information
 TestName
 Unique name of test case executed.
 TestExecID
 Unique identifier of test case execution. 
 Test runtime information
 TestExecDuration
 Number of seconds the recorded test case ex
ecution 
lasted.
 Test result information
 TestExecResult
 The result of the 
test 
execution. Possible value: 
passed
, code 
defect
, false alarm
, undecided. 
Requires interpretation as described in 
Section 
IV.C
 Execution context inf
ormation
 BuildType
 The build type of the binaries on which the test was 
executed. Possible value
: debug
, release
. Architecture
 Architecture information of the binaries under test. 
Possible values: 
x86
, x64
, a
rm. Language
 Language information of the bina
ries under test, e.g. 
en-us. Especially media and GUI tests depend on it.
 Branch
 Unique identifier of the source code branch on which 
the test execution was performed.
   485485485 where the tuple 

 is a combination of test 
 and execution 
context 
, where
 
 represents the number 
of defects reported by 
 when executed in c
, 
 represents the number of times 
 has been executed in 
, and 
where 

 represents the number of false test 
alarms caused by 
 when executed in 
. For example, consider 
a test 
 executed 100 times in an execution context 
, e.g. on build 
type 
release
, architecture 
x64
, branch 
b, and language 
en-us, which report
ed 4 false alarms and 7 defects, then 


 and 


. Both probability measurements 
consider the entire history from the beginning of monitoring 
until the moment the test is about to be executed. Consequently, 

probability measures get more stable and more reliable the more 

historic information we gathered for the corresponding test. 
Note that test failure probabilities enclose code coverage like 
information. For tests not covering a changed code area and for 

test covering the code area but not checking any execution 
results, the defect detection probability 
 will be zero. 
VI.
 COST 
MODELLING 
THEORY
 The decision of when to execute or skip a test case in a given 
execution context is solely based on cost. The idea is to estimate 
the cost of executing or not executing 
a test in a given execution 
context beforehand and to choose the less expensive option. 
A cost model was developed to deliver the cost factors for 
the test selection strategy, using the data feeds and test failure 
probabilities discussed in Section 
IV. It is sensitive to the history 
of a test case as it considers past test executions in the same 
context to assess the expected cost values. For each scheduled 

test execution, the cost model considers two different scenarios: 

executing the scheduled test and not executing it. For both 
scenarios and the given execution context, 
we estimate the 
corresponding expected costs and decide for the scenario which 
is expected to be less expensive. Thus, if the estimated cost of 
not executing the test (


) is lower than the cost executing 
it (


), THEO will skip the test execution
not selecting 
the test to be executed. 
For both execution scenarios, the contributing cost factors 
must be considered. Executing a test raises both the 
computational cost (Section VI.A
) and the cost of inspecting the 
test result (Section VI.B), if necessary. Executing tests that fail 

without detecting a real code defect will trigger unnecessary 
failure inspections performed by engineers. On the other hand, 
not executing a test might lead to undetected defects that will 

escape to later development stages and therefore impact more 

engineers than necessary (Section IV.C) 
In this paper, cost facto
rs, which are described with positive 
values, express the expected cost to be paid. We could also have 

described cost saving values with negative amounts and cost 

increasing values with positive amounts, but we explicitly 
wanted to avoid any up-front judgment on these figures. 
A. Base Cost of Test Executions 
A major cost facto
r is the time-shared cost of infrastructure 
necessary to execute a test on all required execution contexts. 
 2 Price for Azure A7 high memory VM as of  Feb. 2014: $1.6 per hour 
The constant 


 is a constant representing the per 
minute infrastructure cost. Multiplied with the execution time 
per test, we get the total infrastructure cost of running a test. For 
the Microsoft development environment we computed 


 to have a value of 0.03 $/min. The cost factor 
corresponds roughly to the cost of a memory intense Azure 
Windows virtual machine
2 and includes power and hardware 
consumption, as well as maintenance.  
For example, consider we executed a test 100 times in a 
given execution context and that each execution took 10 
minutes. The total machine cost required to run the test in that 
context accumulates to 100 * 10 * 0.03 $/min = $30. 
B. Cost of Test Inspections 
All test failures require human inspection effo
rt, but 
inspecting failing tests due to anything other than code defects is 
unnecessary and should be avoided. The cost of a test inspection 
equals the amount of time required to conduct the inspection 
times the salary of the engineer conducting the inspection. The 
cost constant 


 represents the average cost rate of test 
failure inspections at Microsoft. It conside
rs the size of the test 
inspection teams, the number of inspections performed and the 
average salary of engineers on the team. The average cost per 

test inspection is $9.60. Although this cost may vary from case 

to case, for simplicity reasons, we use the average cost of a test 
inspection in our model. Note that this cost reflects only the time 
spent by inspecting engineers. Additional cost factors such as 

waiting time or the need to run extra tests is not included. 
C. Cost of Escaped Defects 
Code defects escaping a test run can be expensive. The 
longer 
a defect remains hidden the more people can potentially 
be affected and the more expensive the escaped defect become. 
Defects closer to release dates tend to be more expensive [6] and 
increased time from defect introduction to its detection increases 

cost due to aggravated root cause analysis (more changes have 

been applied since then). Understanding and fixing an older 

change is more difficult. Additionally, the greater the number of 
engineers affected by a defect, the more expensive disruptions 
will be while fixing the defect. Defects usually imply some sort 

of development freeze, e.g. no check-ins until issue resolved. 
The constant 


 represents the average cost of an 
escaped defect. This cost depends on the number of people that 
will be affected by the escaped defect and the time duration the 
defect remains undetected. We used a value of $4.20 per 
developer and hour of delay for 


. This value 
represents the average cost of a bug elapsing within Microsoft. 
Depending on the time the defect remains undetected and the 

number of additional engineers affected, elapsing a defect from 

a development branch into the main trunk branch in Windows 

can cost tens of thousands of dollars. 
We do not model defect severity explicitly. There are two 
main reasons for this. First, the severity of a defect cannot be 

determined prior to its occurrence
we would need to predict 
defect severity, which will not be reliable or actionable. Second, 
486486486 all defects breaking a system and integration test and causing 
development activity to freeze on the corresponding branch must 
be considered severe. Vice versa, system constraints and 
properties whose violations are not considered severe will not be 
tested during system and integration testing. Such defects are 

caught by pre-check-in verification processes or dog-food and 

manual testing procedures. For example, breaking look and feel 

properties may not cause a development freeze. The impact of 

the defect on the overall system is too low to cause a sever 
disruption of the overall development process. 
D. Final Cost Function 
Finally, we combine the individual cost components into two 
cost functions: the expected cost of executing a test (


) 
and the expected cost for not executing a test (


). 


 represents the expected cost if we decide to execute 
the test which depends on the machine cost (


), the 
probability that the executed test will fail due to any other reason 
as a defect (
), and the cost of conducting an unnecessary test 
failure inspecting (


): 






 

 represents the expected cost of not executing the test 
which depends on the cost of escaped 
defects (


) and 
the number of additionally affected engineers (

) and the time the defect remains undetected (


): 







 The number of engineers 
(
) is a static property 
of the engineering system and can be determined by 
counting the number of engineers whose code changes 
passed the current code branch. The  


 is the 
average time span required to fix historic defects on the 
corresponding code branch. Both properties are easy to 

measure and reliable (we verified these values with the 

corresponding product teams).  

or tests that found no defects in the given execution context, 
 and 


 is zero and the test 
is skipped. The same test 
for 
a different execution context (e.g. different branch) is likely 
to have a different 
 value and thus might remain enabled. 
Note, that we skip tests only if we know that the code change 
will be tested by the same execution context later again, e.g. on 

a lower branch level as shown in Fig. 1.  
VII.
 IMPROVEMENT 
STRATEGY 
SIMULATION
 Applying THEO to a live development environment without 
a period of thorough evaluation is too risky as it can directly 

impact product quality. The result presented are based on 

simulations of THEO on past development periods. This section 

discusses the process of simulating the execution of the test
s and 
also simulating the impact of any failures that would propagate 
as test
s are removed. Simulating the test selection process also 
allows us to compare our results with actual test and code quality 
behavior.  
A. Simulating Test Case Executions 
To simulate the behavior and impact of our test selection 
strategy, we replayed test executions as they occurred in past 

development periods. Tests executions and their test results 

(failed or passed) are recorded in databases by the test execution 

frameworks at Microsoft. Using these databases, we know the 

test suite and test case executions, the execution contexts these 
tests were executed, and the order in which these tests run. This 
information is sufficient for the simulation. Our simulation 

process follows the following basic steps, described in Fig. 2.   
Step 1:
 Using the databases containing the test executions 
and their corresponding test execution results (failed or 
passed), we order these historic test executions by their 
execution timestamp. Thus, our test optimization strategy is 

fed with test executions in the order they were applied. 
Step 2:
 Each historic test execution and the corresponding 
test execution context definition is fed into a simulation 
process running an implementation of our test selection 

strategy. The test selection process then returns a binary 

decision indicating whether the test case received as input is 

selected to be executed by the test selection strategy. 
Step 3:
 Depending on the binary result, the originally 
executed test is marked as 
skipped
 or 
executed 
in a separate 
simulation table. Skipped test executions represent those test 
executions that would not be executed when using our test 

selection strategy. 
Our simulation process does not execute test cases. It only makes 
decisions on whether a test case would have been executed, 
depending on the cost balance tightly influence by its defect 

finding capabilities. The result of this test case simulation is a 

simple list of test case executions that would have been 

prevented when using our test selection strategy. This list can be 

used to compare against the original set of executed tests. 
B. Simulating Defect Detection 
Removing test executions may impact code quality. Defects 
detected by test executions that have been removed by THEO 
 Fig. 2. 
 Flow chart illustrating the test execution simulation process. For each 
test execution and execution context, ordered by time, we decide which 
tests should 
be execute
d. 487487487 would remain undetected, at least for some time
. Disabling test 
executions is likely to have impact on code changes and 
developer behavior, which cannot be simulated. Thus, we have 
to estimate how undetected defects would propagate through the 
development process and when they would be detected
.   The heuristic estimating when and where escaped defects 
would have been recaptures requires more data about the actual 
project specific development process. This data is needed to gain 

further insight in how code changes, and thus defects, propagate 

through the development process. For this part of our simulator, 

we collect the following, project specific datasets and make 

some basic assumptions about code defects and test behavior
.   
Integration paths of code changes and defects 
Assuming a base code branch, usually called 
trunk
, the 
integration path
 of a code change is a sequence of branches and 

timestamps the corresponding code change was applied to 
before the code change was merged into trunk. For projects 
using a single development branch, e.g. Microsoft Office, the 
integration path of a code change is a single entry identifying the 
name of the single branch and the commit timestamp. For 

projects using multiple code branches, e.g. Microsoft Windows, 

the integration path usually contains multiple entries. For 

example, consider the example shown in Fig. 1. The integration 
path of change 
C lists the branches 
B1, B2, 
B3, and 
trunk
 including the timestamps of the corresponding merge operation 
that applied 
C to the code base in each bran
ch.  For each change originally applied to the version control 
system, we compute their corresponding integration paths 

tracing code changes through the version control system [3]. For 

more details on that procedure, we refer t
o Murphy et al. [3]. 
Basic defect and test behavior assumptions 
We make the following two assumptions with respect to code 
issues and test cases detecting these code issues: 
1. A combination of test case and execution context
3, that 
detected and reported a defect at time 
 will also detect 
and report the same defect at any time 
 if and only if  

 and if 
 is executed on an integration path of 
the defect. This assumption disregards that (even though 

unlikely) the code defect might have be suppressed but 

not fixed by other code changes applied to the code base.  
2. The code issue can be replicated by re-running the test 

in the corresponding execution context. 
We discussed these assumptions with various Microsoft 
product teams who verified and confirmed the
ir validity. Product 
teams also confirmed that in few cases, code defects escape their 

original branches and are re-captured on higher-level branches 

or later on the same branch. 
C. Assigning defects to simulated test executions 
The integration path of code changes is assumed to 
correspond to the propagation path of undetected defects, and 
 3 For defect propagation purposes, we ignore all branch specific execution 
context information as long as the change containing the defect was 
integrated into the branch.  
can be used to estimate which test execution would have re-
captured an escaped defect. In the example shown in Fig. 1. 
a defect in change C is caught by test 
T2 and the code does not 
progress past branch 
B2. A bug fix is created and verified by 
tests 
T4, T5 and 
T6. If THEO skips test 
T2 the defect is assumed 
to be immediately merged into branch 
B3. THEO assumes the 
defect is caught by test 
T6 as it runs the same tests as 
T2. In this 
scenario the bug fix would be applied in branch 
B1 after running 
test 
T6 and THEO would assume that the cost of fixing the defect 
is now higher than its original cost.   
 While the original association between defect and test 
execution is stored in the test execution framework database, our 
simulator returns a modified version of the original associations 
reflecting simulation results. For each test that is executed during 

simulation, we assign all original code issues detected during test 

execution. Additionally, we assign all escaped defects to the test 

execution that would have been caught given the heuristics 
above. As a result, the number of defects associated with a test 
execution equals the number of defects during the actual 
execution of the test, plus an additional set of escaped defects. 
D. Executing all Test Cases At Least Once 
The goal of this work is to optimize testing processes without 
sacrificing product quality. This implies that we ensure that all 
escaped defects are eventually caught, before releasing the 
product to customers. To satisfy this condition, we ensure all 

originally executed combinations of tests and execution contexts 

for all code changes applied to the code base are executed at least 

once
. To ensure this happens we use two separate criteria, 
depending on the development process: 
 Option 1:
 For single branch development processes, e.g. 
Microsoft Office, we enforce each test to execute at least 
every third day
4. Since all code changes are applied to the 
same branch, re-execution of each test for each execution 
context periodically ensures that each code change has to go 
through the same verification procedures as performed 

originally. 
Option 2:
 For multi-branch development processes, e.g. 
Microsoft Windows, we enforce to execute a combination of 
test and execution context on the branch closest to trunk on 

which the test had been executed originally
.  Thus, THEO can only skip test executions if the criteria 
described above allow a test to be skipped

decision to skip a test in a given execution context will be 

ignored by the simulator and the test will be executed. 
E. Training Phase 
As the underlying cost model depends on risk factors 
extracted from historic data, these risk factors will be unknown 
and unreliable in the early stages of the simulation process, in 
which no historic data is known. To compensate, each test and 

execution context combination has to go through a training 
4 This value is the result of a complex analysis we conducted with the 
Office product team and reflects the optimal solution for the system. Due 
to confidential reasons, we cannot share the details of this process. 
488488488 phase of 50 executions before the simulator will allow THEO to 
disable the corresponding test in the given execution context.  
VIII.
 SIMULATION 
EVALUATION
 A. Test Execution Reduction 
The first evaluation identifies the number of test executions 
that were skipped during the simulation of the test selection 

strategy. To retrieve this number, we count the number of 
originally recorded test executions and subtract the number of 
test executions that our test strategy would have executed during 

simulation. We report the 
relative test reduction rate
 as the 
number of skipped test execution divided by the total number of 

originally executed test execution during development. 

Considering the execution time of individual test executions, see 
Section IV.B, we can translate the relative test reduction rate into 
relative test execution time improvements
the total execution 
time of all skipped test executions divided by the total test 

execution time of all tests executed originally. We further show 

reduction rates over time. The number of skipped test executions 

and their summed execution duration determines how much 
machine cost 


 has been saved.  
B. Test Result Inspection 
As discussed in Section VI.B, test failures require human 
effort for inspection in order to decide what 
action to take
. Skipping test cases that would have caused unnecessary test 
inspections (
false alarms
) is an improvement. Relating these 
suppressed 
false alarms
 with the corresponding cost factor for 
test failure inspections (


), identifies the relative 
improvement with respect to test inspection time and the 
associated development cost improvements. 
C. Escaped Defects 
While the reduction in test executions (Section VIII.A) and 
the reduction in test inspections (Section VIII.B) relate to 
productivity and cost improvements, the number of defects that 
escaped due to skipped test execution
s reflects the negative 
aspects of THEO and relates to development cost increases. We 

report the number of 
escaped defects
 relative to the number of 
all code defects reported by test executions. The simulator is 
pessimistic assuming defects can only be found by the same test 
cases that are ignored (comparing 
TestName
 and 
TestExecID
), in reality they may be caught earlier by other test cases
.  D. Cost Improvement 
Skipping tests may save development time. At the same time 
it imposes risk 
of escaped defects temporarily compromising 
code quality, and thus to increase development cost
finding 
defects later in the development tends to be more expensive [6]
. To validate if the estimated development cost improvements 

predominate the estimated development cost increases, we 

report the 
total cost balance
 as the balance of cost reductions
. We add the cost reductions due to reduced test time and du to 
less test failure inspections and subtract the extra cost of escaped 
bugs. A positive balance reflects cases in which the 
improvements predominate. Negative balances refer to cases in 
which our optimization strategy THEO does not payoff and 
would have caused additional development costs rather than 

lowering them.  
E. Evaluation Subject 
We evaluated the effects of THEO on three major Microsoft 
products: Windows, Office, and Dynamics. Combined, our 

simulation results cover 26 months of product development, 
more than 37 million test executions. TABLE II. contains 
information about the duration of simulated development 

periods and the number of simulated test cases per project.  
Results presented for Windows reflect the entire Windows 8.1 
development period (~11 months). For Windows, we simulated 

more than 30 million test executions. Simulation results for 

Office cover development activities and test executions 

covering three mont
hsa total of more than 1.2 million test 
executions. For Dynamics, we simulated a development period 

of 12 months with more than 6.5 million test executions. While 

Windows and Dynamics use multi-branch development setups, 

Office uses a single collaboration branch. Thus, for simulations 

for Windows and Dynamics, we enforce to execute a 

combination of test and execution context on the branch closest 
to trunk (Option 2 discussed in Section VII.D), while for Office 
we simulate using the time based test execution policy (Option 

1 discussed in Section VII.D).
 IX.
 SIMULATION 
RESULTS
 In this section, we present and discuss the results of our 
simulation experiments as described in Section VII. We will 
restrict the discussion in this section to measurable 
improvements. Section X contains a discussion on secondary 

improvements that cannot be measured directly. 
Similar to the cost model the overall cost improvement 
depends on the constant cost estimations as presented in Section 

VIII. The results are summarized in TABLE III.  
A. Test Execution and Test Time Reduction 
THEO would have skipped 40.6% of all Windows test 
executions across all branches. Considering the runtime of these 
tests and relating it to the total runtime of all executed tests, 

THEO would have saved 40.3% of the total test execution time. 
This is a significant improvement. In simulation, submitting a 
code change to a development branch in Windows could have 

been integrated into trunk in only 60% of the original integration 
time. Note that this measurement considers only test execution 
time, but does not consider other development or human factors. 

Thus, the test time improvement of 40% may not translate to a 

40% increase in integration time, but it certainly lowers the 

lower bound of integration time. Multiplying the test time 

improvement with the cost factor for test execution 
(

), we yield a cost improvement of over $1.6 
million. Note that the test time cost improvement figures 
TABLE II. 
 EVALUATION SUBJECT DE
TAILS
.  Windows
 Office
 Dynamics
 Simulated 
period
 ~11 months
 ~3 months
 ~12 months
 #test 
executions
 > 30 million
 > 1.2 million 
 > 6.5 million
 # branches
 > 1 1 > 1 
     489489489 consider only the time of not executing the skipped tests. It does 
not include potential cost improvements due to skipping test 
setups, test teardowns, removing entire dedicated test machines 
from a branch, etc. Thus, the test time cost improvement must 
be seen as a lower bound of the actual cost improvement.  
The average test execution reduction rate for Dynamics is above 
50%. This means that THEO would have prevented more than 

half of the originally executed test executions and saved 47% of 

test execution time. In theory, code could have been moved 

nearly 50% faster into the trunk branch, a significant 
improvement. Although the test execution and test time 
reduction rate exceeds the values achieved for Windows, the test 

machine cost improvements that correlated with the reduced test 

time are two orders of magnitude lower than for Windows. This 

is due to the fact, that tests executed for Dynamics terminate 

much faster than Windows tests. Thus, the reduction rate is 
translating into less computational time and thus is less lucrative. 
The same is true for Office tests, which also execute much faster 
and therefore the savings on reduction of test execution time are 
lower than for Windows. The cost savings for Office are further 
less significant as we only simulate a three-month period and test 

executions on one branch. Nevertheless, THEO would have 

skipped a significant number of 34.9% of all performed test 

executions and saved 
40.1% of the total test execution time 
B. Test Result Inspection
.  As discussed for the cost modelling theory (Section 
VI), 
THEO specifically targets unnecessary test inspections caused 
by test failures due to other reasons than code defects (false test 
alarms). Suppressing such test failures implies reduction of 

unnecessary test result inspections, which translates into cost 

savings. Row 

 of TABLE III. contains 
the relative number of spared test inspection
s for all three 
products. For Windows and Dynamics, the reduction rate lies 
around 33%
; one third of originally carried out test result 
inspections were unnecessary
. For Office, THEO would 
suppress 21.1% of all false positives. Interestingly, the 
associated cost improvements for Windows ($61k
) and Office 
($104k
) are again two orders of magnitudes lower when 
compared to Dynamics ($2.3
M). The reason for the difference is 
again the different absolute number of test failures suppressed. 
C. Escaped Defects 
While removed test executions and reduced test inspections 
determines a positive cost savings, the number of temporarily 
escaped defects increases development costs. 
In our Windows simulation, 0.2% of all defects escaped at 
least one test execution. As shown in TABLE IV. 71% of these 

escaped defects escaped only one branch and were found in the 
corresponding next merge branch. 21% of escaped Windows 
defects escaped two branches and 8% escaped even 3 branches. 
Importantly, none of the defects escaped into the trunk branch. 

On Dynamics, THEO would have elapsed 13.4% of all defects, 

a much higher escape rate as for Windows. The vast majority 
(97%) of these escaped Dynamics defects were caught on the 
direct consecutive merge branch. The remaining 3% escaped 

two branch levels. For both Windows and Dynamics, the extra 
cost caused by escaped bugs is significant. However, in both 

cases, these new extra costs are orders of magnitudes lower than 

the highest cost savings achieved by removed test executions 
and inspections.  
For Office, the results are a bit different. Whereby the 
percentage of bugs that escaped is 8.7%, which is comparable to 

Dynamics, the costs are $75k higher in relation to the cost 
savings. This is due to an additional cost of manual testing work 
that we added as a penalty for Office in case the bugs was not 
found within 10 days. The rationale behind this lies in the way 
the Office test and development is performed. Nevertheless, 
approximately 40% of bugs escaped would have been found 
already in the next scheduled build and test.   
D. Cost Improvement
.  Looking at the overall cost balance, we see cost savings for all 
three evaluation subjects. For Windows, we estimate a total cost 

saving of $1.6M, for Dynamics, a total cost saving of 
approximate $2.0M 
and for Office a cost saving of approximate 
$100k. These values may seem small considering the total 
development budgets of projects of their scale. However, this 

only identifies test savings. Considering the actual test execution 

reduction rates 
of 35% to 50% puts these numbers into 
perspective. The actual values are secondary
, it is important that 
the achieved productivity increase though faster integrations
.  E. Variable Performance over Time 
Fig. 3. shows the relative test execution reduction over time 

(measured in development days) for Windows. The dark area 

corresponds to originally executed tests that were removed 
during simulation. As shown, THEO requires an initial training  
TABLE III. 
 SIMULATION RESULTS
 FOR MICROSOFT 
WINDOWS
, OFFICE
, AND DYNAMICS
.  Windows
 Office
 Dynamics
  Measurement
 Rel. improvement
 Cost improvement
 Rel. improvement
 Cost improvement
 Rel. improvement
 Cost improvement
 Test execu
tions
 40.58%
 -- 34.9%
 -- 50.36%
 -- Test time
 40.31%
 $1,567,607.76
 40.1% $76,509.24
 47.45%
  $19,979.03 
 Test result inspection
 33.04%
 $61,532.80
 21.1%
 $104,880
.00
 32.53%
 $2,337,926.40
 Escaped 
defects
 0.20%
 $11,970.56
 8.7%
 $75,326.40
 13.40%
 $310,159.42
 Total cost 
balance
  $1,617,170.00
  $106,063.24
  $2,047,746.01
        TABLE IV. 
 DISTRIBUTION OF ESCAP
ED DEFECTS OVER 
NUMBER OF 
ESCAPED BRANCHES FOR
 WINDOWS AND 
DYNAMICS
.  Number of escaped branch levels
  1 2 3 Windows
 71%
 21%
 8% Dynamics
 97%
 3% 0%     490490490 phase (see Section VII) in which we observe the current testing 
process to estimates risk factors before applying any test 
selection. Once THEO starts skipping test executions, the ratio 

of removed executions converges to an almost stable state. The 

plot shows fluctuations in the relative number of reduced test 
executions, e.g. a sharp drop from nearly 55% to 40% midway 
through the plotted timespan. The reason for the
se fluctuations 
in test execution reduction rates are natural fluctuations in code 

quality. T
he quality of submitted code changes is not constant; 
a drop in overall code quality causes more test failures and directly 

influences risk factors. Changes in risk factors can cause 
previously skipped tests to be re-enabled. Reduction rates for 
Office and Dynamics look similar. Due to space reason, we 

abstain from showing these plots.  
X. SECONDARY 
IMPROVEMENTS
 The measurable improvements discussed in Section 
IX are 
likely to have further, secondary consequences. Although, these 
improvements are not directly measurable, they are an important 
part of the improvement of the development processes. 
A. Code Velocity 
Reducing the number of executions and consequently th
e overall required test time may have positive effects on code 
velocity. Executing fewer tests implies that code changes have 
to spend less time in verification and changes can be integrated 

faster, freeing up engineering time that may have been spent 

evaluating false positives. However, the immediate impact on 

code velocity is hard to measure. Code velocity is determined by 

many different aspects, including human behavior, which is not 
possible to simulate. Thus, it is hard to predict how THEO would 
affect actual development speed. It might well be that the 

bottleneck of current development processes is not only testing. 

Nevertheless, the number of executed tests represents a lower 

bound to code velocity, as the consecutive time necessary to pass 

all required tests is the minimal time required to integrate code 
changes. By lowering the number of executed tests, THEO 
lowers the lower bound for code velocity. 
B. Developer Satisfaction 
A very important but also hard to measure factor of every 
development process is developer satisfaction. Reducing the 
time for testing and the number of required test inspections is 
likely to increase developer satisfaction. It should help to 
increase the confidence in test results and decisions based on 
testing. Increasing the speed of the development process will 
itself also impact the developer experience. The ability to merge, 

integrate, and share code changes faster can reduce the number 

of merge conflicts and is likely to support collaboration.  
XI.
 THREATS TO 
VALIDITY
 Like most empirical studies, the presented study has threats 
to validity. We identified three main groups of threats. 
A. Generalizability 
We investigated test executions specific to three Microsoft 
products and their development processes. Even though some 
terminology might be unique to Microsoft, the execution of tests 

during software development and the impact of test execution 
time on development speed are generalizable.  
The estimated costs presented in this paper are specific to 
Microsoft. The cost model considers several independent but 
development process specific aspects and cost factors are likely 
to vary across releases and projects (e.g. cost factors for 

machines and engineers). Replicating this study for different 

projects or releases requires detailed reviews and adjustments. 
B. Construct Validity 
The approach to estimate the impact of escaped defects and 
to identify those test cases that would eventually re-capture these 
defects is a heuristic and associated cost values must be 

considered approximations. However, our data was derived 

through investigations, discussions and fine-tuning with the 

corresponding product teams. We consider the approximations 
of these heuristics as fair and realistic. Cost factors used in this 
study are based on average Microsoft development figures and 

numbers (e.g. average salary and work hours per year). These 

numbers vary and might not consider all possible aspects. 
Execution context information might be particular important 
for system and integration tests while other tests, e.g. unit tests, 

might be more independent from them. However, the presented 

concept is generic. Reducing the number of execution contexts 

to one or further increasing the number of execution contexts 
does not threat the validity of the overall approach. 
C. Internal Threats to Validity 
The simulator may contain defects. To conquer this threat, 
we implemented multiple test cases and performed manual 
inspections. Through validating with product teams, we are 
confident that the data collected and analyzed reflects the 
development process
es accurately. 
 XII.
 RELATED 
WORK
 In this section, we give an overview of related studies. 
A. Test Selection, Prioritization, and Reduction 

rally 

[7]. Based on this concept, Basili and Selby [8] presented one of 
the first studies comparing the effectiveness and cost of testing 
 Fig. 3. 
 Relative test execution reductio
n rate for Windows over time. The area 
shows 
the relative number 
of 
tests 
skipped
 by THEO.
 491491491 strategies showing that changing or choosing different test 
strategies might impact test effectiveness. 
Many of the following research studies focus
ed on the area 
of test case selection, prioritization, and reduction. In 2007, Yoo 

and Harman [9] presented a comprehensive survey of research 

studies showing that many techniques assume access either to 
code, execution traces or some sort of model to derive selection 
criteria (i.e., based on code coverage)  [9, 10, 11]. In contrast, 

the strategy discussed in this paper, does not make any such 

assumption. We treat tests entirely as black boxes. Lately, 

Anderson et al. [12] used software repositories to measure 

historic test performances. This study was carried out in parallel 
to this work and does not provide any dynamic test selection 
solution, but rather assess the effectiveness of tests. 
Schroeder and Korel [13] used input-output analysis to 
construct test input to reduce the number of required black box 

test executions without lowering test effectiveness. Contrary to 
their study, THEO measures test effectiveness based on a cost 
model and uses the context and frequency of executions to drive 

efficiency improvement. Altering inputs for tests would not be 

actionable at Microsoft. Goradia [14] used the fault exposing 
potential of a test as the selection criteria, whereby he relies on 
mutation analysis, i.e., modification of the original program to 

determine the probabilities of a test to reveal a fault. More 

generally, a number of empirical case studies and extensive 

literature reviews compared and identify test tools most likely to 
yield optimal test effectiveness [14, 15, 16, 17, 10, 18]. 
With respect to test executions costs, Vallespir and Herbert 
[19] used machine and inspection costs for individual unit tests 

to conclude that the number found defects is low compared to 
the relatively high cost of unit tests. However, the cost 
calculation presented in [19] are based on three samples and are 
rather vague and seem not applicable for development process
es nor for system and integration tests at Microsoft. 
B. Cost Aware Improvement Strategies 
Using cost-aware test improvement strategies is not unique
. Yoo and Harman [20] and Alspaugh et al. [21] used time-aware 
techniques selecting a subset of test cases that can be executed 

in a given time budget. Do et al. [22] assessed the effect of time 

constraints on the cost and benefits of prioritization techniques. 

Additionally, empirical studies exist that consider the impact of 
testing strategies on the cost-effectiveness in the wider context 
of the overall software lifecycle [10, 23]. Lately, Li and Boehm 

[24] proposed a value-based test prioritization strategy ranking 

tests by their risk exposure coverage and the relative cost of tests
. Gustafson [25] applied cost factors to software flow graphs to 
define areas that require additional testing. The difference 
between these studies and THEO is that THEO is solely based 

on a dynamic, empirically derived cost model, which directly 

impacts the strategy decisions. Our model uses not only the cost 

and risk of executing or skipping a test but relates both values to 

each other. Empirical evaluations and application of testing 
techniques at industrial settings [26, 27, 28] remain limited [9]. 
All those studies focus on regression test suites. To the best 
of our knowledge, this study is the first that evaluates system and 

integration test effectiveness based on execution contexts such 
as branching structures and architectures. 
C. Merge Conflicts and Awareness 
Even though version control systems allow parallel 
development activities and avoid conflicts, several studies 
showed that merge conflicts occur frequently, whereby most of 
the studies focused on facilitating collaboration effectiveness. 

One of the first studies that showed how frequent merge conflicts 

occur has been performed by Zimmermann [29]. He showed that 

between 22% and 46% of integrations could not be 

automatically resolved and resulted in conflicts. In a recent 
study, Brun et al. [30] showed that merge conflicts are frequent 
and persistent. In summary, they showed that 33% of merges that 

were reported to contain no textual conflicts by the version 

control system, in fact contained higher-order conflicts, which 

manifested themselves as a build or a test failure. Also Perry et 

al. showed significant correlations between the degree of parallel 
work and the number of quality problems [31]. The effect of 
merge conflicts on quality has also been studied by Bird and 
Zimmermann [2]. Those studies aimed at quantifying the degree 
of merge conflicts, or at establishing collaborative awareness for 

merge conflicts, we focus on quantifying and improving the 

effectiveness and efficiency of tests. 
XIII.
 CONCLUSION
 We presented a novel cost based test selection strategy
, THEO, which skips test executions where the expected cost of 

running the test exceeds the expected cost of not running it. Our 

strategy is dynamic and self-adaptive and only uses historic
al test data, which is already collected by most test frameworks. 

THEO was verified through simulating its impact on the 

Microsoft Windows, Office, and Dynamics developments. 
THEO would have reduced the number of test executions by up 
to 50% cutting down test time by up to 47%. At the same time, 
product quality was not sacrificed as the process ensures that all 
tests are ran at least once on all code changes
. Removing tests 
would result in between 0.2% and 13% of defects being caught 
later in the development process, thus increasing the cost of 

fixing th
ose defects
. Nevertheless simulation shows that THEO 
produced an overall cost reduction of up to $2 million per 

development year, per product. Through reducing the overall 
test time, THEO would also have other impacts on the product 
development process, such as increasing code velocity and 

productivity. These improvements are hard to quantify but are 

likely to increase the cost savings estimated in this paper. 
The technique and results described in this paper have 
convinced an increasing number of product teams, within 

Microsoft, to provide dedicate resources to explore ways to 
integrate THEO into their actual live production test 
environments
.  ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 We thank the Windows, Office, and Dynamics development 
teams for their help and feedback. This work is based on data 

extracted from varies development repositories by the 

Cod

Engineers group. Our special thanks go to Jason Means, Blerim 
Kuliqi, Alex Gorischek
, Alain Zariffa, Wayne Roseberry, 
Adrian Marius Marin, Craig Campbell, and Alan Back.  
492492492 REFERENCES
 [1] 
 M. Vakilian, R. Sauciuc, J. D. Morgenthaler and V. Mirrokni, 

 [2] 
 
What
-
Proceedings of the ACM SIGSOFT 20th 
Internatio
nal Symposium on the Foundations of Software Engineering
, Cary, North Carolina, 2012. 
 [3] 
 
Microsoft Research, Cambridge, 2014.
 [4] 
 
the 

Commun. ACM, 
vol. 43, pp. 63
--69, 
apr 2000. 
 [5] 
 

Acceppted for 8th International Symposium on Empirical Software 
Engineering and Measurement (ESEM)
, Torino, 2014. 
 [6] 
 F. Shull, V. Basili, B. Boehm, A. Brown, P. Costa, M. Lindvall, D. Port, 

bout 

Software Metrics, 2002. Proceedings. Eighth IEEE 
Symposium on
, 2002. 
 [7] 
 
Software Metrics Symposium, 1993. Proceedings., First International
, 1993. 
 [8] 
 V. R. 


IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., 
vol. 13, no. 12, pp. 1278
--1296, December 1987. 
 [9] 
 
prioritization: a s

Softw. Test. Verif. Reliab., 
vol. 22, no. 2, pp. 67
--120, March 2012. 
 [10] 
 

IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng., 
vol. 28, no. 2, pp. 159
--182, February 
2002. 
 [11] 
 
-Suite Reduction and Prioritization 

Proceedings of the IEEE 
International Conference on Software Maintenance (ICSM'01)
, 2001. 
 [12] 
 J. Anderson, S. Salem and 


Proceedings of the 11th 
Working Conference on Mining Software Repositories
, 2014. 
 [13] 
 
-box test reduction using input
-output analy

Proceedings of the 2000 ACM SIGSOFT 
international symposium on Software testing and analysis
, Portland, 
Oregon, USA, 2000. 
 [14] 
 
-effective technique to 
enforce error
-
Proceedings of th
e 1993 ACM SIGSOFT 
international symposium on Software testing and analysis
, Cambridge, 
Massachusetts, USA, 1993. 
 [15] 
 

Cyber Techn
ology 
in Automation, Control, and Intelligent Systems (CYBER), 2012 IEEE 
International Conference on
, 2012. 
 [16] 
 

Electronic Journal of 
Information Systems Evaluation, 
vol. 14, pp. 254 
- 270, 2011. 
    [17] 
 

Software Maintenance, 1999. 
(ICSM '99) Proceedings. IEEE International Conference on
, 1999
.  [18] 
 P. Braione, G. Denaro, A. Mattavelli, M. Vivanti and A. Muhammad, 

Automation of Software Test
, 2012 7th International Workshop on
, 2012. 
 [19] 
 D. Vallespir and J. Herb


Computer 
Science (ENC), 2009 Mexican International Conference on
, 2009. 
 [20] 
 
-objective test case 
selec

Proceedings of the 2007 international symposium on 
Software testing and analysis
, London, United Kingdom, 2007. 
 [21] 
 S. Alspaugh, K. R. Walcott, M. Belanich, G. M. Kapfhammer and M. L. 

-aware prioritization with knapsack 

Proceedings of the 1st ACM international workshop on Empirical 
assessment of software engineering languages and technologies: held in 
conjunction with the 22nd IEEE/ACM International Conference on 
Automated Software Engineering (ASE) 2007
, Atl
anta, Georgia, 2007. 
 [22] 
 
of the effect of time constraints on the cost
-benefits of regression 

Proceedings of the 16th ACM SIGSOFT International 
Symposium on Foundations
 of software engineering
, Atlanta, Georgia, 
2008. 
 [23] 
 G. Rothermel, S. Elbaum, A. G. Malishevsky, P. Kallakuri and X. Qiu, 

-
ACM 
Trans. Softw. Eng. Methodol., 
vol. 13, no. 3, pp. 277
--331
, july 2004. 
 [24] 
 
value
-
Proceedings of 
the 2013 International Conference on Software and System Process
, San 
Francisco, CA, USA, 2013. 
 [25] 
 

Proceedings of the July 9
-12, 1984, National Computer 
Conference and Exposition
, 1984. 
 [26] 
 

in 
Proceedings of the The 18th IEEE International Symposium on 
Software Reliability
, 2007. 
 [27] 
 
regression test selection 
technique on a large scale distributed software 

Empirical Software Engineering, 2005. 2005 International 
Symposium on
, 2005. 
 [28] 
 

 Proceedings of the ACM
-IEEE 
international symposium on Empirical software engineering and 
measurement
, Lund, Sweden, 2012. 
 [29] 
 
Proceedings 
of the Fourth International Workshop on Mining Software Rep
ositories
, Minneapolis, MN, USA, 2007. 
 [30] 
 

Proceedings of the 19th ACM SIGSOFT 
symposium and the 13th European conference on Foundations of 
software eng
ineering
, Szeged, Hungary, 2011. 
 [31] 
 
-scale 

ACM Trans. Softw. 
Eng. Methodol., 
vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 308
--337, July 2001. 
    493493493