 A Multiple Case Study on the Impact of Pair 
Programming on Product Quality 
Hanna Hulkko 
Elektrobit Ltd. 
Tutkijantie 8 
FIN-90570 Oulu, Finland 
+358 40 344 3440 hanna.hulkko@elektrobit.com 
Pekka Abrahamsson 
VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland 
P.O. Box 1100 
FIN-90571 Oulu, Finland 
+358 40 541 5929 pekka.abrahamsson@vtt.fi 
 ABSTRACT 
Pair programming is a programming technique in which two 
programmers use one computer to work together on the same task. 

There is an ongoing debate over the value of pair programming in 

software development. The current body of knowledge in this area 

is scattered and unorganized. Review shows that most of the 

results have been obtained from experimental studies in university 

settings. Few, if any, empirical studies exist, where pair 

programming has been systematically under scrutiny in real 

software development projects. Thus, its proposed benefits remain 

currently without solid empirical evidence. This paper reports 

results from four software development projects where the impact 

of pair programming on software product quality was studied. Our 

empirical findings appear to offer contrasting results regarding 

some of the claimed benefits of pair programming. They indicate 

that pair programming may not necessarily provide as extensive 

quality benefits as suggested in literature, and on the other hand, 

does not result in consistently superior productivity when 
compared to solo programming
. Categories and Subject Descriptors
 D.1.0. [
Programming Techniques
]: General. 
D.2.8. [
Software Engineering
]: Metrics Œ 
Process metrics, 
Product metrics. 
General Terms
 Measurement, Design, Human Factors. 
Keywords
 Agile Software Development, Extreme Programming, Empirical 
Software Engineering, Software Quality, Productivity. 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Pair programming, by definition, is a programming technique in 

which two programmers work together at one computer on the 

same task [1]. The person typing is called a driver, and the other 

partner is called a navigator. Both partners have their own 

responsibilities: the driver is in charge of producing the code 
while the navigator™s tasks are more strategic, such as looking for 
errors, thinking about the overall structure of the code, finding 

information when necessary, and being an ever-ready 

brainstorming partner to the driver. 
Pair programming is one of the key practices in Extreme 
Programming (XP) [2]. It was incorporated in XP, because it is 

argued to increase project members™ productivity and satisfaction 

while improving communication and software quality [2]. Since 

then, pair programming has become one of the most researched 

topics in the realm of agile software development techniques [3]. 
In literature, many benefits of pair programming have been 
proposed, such as increased productivity, improved code quality, 

enhanced job satisfaction and confidence, to name a few. On the 

other hand, pair programming has also received criticism over 

increasing effort expenditure and overall personnel costs, and 

bringing out conflicts and personality clashes among developers. 

However, the scientific empirical evidence behind these claims is 

currently scattered and unorganized, and thus it is difficult to 

draw conclusions in one way or the other. In fact, Hanks [4] 

points out regarding the quality improvement claims that ﬁThere 

does not appear to be any empirical evidence that the programs 

[produced by pair programming] are better in terms of design, 

readability, maintainability, or other internal quality attributes.ﬂ 

As a consequence, the industry has been rightfully hesitant in 

adopting the pair programming practice. 
The purpose of this paper is twofold. First, it summarizes and 
organizes the findings from existing pair programming studies in 

order to systematically review the empirical body of evidence. 

Second, it provides new scientific evidence by reporting results 

from a multiple controlled case study [5] on pair programming 

performed in close-to-industry settings. The focus of this 

empirical study has been investigating, how pair programming is 

adopted and used by developers in industrial settings, and 

determining whether pair programming improves software 

product quality as claimed by its proponents. The objective of this 

paper is, therefore, to answer the following three research 

questions: 
1. What is the current state of knowledge on pair 
programming? 
2. How is pair programming used in practical settings? 

3. How does pair programming affect software quality? 
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In the next 
section, the existing empirical body of evidence is reviewed. 

Then, the context and findings of the four case studies are 

presented, after which the results and their implications are 

discussed. In the end, the paper is concluded with final remarks. 
 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 

not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 

copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 

otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 

requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

ICSE™05,
 May 15Œ21, 2005, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 
Copyright 2005 ACM 1-58113-963-2/05/0005...$5.00. 
  2. REVIEW OF THE EMPIRICAL BODY 
OF EVIDENCE 
In this section, the existing empirical evidence on pair 
programming is summarized and reviewed. First, background 

information, such as research approaches and focuses, on the 

studies is provided. Then, the main findings of the existing studies 

are presented under three categories. Finally, the results of the 

review are summarized. 
2.1 Overview on the reviewed studies 
Included in the review, are empirical studies focusing on pair 

programming, such as case studies, experiments, surveys and 

experiment reports, published in various scientific forums. Also, 

studies focusing on XP and thus only partially addressing pair 

programming, have been included. However, all studies, which 

have been focused on educational aspects related to pair 

programming, have not been included in the review because of the 

industrial emphasis of our study. 
The first reported empirical study on pair programming was 
published in 1998 by Nosek [6], and the most r
ecent studies have 
been dated only a few months prior to writing this paper (June 

2004). Figure 1 illustrates the annual distribution of different 

types of empirical studies found in literature, which were included 

in the review. The studies have been organized based on their 

research approaches to the following categories: case studies 

(CAS), experiments (EXP), surveys (SUR) and experience reports 

(REP). A growing research interest towards pair programming can 

clearly be seen from the figure. However, it should be noted, that 

while Figure 1 illustrates the trends on the types and amounts of 

empirical studies, it is not fully comprehensive, i.e. studies 

focused on using pair programming for educational purposes in 

university settings have not been thoroughly explored. 
0246810121998199920002001200220032004
# of studies
SUR
REP
EXP
CAS
 Figure 1. Studies on pair programming. 
Besides their research approaches, the studies can also be grouped 
based on their research focuses. Figure 2 organizes the reviewed 

studies based on the areas of their main contributions. It shows 

that several research aspects have been addressed in the studies 

with a slight focus on the effects that pair programming has on 

software project and product, such as schedule and quality. In the 

following subsections, the review of empirical body of evidence is 

presented with an emphasis on the findings related to the research 

questions of this paper. 
2.2 Analysis of existing empirical results 
Project related findings. 
A claimed benefit gained from pair 
programming is shortened time to complete the given task due to 

e.g. increased problem solving abilities of a pair compared to an 
individual [7]. Also in larger scale projects, schedule advantages 
have been credited to pair programming because of decreased 

communication overhead, as an example. Williams et al. [8] 

report that in their experiment, pairs completed their assignments 

40 Œ 50% faster than solo developers. Lui and Chan [9] present 

more moderate results of 5% time savings gained through pair 

programming. Also, Müller [10] discovered that pair 

programming halved the time spent on the quality assurance phase 
of a project. However, Nawrocki and Wojciechowski [11] offer 

contrasting results and report that in their experiment, there were 

no significant differences between the development times of 

groups who were employing XP in pairs, compared to ones 

employing XP or Personal Software Process [12] individually. 
PP's effects on 
SW project & 
product, 8
Psychological 
effects of PP, 4
Educational 
aspects related 
to PP, 5
Specialized PP 
techniques, 4
PP vs. reviews, 
3PP as a part of 
XP, 3
 Figure 2. Distribution of empirical studies based on their 
research focuses. 
The effort expenditure and productivity of paired software 
developers is one of the most studied aspects of pair 

programming, since one could assume that when two people are 

doing the same task, the spent effort is doubled. However, 

Williams [13] found that pairs spent approximately only 15% 

more effort on a task than solo developers. Other studies offer 

support as well: in [14], a 10% increase and in [9], a 21% increase 

in effort expenditure resulting from pair programming was 

detected. In a recent study Williams et al. [15] explored the 

impact of pair programming on productivity of new team 

members who were added to a delayed project, and concluded that 

pair programming reduces the assimilation and mentoring times 

and thus improves the productivity of the whole team. All of these 

results offer empirical evidence suggesting that pairs are more 

productive than solo developers. The increased productivity is 

supported also by Jensen [16], who has reported a 127% 

productivity gain achieved by pair programming. On the other 
hand, Nawrocki and Wojciechowski found pair programming less 

productive than XP done by solo developers [11]. Based on the 

existing evidence, it can be argued that pair programming requires 

more effort than developing software individually, but that the 

increase in the effort expenditure is definitely not linear with 

regards to the number of developers. Furthermore, the effort 

expenditure increases more after the initial transition to pair 

programming, but gradually the productivity of the pair rises 

above the productivity of solo developers. This phenomenon, 

which is sometimes referred to as pair jelling [8], could be in part 
used to explain the findings of Nawrocki and Wojciechowski [11] 

towards inferior productivity of pairs, b
ecause the tasks in their 
experiment were relatively small (i.e., 150 Œ 400 lines of code) 

and thus short. Hence, it could be assumed that pair jelling took 
 place during the experiment and increased the effort expenditure 
of the pairs. 
Product related findings. 
The main argument for compensating 
the increased overall project costs due to higher effort expenditure 

of pair programming is improved quality of the resulting software 

[1]. Proposed reasons for the quality improvements include the 

continuous review performed by the navigator, which is claimed 

to outperform traditional reviews in defect removal speed [1], 

enhanced programmers™ defect prevention skills [13], and pair 

pressure, which according to Beck [2], encourages better 

adherence to process conventions like coding standards and use of 

refactoring, i.e. increases process fidelity. Wood and Kleb [17] 

offer empirical support for Beck™s suggestions. Gallis [18] 

speculates even further that stricter adherence to coding standards 

may improve the readability of the code and indicate increased 

information and knowledge transfer between developers.  
In addition to the anecdotal evidence, the quality effects of pair 
programming have been explored in empirical studies using 

various, even divergent metrics. Initial findings indicating that 

pair programming produces shorter code (e.g. [17, 19]) and 

results in better adherence to coding standards [19] have been 

made. Shorter code, which conforms to standards can be 

perceived to improve the maintainability of the software. In 

addition, shorter code is claimed to indicate better underlying 

design [14, 19]. Also, decreased defect rates (e.g. [13, 16, 20]) 

and increased number of test cases passed [8] resulting from pair 

programming have been reported in empirical studies. In addition, 

subjective indicators of increased quality, such as improved 

readability [6, 17] and better grades obtained by the students in 

educational settings (e.g. [21, 22]) have been reported. Also, 

anecdotal evidence on the positive impact of pair programming on 

code quality exists [23, 24]. 
While most of these findings point to a positive direction, the 
generalizability and significance of these findings remains 

questionable. One reason for this is the fact that often the metrics 

used for describing quality have not been either defined in detail 

in the studies, or lack the connection to the quality attribute they 

should be presenting. 
Some studies have also attempted to summarize the effects of pair 
programming and calculate overall cost-benefit ratios for adopting 

it. This task involves identifying and quantifying the effects of 

pair programming on the multiple parameters discussed in 

previous sections. While the results are initial at best, Müller [10] 

reported an increase of 5% on the total project costs caused by 

applying pair programming. According to Williams and Kessler 

[1], pairs have a higher efficiency and overall productivity rate 

compared to individual developers, and pair programming 

increases the business value of a project. 
Usefulness in different application scenarios. 
In addition to 
evaluating, if pair programming is beneficial, it should be also 

considered, when it is most useful [18]. For example, pair 

programming may be most beneficial when applied to only certain 

types of tasks [1]. In the existing empirical studies, some scattered 

observations about the suitability of pair programming for 

different types of tasks have been provided.  
The complexity of a task is one of the factors affecting the 
feasibility of using pair programming. Lui and Chan [9] report 

that pair programming improved productivity most in demanding 

design tasks. Similar findings have been made also in [8, 25] 
where pairing was not found useful in simple, rote tasks. 
Regarding different software development activities, there are 

studies suggesting that pair programming is not very useful in 

testing tasks [8], but more beneficial in performing design and 

code reviews and tasks related to architecture and coding [26]. 
2.3 Summary 
The main arguments put forth in the existing empirical studies are 

summarized in Table 1. The right-hand column denotes if the 

findings are addressed through a research question (RQ) in the 

empirical study presented in the following section. 
Table 1. Summary of main findings of existing studies 
Existing empirical evidence suggest that – RQ 
Pair programming (PP) shortens development time no 
PP requires more effort (than solo programming) no 
Pairs have higher productivity than solo developers yes 
Pairs produce code with higher quality (e.g. better 
readability) 
yes 
Pairs produce code with lower defect rates yes 
Developers enjoy PP more than solo programming yes 
PP is more useful in complex than simple, routine tasks yes 
PP is useful for training a new person yes 
Cost-benefit ratio of PP (quality vs. effort) is unknown yes 
3. EMPIRICAL RESULTS FROM A 
MULTIPLE CASE STUDY 
The empirical evaluation of pair programming through four case 
studies had two main goals: first, to provide qualitative and 

quantitative information on how pair programming is used in 

actual software projects, and second, to explore the impact of pair 

programming on software quality, especially on the quality 

characteristics, which literature has suggested being most affected 

by it, i.e. maintainability [8, 17] and reliability [10]. This section 

begins with the layout of the research design for the study. Then, 

the empirical results are presented. 
3.1 Research context 
Research settings.
 The research method used in the four case 
projects is the controlled case study approach [5]. The approach 

combines aspects of experiments, case studies and action research, 

and is especially designed for studying agile methodologies. In 

brief, it involves conducting a project which has a business 

priority of delivering a functioning end product to a customer, in 

close-to-industry settings, where measurement data is constantly 

collected for rapid feedback, process improvement and research 

purposes. The software development work is performed in 

controlled settings and involves both student and professional 

developers. 
Data collection and validation. 
Since all of the case projects had 
equally important business and research goals, the data collection 

was designed to be as effective and extensive as possible, but still 

consume personnel resources minimally. The empirical evidence 

has been collected from multiple data sources as suggested by Yin 

[27] in order to obtain multiple measures of the same 

phenomenon to improve the validity, reliability and credibility of 
 the research. Table 2 presents a summary of different sources of 
data used in the case studies for investigating the pair 

programming practice. 
Table 2. Data sources in case projects 
Case # 
Source Data type 
2 3 4 Excel sheets
a / TaskMaster 
toolb Effort: task, 
effort type, 

hours 
X a 
X a X b X b Developers™ 
notes (diaries) 
Effort, personal 
remarks 
X X X X 
Pair 
programming 

sheets 
PP: time, task, 
pair name, role 

changes 
- X X X
 1 
Defect lists Defects: 
originating task, 

when found, 

severity, etc. 
X 2 X 2 X X 
Source code 
(baselines 

after each 

iteration and 

final code) 
Code-related 
data, e.g. 

solo/PP parts of 

the code, LOC 

counts 
X 3 
X X X Final 
interviews 
Qualitative data, 
experiences 
X X X X 
Observation Use of PP - - - X 
1 Collection of pair programming sheets ended after the first 3 weeks 
2 Only date when defect found and fixed is available 
3 Solo and pair programmed parts of the code were not tagged 
Case projects. 
Table 3 provides a summary of the four case 
projects including their duration in calendar time, team size, total 

development effort, product type and the developed concept, 

product size in terms of logical lines of code [12] and the used 

programming language. 
Table 3. Summary of the case projects 
 Case 1 Case 2 Case 3 Case 4 
Duration 
8 weeks 8  8  5  
Team size 
4 persons 5.5  4  4-6  
Total dev. 
effort 
7.5 person 
months 
10 5.5 5.2 
Iterations 
6 6 6 61 (9) 
Product 
type 
Intranet 
application 
Mobile 
application 
Mobile 
application 
Mobile 
application 
Product 
concept 
Research 
data mgmt 

system 
Stock 
market 

browser 
Production 
control 

system 
Production 
control 

system 
Product 
size 

(logical 

LOC) 7700 7100 3800 3700 Language 
Java and 
JSP Mobile 
Java 
Mobile 
Java 
Symbian 
C++ 1Case 4 was relaunched after 4 weeks into the project. The first three 
iterations are not included in this study.
 The development teams of the case projects worked in a shared 
co-located office space. The team members were different in each 

case apart from the project manager who managed cases one, two 

and four. Also, the developers did not have any prior experience 
from pair programming (except the project manager, who had of 
course pair programmed when he started in case projects two and 

four). To familiarize the developers with pair programming, a 

tutorial on pair programming practices and means of data 

collection was held in the beginning of each project. Case one 

involved 5-6
th year Master™s students. Case two involved research 
scientists as well, and finally cases three and four were a mix of 

both practitioners and students as defined by the controlled case 

study approach [5]. All team members were committed to a 6-

hour work days, which were adopted, b
ecause the goal was to 
achieve a sustainable working pace emphasized in agile met
hods. 
In addition, it was seen that 6 hours is a maximum amount of time 

per day that a programmer can effectively focus on development 

tasks.  
The product in cases two, three and four was developed for 
commercial markets, but in case one, for internal use. The 

software development method used in all projects was the Mobile-

D approach [28], which is based on known agile methods, namely 

Extreme Programming and Scrum. Note that for the purposes of 

this study, the development method used is a secondary issue, and 

only briefly described here to provide background information on 

the study context. In Mobile-D, the projects are carried out in 

short (usually 1 to 2 week) iterations. Pair programming is one of 

Mobile-D™s nine principal elements, and thus coding, testing, and 

refactoring were encouraged to be carried out in pairs in the case 

projects.  
3.2 Results As discussed earlier, the data sources, collection procedures and 

tools evolved during the case projects. This is why all metrics 

have not been calculated for each project. Table 4 presents a 

summary of which metrics have been calculated for each case 

project. Each metric is defined in the subsequent section together 

with the empirical results. The data sources for calculating the 

metrics were presented previously in Table 2. 
Table 4. Metrics derived from each case project 
Case project 
Metrics used to evaluate pair 
programming: 
1 2 3 4 
Usage metrics 
Pair programming effort percent X X X X 
Productivity between iterations: pair and 
solo 
- X X X 
Rationale for pair programming X X X X 
Quality metrics 
Density of coding standards deviations: 
pair and solo 
- X X - 
Comment ratio: pair and solo - X X X 
Relative defect density: pair and solo - - X X 
3.2.1 Practical use of pair programming 
Pair programming effort percent 
The ratio between effort spent 
on pair programming activities (i.e. pair coding, pair refactoring, 

and pair testing) and respective solo activities is calculated for 

each iteration of the case projects. This metric describes how the 
 use of pair programming evolves as the project progresses. Pair 
programming effort percent is  
TPEEPP%,   
(1)
 where  
EP is effort spent on pair programming activities during 
the iteration, and 
 ET is the total programming effort spent on the iteration. 
Regarding the actual use of pair programming (Figure 3), all case 
projects had quite similar ratios in their first three iterations, 

although case three™s ratio is a little higher and case four™s a bit 

lower. The differences between the case projects did not become 

apparent until the fourth iteration, where the percentages scattered 

more.  
020
406080100

120
123456
Iteration #
Pair programming percent
Case 1
Case 2
Case 3
Case 4
 Figure 3. Pair programming percent between iterations in case 
projects. 
As it can be seen from the figure, the pair programming percents 
of cases two and three decreased steadily after the first two 

iterations. This decrease was especially evident in case three, in 

whose 5
th iteration over 80 percent of programming was done 
individually. On the other hand, in cases one and four, the pair 

programming percentages varied more between the iterations. 

Interestingly, in both case one and case four, the pair 

programming percentage increased in iterations four and six, and 

strongly decreased between them in iteration five. The overall 

trend in case one was quite steady, unlike in case four, where the 

trend was ascending despite the fluctuations.
 Productivity.
 The second metric describing the actual use of pair 
programming in the case projects is productivity, which provides 

information on how pair programmer™s productivity evolves as the 

project progresses and also allows to compare the productivity of 

the two different programming styles. In this study, productivity is 

calculated for both pair and solo programming styles for each 

iteration as a ratio of produced logical code lines and spent effort. 

Thus, productivity of programming style 
N (N is pair or solo) is 
defined as 
NLNNECP,   (2) 
where 
 LNC is the number of logical code lines produced with 
programming style 
N in the iteration, and 
EN is effort spent with programming style 
N in the 
iteration
. It is acknowledged that measuring productivity is not a straight-
forward task, and using lines of code (LOC) counts has its 

challenges. However, it is the most commonly used means for 

describing productivity, and thus used also here.
 The number of 
code lines for each programming style were obtained by 

calculating the amount of code lines in the iteration™s end baseline 

made with each programming style (using code tags), and then 

subtracting the number if previous iteration™s code lines produced 

by the same programming style from it. The productivity metrics 

are calculated only for the last three case projects, since no code 

tags were used in the first case project to separate the code 

produced by different coding styles. 
181514211360510
15
20
25Case 2Case 3Case 4
Logical LOC per person hour
Pair
Solo
 Figure 4. Total productivity of pair and solo programming in 
the case projects. 
Figure 4 shows the total productivity of pair and solo 
programming in the three case projects. There seems to be no 

regularity between the productivity of different programming 

styles: in case two, solo programming has a bit higher 

productivity than pair programming, in case three the situation is 

reversed, and in case four, pair programming has substantially 

higher productivity than solo programming. 
Rationale for pair programming.
 The results concerning with 
the rationale for pair programming obtained through team 

interviews are presented in the following. The focus of this 

qualitative data (i.e., taped, transcribed) is on determining the 

types of tasks and situations, which developers find especially 

suitable or unsuitable for pair programming. In addition to the 

data obtained from the final interviews, entries from TaskMaster 

effort tracking tool describing reasons for solo programming a 

specific task were studied. 
The interviews aimed at collecting team members™ views about 
the usefulness of pair programming in different application 

situations and development phases. One developer found pair 

programming to be suitable for many coding tasks, but not 

necessarily to e.g. installation tasks. The team members of cases 

one, three and four found pair programming to be especially 

useful for novice team members and in the beginning of a project.  
ﬁIn the beginning of a project, pair programming is useful for 
virtually any task, because it helps everyone to get a clear 

understanding on the system.ﬂ [Case three] 
 The effect of the complexity of the task on the usefulness of pair 
programming was also brought up by the developers in the final 

interviews. The developers felt that pair programming was more 

useful for demanding and complex tasks than for rote tasks.  
ﬁIf no one knows how a task should be done, it™s useful to do it 
in pairs to think of different ideas.ﬂ [Case three] 
On the other hand, the some developers felt that tasks, which 
require a lot of logical thinking, were best when done solo: 
ﬁIt™s difficult for two people to think together, so thinking 
about a logical task should be done alone.ﬂ [Case four] 
This can, at least partially, result from the noise in the collocated 
project room, like a developer working in the case four expressed: 
ﬁIf a task is difficult and complex, and I have to focus on it 
and think a lot, the noise in the war room is disturbing, so I 

put on headphones and do the task solo. I could do the task 

with a pair, if there was a possibility to be undisturbed.ﬂ 

[Case four] 
Furthermore, the team in case four felt that pair programming was 
beneficial when writing code, which had many dependencies with 

other parts of the software. On the other hand, according to a team 

member in case two, pair helped in simple tasks to find mistakes, 

to which the coder himself had become ﬁblindﬂ to. This was also 

supported by findings from case four interviews. Other situations 

where having a pair was perceived useful was related to naming 

conventions: 
ﬁPair helped in naming issues, which I find to be the most 
difficult when coding.ﬂ [Case four] 
3.2.2 Quality 
Density of coding standard deviations.
 The first metric used to 
describe the quality effects of pair programming is related to 

adherence to coding standards. In accordance to agile philos
ophy, 
the project team was responsible for defining the coding standards 

in the beginning of each project, and the code has been compared 

against these same standards when deriving this metric. The 

density of coding standard deviations is measured through the 

number of found deviations from the coding standards with 

respect to the amount of code made with 
each programming style 
(all physical lines). Thus, density of coding standard deviations 

for programming style 
N (N is either pair or solo) per hundred 
lines of code
 is  100ANNNCFS,   
(3)
 where 
FN is the number of failures to adhere to coding 
standards (i.e. deviations) made with programming style 

N, and 
ANC is the number of all physical code lines produced 
with programming style 
N. A smaller density indicates better adherence to coding standards, 
which further indicates better readability and maintainability of 

the code [29, 30]. Density of coding standard deviations metric 

has been derived only from case project two and three. The reason 

for this is that in case one, there were no explicitly defined coding 
standards to compare the code against, and in case four, the code 
was written in Symbian C++ and the available tool (i.e. 

CheckStyle [31]) could only be used for analyzing Java programs.  
In case two, a total number of 597 deviations from coding 
standards were found from the final source code. 431 of these 

were made using pair programming, and 166 with solo 

programming. In case three, there were a total number of 354 

deviations from coding standards, of which 302 were made using 

pair programming and 52 solo programming. Results show that 

the most common type of deviations was related to method 

comments. Another common source of deviations was variable 

naming. The distribution of deviations between different types is 

quite similar with both pair and solo programming in both 

projects. However, in solo programming, fewer deviations were 

concerned with variable naming than in pair programming. 
5.16.73.6
3.701
2
345
6
7
8Case 2Case 3
Deviations / 100 physical lines of code
Pair
Solo
 Figure 5. Density of coding standards deviations in case 
projects 2 and 3.
 Figure 5 shows the density of deviations from coding standards in 
cases two and per 100 physical lines of code. It can be seen, that 

in both projects, the deviation density was much higher for pair 

programming than for solo programming. 
Comment ratio.
 Another quality metric used in this study is 
comment ratio, which is calculated as the ratio of comment lines 

and total (i.e. physical) lines of code [32]. Thus, comment ratio 

for programming style 
N is  ANLNANLNANNCCCCCR1,  (4) 
where 
 LNC is the number of logical code lines produced with 
programming style 
N, and 
ANC is number of all physical code lines produced with 
programming style 
N. The higher the ratio is, the more readable and maintainable the 
code can be perceived to be [32]. Figure 6 illustrates the comment 

ratios for pair and solo programming in three of the case projects. 

In every case, the comment ratio for pair programming is higher 

than for solo programming. In case two, the comment ratios are 

almost equal, but in both cases three and four, the comment ratio 

for pair programming is approximately 60% higher than for solo 

programming. 
 46%
40%50%
45%
25%31%
0%10%

20%
30%
40%

50%

60%
Case 2Case 3Case 4
Comment ratio
Pair
Solo
 Figure 6. Comment ratios in case projects 2 to 4. 
Relative defect density.
 Since the mode of work (i.e. solo or pair) 
was not predetermined in the case projects, most of the defined 

programming tasks have not been programmed with a single style, 

but rather, a mixture of pair and solo programming has been used. 

Thus, it has not been possible to trace the origins of the f
ound defects to a single programming style, but only to the originating 

task, whose pair and solo programming effort ratios are known 

based on the hour entries in the TaskMaster tool. This is why it is 

not feasible to investigate traditional defect metrics such as defect 

density, i.e. the amount of total defect divided by the total number 

of logical code lines [12, p. 83], as such. Instead, an applied 

metric which considers also the portion of pair or solo 

programming done in the task where the defect has originated 

from has to be used.
 Relative defect density is a metric which can be applied when the 
programming style of the defect is not known exactly, but only 

estimated using the relative amount of effort spent with different 

programming styles in the task where the found defect has been 

made. It is calculated as suggested by [12, p. 83], but instead of 

using the absolute number of defects made with each 

programming style, every defect is multiplied with the effort 

percent of the programming style in question of the originating 

task. For example, if a defect is made in a task, of whose effort 

70% has been spent on pair programming, the coefficient for the 

defect is 0.70 when calculating relative defect density for pair 

programming, and 0.3 (1
0.7) when calculating relative defect 
density for solo programming. Also, instead of normalizing (i.e. 

dividing) the number of found defects with the total finished 

logical lines of code (LOC), total finished logical LOC made with 

the programming style in question is used. The obtained number 

is then multiplied with 1000 in order to obtain the relative number 

of defects per thousand logical lines of code (KLOC). Thus, 

relative defect density for programming style 
N is 1000%LNiiNCNND, (5) 
where 
 i is the index variable denoting each f
ound defect, 
 NN%
i  is the relative amount of effort spent with 
programming style 
N in the task where the defect 
i has 
been made, and  
LNC is the number of logical code lines produced with 
programming style 
N. Relative defect density is calculated from the final source code for 
both pair and solo programming. The smaller the relative defect 

density for a programming style is, the more mature and reliable 

code it can be perceived to produce. Relative defect density metric 

is derived from the two last case projects, because the defect lists 

from the first two case projects do not contain detailed enough 

information to base the metric on (i.e. the originating task for the 

found defects have not been defined). 
Figure 7 shows the relative defect densities of pair and solo 
programming in cases three and four. In case three, approximately 

three times more defects were found than in case four, and thus 

the overall defect density of case three™s source code is 

significantly higher than case four, due to the fact that the 

projects™ source codes are almost of the same size. In case three, 

the relative defect densities of pair and solo programming are 

almost equal, but in case four, the relative defect density of solo 

programming is over six times higher than of pair programming. 

Based on this, it seems that the main difference of the overall 

defect densities of the two case projects results from the very low 

relative defect density of pair programming in case four. 
7.0
1.3
6.9
8.4
0.0
1.0
2.0

3.0

4.0
5.0
6.0

7.0

8.0
9.0
Case 3Case 4
Defects / KLOC
Pair
Solo
 Figure 7. Relative defect densities in  
case projects 3 and 4. 
4. DISCUSSION 
Pair programming effort percent. 
In all case projects, the pair 
programming effort percent was at a high level during the first 

iteration, although case one was the only project, where the use of 

pair programming was mandated in the beginning. The high initial 

adoption of pair programming is in line with the project members™ 

comments, according to which they f
ound pair programming to be 
especially useful in the beginning of a project to gain 

understanding on the whole system and to increase confidence. 

This may also explain why case four had the lowest pair 

programming percentage in the first iteration, because its first 

iteration was actually the fourth iteration, since the project was 

started over after the first three iterations. The fact that pair 

programming was found more useful in the beginning of the 

projects is also supported by the steady decreasing of the pair 

programming percents towards the final iteration in cases one, two 

and three, although the dramatic decrease of pair programming 

percent in iteration five of case three can be affected by the 

uneven number of team members present (one team member was 

absent for the whole iteration). The increased pair programming 
 percent of the final (correction) iterations can be explained by the 
fact that the team members perceived pair programming most 

useful in non-rote tasks requiring problem solving, which is also 

the case in correction iteration, where the defects found in the 

system test phase are corrected. An exception to the other case 

projects in terms of the development of the pair programming 

percent is case four, where the pair programming percent trend 

was continuously rising throughout the project except for the 

temporary decreases in iterations three and five. This can be 

explained by investigating the number of development tool 

licenses available: in iterations one and two there were four 

licenses, in iteration three there were three licenses, and in the rest 

of the iterations (four, five and six), there were only two licenses 

available. Thus, in iteration three there was an uneven number of 

development tools available, and as a result, one team member 

worked alone with one tool, and therefore the pair programming 

percent temporarily decreased in that iteration. In the following 

iterations, the number of licenses was reduced to two, and thus the 

team had to work in pairs most of the time. As a summary, based 

on the quantitative and qualitative data of the case projects, it can 

be said that the relative amount of effort spent on pair 

programming is at its highest in the beginning of the project and 

in the defect correction (performed after system test) phase of the 

project. 
 Productivity.
 The results of the empirical analysis revealed that 
the productivity of pair programming compared to solo 

programming varied a lot between the case projects. Thus, based 

on the empirical data, no indications towards the superior 

productivity of one of the programming styles could be detected. 

This is in contrast with the findings of the existing empirical 

studies. In addition, although the productivity rates varied in the 

case projects, the differences between them seem to result mostly 

from the productivity of solo programming rather than the 

productivity of pair programming, which remained at constant 

level in all projects. Interpretation of productivity figures is not a 

straightforward task, however. Individual productivity rates of the 

case projects can result from many different reasons which are not 

related to pair programming, e.g. the high overall productivity in 

case two results at least partially from reused code lines (i.e., 550 

physical and 300 logical lines), which have been included in the 

code line counts and thus affect the productivity calculations. 
However, the productivity metrics do enable to analyze how the 
productivity of pair and solo programming evolved in the 

successive iterations of the case projects. According to the 

existing empirical evidence [8], the productivity of pair 

programmers is at its lowest in the beginning of a project due to 

pair jelling, and increases as the project progresses. However, 

based on the case studies conducted within this research endeavor, 

no regularity in the development of the productivity rates could be 

detected between the projects.  
Rationale for pair programming. 
As a summary, the developers 
found air programming most suitable for following application 

scenarios: a) learning in the beginning of a project, b) solving 

problems and thinking of ways to do complex tasks and c) finding 

little mistakes from simple code. Similar findings have also been 

reported in literature [1, 8, 26]. The a) scenario conforms to 

claims that pair programming increases confidence and is an 

effective means for learning and training. The two latter 

application scenarios highlight the two levels of product related 

benefits gained from pair programming: ones related to long-
range ﬁstrategicﬂ issues, e.g. improved designs, and the ones 
related to the short-range, immediate issues, e.g. code with less 

minor defects such as syntax errors and typos. However, the 

developers did not agree about the usefulness of pair 

programming in scenarios b) and c); some considered thinking in 

pairs to be difficult, and others preferred to do simple tasks on 

their own. There are also existing studies indicating that pair 

programming is inefficient for performing simple, routine-like 

tasks (e.g. [25]). One common problem with adopting pair 

programming identified in the literature is scheduling difficulties, 

i.e. finding common time for the developers to work in pairs [24, 

33, 34]. Some evidence, namely from case project four, pointed to 

this direction as well.  
Density of coding standard deviations. 
The distribution of 
coding standard deviations of different types was very similar for 

pair and solo programming in both case projects where the metric 

was derived. The primary focus of the evaluation of the effect that 

pair programming has on adherence to coding standards was to 

determine, if pair programmers actually produce code which 

adheres better to coding standards, as suggested in the literature 

[1, 19]. Yet, the comparison of the calculated densities of coding 

standard deviations for pair and solo programming demonstrated, 

that in both case projects from which the metric was calculated, 

pair programming resulted in distinctly higher deviation density 

than solo programming (approx. 40 % higher in case two, and 80 

% higher in case three). Thus, the claims towards higher coding 

standard adherence presented in literature are not supported based 

on the case studies. Clearly, more cases would be needed to obtain 

more comprehensive data to validate the findings in this regard. 

Nonetheless, the metrics of the two cases were convergent, and 

thus initial conclusions can be drawn based on them. 
Comment ratio. 
The comment ratios calculated from three case 
projects are consistently higher for pair programming than for 

solo programming. This is contrary to the findings of the study by 

Ciolkowski et al. [14] in which pair programming resulted in 

slightly lower comment ratio than solo programming. On the other 

hand, the findings of our study support the arguments made in the 

literature towards pair programmed code being more readable [6, 

17], and of better overall quality [1, 23, 24]. However, it should 

be noted, that the comment ratio measures only the quantity of the 

comments, and not their quality.  
Relative defect density. 
The examination of the relative defect 
densities of pair and solo programmed code of the two case 

projects revealed no pattern towards lower defect density achieved 

with one of the programming styles.  
In literature, pair programming has been reported to reduce the 
amount of defects and thus lower the defect density [10, 11, 13, 

20]. This is supported in one of the cases. Yet, the findings of 

case project three do not indicate that the code produced by pair 

programmers would have relatively less defects than solo 

programmed code. Thus, our findings are conflicting in this 

regard. 
Table 5 summarizes the empirical findings of this study. The 
findings are contrasted with the existing empirical body of 

evidence reviewed in section 3. 
 
  Table 5. Summary of the empirical results 
Metric Existing empirical 
body of evidence 
Findings of the 
present study 
PP effort 

percent 
No evidence New: Effort spent 
on PP is highest in 

the beginning of a 

project and in the 

final iteration 
Productivity Pairs are more 
productive than 

solos; 

PP productivity 

gradually increases 
Not supported: 
neither 

programming style 

has consistently 

higher productivity 
Rationale for 

PP PP is most useful 
for complex tasks 

and training/ 

learning 
Supported: PP is 
most useful for 

learning, and 

complex tasks 
Density of 

coding 

standard 

deviations 
PP produces code, 
which has higher 

adherence to coding 

standards 
Contradicted: PP 
results in lower 

adherence to 

coding standards 
Comment 

ratio 
Pairs produce more 
readable code; 

Pair code has lower 

comment ratio (one 

study) 
Supported: Code 
produced by pair 

programming has 

higher comment 

ratio than solo 

code 
Relative 

defect density 
Pairs produce code 
with fewer defects 
Not supported: 
Conflicting results 
5. CONCLUSIONS 
There are two main contributions in this research: the performed 

summary and review of the existing empirical knowledge on pair 

programming, and the presented new empirical results. The 

empirical findings related to the practical use of pair programming 

provide concrete information, which can be utilized in industry in, 

for example, effort estimations and focusing pair programming 

efforts to certain kinds of activities, tasks, or project phases. 

Furthermore, the presented findings related to the quality effects 

of pair programming provide actual, quantitative information on 

the effects of pair programming to explicitly defined quality 

metrics instead of anecdotal evidence or ambiguous metrics. 

Equally importantly, the findings of the research can be utilized 

by academia in cost-benefit analysis of pair programming as 

empirically obtained and validated parameters for different 

existing calculation models. 
The study at hand suffers from not having calculated all metrics 
from all of the four case studies, but has taken this into account in 

the discussion section when interpreting the results. To our 

surprise, some of the results obtained in this study offer 

contrasting results to the existing empirical body of evidence: our 

empirical data indicates, that pair programming does not provide 

as extensive quality benefits as suggested in the literature, and on 

the other hand, does not result in consistently superior 

productivity when compared to solo programming. Yet, these 

results are far from being conclusive in scientific sense, and 

therefore, further studies on the subject are needed. 
In future research efforts, analysis of the metrics proposed in this 
study, could be extended to a more detailed level. For example, a 
means of tracing defects back to either pair or solo programming 
would be valuable, because wit
hout this, only relative defect 
density can be studied instead of absolute defect density. Also, 

analysis could be extended to consider not only the number of 

found defects, but also their severity. Additionally, the analysis of 

the comment ratio and adherence to coding standards could be 

partially merged to consider not only the quantity, but also the 

quality of the comments in the source code. 
6. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
This work has been performed within AGILE-ITEA project 

(http://www.agile-itea.org/). We would like to thank Professors 

Juha Röning and Veikko Seppänen from University of Oulu for 

their valuable comments. Also, the developers and customers of 

the case projects should be acknowledged for their inputs. We 

would also like to thank the three anonymous reviewers of this 

paper for their valuable improvement suggestions.  
7. REFERENCES 
[1] L. Williams and R. Kessler, 
Pair Programming Illuminated
: Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
[2] K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change
: Addison-Wesley, 1999. 
[3] P. Abrahamsson, J. Warsta, M. T. Siponen, and J. 
Ronkainen, ﬁNew Directions on Agile Methods: A 

Comparative Analysis,ﬂ International Conference on 

Software Engineering, 2003. 
[4] B. F. Hanks, ﬁTool Support for Distributed Pair 
Programming,ﬂ Workshop on Distributed Pair 

Programming. Extreme Programming and Agile Methods - 

XP/Agile Universe, 2002. 
[5] O. Salo and P. Abrahamsson, ﬁEmpirical Evaluation of 
Agile Software Development: A Controlled Case Study 

Approach,ﬂ 5th International Conference on Product 

Focused Software Process Improvement, Japan, 2004. 
[6] J. T. Nosek, ﬁThe Case for Collaborative Programming,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
, vol. 41, pp. 105 - 108, 1998. 
[7] L. A. Williams, 
The Collaborative Software Process. PhD 
Dissertation, 
University of Utah, 2000. 
[8] L. Williams, R. R. Kessler, W. Cunningham, and R. Jeffries, 
ﬁStrengthening the Case for Pair Programming,ﬂ 
IEEE Software, vol. 17, pp. 19-25, 2000. 
[9] K. M. Lui and K. C. C. Chan, ﬁWhen Does a Pair 
Outperform Two Individuals?ﬂ XP2003, Italy, 2003. 
[10] M. M. Müller, ﬁAre Reviews an Alternative to Pair 
Programming?ﬂ 7th International Conference on Empirical 

Assessment in Software Engineering, UK, 2003. 
[11] J. Nawrocki and A. Wojciechowski, ﬁExperimental 
Evaluation of Pair Programming,ﬂ 12th European Software 

Control and Metrics Conference, UK, 2001. 
[12] W. S. Humphrey, 
A Discipline for Software Engineering
: Addison-Wesley, 1995. 
[13] L. Williams, ﬁIntegrating Pair Programming into a Software 
Development Process,ﬂ 14th Conference on Software 

Engineering Education and Training, USA, 2001. 
 [14] M. Ciolkowski and M. Schlemmer, ﬁExperiences with a 
Case Study on Pair Programming,ﬂ First International 

Workshop on Empirical Studies in Software Engineering, 

Finland, 2002. 
[15] L. Williams, A. Shukla, and A. I. Antón, ﬁAn Initial 
Exploration of the Relationship Between Pair Programming 

and Brooks' Law,ﬂ Agile Development Conference, 2004. 
[16] R. W. Jensen, ﬁA Pair Programming Experience,ﬂ 
CrossTalk, The Journal of Defense Software Engineering
, vol. 16, pp. 22 - 24, 2003. 
[17] W. A. Wood and W. L. Kleb, ﬁExploring XP for Scientific 
Research,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. 20, pp. 30 - 36, 2003. 
[18] H. Gallis, E. Arisholm, and T. Dybå, ﬁAn Initial Framework 
for Research on Pair Programming,ﬂ ISESE, Italy, 2003. 
[19] A. Cockburn and L. Williams, ﬁThe Costs and Benefits of 
Pair Programming,ﬂ 1st International Conference on 

Extreme Programming and Flexible Processes in Software 

Engineering, Italy, 2000. 
[20] J. E. Tomayko, ﬁA Comparison of Pair Programming to 
Inspections for Software Defect Reduction,ﬂ 
Journal of 
Computer Science Education
, vol. 12, pp. 213 - 222, 2002. 
[21] C. McDowell, L. Werner, H. E. Bullock, and F. J., ﬁThe 
Impact of Pair Programming on Student Performance, 

Perception and Persistence,ﬂ 25th International Conference 

on Software Engineering, USA, 2003. 
[22] L. Williams, C. McDowell, N. Nagappan, J. Fernald, and L. 
Werner, ﬁBuilding Pair Programming Knowledge through a 

Family of Experiments,ﬂ International Symposium on 

Empirical Software Engineering, Italy, 2003. 
[23] K. Nilsson, ﬁA Summary from a Pair Programming Survey - 
Increasing Quality with Pair Programming,ﬂ 2003. 
[24] T. H. DeClue, ﬁPair Programming and Pair Trading: Effect 
on Learning and Motivation in a CS2 Course,ﬂ 
Journal of 
Computing in Small Colleges
, vol. 18, pp. 49 - 56, 2003. 
[25] M. M. Müller and W. F. Tichy, ﬁCase Study: Extreme 
Programming in a University Environment,ﬂ International 

Conference on Software Engineering, 2001. 
[26] L. Williams and R. Kessler, ﬁThe Effects of ﬁPair-Pressureﬂ 
and ﬁPair-Learningﬂ on Software Engineering Education,ﬂ 

13th Conference on Software Engineering Education and 

Training, USA, 2000. 
[27] R. K. Yin, 
Case Study Research - Design and Methods. 3rd 
ed.
, SAGE Publications, 2003. 
[28] P. Abrahamsson, A. Hanhineva, H. Hulkko, T. Ihme, J. 
Jäälinoja, M. Korkala, J. Koskela, P. Kyllönen, and O. Salo, 

ﬁMobile-D: An Agile Approach for Mobile Application 

Development,ﬂ OOPSLA'04, Canada, 2004. 
[29] M. Elish and J. Offutt, ﬁThe Adherence of Open Source 
Java Programmers to Standard Coding Practices,ﬂ The 6th 

IASTED International Conference on Software Engineering 

and Applications, USA, 2002. 
[30] X. Fang, ﬁUsing a Coding Standard to Improve Program 
Quality,ﬂ 2nd Asia-Pacific Conference on Quality Software, 

Hong Kong, 2001. 
[31] Checkstyle tool. URL: http://checkstyle.sourceforge.net/. 
[32] K. K. Aggarwal, Y. Singh, and J. K. Chhabra, ﬁAn 
Integrated Measure of Software Maintainability,ﬂ Annual 

Reliability and Maintainability Symposium, 2002. 
[33] J. Kivi, D. Haydon, J. Hayes, R. Schneider, and G. Succi, 
ﬁExtreme Programming: a University Team Design 

Experience,ﬂ Canadian Conference on Electrical and 

Computer Engineering, Canada, 2000. 
[34] T. VanDeGrift, ﬁCoupling Pair Programming and Writing: 
Learning about Students' Perceptions and Processes,ﬂ ACM 

SIGCSE, 2004. 
  