 Emergent Process Design 
Olga Jaufman 
DaimlerChrysler AG 
Research and Technology, Wilhelm-Runge street 11, 89081 Ulm 
olga.jaufman@daimlerchrysler.com 
 Categories and Subject Descriptors: 
D.2.9 
Management; Software process models (e.g., CMM, ISO, PSP) 
General Terms: 
Design, Human Factors, Management 
Keywords: 
Flexible plan driven processes, software 
development 
1. RESEARCH PROBLEM 
The typical situation in software developing organizations can be 
characterized by two extremes:  in some organizations or 

organizational units, software development processes are partly 

defined, whereas in organizations or organizational units where the 

processses are well defined, these processes are usually only valid at 

the project start. This is the case as the development and business 

environments change over the course of the project. The 

environment changes are caused, for instance, by new innovations, 

new business relationships, and new technical and cost constraints
.  In both cases (i.e., defined processes only or out-dated processes), 
the likely consequences vary for those involved: for all project 

participants, lack of coordination; for developers, fire-fighting and 

overtime; for project managers, deteriorating progress control; for 

the customer, higher costs to achieve the required product quality. 

Hence, practitioners need support in the design and evolution of 

project-specific processes over the course of a project in a dynamic 

project environment.  
2. PROPOSED SOLUTION 
2.1 Requirements  
In order to understand how a software development process should 
look if it is to be acceptable by both project managers and engineers, 

I first defined the requirements placed on the processes. To do so, I 

held workshops and interviews with DaimlerChrysler project 

managers, engineers, and experts in the domain of process design 

and adaptation. This helped me to understand the strengths and 

deficiencies of applied software development processes from the 

interviewees' and workshop participants™ points of view. Then I 

monitored the development processes in different DaimlerChrysler 

projects and analyzed them in order to understand the real cause of 

the process deficiencies. Second, I defined the possible process 

flexibility levels and the necessary process flexibility level for the 

particular issue of development of large, safety critical software in a 

dynamic environment. Third, the actual definition of the demands 

placed for processes was geared at the GQM met
hod for the 
required process flexibility level. Finally, the importance of the 

requirements on the processes was validated [2].       
2.2 Concept  
For design of a process that is able to fulfill the requirements, I 

propose an Emergent Process Design (EPD) approach. The EPD 

approach guides the extraction and the adaptation of a project-

specific process. This is done as follows. Initially, the project-

specific process frame is extracted by tailoring one of the process 

variants provided in a process line. The first development is based 

on the tailored process frame. For further development iterations or 

projects that are to utilize this frame, the frame is adapted and 

refined to the project-specific process based on the logs of the 

performed tasks in the previous process iteration. In order to insure 

the desired quality of the final product, the project-specific process 

becomes more stringent over the course of the project.  
As the approach should also be suitable for a dynamic environment, 
the EPD approach should guide the adaptation of the prescriptive 

process to the emerging project situations. The systematic process 

adaptation is insured by the definition of modification 

preconditions. These modification preconditions describe the criteria 

to be fulfilled before a process can be modified. Thus, the process 

can easily and systematically be adapted to new situations by the 

application of a suitable process variant.  
2.3 The Empirical Validation  
The EPD approach is currently being validated in the context of a 

controlled experiment. In the experiment, we compare the EPD 

method with the V method [4]. The V model is taken for 

comparison, as it is a widely used method in practice. In the 

experiment, nine groups (six following the EPD approach and three 

following the V tailored process) develop a control device for a bus. 

The first results show that the EPD method significantly contributes 

to a more productive development of higher-quality products.    
3. RELATED WORK 
The topic addressed in my thesis has been discussed by Jorgensen 

[3] and Cugola [1].   
4. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
I would like to thank Dieter Rombach, Kurt Schneider, Michael 

Stupperich, and Jürgen Münch for their very helpful support.  
5. REFERENCES 
[1] 
Cugola, G. Inconsistencies and deviations in Process Support Systems, Ph. D. 
Thesis, Politecnico di Milano - Dipartimento di Elettronica Informazione, February 

1998. 
[2] 
Droschel, W., Wiemers, H. Das V-Modell 97, Der Standard für die Entwicklung 

von IT-Systemen mit Anleitung für den Praxiseinsatz, Oldenbourg, 
2000 (German).  
[3] 
Jaufman, O., Dold, A., Haeberlein, T., Schlumpberger, C., Stupperich, M. 
Requirements for Flexible Software Development Processes within Large and Long 

Taking Projects, QUATIC, Porto, 2004. 
[4] 
Jorgensen, H. Interactive Process Models. Ph.D. Thesis, Dept. of Computer and 

Information Science, University of Trondheim, January 2004.
 Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

ICSE™05
, May 15Œ21, 2005, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 
ACM 1-58113-963-2/05/0005. 
  