 Bringing the Systems Analysis and Design Course into 21
st Century: A Case 
Study in Implementing Modern Software Engineering Principles 
  Christopher G. Jones, CPA/PhD 
Utah Valley State University 
jonescg@uvsc.edu 
  Abstract 
 While today™s IT students may have a theoretical 
knowledge of all the phases in the systems development 
lifecycle, they often have little exposure to software 
development core practices.  Few are able to build a 

new system from scratch. This paper examines a 

pedagogical approach to modern software engineering 

based on ﬁdoingﬂ systems development from day one. 
Course materials were produced by Agile methodology 
expert, Alistair Cockburn.  Early results from an 

implementation of the experimental approach to the 

systems analysis and design course are examined.   

 1. Introduction 
 Declining enrollments in computing-related 
disciplines in US colleges and universities have 
prompted educators to reexamine the relevance of 
information technology (IT) curricula [8].  Andriole [2] 

claims the gap between theory and practice is widening 

even though concerted efforts have been made by 

academia to modernize model curricula. Trauth et al. 
[9] labeled the difference between industry 

expectations and academic preparation, the 

ﬁexpectation gapﬂ.  Johnson and Jones [7] refer to the 

lag between the time industry develops best practices 
and these practices find their way into the classroom as 
ﬁacademic latencyﬂ.  In a flat world [4] where time and 

space are no longer serious barriers to entry, the global 
pace of change exacerbates this latency.   
 As academic latency increases, traditional 
approaches to software development education become 

increasing irrelevant. The result: 
IT majors graduate 
with a theoretical knowledge of the phases and 

activities in the system development lifecycle but lack 

the skills required to build useful applications for 
today™s marketplace.
  What is needed is a pedagogical 
strategy for addressing the relevance gap.  This paper 
presents the preliminary results of a work in progress 
to increase relevance and immediacy of software 

engineering education at a large regional college. 
 2. Computing at Utah Valley State College 
 Utah Valley State College (UVSC) is a large 
regional college located in the U.S. intermountain 
west.  Beginning in 1993, the UVSC School of 
Business began offering a combined baccalaureate 
degree in Computer Science/Information Systems 
(CS/IS).  The BS CS/IS shared a common core with 

three emphases:  (a) computer science, (b) information 

systems, and (b) networking.  As the program matured 
and the number of majors approached 1000, the degree 

was split.  In 2001, the BS CS/IS became a BS in 

Computer Science and a BS in Information Systems.  

With the split, the computer science program and 

faculty were moved to a new School of Computer 

Sciences and Engineering.  The BS Information 
Systems program and faculty remained in the School 
of Business. 
   In 2004, under the leadership of a new academic 
administration, all computing disciplines were 

reorganized and clustered in a new School of 

Technology and Computing (T&C). Today under the 

auspices of the School of T&C, UVSC offers separate 

baccalaureate degrees in computer science (CS), 

information systems (IS), and information technology 

(IT).  The BS in Computer Science is ABET accredited 

and includes emphases in computer science, software 
engineering (SE), computer engineering (CE), and 
networking.  The BS Information Systems and BS 

Information Technology have been designed in 

accordance with ABET guidelines for these computing 

subdisciplines [1] with plans to seek initial 

accreditation in 2008.  All computing programs and 

faculty are housed in the Computer Science building. 
 
As a result of UVSC™s strategy of combining all 
computing education under one roof, there is a close 
 association between the computer science, information 
systems, information technology, and multimedia 

faculty.  Many of the computer science faculty have 
taught information systems courses and vice versa.  
The author, for instance, has taught both software 

engineering and systems analysis and design for 
combined audiences of computer science and 
information systems majors and to separate audiences 

of purely CS or IS majors.  While model curriculum 
guidelines [1, 5, 6] provide separate objectives for 

software engineering and systems analysis, there is a 

great deal of overlap between these two courses.   

Primary differences resolve around content depth.  

Software engineering spends more time on software 

quality assurance and testing.  Systems analysis 
explores several ways to measure the business value of 
systems and examines the behavioral aspects of 

introducing change into an organization. 
 2. Bridging the Relevance Gap 
  To bridge the ever growing chasm between practice 
and theory, two concerns must be addressed: (1) the 
immediacy of the knowledge transfer of effective 
practices from industry to academia, and (2) the 
students™ skill level with those effective practices.   
 2.1. Increasing the Immediacy of Course 
Content 
 The primary bottleneck in getting fresh content to 
students is the text book industry publishing cycle.  
Depending on publisher, the lead time for getting a 
textbook on the shelves of the college bookstore can be 

between one and two years once the draft manuscript 

has been submitted.  Reviews, copyediting, permission, 

and layout are time intensive.  Assuming the 

manuscript takes six months to a year to write, by the 
time the book is published, the content can be from one 

and to three years old.  Add to that the time it takes for 

academia to embrace changes in the field, and the time 

line can easily stretch to five years or longer.  By way 
of example, the author began teaching object-oriented 
systems analysis in 1991 with trade books and selected 
readings.  Not until the early 2000s were object-
oriented analysis and design texts available for 

classroom use.  And even those were (and continue to 

be) based primarily on heavy-weight methodologies 

such as the Rational Unified Process with extensive 

UML diagramming. 
 
Historically, systems analysis and design was taught 
at UVSC as a two-course series. Planning, project 

management, analysis, and requirements elicitation 
were taught in the first course.  Design, 

implementation, and maintenance were taught in the 

second.   Beginning Fall 2006, the two systems 

analysis and design courses were combined into a 

single course.  Coverage of traditional methodologies 

such as structured analysis/structured design (SASD) 
was dropped in favor of concentrating on object-
oriented analysis and design.  This shift in focus to 

objects-only necessitated a textbook change.  After 

reviewing the available OOAD texts, 
Systems Analysis 
and Design with UML Version 2.0 (2nd Ed.)
 by 
Dennis, Wixom, & Tegarden [3] was selected. 
 
Approximately three weeks before the beginning of 
the Fall 2006 semester, UVSC colleagues Neil 

Harrison and Chuck Allison from the Computer 

Sciences and Networking Department invited the 

author to explore the possibility of collaborating with 
Agile methodology expert and original signer of the 
Agile Manifesto, Alistair Cockburn, on a project to 

modernize software engineering education for the 21
st century.  After an initial series of meetings and an 
examination of the course topics, the author agreed to 
participate in the project.  At that point, the syllabus for 
INFO 3430 Systems Analysis, Design and Integration 

was updated to include a second text:  
 Cockburn, Alistair. (2007). 
Software 
Engineering in the 21st Century: A Guide for 
Building Software Engineering Competence 
from Craft, Cooperative Gaming, and Lean 

Manufacturing.
 Just-in-Time draft available in 
course download area. 
 Of special interest is the caveat that the text was ﬁjust-
in-timeﬂ.  Alistair had agreed to stay at least one week 
ahead of the course schedule in terms of delivering the 

chapters.  He has made good on his promise, delivering 

drafts to all three of us for review prior to release to the 

students.   
 By the third week in the course, students were asked 
if they wanted to continue with 
Software Engineering 
in the 21
st Century
 as it was being ﬁstreamedﬂ to them 
or revert to the original hard bound text from Dennis et 
al.  Using the McCarthy ﬁDecider Protocolﬂ for teams 
introduced in Module 2 of the Cockburn text, the 
author of this paper proposed using the e-text as the 

only course textbook.  The voting was unanimously in 

favor of the dropping Dennis, even though the time for 

selling the text back to the bookstore had passed.  In an 
effort to ameliorate the financial cost of the class 
decision, arrangements were later made for the 
bookstore to buy back the unused texts.   Unfortunately 
 many of the students had purchased the text online and 
were not able to return them for full price. 
 The e-text has an interesting design philosophy.  
For each module, a set of slides are prepared for 
classroom presentation.  The slides contain the main 
points for the topics and act as visual markers for an 
extended discussion.  The text is organized around the 

slide set and includes a narration for each illustration.  
Once the module is presented to the class, the slides 

and accompanying text are uploaded to the course ftp 

site for student access.  Students have commented that 

they enjoy reading Alistair™s slide explanations out of 

curiosity as to how he might treat the subject 

differently than was covered in class.  Perhaps, this 
interest in following Alistair™s perspective stems from 
having him present the first module of the course.  

Students seem to have developed an intimacy with the 
Alistair that is usually missing with traditional texts 
that are developed by unknown authors. 
 2.2. Increasing Student Skill Level with 
Software  Development Core Practices 
 Employers typically fault higher education for 
producing students lacking critical skills for building 
modern information systems [2, 9].  A common 
complaint often heard is: ﬁYour students know what a 

system is, but they aren™t quite sure where to start 

when it comes to building one.ﬂ  The premise behind 

the modernization of the software engineering 

education at UVSC was that students should be able 
ﬁto doﬂ systems, not just ﬁknowﬂ about them.  In order 

to achieve that objective, the software engineering and 

systems analysis courses needed to be restructured to 

focus on skill building.  This required that students 
practice software development and practice it more 
than once.   
 
With only a one semester time frame to work with, 
increasing practice levels meant identifying a subset of 

core software development concepts and practices.  

Alistair, Neil, and Chuck met several times during the 

summer 2006 to determine the appropriate set of topics 

based on IEEE guidelines for software engineering 

education [6].  A total of 20 modules were identified 

focusing on the following core practices: (a) working 
in teams, (b) incremental/iterative development, (c) 
automated regression testing, (d) use of configuration 

management, (e) progress reporting through earned-

value charts, (f) mid-project retrospectives, and (g)  

incorporating changing requirements and designs.   For 

a complete description of the experimental course see 

Designing an Incremental-Iterative One-Semester, 
Undergraduate Course in Software Engineering
 by 
Alistair Cockburn available at http://alistair.cockburn. 

us/index.php/Designing_an_incremental-iterative_one-

semester,_undergraduate_course_in_software_engineer

ing 
   The 20-module curriculum takes a spiral approach 
in which students are presented the course material at 
least three times at increasing greater depth.  As early 

as day one, students meet in teams, receive a system 

problem and work through analysis, design, and 

implementation.  The INFO 3430 course is taught two 

days a week, with students meeting 28 times during the 

semester.  Twenty of those class sessions are devoted 

to the modules.  The remaining eight sessions have 

been scheduled for topics unique to systems analysis 

and design (e.g. economic feasibility determination 
using payback analysis, net present value (NPV), and 
internal rate of return (IRR)) or unique to the systems 
analysis cohort.  Unlike the software engineering 

cohort using C++, cppunit, and darcs for a 

development platform, the systems analysis cohort is 
using C#, NUnit, and Visual Source Safe (VSS).  Some 

class sessions has been devoted to test driven 

development using NUnit and some to source code 

control using VSS. 
 At the time of the writing of this paper, students had 
completed the first iteration of the development cycle.  
The first assignment was a simple exercise where 
students echoed hard coded strings, command line 

arguments, and keyboard input to the display, complete 
with unit testing.  Students programmed in C#.  Since 

C# has only been in use one year as the pedagogical 

language in the Information Systems and Technology 

Department, this presented a challenge.  Of the 17 

students enrolled in INFO 3430, only two had 

completed the two-course C# programming series.  

The other 15 were either familiar with Java or VB 6.0.  

No instruction was provided in migrating from these 

earlier teaching languages. Students worked in teams. 
Those teams having at least one member with a C# or 
Java background faired the best.  
 
Working with NUnit seemed to be universally 
problematic. In the second C# programming course, 

students are introduced to NUnit as a testing 

framework.  With only two students in the INFO 3430 

having been exposed to unit testing, the low level of 

prior knowledge in testing frameworks posed a real 

problem.  Students struggled trying to get NUnit to 

integrate with Visual Studio.  At times they seemed 
clueless when it came to writing tests.  For some 
reason, source code control was readily understood and 

easily implemented.  Perhaps this was because a 
 detailed tutorial was provided on Visual Source Safe.  
Although test framework configuration and unit testing 

was demonstrated on at least three occasions and a 
detailed example with source code provided, students 
still had trouble installing and running NUnit inside 

Visual Studio.  How to write assertions also remained 
elusive.  The next time the course is offered, a detailed 
tutorial on test framework configuration and unit 

testing will be added to the course prior to due date for 
the first software development assignment. 
 
Students have begun to work on the second iteration 
of the development cycle.  In the second iteration, 

students tackle the entire development process from 

end-to-end by designing and building a simple up-
down counter client-server application.  To date 
students have written the project mission with priority 

trade-offs, developed use cases for each service to be 
provided by the system, and identified a release plan.  
Over the next two weeks students will start and finish 

construction of the application using the 

C#/NUnit/VSS development environment.  Students 

will provide project visibility through burn charts.   
 
The third and final iteration of the development 
cycle is scheduled for the last eight weeks of the 

course.  The first two weeks of the block will be 

devoted to planning, analysis, and determining what to 

build.  The final six weeks of the block will provide 
three two-week delivery windows to accommodate 
three releases of the system.  Each release will be 

accompanied by team reflection with the goal of 

incrementally improving the software development 

process.  Along the way, students will receive 

instruction in additional software engineering topics 

such as software metrics, the SEI Capability Maturity 

Model (CMM), ISO standards, and software 

maintenance.  It was felt that these topics could be 

deferred till the end of the course as they would not 

impact the ability of students to meet software release 

targets.   
 3. Acknowledgements 
 The author is indebted to Alistair Cockburn for his 
willingness to foster an industry-academia alliance.  
Thanks also to colleagues Neil Harrison and Chuck 
Allison for their efforts in bringing this 21
st century 
approach to software development to the UVSC 
campus.   
 4. References 
 [1] 
ABET Criteria for Accrediting Computing Programs
. (October 29, 2005). Retrieved September 15, 2006 from 
http://www.abet.org/Linked%20Documents-
UPDATE/Criteria%20and%20PP/C001%2006-
07%20CAC%20Criteria%209-12-06.pdf
   [2] Andriole, S. (2006).  Business technology education in 
the early 21
st century: The ongoing quest for relevance.  
Journal of Information Technology Education
, 5(1), 1-12.  
 
[3] Dennis, A., Wixom, B. H., & Tegarden, D.  (2005). 

Systems Analysis and Design with UML Version 2.0 (2nd 
Ed.)
. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 [4] Friedman, T. (2005). 
The World is Flat:
 A Brief History 
of the Twenty-first Century
.  New York, NY: Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux. 
 
[5] Gorgone, J.T., Davis, G.B., Valacich, J.S., Topi, H., 
Feinstein, D.L., & Longenecker, H.E. Jr. (2002). 
 IS 2002: 
Model curriculum and guidelines for undergraduate degree 
programs in Information Systems
, Association for 
Information Systems, Atlanta, GA. 
 
[6] IEEE Computer Society, Association for Computing 

Machinery, 
Software Engineering 2004: Curriculum 
Guidelines for Undergraduate Degree Programs in Software 

Engineering, 
A Volume of the Computing Curricula Series, 
August 23, 2004.  
 [7] Johnson, D. W. & Jones, C. G. (2006).  IS education: The 

changing complexity of relevance. 
Issues in Information 
Systems
, Vol. VII (1), 188-192.  
 
[8] Lomerson, W. & Pollacia, L. (2005).  Declining CIS 

enrollment: An examination of pre-college factors.  

Proceedings of the 22
nd Annual Information Systems 
Education Conference
, October 2005.   
 [9] Trauth, E., Farrell, D., & Lee, D. (1993). The IS 

expectation gap: Industry expectations vs. academic 
preparation.  
MIS Quarterly
, 7(3), 293-307. 
 _________________________ 
Note:  
This paper has covered early results from the 
software development course restructuring.  This 
experience report along with final lessons learned will 

be updated for the ICSE conference presentation.    

 