 ABSTRACT
Daily build is a software development paradigm that

originated in the PC industry to get control of the
development process, while still allowing the focus on end

user requirements and code. The PC industry used daily

build to avoid chaos in increasingly larger applications in an

environment without a strong development process. Ericsson

Radio Systems has chosen to implement daily build to

increase the focus on end user requirements and code, but

from a different starting point with a traditionally strong

development process. In this article we discuss our

experiences with daily build and feature oriented

development in this context. We also relate our experience to

the concept of extreme programming, arguing that our ideas

can help extend the applicability of extreme programming

beyond small co-located projects.
Keywords
Daily build, Incremental development, Feature teams,

Integrated Product Teams, Extreme programming
1Introduction
Ericsson is the world leading supplier of Mobile

Communication Infrastructure. The World Class

Provisioning (WCP) improvement initiative discussed in this

article covers the GSM business area BMOG (Switches and

base stations). Development is done in more than 15

countries and by more than 5000 developers. There are

several large stand alone applications developed by rather

independent product units and most products are developed

over several geographically distributed sites. The

development environment ranges from the traditional

proprietary AXE 10 environment to a Corba/Java/UML

environment for newer applications.
The WCP (World Class Provisioning) initiative was started
in 1998 to secure and strengthen Ericsson's position as the
world leading supplier. The goals of WCP are by 2001 to

achieve the following improvements:
¥10 x Quality
¥4 x Productivity
¥1/2 x Lead-time

To achieve these goals 10 guiding principles where chosen
based on BMOG's current situation and benchmarking with
other telecom and computer industry:¥Daily build and incremental development
¥Customer and supplier involvement

¥Cross-functional teams with sustained responsibility

¥Reward for results

¥Learning organization

¥Instant plug and play

¥Management commitment to quality

¥Unbundled and open system architecture

¥World class working environment

¥Predevelopment

In this article we will mainly focus on the daily build and
incremental development guiding principle, and the changes

that they require, but in section 8 we discuss some synergies

with the other guiding principles.The WCP initiative is organized as a matrix, with persons at
each product unit responsible for the WCP goals and guiding

principles across their product units. Their role is to ensure

that the product unit achieves the WCP goals by making

efÞcient use of the guiding principles. The third author is the

WCP responsible for the Base Station Controller node. On
the other dimension there are guiding principle responsibles
supporting the guiding principle across all product units. The

two Þrst authors of this article are responsible for daily build

and incremental development. We are responsible for

promoting and supporting the product units to use daily build

and incremental development.
Daily build is a software development paradigm that
originated in the PC industry to get control of the
development process, while still allowing the focus on end

user requirements and code. A prime example of this is

Microsoft [2] where a buddy pair of designer and tester are

responsible for implementing a customer feature. The

designer will check-out and update all modules which are
needed for the feature in parallel with other designers
responsible for other features. The daily build is used to

allow designers to fast check the update into the main code

line to avoid large merge conßicts from parallel check-outs.

The designer checking in his changes Þrst is the lucky one,
 Daily build and feature development in large distributed projectsEven-Andr” Karlsson
Q-LabsIdeonS-22370 LundSweden+46-46-2863033even-andre.karlsson@q-labs.se
Lars-Gıran AnderssonEricsson Radio Systems AB
S-164 80 StockholmSweden+46 8 585 31768lars-goran.andersson@era.ericsson.sePer Leion
Ericsson Radio Systems AB
LinkıpingSweden+46 13 287300per.leion@era.ericsson.se
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for  
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies  
are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that  
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy  

otherwise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists, requires  
prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
ICSE 2000, Limerick, Ireland 

© ACM 23000 1-58113-206-9/00/06 –$5.00 
 as it is up to the later designer to take care of any merge
conßicts. The PC industry used daily build to avoid chaos in
increasingly larger applications in an environment without a

strong development process. Ericsson Radio Systems has

chosen to implement daily build to increase the focus on end

user requirements and code, but from a different starting

point with a traditionally strong development process

originating from an environment with stable requirements

from a slow regulated market. In this process the control of

the code has been through detailed design documents, and
coding has been done by designers implementing one
module each based on design impacts from different

features. Thus the code control mechanism in this process

has been the thorough detailed design. Daily build is a

orthogonal control mechanism which to some extent is in

conßict with designers responsible for separate modules. In
this article we discuss our experiences with daily build in

this environment.
The guiding principle also includes incrementaldevelopment. It is therefor important to clearly deÞne what

we mean as the difference between these two concepts.
Incremental development is the delivery of the functionality
in increments with a well deÞned subset of the functionality
(set of features) in each increment. These increments are

planned on the project level. The frequency of increments

can be rather different, down to one week for smaller

projects.Daily build is the team/individual controlled delivery of code
to a main codeline which is built and tested daily. Any

functionality of the delivered code is completely controlled

and used by the team/individual. The daily test only covers

the functionality that existed in the system at the last stable

baseline.As we see from this the main differences between daily build
and incremental development are:
¥Who controls and deÞnes the deliveries
¥The frequency

¥The functional level of the deliveries

Daily build can be divided into three main components:
¥Build
¥Test

¥Design

The rest of this article is organized as follows:
¥Section 2 discuss the build component of daily build
¥Section 3 discuss the test component

¥Section 4 discuss the impacts on design

¥In section 5 we describe the impacts of daily build in a
distributed development environment.
¥Section 6 describes the measurements for degree of
implementation¥Early experiences are discussed in section 7.

¥In section 8 we discuss the synergies with some of the
other guiding principles.¥Section 9 contains a discussion how the principles of
incremental development and feature teams impact

project planning.¥A comparison to the concept of Extreme programming is
provided in section 10.
¥Section 11 provides a general roadmap for how to imple-
ment daily build
¥Section 12 concludes the article.

For commercial reasons, we do not disclose any facts or
measurements from real projects, but all information

discussed in this article has been implemented in several

large multi-site projects over the last 2 years.
2Build
One of the components of daily build is the ability to build

the system on a daily basis. This means that:
¥Designers must know where to put their code.
¥The code must be consistent, i.e. interfaces (signal
descriptions) must match bodies (modules) etc.¥We must be able to compile and load the code and any
related data in much less than 24 hours.We will discuss the impacts of the second and third
requirement on the system (the Þrst is rather evident, and is

solved by a good conÞguration management process and

tool), but Þrst we will discuss what we mean by the system

and hardware in this context. BMOG is producing all

components of a GSM network out to the mobile phone, i.e.

the switch (either traditional circuit switched AXE 10 or

packet switched GPRS/UMTS), base station controllers and

base stations, as well as the Management System. We could

regard the system to be built as a complete GSM system,

loaded into a GSM network. The system could also be each

node in the GSM network, e.g. a base station controller.

These nodes have standardized interfaces, and are usually

developed by separate product units. There are usually

standardized products for testing the protocols between the
nodes. This is the level of system where we have focused the

daily build activity currently, as this is the level where

software is physically built and loaded. Ideally we should

envision a daily build on a complete GSM network. We

could also go into each of the nodes and look at separate
subsystems as the system to be built. In this case the

hardware has to be a simulator able to simulate the interfaces

to the other subsystems. Doing a daily build on a lower level

than system means that we loose many of the advantages, i.e.

consistency check on interfaces will be local.
Consistent code means that all impacts for a speciÞc part ofan end user functionality needs to be in place at the same
time, i.e. if two modules interact to do something the

implementations of this interaction must be checked in at the

same time. Take as an example a functionality that needs a

new parameter in a function (signal). Both the caller and the

called module have to implement the additional parameter at

the same time. To achieve this efÞciently both impacts

should be implemented by the same individual/team,

otherwise the amount of communications between teams to coordinate what to check in when will be too high.Loading the software into the hardware is not a trivial task in
a telecom system for several reasons. First there exists a lot

of data in the system, e.g. subscriber data, cell layout, etc.
which also needs to be loaded. There are three alternatives

for this loading: either a complete reload with code and data,
or a so called function change where only the changed
modules are loaded together with a data change information
(DCI) providing a mapping from the old data structures to

the new. The DCI can be done in two ways, either complete

from the previous version or increment, or a partial from the

last build. The partial one will be fastest but puts an extra

burden on the designer as they have to provide intermediate

DCI's, as well as the Þnal one which the customer needs to
upgrade the software during operation. The full DCI is

slower as more modules must be loaded, but is better from a

end user test perspective as we test the Þnal DCI all the time.
The second problem with loading is the amount of sourcedsoftware in particular in the Management System which

makes the loading of a system a rather complex task which

needs a lot of manual intervention. This must now be

automatized, but this is also for the better for the real

installation, as they get an easier job.
Generally on the build part we have encountered several
technical barriers, none of which have been impossible to

overcome, and we are able to build most systems in well

under 24 hours, even if some large legacy systems still need

up to a couple of days for a complete build from scratch.

Being able to build the system fast and efÞciently is also an

advantage for the development, independent of how often the

build is performed.
3Automatic testing
Automatic testing is the second part of daily build, as it is of

little use to be able to build a system on a daily basis if we

can't ensure that it has a certain level of quality. The idea of

the test is to ensure that nothing of the existing functionality

in the system is broken, i.e. a regression test. This test has to

be automatic as the amount of effort needed to manually do

the tests every day is prohibitive. There are two alternatives

when it comes to what the test includes:¥The functionality level of the last increment.
¥The functionality level of the last successful build.

The last alternative makes it possible for teams to include
test cases to safeguard their functionality in the test, thus as

soon as they have done their own test of the last build to

ensure that it has the required functionality, passed test cases

can be included in the automatic test. These test cases will

ensure that any changes impacting their new functionality

will be detected.As discussed for build, the tests have to be on the level of the
build, i.e. network, node or subsystem.
If the build fails, either during build or test, we are quite sure
that it can be traced back to the last check-in, and those who
have done this check-in should be the ones most natural to

Þx the problem. In any case we still have the last successful

build.
The teams will get the tested software back and can check if
their newly implemented functionality is working.
Since breaking the build is a rather serious matter, there
should be a possibility for the teams to do part of the build

and test steps in a private environment before submitting it to

the main code line and a system build. How much of this

private activity which is cost effective to perform has to be

judged for each system, as it is not reasonable to do the same
things twice. We recommend a scheme where each team

does a code review, compile, load and some form of

regression test before submitting the code. The full

regression test of old functionality is done centrally. If we set

the seriousness of breaking the build to high, we will get a

lot of double work, if we set it too low we don't get enough

progress in the build.
Usually there is a function/system test activity of the
previous increment going on in parallel with the daily build

activity of the current increment. We have two alternatives

here:¥We can freeze the code line at the delivery of the incre-
ment, letting the function/system test proceed in a stable
environment.
¥We can let function/system test use the same code line as
the daily build.
Using a frozen code line has the disadvantage that we must
maintain two branches, i.e. serious errors must be corrected

both for the frozen code line and the daily build code line.

Using the same code line will mean that function/system test
will execute in less stable environment, and we can never be

sure if a fault comes from something delivered in the last

increment or last build, similarly we can experience that test

cases which passed earlier now fail because of code in the

latest build which was not detected by the automatic test.

However if we can include all passed test cases in the

automatic test run daily we can ensure some quality here.
Even if the function/system test is executed in a more

unstable environment we have the advantage that faults are

detected earlier.
If the amount of test cases becomes too big to be run every
day, we can make a scheme where we alternate test cases so

that all test cases are run at least once a week. If we have

several hardware platforms we can run the test cases

alternatively on different platforms to get a full coverage. 
Usually there has been rather limited incentive for automatic
testing, as most test cases are run only once, and the amount
of regression test has been limited. In a daily build

environment this is changing radically and automatic testing

is a prerequisite. Automatic testing is as fast build a technical

barrier, however most of the software, e.g. protocol testers

and emulators are in place to perform automate test cases,
the challenge is to start writing tests so they can be

automatically executed. Automatic testing is also an

improvement which can be of use even with less frequent

builds. 
4Design impact of daily build
Up to now we have discussed the technical requirements on
 daily build, i.e. fast build and automatic testing. However to
have any use of daily build, design has to deliver code with

some frequency, otherwise there is nothing to build. This

code also has to be consistent so that it can be built. Note that

there is no requirement on any functional content, as the new

code is not executed by the automatic tests, but for the team

to use.There are two main connected impacts on design of daily
build, the organization of responsibility and the development

process.Generally there are two ways of organizing design, either
based on end user functionality where one team is
responsible for a customer feature, or based on system
modules where a team/individual is responsible for one or

several modules and implements impacts from all features in

these modules. With customer feature responsibility the team

will implement changes in all modules which are necessary
for the end user feature to work, possibly in parallel with

other teams implementing impacts from other features in
some of the same modules. These two ways of organizing

design are not mutually exclusive, as we can have an

organization with predominantly customer feature

responsibility, but where some central modules are the

responsibility of a separate team. In this case the module
team has to coordinate when to implement the changes with
all feature teams. Daily build can only be fully implemented

in an organization with predominantly customer feature

design responsibility. Note that this responsibility has to

extend to the system level we want to implement daily build,

e.g. network, node or subsystem. The reasons why feature

responsibility is a prerequisite for taking advantage of daily

build is the amount of coordination/planning needed

between module responsibles to deliver consistent parts of

the modules which can be built if module design

responsibility is used, i.e. every module designer has

potential several features impacting his module, where each

feature is also impacting many other modules. In a feature

team these coordinations are all handled within the team.
There are however the conßict with concurrent updates of

the module by different feature teams, and here frequent

build and automatic testing is a prerequisite for

implementing feature teams, to ensure that what is checked

in has the appropriate quality, i.e. has been appropriately

merged with what was previously checked in. 
When implementing feature team responsibility there aregenerally two approaches to handling several impacts on the

same module, either opportunistic or planned. Opportunistic
handling means that anyone can check out a module and

work on it in parallel with anyone else. The Þrst to check in

their change do not have to do any merging, whereas all later

have to merge with all who have worked in parallel and

checked in before. The opportunistic handling provides a big

incentive for making small changes to the modules and

checking them in frequently, thus serving as the engine of

daily build. The planned handling means that each feature

team has a time window when they work alone with the

module. This time window can be planned centrally or

decentralized by the involved feature teams.
Note that even if we have several feature teams doing the
work in the same modules does not mean that we need to

give up the idea of a module responsible, on the contrary this

role is getting even more important in a feature team

organization. The role is changing from someone who does

all the work in a module, to someone who is guiding,

checking and approving solutions and implementations

proposed by each feature team. Of course the module
responsible should participate in the feature team which has
the biggest or most complex impact on the module.
The development process is also impacted by daily build, as
if we use a traditional waterfall development model there is

no code to be build until very late in the project, thus we

loose most of the advantages of daily build. To get full

advantage of daily build we have to split the development

into smaller iterations, where each iteration is taken to

executable code. This means that we can adapt the amount of

design documentation to the iterative way of developing

software. One interesting observation when looking at

design documentation is that it has two purposes: one is to

support maintenance and enhancements of the system, the
other is to serve as input to the next stage of the development

process. For the Þrst purpose we usually need less

documentation than for the second, as in the maintenance
case we can have the design information on an overview

level and look for additional details in the code. On the

contrary for input to later stages of development where we

don't have the code, thus there is a tendency to put additional

details in the high level design documentation to help the

later stages. Working more iteratively on all levels of

documentation at the same time will allow us to put the

information directly where it belongs. This of course

requires that we have a design organization where a team is

responsible for the end user functionality, as otherwise we

have a handover of information from many customer

features to the module responsible, and this design
information has to be more detailed than the information
necessary for maintenance as the module designer is going to
implement the impacts in the modules only from that
information, and has limited time to understand each
individual feature or communicate with different feature

designers. It is thus natural that the development process is

adapted if we use feature teams and daily build, with a

higher focus on code, starting coding of parts that don't need
thorough design early interleaved with design and possibly

analysis of more complex parts, where information is put

directly into the level of documentation where it belongs

based on maintenance needs. This iterative approach should

not be driven too far, i.e. the team should make a plan for

how the feature should be developed in different iterations,

but this is a local plan to each team, maybe coordinated with

other team for access to common modules. Note that the
daily building will enforce that there is such a plan,

otherwise the code developed will be inconsistent and break

the build.
There are some approaches to daily build where a feature
team has a private branch of the code during the complete

development of a feature, and only checks in at the end. This

is not recommended as it usually leads to major merging
 problems when several features are checked in towards the
end. This could be solved with a detailed planning of the

impacts of different modules avoiding the merge. This is

however rather difÞcult as this planning has to be on a

central level, putting a high strain on the planner when there

are changes in requirements or wrong effort estimates.
Another consequence from parallel design is the need to beable to merge different work products easily. This is usually

supported at the syntactic level of ascii Þles (e.g. code). For

other type of documents, e.g. word processors and design

tools the merging capabilities needs to be an important

criteria when choosing the tool. Some tools, e.g. Microsoft
Word actually have quite good support for merging parallel

work.
Test is also impacted by daily build in that traditionally there
has been several different test phases, e.g. basic, simulated,

function and system test. The practice has been to include as

much as possible in the earlier test phases, as it is more
expensive to discover an error in a later test phase., and the

feedback is longer. The disadvantage with all these test

phases is a lot of overlap, i.e. the same functionality tested

several times and a long lead-time. With daily build and

automatic testing this assumption is not necessarily valid any

more, as we can do any sort of tests after the daily build.

Thus a feature team can and should test the functionality
where it is most efÞcient, and only once.
5Impacts of daily build
We divide these impacts into two groups, one concerning the

advantages from frequent build and automatic test of the

system, the other from organizing design in features teams to

deliver frequently. We also discuss some pitfalls when

reorganizing design to take advantage of daily build.
Frequent builds and automatic testing
The major advantages of being able to build and test the

system daily are:¥Stability We always have an executable system, even if
the current build fails we can go back to the last stable

one.¥Test
 Teams can always integrate their code into a running
system and test it on a system level.
¥Follow up
 We see progress very clearly, i.e. not only doc-
ument statuses but real executable code. If a team has not

delivered any code for a long time, we know that it is

something which should be investigated.
¥Feedback
 We can get early and continuous quality feed-
back. Thus if a team is delivering substandard code it will

be immediately discovered and can be adjusted before

the damage is too big.¥Early fault detection Faults are detected early after they
are introduced. This does not only pertain to local faults

but also global system faults and interference with old

functionality. These types of faults are usually discovered

later without daily build.
¥Isolated errors
 It is easy to isolate errors, as they in most
cases come from the new code in the current build, and

the teams delivering this code should be able to Þx the
errors.¥Parallel system test
 System test can proceed in parallel
with development, thus reducing the lead-time for system

test at the end.¥One code line When using only one main code line for
development and system test, the need for parallel code

updates disappears. Feature teams
The major advantages of using feature teams as described in

section 4 are:¥Motivation
 The feature team has a focus on end user
functionality and code. They have the full responsibility

for implementing the feature, and use the existing mod-

ules as means to achieve this functionality.
¥Change management Changes can be absorbed more
easily by the feature team, i.e. both external requirements

changes and changes in the design can be handled within
the team without impacting other teams. As most changes

are pertaining to a speciÞc feature this is one of the major
advantages of feature teams. With module responsibility

the feature changes have to be analyzed on a central level

and distributed to each affected module. If there are

changes in the design of one module for a feature and this
impacts the work load for the module responsible other

features may need to be rescheduled leading to more
module responsibles being impacted. This is one of the

effect we see when projects are doing frequent (down to

weekly) centrally planned increments with module
responsibility, the plans get very volatile to both external

and internal changes, and the work load on the architects

and planners is very high.
¥Coordination towards associated projects. Usually a
requirement towards an associated system is because of a

feature. If the interaction to the associated system is
through a module which have impacts from many fea-

tures, the module responsible will not be able to fully
understand the reason for each requirement, and can not
efÞciently communicate with the associated system. This

leads to an inefÞcient coordination if we don't use feature

teams, which are responsible for both the feature and the
impacts in the interface module and can make efÞcient

trade-offs with the associated system.
¥Interface coordination Usually changes in interfaces
between modules are because of new features which need

extended interaction. When we use feature teams the

interfaces are handled within the team, when using mod-

ule responsibility the interfaces have to be settled before

each module is implemented to allow parallel work. This

is usually an impossible task, leading to time consuming
coordination, rework and integration problems.
There are also pitfalls when using feature teams. The major
being the potential degeneration of each module and

interfaces. This is a real problem which we propose to solve

with a module coordinator which is approving and checking

what each feature team implements in the module.The focus on early code can lead to an ill structured designof a feature where later iterations will have to redo coding
 done in earlier iterations. To avoid this we need a certain
level of analysis and planning for the development of the

feature in iterations by the feature team.Another constraint is having a distributed development
organization where different sites are cooperating on a

project. This means that either we have to have people from

different sites in the same team or moving modules between

different sites. In any case this increases the demands on

travels and computer supported cooperative work tools, i.e.

efÞcient conÞguration management and teleconferencing

equipment.6Measurements
In the WCP program we have the three overall goals on

quality, productivity and lead-time which are followed up by

measurements. But we also want to monitor the degree of

implementation of daily build, both for individual projects

but also aggregated over product units. For that we have

designed a the following measure:
Degree of implementation
 of daily build is measured by the
number of days with successful builds during the design

lead-time divided by the number of days for design.
In this measurement the lead-time of design is up to eachorganization to deÞne, but is usually measured from the end

of feasibility (decision to start the project) to the start of
function test of the last increment. Also the criteria for a

successful daily build is up to each organization to deÞne. It

has three components:¥The daily build has to be above some size, i.e. the there
has to be some new code delivered. We recommend to

use the limit of new code > 0.5 total code / number of

days for design¥The daily build and test has to run successful.

¥The executable system has to be distributed to the users. 

Note that this measure can be used to continuously follow up
the degree of implementation by only counting the days of

design up to today. The reason for stopping the counting as

design is completed is that daily build is a design activity, not

primarily a means to speed up error correction during test,
thus even if we will use daily (and possibly more frequent)

builds during Þnal testing, we don't include that in our

measure.For a product unit with several products the aggregated
measure is a weighted average by size of effort over the

different products.
This gives us a simple way to quantify the progress of
implementing daily builds through the complete WCP

program.We have also some recommendations for projects on how to
follow up the impacts daily build has on the WCP goals, i.e.

quantiÞcation of the impacts discussed in section 5. This is

usually a rather complex relationship which has to be

adapted for each organization based on their reasons for

doing daily build and their implementation.
7Early experiences 
Our current experiences with complete implementation of

daily builds are not complete, meaning that we have different

projects all on the way towards daily build, but none with a

complete implementation as deÞned by our metrics.The following is a cross sample of the different projects:

A) This project is a distributed project over 5 sites involving
about 50 designers. It is developing a base station controller

module from scratch. The project has implemented daily

builds and automatic regression test. There is a build daemon

which does the build and test every night (or even more

frequent), and distributes a mail message about the result.

The organization of design is however still based on design

responsibility, and frequent (down to twice a week)

increments are planned on the project level. This makes the

project rather volatile to changes, and this level of detailed

planning is probably at the limit of what can be done
centrally. The design is robust against incomplete interface,

as each module will accept all calls, but just discard with an

error message any call that is not implemented, thus the daily

build and automatic test can proceed without coordinated

interfaces as long as they are not used in the test.
B) This project is making enhancements to an existing node
in the network. It is organized at one site, and has used

feature teams for a long time. Daily build and automatic test

is not implemented, but the system is built whenever the

teams check in anything. This project has focused on the

impacts of feature teams on the development process, where

they have discovered that there can be a rather dramatic

reduction in design information by using feature teams and
parallel work on design and code. One example of a function

description being reduced from 200 to 9 pages was reported.
C) This project is a large multi node project involving more
than 500 developers. In this project we have introduced

feature teams on the network level. The project is planned

with four increments, two of which are pre-releases to early

customers. One of the nodes have changed from module

oriented to feature oriented development, with the

modiÞcation that some key modules are handled by separate

teams. A daily build environment is introduced in this node.

Some early experiences are that we have been able to reduce

the total lead-time of some critical features with 40% by
iterations inside the feature teams.8Synergies with other guiding principles
Even if the changes described in the earlier sections

originated from the daily build and incremental development

guiding principle, they have important synergies with several

other guiding principles. Cross functional teams with sustained responsibility
The feature is the natural unit of functionality that we
develop and deliver to our customers, thus it is the ideal task

for a team. The feature team is then responsible for getting

the feature to the customer within a given time, quality and

budget. A feature team needs to be cross functional as it

needs to cover all phases of the development process from

customer contact to system test, as well as all areas of the
system which is impacted by the feature. Incremental development
Incremental development is the project level planning of

features to increments based on customer prioritizing. On the
project level we must ensure that 
¥each feature team has the right resources, 
¥they make realistic plans, and

¥follow their plans

This way of planning gives much more stable plans on the
project level of the following two reasons:
¥Most changes are directly related to one feature, and will
only impact one feature team. ¥A feature team can easily adjust to smaller changes in
plans, e.g. opening a new module for a minor impact,

changing the effort from one module to another, etc.

without impacting anyone else. Also larger impacts

would only mean that the feature will be rescheduled for

delivery in a later increment.
In the traditional product organization these type of changes
have unnecessary large consequences as they spread like

rings in the water because features are interconnected

through the module implementers.We should also on the project level planning ensure that
features are grouped in increments to allow for the best

possible scheduling of impacts to critical modules. Some
examples:
¥If we have many impacts from different features to some
modules we should try to schedule the features evenly

over the different increments to have a even work-load on

the modules.¥If we have one feature which (re)builds the infrastructure
in one module, this should be done before other features
impacting this module.Customer and supplier involvement (subcontract man-
agement)
Customer involvement is very natural with feature teams

(compared to our traditional way of organizing where

development is organized around products (modules)). The

feature team can have continuous contact with the customer,

and show him early versions of the feature working in the

system (through daily build). Also the prioritizing of features

in increments can allow us to be more ßexible with the

customer, but on a higher level, e.g. if the customer decides

that a new feature is very important it can replace another in

a late increment.Another important aspect of feature teams is in relationshipto supplier involvement (subcontract management). Here

most requests on a subcontractor come because of the new

features. It is then very natural for the feature team to keep

close contact with the subcontractor to ensure that they Þnd

the optimal solution for their feature. This contact is much

more difÞcult when development is organized around

products (modules), and the responsibles for implementing
the two interfacing modules have several different features to

think of, and can not easily make any global changes to

achieve a better solution for the feature. A related issue here
is the interface coordination between different parts of the
product if we use product responsibility in development.

This will to a large extent disappear if we use feature teams,

as most changes to interfaces are due to the feature, and the

feature team is responsible for both the interfaces and the

implementations.Reward for results
The goal of a feature team is rather clear and independent,
i.e. deliver a feature with required quality that satisfy the

customer requirements. It is then easy to reward the team for

accomplishing this goal.Learning organization
Working in feature teams with fast feedback (daily build)

will allow the organization to learn much quicker. 
Part of World Class Working Environment (ClearCase)
The conÞguration management tool (in our case ClearCase)
is a support infrastructure for daily build, and thus feature

teams. It helps to keep track of versions for the team itself,

and also to consistently select versions for build (Make).
9Impacts of incremental development and daily build 
on project planning

This section discusses how incremental development and

feature teams impact the different decision points (tollgates)

and interfaces between product and project management. 
Baseline situationThe interface between product and project management and

the use of the tollgates has not been optimal. The initial

scope of the projects has been far too big, and the early

tollgates have been used mainly to limit this scope. Project

management tried to limit the scope as fast as possible to get

the project under control, and be able to start realistic
planning, as planning with a unrealistic scope was not

possible, and product management was afraid of excluding

any features before they really had to as there was little

chance for getting the features in again. Also previous

projects have experienced overruns in cost and lead-time

which there has been no possibility to adjust by cutting scope
as all features have been developed in parallel. Thus there is

a situation where pre TG2 (decision to start execution of

project) scope is reduced as much as possible, and after TG2

we could just hope that the project will meet their cost and
time goals with the decided scope, as there was little

ßexibility in adjusting the scope.
The new model for projects
In the current environment we have a more ßexible set of

features throughout the project based on customer priority,

stability of features and project resources.We describe an example of how such a project divided into
four increments would look.
At TG0 the overall scope of the project is set in terms of 

¥end date, 
¥total resources, and

¥direction (only new features, restructuring, system
improvements, etc.)
 All new features are grouped into four categories:
¥Group 1
 Very important and stable feature, needing 25-
35% of total resources (candidates for Þrst increment)¥Group 2 
Important and relatively stable feature, needing
40-50% of total resources (candidates for second and
third increments)¥Group 3 
Other important features, needing 25% of totalresources (candidates for last increment)¥Group 4 
Other interesting features, up to 50-100% oftotal resources.Note that these four categories totals to 150%-200% of
project resources, but we only expect to complete the three

Þrst categories. Features in group 1 is put on a Òfast trackÓ

through prestudy (specifying requirements) and feasibility
(implementation proposal and cost estimates) for early start
of execution in the Þrst increment. Features in group 2 are

driven through prestudy in the usual speed. Features in group

3 are given less priority, and only prestudy for complex ones

are started. Features in group 4 are in reserve, and no

resources are used on them from the prestudy project.Project management can now start preliminary planning of
resources based on this grouping. This does not mean that

the plans will not be changed - they indeed will, but at least

there is a baseline to change.At TG1 the overall scope of the project is adjusted. A
decision can be taken to start execution (as soon as possible)

for features in group 1. Based on the output of prestudy of
features in group 2, a suitable set for increment 2 should be
determined, and feasibility for this started. The scope for

prestudy for increment 3 is adjusted, and any features not

prestudied are started. Note that at any point features from

group 4 can replace features in the other groups. The

tollgates are used to do this regrouping.
At TG2 the execution content of increment 2 and 3 are
decided and execution of increment 2 started. Content for

feasibility for increment 4 is decided and started. Any

additional features popping up are started on a fast track

through prestudy and feasibility.
At TG3 the execution content of increment 4 and the Þnal
scope of the project is decided.The following Þgure gives an idea about how this could look.
Here we could assume 3 months between each TG, giving a

lead-time TG0-TG4 of 12 months. The list of features in

each priority group would change during the project, and a

new feature can come into the project as late as TG3 if it can

be run through prestudy, feasibility and execution in 3
months.As we see here there will be a continuous adjustment offeatures during the project. The tollgates will mainly be used

to decide on the overall scope of the project, i.e. functionality

versus lead-time and resources, whereas individual features

can be adjusted at any time.
Why feature teams?
This will be a rather complex project environment, where the

main project steering mechanism is the current list of
features, their status and estimated completion cost.
Delegating each feature to a team which has the complete

responsibility to develop this feature will then make the

project follow up and replanning much easier. Removing one

feature will only affect one team, and it is easier for different

teams to work out of phase. 
Feature teams are also an advantage for product
management, as they can then directly communicate with the

feature team, and also see early versions of the feature.
Trying this way of running a project in a traditional
organization with module responsibility would most

probably fail, as it is impossible to predict the work for each

module responsible during the different phases of the

project, or this will drastically reduce the ßexibility of

replacing features.Allocating a feature to a feature team at one site will alsoallow us more ßexibility in when we start development of

each feature, i.e. when we have resources (with the necessary

competence) at one site we can start a feature there, and we
avoid all the coordination with resources on other sites

which previously needed to work synchronously. The feature

team will of course need support and guidance from other
sites for products (modules) they are not familiar with, but

this is less than having the other site to do the work. Note

that the feature team has to have the core competence for

developing the feature.
Note that our ßexibility is not complete, as our resources are
not completely interchangeable even if we use feature teams,

thus if we want to replace one feature with another, and the

team intended for the Þrst feature does not have the

competence for developing the other feature we need to

reallocate people between teams. Thus product management

does not have complete freedom.
FeaturesPrio 1Prio 2
Prio 3Prio 4TG0TG1TG2TG3TG4Pre + FeasExecutionPrestudyPrestudyFeasibilityExecutionFeasibilityPrestudyExecutionExecutionFeasibilityPre + FeasPre + Feas + Exec Another advantage of using feature teams is that we avoid
the tendency of Òdelay creepÓ, i.e. a project organization

where module responsibles are implementing all impacts on
a module it is very ÒeasyÓ to accept a ÒsmallÓ change

request, as it is just minor additions for several people,

similarly bad feature estimates are spread over several

persons, but all these small increases add up to large

ÒhiddenÓ delays and cost overruns. In a feature team

environment these problems will still be there, but they will

be more ÒisolatedÓ and visible, i.e. this feature will be
delayed, thus we can not start on the next as planned.
10Relation to Extreme programming
Extreme programming (XP) was conceived and developed to

address the speciÞc needs of software development

conducted in small teams in the face of vague and changing

requirements [1]. It is a light-weight methodology
challenging many conventional assumptions. In this section

we discuss how our approach relates to XP, and propose

some extensions that could be useful for it to scale up.
The planning game is well covered already in our practices.
Currently we do the planning on two levels, features into

different increments of a release where there is a constant

discussion between product management (business) and the

project (technical) on what can be included. The discussion

is on the feature level. Then each team is responsible for the

development of each feature.
Small releases
 is a practice which is not too simple, as the
roll-out of new telecom software into a network is a rather

complex process, but we are increasing the potential delivery

frequency from 12 to 3-4 months.
The metaphor is a less established practice, as we still have
a lot of very detailed high level documentation, and actually

sometimes lacking the 10.000 feet view.
Simple design is not done well. We still tend to use far too
much time up front to develop the full design on paper.

However we believe that as we get more experience this will

start to change.Automatic testing
 is starting up. We are discussing the need
for basic tests to cover all functionality, i.e. if there is an

automatic user test which covers several basic test cases in

different modules, why should we then have the basic test

cases as well? With the feature teams we also solve the

problem mentioned in Beck's book [1] on page 118, i.e. how

to synchronize the function tests with design, as the feature
team takes care of both development and test. However the

concept of writing (basic) test cases Þrst is not practices to
any large extent yet, However user test cases are written

before the code, and we are also discussing to let the test
cases take over more of the functional speciÞcations.
Refactoring is also a practice that we have not utilized in the
XP way. We do restructurings of our systems, but these are

usually large and traumatic experiences.
Pair programming
 is not used as described in XP. This will
be one of the practices that we need to put in place when we
want to reduce the amount of high level documentation and

up front design even further than what can be achieved with
a feature team. There is an interesting combination of pair
programming with module architects/coordinators, i.e. there
should always be a module coordinator in the pair when

complex things are done with a module. This would be a

good way to ensure the consistency and competence transfer

in a large system.
Collective ownership
 is started with the introduction of
feature teams, where the feature team is impacting all
modules necessary for the feature. Continuous integration is implemented through daily build.
Note that we have this mechanism on two levels, on for the

feature team themselves on a private branch as well as for the

complete system. The reason for keeping these two branches

separate is to reduce the impacts of any errors.
40-hour week is not practiced as described in XP, however
since Ericsson is an European company, there is a higher

adherence to normal working hours.
On-site customer is not trivial, as Ericsson is developing
products for the open market, we do however often have a

product management (internal customer) representative in

each feature team.Coding standards are already quite well implemented in
Ericsson. We do have a thorough code review process called

desk check of all code written which enforces this. The desk

check could with the introduction of pair programming be
reduced.In summary we have started to apply some of the principles
of XP. Our major contribution to the XP practices might be

the focus on feature teams and the introduction of the
module architect role to allow the other practices to scale up.
11General roadmap
To support the organizations implementing daily build we

have provided a general road-map. This road-map covers the

essential aspects of daily build, and let the organization

assess where it is according to these aspects. The road-map

is to be used for each project. The basic ingredients of the

road-map are as follows:
Build¥CM tool in place (e.g. Multisite Clearcase)
¥Daily build on team level

¥Daily build on subsystem level

¥Daily build on system level
Automatic test
¥Basic test level
¥Simulated function test

¥Target test (function and system)

¥Automatic notiÞcation of errors
Design¥Merge tool to support for Code (ascii)
¥Merge tool to support for Design (e.g. documents, SDL,
UML)¥Feature teams on subsystem level 
 ¥Feature teams on application level
¥Feature teams on system level 
12Conclusion
Implementing daily build and feature teams in an

organization with a strong development process, distributed

development and a tradition of module responsibility is not

an easy task. We have currently implemented all aspects

described in this article in different projects, but we have still

to see a complete implementation of the whole concept in a a
completed project, the Þrst large projects approaching this

degree of implementation will complete during 2001. Even
so we can already see large advantages of the elements that
we have implemented, as well as future improvements, e.g.

from extreme programming.
REFERENCES1.ÒExtreme Programming explained, Embrace ChangeÓ, 
Kent Beck, Addison-Wesley, 2000.
2.ÒMicrosoft Secrets: How the worlds most powerful soft-
ware company creates technology, shapes markets and 

manages peopleÓ, Richard W. Selby and Michael A. 

Cusumano, Simon & Schuster, 1998
