 Agile Process Tailoring and probLem analYsis (APTLY) Frank KeenanUniversity of Ulster at Coleraine frank.keenan@dkit.ie1. Research Area Software process, process tailoring, problem analysis. 
2. Research Problem Developing software using a well-defined, well-
understood process improves the likelihood of delivering 

a product with the required quality. Enhancing that 
process to meet recognised process standards, such as 
CMMI and ISO 9000, can further facilitate the 

development of complex systems in a repeatable and 
predictable way. There are tradeoffs involved, however.  

In particular, because projects differ in their scale, scope, 
and technical challenge, the same process will not suit all 
circumstances. 
Agile approaches to development, such as 
Extreme Programming (XP), SCRUM and Crystal 

Methodologies, recognise this dilemma and suggest that 
processes be tailored to each situation. The research 

problem for postgraduate investigation is to determine in 
detail how this can be achieved successfully. This will 
include a consideration of how best to define, maintain 
and give access to a knowledge base recording details of 

process concepts, techniques and experience.  3. Approach There are three main strategies for process tailoring: 
(a)Provide a comprehensive process framework, such 
as RUP, that attempts to cover all possibilities, and 

from which the most appropriate elements are 

selected at the beginning of each project. 
(b)Define a set of process templates corresponding to 
different types of project, as with the Crystal family 

of methodologies [1], and select the best match for 
the situation presented, possibly followed by some 
fine-tuning of the selected process. (c)Define a process by blending ideas and techniques 
from best practice and local experience. 
Strategies (a) and (b) imply 
static tailoring at the 
beginning of a project.  However, during development 
some adjustment may be necessary to attain optimal 
performance [2]. The “Living Software Development 

Process” [3] provides a pattern-based framework for such 

dynamic tailoring.  Lycett describes a similar approach 

[4] in which each situation is assessed on four criteria: 
project,product,team and 
organization. Patterns are selected from RUP and each process evolves as a learning 

network. Figure 1 is one way of describing a general framework for process tailoring based on approach (c). 
3. Analyse 
problem 
situation
1. Be aware of 
existing techniques, 

current practice and 
emer
ging ideas
2. Maintain 
process 
knowledge 
4. Design 
development 
process
5. Apply 
process
7. Monitor 
results and take 
control action as 
necessary 
6. Define 
Expectations 
Framework 
Level 
Application 

Level 
Figure 1: Process Tailoring FrameworkTheframework level is concerned with gathering and 
providing information useful in the creation of 
development processes (2). This is a combination of what 
can be gathered from external sources (1), such as the 

ISO 9000 quality series and SPICE, together with 
examples of well-established practice, such as the RUP or 
CMMI, and knowledge from local experience of 

development (7). At a more detailed level, it might also 

record information about individual techniques for 
Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’04) 
0270-5257/04 $20.00 © 2004 
IEEE 
 aspects of development such as requirements analysis, 
architectural design and testing. There are five activities at the application level. The first is the assessment of the problem situation (3) to set 

the context for the design of the development process (4) 

and its subsequent application (5).  A challenge for 

successful tailoring is to be able to capture the problem 

situation in a suitably informative way to enable its 
characteristics to be matched to process types and 
instances recorded in the knowledge base.  To facilitate 

“learning” it is necessary to define process expectations 
in advance (6). This model raises several related research questions: 
•How can processes, process elements and past 
projects be recorded to capture the essence of what 

each offers to facilitate selection in a given problem 

situation? 
•What is the minimal effort needed to analyse a 
problem situation to extract sufficient information to 
guide the design of the development process? 
•How practical is dynamic process adjustment? 
4. Justification The concept of process tailoring is not new. For example, CMMI level 3 requires that a well-understood 
set of standard processes is defined and that each project 
is able to tailor these within certain guidelines. Offering 

such facilities does not, however, mean that they are used 

as anticipated. For example, RUP users sometimes ignore 
tailoring and try to include the whole process [1]. Conversely, development organisations claiming to 
use a particular process will often tailor it. For example, 
an XP process may use a subset of the defined 12 
practices, rather than adopt them all. 
Some approaches are 
methodologies offering a 
framework from which process instances can be defined 

[5]. For example, each of the Crystal methodologies 

requires certain roles, policy standards, products and 
tools to be adopted.  Developers are free to decide how to 

produce the work products and may select practices from 

other approaches such as XP, SCRUM or DSDM. Some 

guidance on selection is desirable, however, otherwise it 
will be unclear whether the resulting process meets the 

basic needs of the methodology. 
UML is another example of an umbrella approach but 
does dictate how it is used in a development process.  In 

general, there is a need to have clearer guidelines on 

process frameworks and the selection of elements to 
complete processes derived from those frameworks. 
As might be expected, successful project tailoring is 
not a trivial task. Jones [6], for example, claims that more 

than “100% differences in work effort have been observed 
for projects of exactly the same size due to variations in 
the activities performed”.Software tool support is needed to facilitate process 
tailoring.  To be effective, the tool is likely to use soft 

case-based reasoning techniques to match the 
characteristics of a situation to stored knowledge about 
process structures and experiences. 5. Research Hypothesis The research hypothesis is that software engineering can be improved by tailoring each development process 

to individual circumstances using captured, context-

specific process knowledge.The expected output of the research will be:  •A survey of existing process tailoring practices, as 
described in the literature and followed in industry. •The design of a process-tailoring framework, 
covering all aspects of software production and 

maintenance (evolution), from which specific 

processes can be developed.  •The design of an agile form of problem analysis to 
facilitate the gathering of information needed for 

process design. •Support tools for the framework that maintain a 
process knowledge base and assist with process 

construction. •An evaluation of the resulting process tailoring approach and associated tools in an industrial setting. 
6. Details of Proposed Solution A process knowledge base will have some general 
information and some that is specific to the organisation 

in which it is used. The general part will hold techniques 
for individual aspects of a process and patterns for 

complete processes. These will be taken from the 
literature. The specific part is organisational knowledge 
recorded as a set of process patterns for completed 

projects. It is expected that case-based reasoning 
techniques will be used to store, retrieve, and update such patterns. The desire to support an agile development 
philosophy is one of the main motivators for investigating 

process tailoring. It is therefore important that the 
problem analysis leading to process design be as lean as 
possible. System development is assumed to be a socio-

technical activity, so reasonable attention has to be paid 

to the organisational context in which the computing 

system under development will be used. 
Soft Systems Methodology (SSM) [7] has been 
selected as the basic problem analysis technique. This 

follows an assumption that computing systems are part of 
Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’04) 
0270-5257/04 $20.00 © 2004 
IEEE 
 a wider human-activity system. Each problem being 
analysed falls in a spectrum from 
hard (well defined) to 
soft (difficult-to-define, possibly with a social and 
political aspect). The development of most computing 

systems has a soft side that should be explored to ensure 
that system requirements are specified accurately. 
SSM, either as a methodology by itself or in 
combination with other approaches, is a good technique 
for soft problems [8]. However, it is a relatively slow 
process [9], designed for effectiveness rather than 

efficiency. Ways of making it more agile are being 

considered in this research. One approach, for example, is 
to make use of domain patterns.  In particular, it may be 
practical to define standard patterns for certain types of 
organisation, such as banks, hospitals, or universities, 
from which specific organisational descriptions can be 

developed. 7. Progress so Far Work so far has concentrated on clarifying the basic 
tailoring framework and identifying relevant research and 

practice in the literature. This includes material on the use 
of process patterns and the characterisation of projects. 

Boehm and Turner [10], for example, describe a project 
characterization approach that uses a 5-point radial 
diagram covering 
size,culture,dynamism,personnel and 
criticality.As well as looking at the literature, software 
development companies in Ireland are being visited to 

assess their use of agile techniques and the extent to 

which tailoring occurs in practice. Recent interviews, for 
example, have revealed a wide range of approaches to 
problem analysis.  In one case problems were initially 

characterised and classified within a few minutes, as part 
of a tendering process.  The time for subsequent analysis 

ranged from 20 weeks to a matter of minutes depending 

on circumstances. 
Good relationships have been established with several 
software development organisations so there is ample 
support for action research once the tailoring framework 
has been adequately defined. Action research implies a 
feedback and refinement cycle consistent with the agile 

philosophy.  It is also expected that the work will link in with existing development practices such as techniques 

associated with UML. RUP supported by UML and its 

business extensions, facilitates business domain 

modelling, although some weaknesses have been reported 

[11]. 
Particular contributions of the research are expected to include: •A consideration of the implications of the agile 
philosophy for socio-technical systems development. 
•Adaptation of SSM for more rapid deployment. 
•Characterisation of software process standards and 
recommended practices in a form suitable for storage 
and retrieval. •Use of case-based reasoning in process description. This research is at an early stage and it is expected 
that the scope will be narrowed soon.  I would like to 

acknowledge the contribution of Professor David Bustard 

and the Centre for Software Process Technologies 

(CSPT) at the University of Ulster to this work. 8. References [1] A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development, Pearson Education, USA, 2002. 
[2] L. Williams, A. Cockburn, “Agile Software Development: 
It’s about Feedback and Change”, IEEE Computer, IEEE 
Computer Society, June 2003 (Vol. 36, No. 6)pp 39-43. 
[3]. M. Gnatz, F. Marschall, G. Popp, A. Rausch, and W. 
Schwerin, “The Living Software Development Process”, 
Software Quality Professional, American Society For Quality, 
June 2003,Volume 5 Issue 3. 
[4] M. Lycett, R. D. Macredie, C. Patel, R. J. Paul“Migrating 
Agile Methods to Standardized Development Practice”,IEEEComputer, IEEE Computer Society, June 2003 (Vol. 36, No. 6). 
[5] B. Fitzgerald, “The Use of Systems Development 
Methodologies in Practice: A Field Study”, 
The Information Systems Journal, Blackwell Publishing, 1997 Vol. 7, No. 3. [6] C. Jones., “Software Cost Estimation in 2002”, 
CrossTalk The Journal of Defense Software Engineering
, U.S. Department of Defense June 2002. 
[7] P.Checkland,
Systems Thinking, Systems Practice. Includes 
a 30 year retrospective, Wiley, England, 1999. 
[8] I. Munro, J. Mingers, “The use of multimethodology in 

practice – results of a survey of practitioners”, 
Journal of the Operational Research Society, Palgrave MacMillan, Mar 18 
2002, pp. 369 – 378. 
[9] J. Mingers, S. Taylor, “The Use of Soft Systems 
Methodology in Practice”, 
Journal of the Operational Research Society, Palgrave MacMillan, Apr 01 1992, Vol. 43, No.4. [10] B. Boehm, R. Turner
, “Using Risk to Balance Agile and 
Plan-Driven Methods”, IEEE Computer, IEEE Computer 
Society, June 2003 (Vol. 36, No. 6), pp. 57-66
.[11] A. Dietzsch, “Adapting the UML to Business Modelling’s 
Needs – Experiences in Situational Method Engineering”, 
LNCS2460, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2002, pp. 73–83. Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’04) 
0270-5257/04 $20.00 © 2004 
IEEE 
