 Analysis of the Interaction between Practices  for Introducing XP Effectively  Osamu Kobayashi Software Research Associates, Inc. 
Osaka Honmachi-nishi Daiichi-seimei Bldg. 5F,  2-1-1 Awaza Nishi-ku, Osaka 550-0011 Japan +81-6-6536-2331 o-kobaya@sra.co.jp Mitsuyoshi Kawabata Agileware  2-20-34-405 Hanaten-nishi, Johtoh-ku, Osaka 536-0011 Japan  +81-6-4258-2115 kawabata@agileware.jp Makoto Sakai SRA Key Technology Laboratory, Inc. Marusho Bldg. 5F 3-12 Yotsuya, Shinjiku-ku, Tokyo 160-0004 Japan  +81-3-3357-9011 sakai@sra.co.jp Eddy Parkinson Department of Computer Science, Osaka University 1-3, Machikaneyama-cho, Osaka, 560-8531 Japan   +81 (0) 9036218029 eddy@ist.osaka-u.ac.jp     ABSTRACT In this paper, we discuss interactions between XP (eXtreme 
Programming) practices. We discuss 2 case studies of introducing 
XP practices selectively from the 13 practices which are defined 
in XP, and we analyze how to select practices. Our analysis is 

based on interviews with developers. While it is difficult to 

introduce all the XP practices at once, our knowledge makes it 

easier to determine more effective combinations of practices.   
Categories and Subject Descriptors K.6.3 [Software Management
]: Software process 
General Terms Management. Keywords
 extreme programming, software process, software engineering, 
metrics. 
1. INTRODUCTION XP (eXtreme programming), is an
 agile software development method which can quickly adapt to changes, it is gaining more 

attention [1]. Traditional methods
 based on waterfall model make large scale development easier by freezing specifications after 

defining them or strictly controlling changes to specifications. 
But freezing specifications prevents us from adapting to changes 
in user requirements and environments. When it seems difficult to 
freeze specifications it is necessa
ry to use methods such as 
prototyping. In recent years, computers have become a lot faster 

and their functionalities have become
 more diverse, more types of 
users and user-interfaces have appeared. These trend to accelerate 

the possibility of changes to requirements. In circumstances such 

as these, agile software development methods are gaining more 
attention. Among agile software development methods, XP characteristically has "four values" and also defines several 

practices. This makes it easier to understand its guidance and methods of development and has promoted the acceptance of XP 

in Japan. XP emphasizes four values (communication, simple 
design, feedback, courage). Communication makes it easier for 

the development team to head towards its goal. Simple design 

reduces defects and makes maintenance activities easier. 

Feedback from testing increases 
quality. Lastly, courage allows 
big problems to be tackled in a more fundamental manner. XP defines many practices that emphasize these values. 
When introducing XP into our projects, we must choose which 
practices to use. Ideally we would introduce all XP practices at 

once, but in reality we often cannot use some practices because of 

constraints from customers or lack of resources. In some cases, 

because of the characteristics of 
the project, certain practices are 
neither necessary nor effective. 
Studies have reported many cases 
which used practices selectively. [6,8,10,12]. But these studies 

only report the effects of a single practice, there have not been 

sufficient examination of the effects of combining different 

practices. If we can improve our understanding of interactions 
between practices, we can better decide which practices to use in 

which projects, so we can introduce XP much more effectively. 
In this paper, we report two case 
studies of software development projects using XP, and knowledge about interactions between 
practices gained from interviews
 with developers. We also consider methods of selective in
troduction of XP practices based on our analysis. 
2. XP(eXtreme Programming) 2.1 Practices of XP There are strong relationships between XP and its practices. Without practices it's not XP, and 
without practicing the practices of XP it cannot deliver benefits. Four values which XP emphasizes are not concrete practices, but are essential ideas 
 Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 

requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.  

ICSE'06,
 May 20Œ28, 2006, Shanghai, China. 
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-085-X/06/0005...$5.00.   designed to lead projects to success. Practices are concretizations 
of these ideas as methods to be pr
acticed in real projects. To solve 
problems of projects from all view
points, Kent Beck selected 12 
practices [2], and Ron Jeffries de
veloped them further and has 13 
practices [7]. In this paper, we i
nvestigated effects of interactions 
between the following 13 practices.  Whole team All people who take part in the project gather in one place to 
develop the system as a team. 
Planning Game 
Developers and customers make 
plans for software releases 
and iterations together, identifying each role clearly. 

Specifically, this involves the making of story cards from 

each user's point of view and splitting each story into task 

cards for individual developers. Based on these cards, they 

make plans that take into consideration the volume of work 

and the schedule.  Small Releases By creating several small releases, usually each one or two 
months, developers get feedback from users. The 

development periods between releases are called "iterations". 
Customer Tests 
 Users define test cases for system releases.  
Simple Design Developers implement just
 enough parts to satisfy 
requirements, and keep code si
mple. Always keep in mind the 
principle of YAGNI (ﬁYou aren™t going to need itﬂ).  
Pair Programming Programmers always program in pairs sharing a computer.  
Test Driven Developments 
Programmers always create tests before implementing any 
functionality.  
Refactoring Make internal structures of 
programs better, without changing 
their behavior.  Continuous Integration 
Integrate small units into the system which developers plan 
using a planning game and always keep the system running.  
Collective Code Ownership 
Code is owned not by some programmer but owned by the  
team collectively, and anyone can change any code at anytime.  
Coding Standards 
Make common rules to standardize coding styles in the team.  
Metaphor 
Using metaphor, developers in 
the team share understandings 
about how their programs work.  Sustainable Pace Avoid overwork, work in sustainable pace.  
If we cannot use some of the practices, then the gap should be 
filled using an alternative approach [12]. For example, pair 

programming has the effect of improving the quality of code, like 

code reviews, so if we cannot
 use pair programming for some 
reason, the practice can be replaced with code reviews. On the 

other hand, if only one quality control practice is used, for 

example pair programming, then code quality suffers. For 

effective code quality, we need other practices, like test driven 

development (TDD) as well. W
ithout having tests and making 
sure the program passes them it is difficult to keep quality high. 

But even when TDD is used, developers who have little 

experience at writing tests can eas
ily overlook important tests. We 
need reviews for tests too, a
nd pair programming has a similar 
effect to reviews. As such, a lack of experience can be addressed 

by combining several practices. Thus, practices interact with each 

other, and this makes them more effective.  2.2 Case study of XP introduction When introducing XP into projects, 
it is difficult to use all the XP 
practices. So it is important to
 choose appropriate practices. 
Several issues regarding XP
 introduction strategies and 
compromises have been published.
 Articles [6] and [12] show 
some ideas about how to use practi
ces that to apply XP. In article 
[10], they apply XP practices in pha
ses. In article [8], they show 
the effect of each practice and which practices were difficult to 

apply. 
In [6], they report on experiences of XP introduction in a large 
organization in which software
 development processes were 
strictly defined. In this case study, they tried to apply XP to only 

one subsystem of a large safety critical system. They tried to use 

all the XP practices, but recogni
zing the characteristic of the 
system and policy of the orga
nization, they used use case 
diagrams in planning games a
nd prepared minimal necessary 
documents (but not only to conform to organization's policy. They 

prepared only useful ones.) 
In [12], they report about a very small scientific research project 
which had only 2 developers. First,
 they show which factors make 
it difficult to apply XP to research projects, then they describe 

how to overcome these factors by changing some practices. For 

example, in planning game and si
mple design, they took the roles 
of customers themselves instead of real customers. They also 

show pair programming and collective code ownership increased 

productivity and readability of code. 
In [10], they report about the application of XP when their project 
recovered from a big problem and 
moved to stable maintenance 
phase. In this case study, some members joined the project half 

way through to help it recover, then they introduced XP's 

practices in some phases after the first release, to create steady 

maintenance environment. Specifically, after creating a 

maintenance environment, they applied these practices; 
  Continuous Integration 
  (Modest) Refactoring    Simple Design 
  Coding standards 
  Standup meetings After the project became stable, they examined some other 
practices. 
In [8] there is a description of a case study of applying XP to a 
project involving the rewriting of a legacy system using new 

technology based on Java. In the report, they say that pair 

programming had the most impact and it helped when applying 

simple design, test driven deve
lopment, and refactoring. Pair 
programming was especially important
 when used with test driven 
development. The report also de
scribes applications and the 
effects of all practices. They mention communications between 

external teams, the whole team and defining the role of testers as 

difficult but important points. Thus, when we introduce XP, whic
h practices are used and how, 
has big influence on XP, because of this there is a need to analyze 

case studies carefully. It is impor
tant to consider interactions 
between practices, especially because practices are not 

independent of each other. In [6] and [12], each practice is used 

independently and interactions between practices are not 

examined. In [10], they show an
 example of introducing XP in 
phases, but they do not show in
teractions between practices 
clearly, so we cannot find in this case clues of how to introduce 

XP in different situations. In [8], they report that pair 

programming has a positive effect on applying other practices, but 

only a few of interactions between practices are considered. Thus, 

there has not been enough analysis of how to choose which 

practices to use when XP is introduced into projects. 
3. RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN PRACTICES BASED ON CASE STUDIES 
3.1 Case 1: building online shopping site 3.1.1 An overview of the Project In this case study, we introduced 
XP into the development of a 
system for analyzing workload of Nissen™s online shopping site. 

(Table.1) This system analyzes the behavior of customers who 

visited the shopping site, such as
 when, on which site, what kind 
of goods, how much they bought. 
Table 2 shows practices we used in this case. When the project 
began using XP, they had almost completed gathering 

requirements, so we applied XP from the next phase. 3.1.2 Details of the project First and second iterations 
In the first iteration, stories of th
e system were rather simple, so 
we omitted distinct design activ
ity and began programming using 
TDD. But because we were not us
ed to TDD and we gave short 
term schedules higher priority,  we could not do enough 

refactoring. As a result, the program code became complex and 

we could not use it in the second iteration. We did a lot of 

refactoring in the second iteration throwing away almost all the 

code from the first iteration. This shows that even for simple 

stories it is necessary to do so
me modeling of functionalities. If 
we had done modeling like CRC sessi
ons [4], we would not have 
needed to do such a large amount of refatoring. And if we had 
done firm refactoring, program c
ode would have been reusable 
and would have not been thrown away. 
We always practiced pair progr
amming, but could not keep going 
at a sustainable pace. Because of schedule delay we had to work 

at an unsustainable pace. After a week of overwork, both member 

of the programming pair began to 
arrive late for work, and said 
that they could not think well in th
e morning. It was apparent that 
overworking did not recover the de
lay, so we switch to using a 
sustainable pace of 40 hours a week. When we developed using a 

sustainable pace, productivity improved. 
Third and fourth iterations 
After doing agile designs by all 
members, the project progressed 
rather smoothly. There were three 
developers, so in the first two 
iterations, two of them did pair programming and the other 

worked alone. But in the third iteration it became apparent that 

solo programming introduced bugs and misunderstandings of 

specifications. So we did ﬁtripl
et programming [11]ﬂ for rather 
Table 1. An overview of the Project of case 1 
Attribute Value 
Member Manager, 
Developer x 3, User x 2 Term 5 months 
(XP: 3 months) Language C#, 
stored procedure
 Number of release 3 
Number of iteration 4 
 Table 2. Used Practices of case 1 
Practice Application Whole team Partial 
Planning Game Partial 
Small Releases Full 
Customer Tests Full 
Simple Design Full 
Pair Programming Full 
Test Driven Developments Full 
Refactoring Full Continuous Integration Full 
Collective Code Ownership Full 
Coding Standards Full 
Metaphor No 
Sustainable Pace Full 
  complex stories, and after th
is few misunderstandings were 
experienced. Pair programming, test driven de
velopment and refactoring had a very good synergy allowing code to 
be kept simple. With simple 
code, we could implement stories for the third and fourth 

iterations faster than we had estimated, had recovered the 

schedule delay. 
One of developers was less skille
d at refactoring, but by doing 
pair programming with anothe
r developer who was good at 
refactoring allowed the developer to gain the required refactoring 
skills. On the other hand, the skilled developer sometimes 

refactored too much. He violated the principle of YAGNI and 

added too much flexibility. In such cases, the less skilled 

developer took an important role, creating a balance between the 

two extremes. Using pair programming was an effective method 

of doing test driven development. 
In test driven development, we 
can improve software quality by creating only test cases which 

might fail [3]. When developers 
programmed solely, they tend to 
miss some test cases or make 
too many test cases. In pair 
programming, they could always check the quality of test cases. 

Pair programming promoted the st
andardization of program code 
naturally without documented coding standards.  
Test driven development enabled continuous integration. By 
providing test cases beforehand,
 we could find problems and 
analyze causes during integrations. And by refactoring we 

replaced conditional statements with polymorphism. This reduced 

the number of pre-conditions and te
st cases and kept the cost of 
test driven development low.  Our developer™s impressions
  We should have used rapid mode
ling before the first iteration, 
because we had to do major refactoring after the first 

iteration. (XP suggests CRC sessi
ons for modeling, but does 
not force it as a practice.) 
 We need another new practice ﬁmodeling togetherﬂ.  We found that pair programming,
 test driven development, 
refactoring, continuous integr
ation and coding standards are firmly interrelated. 
 To practice pair programming, a steady sustainable pace is 
needed.  Standup meetings [2] are very effective (Throughout our 
project, we had a standup meetings [2] everyday, checking 

the project™s condition with story cards and task cards tapped 

on the wall, so we could grasp the progress and problems of 

the project without project management documents). 3.2 Case study 2. Customization of shrink-
wrapped cost estimation software  
3.2.1 An overview of the overview This case study is about a project to customize shrink-wrapped 
cost estimation software. (Table 3) The size of the software itself 

was large, but only one-fifth of it 
required customization. Table 4 
shows practices we applied to the project. 3.2.2 Details of the project The first iteration. 
We began to estimate requirements of customizations, because 
estimations of customization vari
es a great deal depending on the 
customized software, at first we analyzed the software itself and 

found that the style was not that of normal object-oriented code. 

There were large procedures that exceed 2000 lines, and it seemed 
to be inevitable that customizing them would affect existing 

functions within the software. So we decided to refactor the 

software first. We had to re
factor a large volume of code 
including code that contained functions not allocated to our 

project. This made collective code ownership a necessary practice, 
Table 3. An overview of the Project of case 2 
Attribute Value 
Member Manager,
 Requirements 
Developer x 2, Developer 

x 4, User x 1 Term 3 months 
(XP: 3 months) Language Java, Struts Framework 
Number of release 2 
Number of iteration 3 
 Table 4. Used Practices of case 2 
Practice Application Whole team Partial 
Planning Game Full 
Small Releases Full 
Customer Tests Full 
Simple Design No 
Pair Programming No 
Test Driven Developments No 
Refactoring Partial Continuous Integration Full 
Collective Code Ownership Full 
Coding Standards No 
Metaphor No 
Sustainable Pace No 
 Table 5. Number of tasks and 
work time in 1st iteration 
Number of tasks in 1st 
iteration / in all iterations 98/192 Actual hours in 1st 
iteration / in all iteration 149h/374h   because without it we did not have the confidence needed to 
refactor. We made a rule for collective code ownership that we 

should synchronize the code at least once a day. We thought that 

if we did not synchronize, after about three days the number of 

conflicts would become excessively large and result in time being 

wasted. For classes which we sh
ared on a regular bases we found 
we could avoid conflicts by sync
hronizing the code just before 
making changes. The second and third iterations 
Refactoring during the first iteration had a good effect. During the 
second and third iterations, there were additional changes to 

requirements of functions implem
ented during the first iteration, and feedback from end users about the first release of the software. 

Table 5 shows the number of and actual hours of work for tasks 

on the second and the third iteration, which were related to tasks 
of the first iteration. This shows th
at more than the half tasks of 
the second and third iterations ware
 related to the first iteration, 
but hours of worked on then was less than 40 %. Tasks which 

involved refactored code took 
less hours and refactoring during the first iteration took 22 hours, so 
we can say that refactoring had 
actually improved productivity. 
Our developer™s impressions. 
 We needed collective code ownership to make refactoring 
successful. (To implement coll
ective code ownership we 
used CVS as a version-control tool. One characteristic of 

CVS is that we can change the same program code 

simultaneously without locking it. In XP projects there is 

frequent refactoring, so this characteristic of CVS is highly 

suitable for XP.)  When refactoring we made use of ﬁMethod extraction [5]ﬂ 
several times, this improved 
our productivity. (During the 
first iteration we made heavy use 
of refactorings, but this still 
totaled less than 50 % of code. This is because if we 

refactored excessively it would damage the framework of the 

software. When refactoring the code, we could foresee 

requirements of the second and 
the third iterations to some 
extent, so we refactored only code which seemed to be 

related to those requirements.) 3.3 Interactions between practices and their 
effects We interviewed the developers of
 case study 1 and 2 about what 
we said in section 3.2, and we
 found that the introduction of XP 
had following 5 effects and there are dependencies between these 

practices of which some are strong and some are weak. So we 

defined a notation for these depe
ndencies and interviewed them again. Figures 1 to 5 show the resu
lts of these inte
rviews. In these 
figures, we categorized dependencies between practices according 

to their effects. We denote each practice as a rectangle and denote 

each dependency as an arrow. The meanings of different kinds of 

arrow and their directions are as follows, 
<Relationships between practices> 
  Solid line arrows means ﬁstrongﬂ dependency. 

  Dotted line arrows means ﬁweakﬂ dependency. 

  The practice which an arrow points to depends on the 
practice that the arrow comes out from. 
(1) Communications reduced cost 
of documentations. (Figure 1.) 
By using the practices of whole team, planning games, pair 
programming, customer tests and 
test driven development the 
three developers of case study 1 could share knowledge about 

requirements and design without documents. To share knowledge with each other,
 developers have to change 
their partners in pair programming frequently. To achieve this all 
Whole team
Planning Game
Customer TestsPair Programming
Test Driven 
Developments
 Figure 1. Communication reduced cost of documentation 
 Whole team
Planning GameSimple Design
Pair ProgrammingTest Driven 
Developments
Refactoring
Collective Code 
Ownership
Sustainable Pace
 Figure 2. Improvement of productivity 
 Pair Programming
Test Driven 
Developments
Refactoring
Collective Code 
Ownership
 Figure 3. Improvement of the quality of program code 
 Planning Game
Small Releases
Customer Tests
Test Driven 
Developments
Continuous 
Integration
 Figure 4. Improvement to the quality of requirements 
 Pair Programming
Test Driven 
Developments
Refactoring
Collective Code 
Ownership
Coding Standards
 Figure 5. Improvements that simplify maintenance 
 developers must gather on one site
. In customer tests, users write 
many test documents, and these 
test cases show details of 
specifications, this means we can keep specification documents 

themselves simple. 
(2)  Improvement of productivity (R
eduction of cost of changes by 
refactoring, Figure 2) 
By using the practices of simple
 design, pair programming, test 
driven development, refactoring 
and collective code ownership, 
we could maximize the feedback of code implementation 

information and this minimized re
-working and promoted reuse of 
components. This improved our productivity. 
A sustainable development pace is needed for efficient pair 
programming. Sometimes we need to do large amount of 

refactoring to keep the design simple and well structured, because 

of this, the issue had to be considered during the planning games. According to the policy of XP™s simple design, we must keep the 
growing system simple. We achieve
d this by using test driven 
development and by refactoring to keep the code simple. 
Sometimes refactoring reduced th
e productivity in the short term, 
but in the long run, it promoted reuse of components and 

improved productivity. In iterative development, we make 

changes and additions to existi
ng code frequently, and it often 
takes a lot time to understand complex code. Changes and 

additions to simple code take
 much less time, refactoring 
generally improves productivity. 
(3)  Improvements in the quality
 of program code. (Figure 3) 
By practicing test driven de
velopment, pair programming, 
refactoring, continuous integrati
on and collective code ownership, 
we could keep the quality of the software satisfactory for users. In 

case study 1, after the first re
lease, which consisted of 110 
modules and 7,500 lines of code, only 3 defects were found. 
In test driven development, programmers also create test cases, so 
it is important to review test cases during pair programming to 
reduce mistakes and help stop nece
ssary test cases being missed. 
As a result pair programming is able to contribute to test driven 

development. (4) Improvements in the quality
 of requirements (Figure 4.) 
By practices of planning games, sm
all releases and customer tests, 
we had many chances to reflect 
on users™ requirements of systems 
in short iterations, this impr
oved satisfactions of users. In order to keep doing iterations 
with small releases, we had no 
time to do integration tests, so we
 need continuous integration. By 
doing customer tests in early iterations, we can get rapid 

feedbacks and find defects relating to the quality of requirements. 
These enabled us smooth out releases. 
(5)  Improvements of ease
 of maintenance (Figure 5.) 
By practices of pair programmi
ng, collective code ownership, 
coding standards, test driven 
developments and refactoring, 
program code can be kept standardized and simplify maintenance. 
Refactoring keep code readable and simple, but if everyone 
named their own program modules the chance of 

misunderstandings increases, so 
we needed coding standards. 
Collective code ownership also
 necessitates coding standards 
because we must change code written by others. 
In pair programming, we write c
ode adjusting partners according 
to what was needed. By continually changing partners, all 

development code gets sta
ndardized. By defining coding 
standards, we can avoid extra 
discussions about coding styles 
between drivers and navigators and do pair programming 

smoothly. 
4. DISCUSSION Table 6 shows interactions between practices and their effects 
which we discussed in section 
3.3. The table contains ﬁvﬂ 
symbols and indicates which pr
actices are related to which 
effects. The column titled ﬁeffectsﬂ contains the number of ﬁvﬂs 
  Table 6. Interactions between practices and their effects 
 Effects communication productivity quality of code quality of requirements ease of maintenance dependency  contribution       
Small Releases(SR) 1 
   v 
1.51
CI PG 
CT  Continuous Integration(CI) 1 
   v 
11TD SR   Customer Tests(CT) 2 v 
  v 
10.5
WT 
 PG SR 
Planning Game(PG) 3 v v 
 v 
11.5
SR SP   CT Simple Design(SD) 1 
 v 
  2.50
TD R 
PP  Sustainable Pace(SP) 1 
 v 
  11PG 
PP   Coding Standards(CS) 1 
    v 12PP 
CC   R TD Whole team(WT) 2 v v 
  01.5
PP   CT Refactoring(R) 3 
 v v 
 v 3.52TD CC 
SD CS PP PG 
Collective Code Ownership(CC) 3 
 v v 
 v 2.51
CS R CS  Test Driven Developments(TD) 4 v v v 
 v 1.54R 
SD CC CI PP 
 Pair Programming(PP) 4 v v v 
 v 32.5CS SP WT
  SD R TD 
  for each practice. Columns whose titles contain arrow marks show 
dependencies between practices. The columns with arrows that 

point to the left contain the initia
ls of practices. 
These initials are 
the practices that the left hand column practices depend on. The 

reverse is true for the columns 
with arrows that point right. 
Figures in the ﬁdependencyﬂ column show the scores of 

ﬁdependencyﬂ for each practice. We assigned 1 to each ﬁstrongﬂ 

dependency, which is denoted with a solid line arrow and 0.5 for 

a ﬁweakﬂ one, which is denoted with a dotted line arrow, these are 

summed for each practice. Figures in the ﬁcontributionﬂ column 

show scores of ﬁcontributionﬂ for each practice. (We excluded 

practices which were not used in both case studies, because we 

could not gain knowledge about their interactions.)   Using this table, we can know which practices are necessary for 
which expected effect and also know the characteristics of each 

practice. For example, test driven development has a rather low 

score 1.5 for ﬁdependencyﬂ and 
high score for ﬁeffectsﬂ. This 
means that this practice is eas
y to introduce with a few other 
practices and also can be very effective. Both refactoring and pair 

programming have high score of 3 
for dependency, so it might be 
difficult to introduce them alone, but refactoring has a high score 

for contribution and effects, so if
 we could introduce refactoring, 
the data suggests it would have a large positive effect.  Collective code ownership has a score of 3 for effect and a score 
of 1 for contribution. Pair progra
mming has a score of 4 for effect 
and a score of 2.5 for contribution. Both of these practices have 

high effects and low contribution.
 This might mean that these 
practices have many merits by themselves and these merits are 

independent on other practices. On the other side, the scores for effect in table 6  are determined 
by counting relationships to five 
categories of effects which were 
gathered from interviews with deve
lopers, so we must be careful 
how the scores are treated. Introducing practices which have high 

effect scores is in theory an e
fficient way or introducing XP, but it 
does not necessarily mean that in 
practice this will be effective for 
realizing all four XP values. Esp
ecially if we pay attentions to 
practices which improve quality, these have different 

characteristics from the practices that have other improvement 

effects. The table shows that when we try to improve quality there 

is no simultaneous improvement of 
other effects, so scores for 
effects are not so high. But when quality is a major business goal, 

practices that improve quality need to be applied. 
5. CONCLUSIONS We described two case studies that 
apply practices of XP to real 
projects and summarized interactions between the practices based 

on interviews with developers. A
nd we considered the effect of 
selective application of XP practices. Using the knowledge 

gained, it is possible to make more informed choice when 

selecting combinations of XP practices. So far, when we introduced XP, 
we had to apply practices based 
on knowledge of what look to be 
independent pros and cons of 
each practice. In such cases, the application of practices can fail 

or becomes less effective than 
expected, because of unforeseen 
interactions between practices. 
By modeling these interactions 
between practices based on our experiences, we can foresee the 

effects of practices and prepare 
for problems. This might make 
the introduction of XP safer even when we cannot apply all of it™s 

practices. 
For example, if improvement of productivity has the highest 
priority, we can introduce XP effectively. First we can consider 8 

practices which relate to the improvement of productivity in table 

6 and choose ones which can be applied. Then we can consider 

other practices on which the chos
en ones depend and alternatives 
for ones which we cannot apply. In
 such a way, we can use table 
6 when we examine effective selections and alternatives of 

practices considering purposes and constraints of our projects. We know that we did not use all practices under the various 
possible situations, and we did not
 experience all possible effects 
of interactions between practices. And because there can be many 

projects which have characteristics that are different from our 

projects, we don™t say that our knowledge can be generally 

applied. We are going to apply XP
 to various projects using the 
knowledge gained.  We would understand the effect of 

interactions and find effective ways to choose practices more 

accurately. Our goals are to accumulate case studies and patterns 

of XP introductions. 6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This work is supported by the 
Comprehensive Development of e-
Society Foundation Software program of the Ministry of 

Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology. 
7. REFERENCES [1] Beck, K., Boehm, B., Agility through discipline: A debate, 
IEEE Computer, pp.44-46, June, 2003. [2] Beck, K., 
eXtreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change, Addison-Wesley, 1999. 
[3] Beck, K.,  
Test-Driven Development: By Example,
 Addison-Wesley, 2003. 
[4] Bellin, D., Simone, S. S., 
The CRC Card Book, Addison-Wesley, 1997. 
[5] F., Martin, Kent, B., Brant, J., Opdyke, W., Roberts, D., 
Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code, Addison-Wesley, 1999. 
[6] Grenning, J., Launching eXtreme Programming at a Process-Intensive Company, 
IEEE Software, Vol.18, No.6, pp.27-33, 2001. [7] Jeffries, R., What is eXtreme Programming?, 
http://www.xprogramming.com/xpmag/whatisxp.htm, 2001 [8] Rasmusson, J., Introducing XP into Greenfield Projects: Lessons Learnd, IEEE Software, Vol.20, No.3, pp.21-28, 2003. [9] Sakai, M., Matsumoto, K., Torii, K., A new framework for 
improving software development process on small computer systems, 
International Journal of Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering, vol.7, no.2, pp.171-184, 1997.  [10] Schuh, P., Recovery, Redemption, and eXtreme 
Programming, IEEE Software, Vol.18, No.6, pp.34-41, 2001. [11] Williams, L., Kessler, R., 
Pair Programming Illuminated, Addison-Wesley, 2002. 
[12] William A. Wood, William L.
 K., Exploring XP for Scientific Research, IEEE Software, Vol.20, No.3, pp.30-36, 2003. [13] Japan XP User Group, Japan XP User Group,  http://www.xpjug.org/, 2001. 