 1Managing Commitments and Risks:  
 Challenges in Distributed Agile Development Jyrki Kontio*, Magnus Höglund°, Jan Rydén°, and Pekka Abrahamsson
+jyrki.kontio@hut.fi, magnus.hoglund@tietoenator.com, jan.ryden@tietoenator.com, pekka.abrahamsson@vtt.fi* Helsinki University of Technology 
SoberITP.O.Box 9210, 02015 HUT, Finland ° TietoEnator 164 87 Kista,Sweden+ VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, P.O.Box 1100, FIN-90571 Oulu, Finland.AbstractSoftware development is always a challenging 
undertaking and it requires high commitments from 

individuals who participate in it.  Software development 

often involves new technology, challenging or unknown 

requirements, and tight schedules – making it 
particularly prone to several types of risk.  These 
challenges are even more paramount in agile 
development and in distributed development, where the 

need for efficient information sharing is important, yet the distributed development makes it very difficult.This tutorial uses innovative and new learning methods 
to explore and to learn about these challenges and how 
to deal with them.  The tutorial is partially based on 

presentations given by authors, but a major element in 

the tutorial is the case study that is introduced and in 
which will involve all the participants.  The learning in 
the tutorial is strongly facilitated by participants’ 
discussions and the insights generated in concrete 

problem solving situations.  1 Introduction Many of the practical challenges in software 

engineering are not limited to technological issues.  
Managerial issues, communications, personnel 
relationships, and competence management often have a 

substantial impact on a software project’s success.  This 
tutorial explores and studies these issues of software 
management from three specific perspectives: how 
commitments are made and managed, how the risks are 
managed, and what are the specific challenges in agile 

software development, in context of distributed software 

development.  
Commitment management has been proposed to be 
an important element both at the level of individuals and 
attitudes as well as how commitments are defined and 

managed at the project or program level [Höglund
 et al.
,2000; Kontio
 et al.
, 1998].  The definition and 
specification of commitments seems to be sensitive to 
the situation at hand: in a very stable situation it might 
be possible to define all the commitments explicitly, 

while in more dynamic projects some commitments are 

better left initially open and defined later in the project.  
The traditional view of trying to specify and freeze 

everything in the beginning is neither realistic nor 
effective in all situations [Kontio et al., 1998]. 
Risk management has become a recognized project 
management practice in the software engineering field. 

However, it seems that not all organizations are 

systematically applying risk management methods 

[Ropponen et al.
, 2000].  Furthermore, it has also been 
argued that many of the methods in-use contain 
substantial biases and are based on unsound 

assumptions, such as ignoring stakeholder interests, use 
of mathematically unsound methods to calculate risks, 
and incomplete assessments of loss impacts [Kontio, 

2001].  Thus, more effective and sound methods for 

software risk management should be introduced and 
used.The agile software process has become a hot topic 
among consultants, practitioners and researchers 
[Anon., 2002; Cockburn, 2001; Martin, 2001] through 
concepts like Extreme Programming [Beck, 1999] and 

SCRUM [Schwaber et al.
, 2001].  A number of case 
studies and reports are available indicating that the agile 
approaches seem to provide substantial benefits for 

small teams and projects.  While many of the 

consultants and books specializing on agile methods 
give some guidelines regarding how to manage agile 
projects, there are many practical issues, especially in 

larger project contexts, that are not obvious or known 
[Abrahamsson
 et al.
, 2003].  Furthermore, most 
practitioners are just taking their first steps in managing 

agile software development.  
2 Description The tutorial aims at sharing best practices in 

commitment and risk management in agile development 

area; identifying challenges and solutions; helping 
Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’04) 
0270-5257/04 $20.00 © 2004 
IEEE 
 2participants establish contacts with each other; and 
exploring new ways of learning.  After the tutorial, the 
participants will have a better understanding and appreciation of these challenges through their reflection 

and the sharing of their own experiences. The tutorial is based on interactive discussion and 
involves role-playing.  All participants take part in 

working groups in solving the problem that is presented 

to them.  The participants are all presumably employees 

of a company (“Mobile Widget Inc.”) and are spending 

time together to resolve some problems in their agile 

software development process.  Participants are 

assigned to teams based on the specific preferences they 

indicate prior to tutorial. The problem scenarios are the 
following:  Distributed agile software development  
Organization of daily work and meetings 
Organization of pair programming teams 
How to introduce agile development into a project 
Preparing a business case for the use of XP Architectural design in agile development 
Risk management in agile development 
The workshop uses quite unconventional methods to 
encourage and facilitate learning and discussion.  The 

workshop is based on using teamwork, role-play and 

acting as a way to promote discussion and make the 

management situations concrete for discussion and 

analysis.  We have used this approach earlier with 
success at the 2002 European Conference on Software 
Quality and ICSE 2003 and believe that the format 

combines fun and intellectual challenge in a unique, 

engaging, and powerful manner. 
The tutorial is targeted mainly for software project 
and program managers, software engineers, and 

researchers in software engineering.3 Presenter Backgrounds 
Dr. Jyrki Kontio is a professor of Software Product 
Business at Helsinki University of Technology. His 
prior work experience includes 15 years at Nokia 

Corporation in various positions.  Between 1994 and 

1997 he was a senior researcher at the Experimental 

Software Engineering Group at University of Maryland.  
His research interests include software business models 
and strategies, risk management, process management, 
COTS evaluation, and requirements engineering.  His 
web site is at http://www.soberit.hut.fi/~jkontio/   Magnus Höglund, M.Sc. in Computer Science and 
Engineering, is a Sales Director working with customer 

integration and business development at TietoEnator. 
He also gives seminars, workshops, courses, and 

conference speeches on topics such as project 

management, software metrics, and commitment 
management. He is a co-author of the book “IT 
Measurement – Practical Advice from the Experts”, 
Addison-Wesley 2002. Magnus has a background as 

software engineer, test manager, software metrics 

specialist, and Managing Director. Before joining 

TietoEnator he was an R&D engineer at Ericsson. Jan Rydén, M.Sc. in Embedded Systems, is a Sales 
Director working with customer integration and 
business development at TietoEnator. He also gives 

seminars, workshops, and conference speeches on topics 

such as telecom trends and commitment management. 

He has experience from hardware development, project 
management, R&D line management, and being a 
Managing Director. Dr. Pekka Abrahamsson is a senior research 
scientist at VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland. 

He received his PhD on “The role of commitment in 
software process improvement”. He has coached several 

agile software development projects in industry and 
authored actively on the topic. His professional 
experience involves 5 years in industry as a software 

engineer and a quality manager. 
ReferencesAgile Manifesto, http://agilemanifesto.org/, 2002 
Abrahamsson, P., Warsta, J., Siponen, M.T., Ronkainen, J.,
New directions on agile methods: A comparative analysis. In 
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on 
Software Engineering,  pages 244-254, 2003. IEEE Computer Society. 
Beck, K., Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change, 
Addison-Wesley Pub Co, 1999. 
Cockburn, A., Agile Software Development, Addison-Wesley 
Pub Co, 2001. Höglund, M., Rydén, J., The Committed R&D Organization. 
In Proceedings of the SPI 2000 Conference,  2000. Kontio, J., Software Engineering Risk Management: A Method, Improvement Framework, and Empirical 
Evaluation. Doctoral dissertation. (2001), Helsinki 
University of Technology, publisher: Center of Excellence, 
ISBN: 952-5136-22-1. Kontio, J., Pitkänen, O., Sulonen, R., Towards Better Software Projects and Contracts: Commitment Specifications in 
Software Development Projects. In Proceedings of the ICSE 

98 Conference,  pp 486-489, 1998. IEEE Computer Society. 
Martin, R.C.,  Agile Development: Principles, Patterns, and 
Process, Prentice Hall, 2001. Ropponen, J., Lyytinen, K.,  Components of software 
development risk: how to address them? A project manager 
survey, IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering, 

26(2):98-112, 2000. Schwaber, K., Beedle, M.,  Agile Software Development with 
Scrum, Prentice Hall, 2001. Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’04) 
0270-5257/04 $20.00 © 2004 
IEEE 
