 Pre-Workshop Summary: Workshop on Iterative, Adaptive, and Agile Processes Craig Larman Frances Paulisch Valtech Siemens AG E-mail: clarman@ieee.org E-mail: frances.paulisch@mchp.siemens.de THEME AND GOALS Broadly, the goals of this workshop are to Ł promote a deep and shared understanding of various iterative, adaptive, and agile processes, including Crystal, DSDM, Extreme Programming (XP), Serum, and the Unified Process (UP) Ł to identify the factors for their successful adoption Ł to share relevant research results discover lines of research to further this discipline OVERVIEW We suspect very few methodologists created a process with the explicit intent, "Oh boy, this will be heavy and rigid!" And yet it's a common complaint. Why is that? It influences the motivation for this new generation of process ideas. Will the same forces that have led to "unhealthy" application of prior generations of development processes also inhibit the new ones? For example, cases are now emerging of organizations just doing occasional unit-testing or avoiding documentation, and calling it "XP." What are the skillful means and capabilities required to really help these new process ideas be adopted and succeed? What's working? What isn't? And what are the hard-data justifications? In this first year of the workshop, there are three major goals: Ł To provide a supportive and fun forum for interested stakeholders to share their passion, research, stories, and ideas. Ł Compare and contrast (via a summary of key details, a case study, and discussion) related processes, ideally including Crystal, DSDM, FDD, Serum, UP, and XP. Ł Identify cases, best practices, human factors, and impediments to successful adoption of these process as a whole (such as XP), or specific practices (such as daily serum or pair programming). FURTHER INFORMATION Please contact Frances Paulisch, Siemens (frances.paulisch@mchp.siemens.com) or Craig Larman, Valtech (clarman@ieee.org). See also http://www.craiglarman.com/icse wsagile.htm for additional information on this workshop. In this workshop, we invite practitioners and researchers interested in the application of iterative, adaptive, and agile processes. And we expect to learn from each other. We include those favoring detailed or large-scale process descriptions (such as the Rational UP) to those favoring minimalist descriptions (such as Serum), from process evangelists to process agnostics, from expert developers to business managers, from domains where speed is the top priority to domains where quality or verifiability are the top priority. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to fists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 1CSE'02, May 19-25, 2002, Orlando, Florida, USA. Copyright 2002 ACM 1-58113-472-X/02/0005...$5.00. 676 