 Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 

copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 

otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 

requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
ICSE'06,
 May 20Œ28, 2006, Shanghai, China. 
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-085-X/06/0005...$5.00. 
Maintaining Mental Models: A Study of Developer Work Habits 
Thomas D. LaToza 
Institute for Software Research International 
Carnegie Mellon University 
5000 Forbes Avenue 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213 USA 
tlatoza@cs.cmu.edu 
Gina Venolia 
Microsoft Research 
One Microsoft Way 
Redmond, WA 98052 USA 
gina.venolia@microsoft.com 
Robert DeLine 
Microsoft Research 
One Microsoft Way 
Redmond, WA 98052 USA 
rob.deline@microsoft.com 
  ABSTRACT
 To understand developers™ typical tools, activities, and practices 
and their satisfaction with each, we c
onducted two surveys and 
eleven interviews. We found that many problems arose b
ecause 
developers were forced to invest great effort recovering implicit 

knowledge by exploring code and interrupting teammates and this 

knowledge was only saved in their memory. Contrary to 

expectations that email and IM prevent expensive task switches 

caused by face-to-face interruptions, we f
ound that f
ace-to-face 
communication enjoys many advantages. Contrary to expectations 

that documentation makes understanding design rationale easy, 

we found that current design documents are inadequate. Contrary 

to expectations that code duplication involves the copy and paste 

of code snippets, developers reported several types of duplication. 

We use data to characterize these and other problems and draw 

implications for the design 
of tools for their solution. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors 
D2.7 [
Distribution, Maintenance, and Enhancement
]: 
Documentation; D2.9 [
Management
]: Programming teams;  
D.2.6 [
Programming Environments
]: Integrated environments. 
General Terms
 Design, Documentation, Experimentation, Human Factors 
Keywords
 Code duplication, communication, 
interruptions, code ownership, 
debugging, agile software development 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Developers must know or obtain a variety of information to 
successfully understand and edit code Œ what code to change, how 

design decisions are scattered across code [4], the rationale or 

history behind decisions [7], the slice affecting a variable™s value 

[13], the owner responsible for the code [1], other developers 

currently editing it, which changes will break code elsewhere, and 

which changes elsewhere affect it. Developers choose among 

many strategies to record, communicate, and discover this 

information. Naming, comments, and design documents allow 

developers to share their current understanding with future 
developers, but require an investment of time and knowledge 
about what future developers will need to learn. Conventions, 

factoring, and patterns minimize documentation burdens by 

providing general answers but constrain possible solutions and 

themselves become more to learn. For many types of information, 

the simplest solution is frequen
tly to ask a teammate for the 
answer [2], yet the teammate is interrupted, must change tasks, 

and forgets goals, decisions, and interpretations relevant to the 

interrupted task. Modern development environments compute 

facts from code (e.g. callers of a method, writers to a field, 

methods overriding a method, average execution time) or other 

artifacts and require neither interr
uption nor investment in error 
prone documentation maintenance, but require a tool vendor or 

researcher to have anticipated the developer™s situation and needs.  

And computing many types of information may require the 

developer™s assistance. 
We performed a series of investigations of developers. The central 
theme that emerged was the deve
lopers™ reliance on implicit code 
knowledge.  Developers go to great lengths to create and maintain 

a mental model of the code, and knowledge is shared between 

developers through face-to-face communication and the code 

itself. Developers avoid using 
explicit, written repositories of 
code-related knowledge in design documents or email when 

possible, preferring to explore the code directly and, when that 

fails, talk with their teammates. Exploring code is made difficult 

by tool limitations and difficulties 
traversing relationships. Using 
the social network as the second line of inquiry causes 

interruptions and lost work, but those costs are offset by other 

benefits. Implicit knowledge retention is made possible by a 

strong, yet often implicit, sense of code ownership, the practice of 

a developer or team being responsible for fixing bugs and writing 

new features in a well defined section of code. This increases the 

payoff from the large investment understanding code. Implicit 

knowledge retention makes some information difficult to uncover, 

particularly code duplication.  Yet developers view it far more 

broadly than the clone detection literature. 
We used both qualitative data from interviews and quantitative 
data from two surveys in our investigation. While the breadth of 

our exploratory approach precludes the detail necessary to fully 

understand 
each topic, and we were often left with more questions 
than answers, we highlight interesting observations and propose 

promising directions for 
future investigation. 
We first present a taxonomy of developer activity which guided 
our investigation. We then describe the study design and 

organizational characteristics of 
the participants. In the first 
results section, we describe developers™ time usage, tool usage, 

and tool preferences. In the second, we discuss the nature, 

motivations, and problems with developers™ reliance on implicit 
 Table 1.  Descriptions of activities read by respondents.  Descriptions ending in [–] have been shortened. 
Designing 
Analyzing a new problem and mapping out the broad flow 
of code which will be used to solve the problem. [–] 
Writing  
Creating a new method, source file, or script and getting it to a compilable state 
Understanding  
Determining information about code including the inputs 
and outputs to a method, what the call stack looks like, 
why the code is doing what it is doing, or the rationale behind a design decision. [–] 
Editing  
Editing existing code and return
ing it to a compilable state. 
Unit testing  
Ensuring that code is behaving as expected. [–] 
Communicating 
Any computer mediated or face-to-face communication a
bout information relevant to a coding task [–] 
Overhead 
Any other code related activities including building, synchronizing code, or checking in changes. 
Other code 
[No description provided] 
Non code 
Any other activities included in your work time 
code knowledge. Finally, we present design recommendations for 
tools and conclude. 
2. ACTIVITY TAXONOMY 
We began our investigation by characterizing developers™ 
interactions with code Œ their activities, tools, and biggest 

problems.   Rather than bringing a preconceived area of focus, we 

wished to be more opportunistic and let our users Œ the developers 

Œ guide us in selecting what they perceived as most painful 

through reports of their time, tool effectiveness perceptions, and 

problems. 
Two previous studies have categ
orized developers™ activities in 
the field through diaries, observation, and surveys. In the first 

study [9], thirteen developers on a large software project logged 

every hour for a year which of 13 activities they were engaged in. 

The categories distinguished different life cycle activities such as 

estimation, requirements, high level & low level design, test 

planning, coding, inspections, and 
high level & low level testing. 
Most developers reported being in a coding stage. Despite 

waterfall or spiral models predicting developers spend their time 

coding in a coding stage, developers reported coding for only half 

of their time with the rest spent 
on activities associated with other 
life cycle stages. 
In the second study [12], developers were surveyed, observed, and 
interviewed to count the number of times they switched between 

one of thirteen activities. Observations of eight developers for an 

hour 
each revealed that they most frequently executed UNIX 
commands, followed by reading the source, loading or running 

software, and reading or editing notes. Yet is not clear how 

activity switches translate to time spent on activities as activities 

may be frequent and brief or long and infrequent.  
We designed our own taxonomy (see Table 1) to focus more 
specifically on code related activities and the motivation behind 

these activities. We wished to know specifically for what types of 

activities developers used devel
opment environments and which 
activities environments were poorest in supporting. We also 

wanted to know whether devel
opers chose different tools for 
different activities. 
From the our own personal experience as software developers, 
hypotheses about what developers 
might find difficult, and topics 
of ongoing research, we also formulated nineteen hypothesized 

problems developers might have in obtaining or communicating 

about code-related knowledge. 
3. METHOD 
The study consisted of three parts: a survey about activities, tools, 
and problems (the ﬁactivities surveyﬂ), a series of semi-structured 

interviews, and a survey of work practices (the ﬁfollow-up 

surveyﬂ). 
3.1 Organization The population we selected for study was software developers at 
Microsoft Corporation. Microsoft is a large software company 

whose products span a wide range of markets: web portals 

(MSN); consumer devices (Windows Mobile, Xbox); office 

productivity applications (Windows, Office); and developer tools 

and infrastructure (Visual Studio, Great Plains, SQL Server). Of 

the roughly 63,000 employees, roughly 6,000 are software 

developers who work on shipping code in product groups. Other 

developers include those who work on test infrastructure and tools 

and those in Microsof
t Consulting and Micros
oft Research. These 
groups were excluded from our study. 
Within a product group, there are three core roles Œ software 
design engineer (SDE), program manager, and software test 

engineer. SDEs are responsible for software design, fixing bugs, 

and writing new features.  Program managers are responsible for 

specifying and prioritizing features and for writing high level 

feature specification documents which developers use to write 

code and testers use to write test cases. Software test engineers 

translate feature specifications into test cases and manually test 

the software. A somewhat less common role is software design 

engineers in test (SDE/T) who write test automation 

infrastructure. Members of each of these roles work in small 

teams of ﬁindividual contributors.
ﬂ Individual contributors are 
managed by a lead (e.g. lead software design engineer) who 

reports to a manager (e.g. software design engineer manager). 

Other less frequent roles include software architect, product 

designer, and usability engineer.  Nearly all individual 

contributors have private offices (not cubes) and most do not 

share an office. 
Product group work for a particular release of a product is divided 
into milestones. In the first milestone, program managers make 

initial decisions about what features will be in the release, what 

features developers will work on 
in subsequent milestones, and 
write initial feature specificati
on documents. SDEs may work on 
bug fixes and patches from the previous release, try out new 

technologies, or plan major changes. Several milestones of 

development follow. Each milestone is divided more or less into a 

coding phase, where features are added, and a stabilization phase, 
 where developers concentrate on fixing bugs. During the last 
milestone, most of the work involves fixing bugs. As the release 

nears, most changes become too time consuming and risky to test, 

and developers spend more time making the next version™s code 

more maintainable (see Figure 1). 
3.2 Procedure 
Activities survey participants first completed a number of 
demographic items. They next read the activity descriptions found 

in Table 1. They were then asked to report the fraction of their 

past week work time spent on each activity, c
hoosing among 10% 
increments plus choices for 1%, 2%, and 5%. For each activity, 

they were asked the percent of time on that activity they used each 

of a set of tools or techniques, using the same scale. For each 

tool/technique combination and activity, developers were asked to 

rate its effectiveness on a seven-point Likert scale. Finally, they 

rated the seriousness of each hypothesized problem using a seven-

point Likert scale. There were 204 questions in all. 
While we expect respondents misremembered, misestimated, and 
misreported the time fractions, we expect they were able to 

differentiate across large distinctions like values near 0% and 5% 

or values near 10% and 40%. We normalized each gr
oup of 
fractional responses to sum to 100%. 
Before deploying the activities survey we used two techniques to 
ensure that its design fit the activities, tools, techniques, and 

problems relevant to our target population. First we ran three 

experienced developers through the survey using a think-out-loud 

protocol. We adapted the survey wording and structure based on 

their feedback. Second, we developed a reduced version of the 

survey that included extensive opportunities for participants to 

write in additional activities, tools, and problems. We deployed 

this pilot survey to 99 randomly selected developers and r
eceived 
28 responses. Any write-in response from two or more 

respondents was included in the activities survey. No activities or 

problems met this criterion, but a few tools did. 
We selected the four problems rated as the most serious on 
average from the activities survey (see Table 2) and designed a 

series of interview questions to elicit qualitative information about 

the character and impact of these problems. We added several 

general, open ended questions on how the participants 

characterized their work and activities and on team 

communication patterns. Two authors attended each interview. 

Ten of the eleven interviewees consented to having the 

conversation audio-recorded. All three authors used their notes or 

recordings to generate nearly 1,000 note cards of observations. 

The cards were then used for a card sort [14] where they were 

placed on the walls of a ~30 foot hallway to form gr
oups, elicit 
themes and trends, and consolidate observations across 

interviwers and interviewees. 
From the card sort we identified several preliminary hypotheses. 
We developed a follow-up survey to assess the hypotheses 

amenable to surveying. Participants first answered demographic 

questions. Next they answered questions about the size of their 

feature team, which was defined as, ﬁthe core group of developers 

that you work with.ﬂ They then answered a series of questions 

about communication patterns, code ownership, design 

documents, understanding unfamiliar code, code duplication, unit 

testing, and adoption of agile practices. There were 187 questions 

in all. 
3.3 Participants 
We drew our participants from the population that deals directly 
with code: SDEs, SDE/Ts, and architects at both the individual 

contributor and lead level. After the activities survey we decided 

to focus on developers working on 
shipping
 code, and so removed 
the responses from architects and SDE/Ts from our analysis and 

the subsequent observations. We felt that our survey questions 

were most informative about SDEs, and we lacked resources to 

investigate all three roles.  We excluded contractors because of 

logistical problems and excluded interns because we wished to 

generalize to professional software developers.  
Participants were invited to partic
ipate in the surveys by email and 
sent a reminder email several days before the surveys were closed 

if they had not yet responded. Respondents were compensated by 

entry in a drawing for $50 gift cer
tificates. In the activities survey, 
we randomly sampled 1,000 participants from the participant 

pool, excluding those invited to take the pilot survey. We r
eceived 
157 responses, 104 from SDEs, including 18 from lead SDEs. We 

were somewhat disappointed with the response rate and attribute 

it to the survey being deployed in early July when many were on 

vacation, some technical problems with the survey deployment, 

and sheer size of the survey. In the follow-up survey, we 

randomly sampled 1,000 from the same pool excluding SDETs 

and recipients of the activities and pilot surveys. We received 
187 responses, 176 from SDEs.  For both surveys, we did not measure 

self selection bias to ensure our sample was truly representative. 
The activities survey contained several demographic questions. 
Since participants from all surveys were randomly sampled from 

the same population of SDEs, and we expect any self selection 

bias to apply equally to both surveys, these demographics apply to 

all study participants. The average respondent is in their 30™s with 

an undergrad degree, 12.1 (± 6.5) years programming, 5.8 (± 4.2) 

years at Microsoft, and 2.9 (± 2.4) years on their current team; 

89% of respondents are male.  37% reported that most of their 

code base was written in C#, compared to 56% in C or C++, 

reflecting both older, established code bases and newer code bases 

written in C#. 
We interviewed eleven respondents, five SDEs from the pilot 
survey and 6 lead SDEs from the activities survey.  
4. ACTIVITIES AND TOOLS 
Far from spending all of their time understanding or editing 
existing code, developers reported spending most of their time 

elsewhere. Developers™ tool use was frequently correlated with 

their tool preferences. This is cl
early visible in the positive linear 
relationship of tool usage to effectiveness (Figure 5).  As the study 

was exploratory rather than being hypothesis driven, results are 

presented with descriptive statistics. Times are reported using the 

mean (± standard deviation).  
4.1 Time breakdown 
Developers reported spending a 
little less than half of their time 
(49% ± 39%) fixing bugs, 36% (± 37%) writing new features, and 

the rest (15% ± 21%) making code more maintainable. This 

confirmed our expectation that most developers spend much of 

their time fixing bugs. But the va
st variability in these numbers 
also demonstrates that typical development activity varies greatly 

across teams and across the lifecycle (Figure 1). 
 1-3
4-6
7-12
13-24
25-36
0%20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
Months until next planned release
Percent of work time
(n=2)
(n=16)
(n=34)(n=14)(n=22)
Writing new features
Fixing bugs
Making code more maintainable
Figure 1.  The time spent fixing bugs, making code more 
maintainable, and writing new features varies with the time 
until the product is planned to be released. 
 Figure 2.  A box plot of activity time.  The box bottom, 
internal line, and to
p are the first, second, and third 
quartiles. 
The exterior lines extend for 1.5 times the inter
quartile re
gion, 
with outliers displayed above. 
 -0.251
0.363
-0.301
-0.244
-0.425
-0.270
0.214
0.363
Designing
Editing
Writing
Non-code
Other Code
Overhead
Communicating
Understanding
Figure 3.  Statistically significant correlations between time 
spent on each activity. Negative numbers indicate inverse 
relationships. (Spearman™s rho, thin lines for 
p<0.05, thick 
lines for 
p<0.01, n=104.) 
 Number of Activities in Past Week
Percent of Developers
987654322520
151050Figure 4.  Most developers engage in a number of activities in 
a given week. 
Median times spent on each activity (Table 1) are remarkably 
close (Figure 2), dashing hopes that a single activity accounts for 

most of developers™ time.  Most developers engage in multiple 

activities in a given week (Figure 4).  However, most activities 

still had individual developers who spent most of their week on 

that activity. 
Pairwise correlations of activities (Figure 3) reveal several 
statistically significant, if not large, activity relationships.  

Designing code and writing new code are positively correlated.  

Editing code goes hand-in-hand w
ith overhead tasks like building 
and source code management.  Understanding existing code is 

negatively correlated with designing code and writing new code, 

suggesting that one is either working on new code or examining 

existing code, but not both at the same time.  Designing and 

writing are negatively correlated with non-code activities, 

suggesting that working on new code
 is an all-consuming activity. 
The negative correlation between writing new code and 
communicating about code suggests developers working on new 
functions or classes need less information from their teammates.  

Unit testing was the only activity for which we found no 

correlation to other activities.  It is worth noting that analyzing 

only pairwise correlations neglects any relationships involving 

multiple activities. 
4.2 Communicating 
Developers both preferred and spent more time using face-to-face 
communication than electronic communication (Figure 5a), 

replicating a 1994 finding [9] of a strong preference for face-to-

face over email. Yet, email has since increased in prominence and 

sophistication and instant messaging has made possible short 

response time, interactive communication. Developers gave a 

number of reasons for preferring face-to-face communication. 

Developers reported that email questions often took hours or days 

to receive a res
ponse, that developers frequently misinterpreted 
emails™ meanings, writing an email without immediate feedback 

often resulted in explanations w
ith more or less detail than the 
recipient required, and that ema
il was just tedious to write. We 
believe many of these problems generalize to other electronic 
 % communicating about code time
Effectiveness (1 = Low, 7 = High)
3025201510507654321Other
Web
External docs
Internal docs
Bug database
Phone
IMEmail
Unplanned meetings
Planned meetings
% designing code time
Effectiveness (1=Low, 7=High)
353025201510507654321Other
Source code editor
Visual designers
Visio
Word processor
Paper
Whiteboard
% understanding code time
Effectiveness (1=Low, 7=High)
3025201510507654321Other
Diff tool
Profiler
Other debugger
SQL editor
Notepad
Source Insight
SlickEdit
Emacs
VIVisual Studio debugger
Visual Studio editor
% understanding code time
Effectiveness (1=Low, 7=High)
4030201007654321Other
Trace statements
Debugger
Running code
High level views
Checkin messages
Reading code
Figure 5a-d.  (See text.) 
communication such as documentation, bug databases, and IM. 
Developers still use email when 
the issue is of low priority, 
involves multiple people, or involves non-teammates, averaging 

16.1 (± 14.5) emails sent to teammates in the prior week and 5.9 

(± 11.5) to non-teammates. The preference for f
ace to face 
communication over email might limit benefits from systems 

helping developers locate old emails, and the barriers 

discouraging email use might make it difficult to encourage more 

retention of knowledge in emails. Unplanned, face-to-face 

meetings happen frequently with teammates, averaging 8.4 (± 

11.7) per week, and much less frequently with non-teammates, 

averaging 2.6 (± 4.0). Communica
tion within the team is much 
more common than communication across teams, indicating that 

the culture of informal communication works well and that the 

team boundaries are typically in the right pl
aces. 
Most developers reported using IM only infrequently for code 
related tasks. It was more frequently used to contact teammates for 

social functions (e.g. going to lunc
h) or to talk to family. Use of 
the telephone for code-related communication was similarly rare. 
4.3 Designing  Despite the availability of high-level views of code and visual 
editors such as tools for UML, developers remain focused on the 

code itself. Developers reported using a source code editor the 

most for design while paper and whiteboards were perceived most 

effective (Figure 5b). We hypothesize that the need to find details 

about the existing design by using a source code editor 

discourages increased use of paper or whiteboards, even though 

both were viewed as more effective tools. 
4.4 Perceived problems 
Table 2 lists the problems we proposed in the survey and the 
percent of respondents who agreed that the problem is a ﬁserious 

problem for me.ﬂ The top four are: understanding the rationale 

behind existing code, having to switch tasks because of manager 

or teammate requests, being aware of changes elsewhere, and 

finding code duplicates. We focused our semi-structured 

interviews on these problems to discern what makes them 

difficult. Several themes emerged: 
Ł Developers go to great lengths to create and maintain rich 
mental models of code that are rarely permanently recorded. 
Ł Understanding the rationale behind code is the biggest problem 
for developers. When trying to understand a pi
ece of code, 
developers turn first to the code
 itself and, when that fails, to 
their social network. 
Ł Developers and development managers use a variety of tools 
and work practices and are actively looking for better solutions. 
We present these themes with support from our follow-up survey. 
5. MAINTAINING MENTAL MODELS 
Developers create and maintain intricate mental modes of the 
code. Through our interviews, we know that developers, without 

referencing written material, can talk in detail about their 

product™s architecture, how the architecture is implemented, who 

owns what parts, the history of the code, to-dos, wish-lists, and 

meta-information about the code. For the most part this 

knowledge is never written down, except in transient forms such 

as sketches on a whiteboard. One interviewee summed it up well - 

ﬁLots of design information is kept in peoples™ heads.ﬂ 
 Table 2. Developer ratings of proposed problems. In the 
survey, problems were presented without headings and in a 
different order. 
This is a serious problem for me
 % agree
 Code Understanding 
Understanding the rationale behind a piece of 
code 
66% 
Understanding code that someone else wrote 56% 
Understanding the history of a piece of code 51% 

Understanding code that I wrote a while ago 17% 
Task Switching
 Having to switch tasks often because of requests 
from my teammates or manager 
62% 
Having to switch tasks because my current task 
gets blocked 
50% 
Modularity
 Being aware of changes to code elsewhere that 
impact my code 
61% 
Understanding the impact of changes I make on 
code elsewhere 
55% 
Links between Artifacts 
Finding all the places code has been 
duplicated 59% 
Understanding who ﬁownsﬂ a piece of code 50% 

Finding the bugs related to a piece of code 41% 

Finding code related to a bug 28% 

Finding out who is currently modifying a piece of 
code 
16% 
Team
 Convincing managers that I should spend time 
rearchitecting, refactoring, or rewriting code 
43% 
Convincing developers on other teams within 
Microsoft to make changes to code I depend on 
42% 
Getting enough time with senior developers more 
knowledgeable about parts of code I'm working on 
34% 
Expertise Finding
 Finding the right person to talk to about a pi
ece of 
code 
39% 
Finding the right person to talk to about a bug 38% 
Finding the right person to review a change before 
check-in 
19% 
5.1 Personal Code Ownership 
Mental models are expensive to create and maintain. Developers 
have a strong notion of 
personal
 code ownership
, which 
constrains the amount of code they have to understand in detail. 

In our follow-up survey, 77% of respondents agreed
1 with the 
                                                                
 1 Throughout this paper, the word 
agree
 means that the participant 
selected either ﬁSomewhat agreeﬂ, ﬁAgreeﬂ, or ﬁStrongly agreeﬂ 

from a seven-point Likert scale. 
statement, ﬁThere is a clear distinction between code that I own 
and the code owned by my teammates.ﬂ On the other hand some 

teams have a policy to avoid personal code ownership because it 

makes individuals too indispensa
ble and promotes, in the words 
of one of our interviewees, ﬁtoo much passion around the code.ﬂ 

Code ownership is a long-term proposition, reducing the number 

of times that a developer has to learn a new code base. In the 

activities survey, the average time on the current code base was 

2.6 years, with 32% reporting 6 years or more. Personal code 

ownership is us
ually tacit, i.e. part of the mental model.  Written 
records of ownership, when present, are often out-of-date and 

distrusted. 
We received conflicting information a
bout design documents for 
issues within a team. Design documents are usually written by a 

developer immediately prior to implementing a larger change that 

affects other developers to solicit other developers™ input on 

important decisions.  In the interviews, design documents were 

described almost as write-only media, serving to structure the 

developer™s thinking and as an artifact to design-review, but 

seldom read later and almost never kept up-to-date. On the other 

hand our follow-up survey respondents reported a different 

picture of design documents for issues within the team: their 

feature teams wrote an average of 7.6 (± 10.2) documents in the 

prior year, and kept 51% of them up-to-date. We were surprised 

with these numbers and can™t reconcile them with the results of 

the interviews. 
5.2 Team Code Ownership and the ﬁMoatﬂ 
Even stronger than personal code ownership is a notion of 
team 
code ownership
. An overwhelming 92% agreed with the statement 
ﬁThere is a clear distinction between the code my feature team 

owns and the code owned by other teams.ﬂ  Feature teams are 

small.  93% stated that their feature team consisted of 2-4 people 

(including the respondent). There seems to be a sweet spot at 

three-person feature teams, reported by 49%. Feature teams are 

almost always collocated, facilitating informal knowledge sharing. 
One of the ways developers maintain their mental model of their 
team™s code is by subscribing to check-in messages by email, 

though several interviewees expressed dissatisfaction with the 

lack of detail provided by teammates. 
Small feature teams™ strong code ownership forms a kind of 
moat
, isolating them from outside perturbations. The moat is defined, in 

part, by design documents, which specify the interface across the 

moat. Design documents related to cross-team issues were less 

common than those relevant to issues within the team. Although 

the average number of design documents written in the last year 

for cross-team issues was 4.5 (± 
7.8), significantly less than the 
7.6 (± 10.2) for within-team issues (two-tailed 
t-test, p<0.01, 
t=4.78), cross-team design documents are significantly more 
likely to be kept up-to-date (61% versus 51%, two-tailed 
t-test, p<0.01, 
t=3.58). The greater care taken with cross-team design 
documents reflects their important role in defining the moat. 
Unit tests, used by 79% of our respondents, are an important part 
of the development process for many reasons. One surprising 

function is to defend the moat from outside perturbations Œ 54% 

of respondents agreed that an important benefit of unit testing is 

that ﬁthey isolate dependencies between teams.ﬂ 
 Table 3.  Forms of code duplication reported by interviewees with frequency and importance from follow-up survey respondents. 
 Repeated work Example Scattering Fork Branch Language 
Creation 
Separate developers 
implement same 

functionality 
Copy and 
paste of 

example code 
Design decision 
distributed over 

multiple methods  
Copy of other 
team™s code 

base 
Branch 
maintained 

separately  
Reimplementation by 
same developer in 

different language 
Aware when 
created 
No 
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes Refactoring 
challenge 
Awareness at 
creation; different 

design decisions 
Investment 
creating 

abstraction 
Changing 
architecture 
Convincing 
other team to 

make changes 
Combining 
released 

branches 
Changing architecture 
or implementation 

language 
Size of clone 
Members, classes 
Members, 
classes Members, classes 
Many classes, 
code base 
Code base 
Members, classes 
Repeated change 
24% 44% 29% 13% 25% 29% 
Refactoring  
19% 
39% 
14% 
5% 
6% 
15% 
Agree problem 
42% 41% 37% 29% 28% 29% 
 Almost all teams have a 
team historian
 who is the go-to person 
for questions about the code. Often this person is the developer 

lead and has been with the code base the longest. 
5.3 New team members 
Creating a mental model from scratch requires a lot of energy for 
the new team member and the team as a whole. Often the 

newcomer is assigned a mentor, often the team historian, 

designated as the first point of contact for questions about the 

code. The mentor helps to jumpstart the newcomer™s mental 

model and social network. Newcomers are much more likely to 

read the team™s design documents than seasoned team members. 

Some teams maintain online 
documents specifically for 
newcomers. Unguided exploration of the code is rare; more 

commonly the newcomer is assigned bugs specifically to 

introduce them to the code while minimizing risk.  While all 

changes are code reviewed before checkin, newcomers receive 

extra attention and feedback on early changes they make.  Several 

interviewees viewed fixing bugs as requiring less design 

knowledge than implementing new features.  Bug fixing allows 

newcomers to do useful work while still learning the code base. 
5.4 Code duplication 
Two previous studies [5] [10] and the focus of clone detection 
tools (e.g. CCFinder [3]) led us to expect that when developers 

were asked about code duplication, they would discuss copying 

and pasting example API usage code, subclasses, or other hard-to-

understand example code or even regale us with stories of hard to 

refactor clones. When pressed, a few admitted to copying and 

pasting code in dubious ways. Yet most responded with stories 

that had nothing to do with finding example code or copy and 

paste. 
From our interviews, we identified six distinct forms of code 
duplication (Table 3), corresponding to columns in the table.  

Each clone type can be characterized by its creation mechanism, 

whether developers are aware they are creating clones, the 

refactoring challenges to remove the clones, and the size of the 

clones.  Our follow-up survey also revealed the percentage of 

developers who had made changes repeated in multiple places or 

refactored or otherwise eliminated duplication during a one week 

period.  Finally, developers rated the difficulty maintaining their 

code base caused by each type of clone. 
In 
repeated work clones
, multiple developers separately and 
unknowingly reimplement the same functionality. One developer 

reported that he had been implementing a small piece of 

functionality that another developer was also working on for a 

different problem until a program manager suggested that he talk 

to a second developer. After creation, interviewees viewed these 

clones as being difficult to refactor as each developer may have 

made subtly different decisions that are difficult to change. 
The most studied clone type, 
example clones
, occurs when some 
usage context code which illustrates how to create or make use of 

some code is copied and pasted and modified. We expect that this 

usually involves a small amount of code. Kim 
et al.
 [6] argue that 
copies frequently diverge and that it is difficult to predict whether 

the clones would be better off factored into a new abstraction. 
Scattered clones
, or logical clones, invo
lve crosscutting changes 
in the aspect oriented programming sense [4]. Here, changing a 

particular decision requires making changes to many widely 

dispersed areas of code. One developer reported that correctly 

changing one method required changing another method that was 

hidden several calls deeper into the component. Another reported 

that they would sometimes make a change, hope for the best, and 

rely on testers to find any other necessary related changes.  
Fork clones
 occur when a team takes a large portion of code from 
another team. One developer reported doing this when they 

wished to use code that the original team was not ready to ship. 

They subsequently heavily modified the code to remove 

functionality they didn™t need. Forks occur when a consuming 

team wishes to use functionality pr
ovided by a producing team in 
ways that the producing team is unable to support. Interviewees, 

when asked, all agreed that it was best to avoid forked code 

whenever possible. Yet, when faced with the alternative of 

reimplementing the functionality from scratch, forking is 

frequently a better alternative.  Particularly difficult are bug fixes. 

The consuming team must monitor bug fixes made by the 

producing team and reimplement the fixes themselves, taking on 

much of the maintenance burden of the producing team. 
Branch clones
 occur when developers must reimplement their 
change in several branches of the same code base. They aren™t 

clones in the strict sense of duplicate code but rather copies of the 

entire code base in various stages of release. One developer 
 reported fixing a bug in both code used in production and the 
current version under development.  
Language clones
 involve the same code implemented in multiple 
languages. One developer reported having the same methods in 

both C++ and C#. 
In contrast to the clone detection literature™s narrow view of 
cloning as syntactically similar code, developers viewed cloning 

as making the same change several times. This includes many 

cases involving code not syntactically similar in a single code 

base but cloned across code bases or repeated in multiple 

languages or branches. From the developer™s perspective, many of 

these problems seem similar in that individual bugs have to be 

fixed in several places, new feature work involves changes in 

many different places, or changes crosscut the strong team code 

ownership boundary. Future empirical work might be best served 

by focusing on this broader definition of repeating the same work. 
6. RATIONALE AND COMMUNICATION 
Understanding the rationale behind code is the most serious 
problem developers face among the problems activities survey 

respondents were asked about.  66% of the respondents agreed 

that ﬁunderstanding the rationale behind a pi
ece of codeﬂ was a 
serious problem (see Table 2). There are many facets to the 

rationale problem: 82% agree that it takes a lot of effort to 

understand ﬁwhy the code is implemented the way it is,ﬂ 73% 

ﬁwhether the code was written as a temporary workaround,ﬂ 69% 

ﬁhow it works,ﬂ and 62% ﬁwhat it™s trying to accomplish.ﬂ 
Consideration of rationale led us to understanding how developers 
understand and explore code. We found that developers had many 

complaints about using their tools to explore code, eschewed 

design documents for interrupting teammates, had code ownership 

boundaries to minimize how much they must understand, and 

rarely documented their understanding for others. This led to the 

second most serious problem - developers felt they were too 

frequently interrupted by their teammates. We also explored how 

developers maintained awareness of changes affecting their code 

and what developers meant by code duplication. 
6.1 Investigating Code Rationale When investigating a piece of code, developers turn first to the 
code itself: on average respondents spent 42% (± 29%)  of their 

understanding time examining the source code, 20% (± 17%)  

using the debugger, 16% (± 19%), examining check-in comments 

or version diffs, 9% (± 10%) examining the results, 8% (± 12%) 

using debug or trace statements, and 3% (± 14%) using other 

means (Figure 5d). In other words, the code itself is the best 

source of information about the code. However it is not flawless. 

Developers commonly become disoriented in unfamiliar source 

code, and discerning the relationship between observed program 

behavior and the source code is often difficult. 
When the code itself does not give the answers the developer 
needs, one might expect them to turn next to the vast amount of 

information that™s written about it 
Œ the bug reports, the specs, the 
design documents, the emails, etc.
 This is emphatically not the 
case. Several factors combined to dissuade most developers from 

using design documents for understanding code. First, finding 

design documents was frequently difficult. Design documents 

were stored on internal websites without a usable search facility, 

forcing developers to manually navigate hierarchic collections 

looking for the appropriate design document. Thus, even if 
developers thought there was a possibility of a design document 
containing the information they cared about, it was not worth 

looking for. If search were available, it was not clear that 

developers would know the correct search terms. Second, design 

documents were not reliably updated. Thus, developers consulting 

a document would not be sure if the code still conformed to the 

document and would be forced to inspect the code. 
The second recourse for investigating the rationale behind code is 
the social network. If the developer thinks a teammate might be 

able to provide the needed information (or the name of the person 

who might), she will walk down 
the hall to talk with them. 
Once the developer has the desired information, she returns to her 
office, applies the newfound information, and gets on with her 

work. This information is preci
ous: it is demonstrably useful, 
demonstrably hard to ascertain from the code, and was obtained at 

a high cost. Yet it is exceedingly rare for this developer to then 

write this information down. The next person who needs the same 

information must go through the same laborious discovery 

process. There are plenty of reasons that a developer would 

choose to not record the information. The overhead of checking 

the code out, editing it, and checking it back in (possibly 

triggering check-in review processes, merge conflicts, test suite 

runs, etc.) is enough to dissuade the developer from recording the 

information as a comment in the code. Some interviewees 

expressed the concern that the newfound information was not 

authoritative enough to add permanently to the code or that 

checking in the comment under their own names would 

inappropriately make them experts. Hence the information tends 

to remain in the developers™ 
heads, where it is subject to 
institutional memory loss. 
6.2 Interruptions 
Each of these unplanned, f
ace-to-face meetings represents an 
interruption of at least one person. Recovering from these 

interruptions is a substantial problem, ranking second with 62% 

of developers agreeing that this is the case (Table 2). Recovering 

from an interruption can be difficult. Developers must remember 

goals, decisions, hypotheses, and interpretations from the task 

they were working on and ri
sk inserting bugs if they 
misremember.  
Developers have adopted various strategies to mitigate the effects 
of interruptions on themselves, such as using a closed office door 

or other social cues to deflect interruptions, working on 

complicated tasks at times of the day when interruptions are 

infrequent, staving off an interruption for a moment while 

finishing a thought, or scheduling ﬁoffice hours.ﬂ Sometimes the 

interrupter mitigates the impact of interruption by using email 

instead of face-to-face for low-priority issues or emailing a 

warning 10 minutes before the inte
rruption to give the interrupted 
person a chance to save his working context by writing down 

notes. 
While many (though not all) interviewees indicated that they 
received too many interruptions, all acknowledged that 

interruptions were a valuable part of the work culture. 

Interestingly, two interviewees 
indicated that interruptions had 
become more of a problem since their teams had adopted agile 

processes. 
 Table 4.  Agile practices adopted by respondents. 
Does your team use
 % agree
 Collective code ownership within the team 49% 
ﬁSprints,ﬂ i.e. a development cycle that last four 
(or so) weeks 
42% 
An intentional policy to involve customers 
(internal or external) deeply into design and 

planning 
33% 
ﬁScrum meetings,ﬂ i.e. a brief daily status meeting 
including all stakeholders 
25% 
ﬁBurndownﬂ estimate or chart, i.e. a measure of 
the time remaining 
in the sprint 
24% 
An intentional policy of preferring face-to-face 
over electronic communications 
16% 
Pair programming, i.e. developers working 
together, shoulder-to-shoulder on a problem 
16% 
A ﬁbullpenﬂ or other open-floorplan space for the 
team 
10% 
6.3 Bug Investigation Example 
Developers reported spending nearly half of their time fixing 
bugs. A bug investigation help
s illustrate how their tools, 
activities, and problems interact to make fixing bugs possible but 

also suboptimal. When asked to describe an instance of a 

difficulty understanding the rationale behind a pi
ece of code, one 
developer responded with a bug investigation narrative. While 

this is but a single story and not necessarily general and based on 

a recollection of events and not completely accurate, it illustrates 

several themes supported by interview and survey data. 
After being assigned a new bug through a bug tracking tool, the 
developer first reproduced the bug by navigating to a webpage 

and ensuring that 
error 500 Œ internal error
 was triggered as 
reported in the bug. Next, the developer attached the Visual 

Studio debugger to the web server, set it to break on exceptions, 

reproduced the error again, and was presented with a null 

reference exception in Visual Studio. From an inspection of the 

call stack window, the developer considered the functions that 

might be responsible for producing the erroneous value. The 

developer switched to emacs to read the methods and used 

ctags.exe to browse callers of methods. The developer then 

switched back to the Visual Studio debugger to change values at 

run time and see the effects. The developer made a change, 

recompiled, and found that the same exception was still being 

produced. Finally, the developer browsed further up the call-

stack, tracing the erroneous value to one object, then to another 

object, and finally to a third object protected with mutexes.  
By this time, the developer had wandered into code that he did not 
understand and did not ﬁownﬂ Œ or have primary responsibility for 

making changes. But a second developer was working on a high 

profile feature that touched this code, so he immediately knew 

that this second developer would understand this code. He went to 

the second developer™s office, interrupted the second developer, 

and engaged him in a discussion about the rationale behind the 

code. He walked back to his office, made a change based on this 

information, and determined that the change wouldn™t work, 

leaving him with a new problem. He then walked back to the 
second developer™s office who then him that the functionality 
causing the problem was actually related to code that a third 

developer was working on. They both went to visit the third 

developer™s office only to find the third developer away for lunch. 

The first developer, now blocked, switched to another task. After 

lunch, both developers returned to the third developer™s office, 

had a design discussion about how the functionality should 

behave, and finally passed the first developer™s bug to the third 

developer to make the fix. 
This story illustrates several themes
 in our surveys and interviews: 
• Developers rapidly switch between multiple tools. 
• When looking for detailed information about code, developers 
first explore the code by reading it and using a debugger. 
• When unable to find answers exploring code, developers 
consult knowledgeable teammates rather than specs, design 

documents, email, or other artifacts. 
• Face-to-face communication is strongly preferred over email or 
IM. • Developers switch tasks when blocked or interrupted by 
teammates seeking code knowledge. 
• Software development is a highly social process. 
• While code ownership within a team is well understood, 
changes crosscut ownership boundaries. 
• Developers spend vast amounts of time gathering precious, 
demonstrably useful information, but rarely record it for future 

developers. 
7. OPENNESS TO CHANGE 
Developers and development teams are constantly trying new 
tools and work practices to optimize their work. Developers use a 

variety of tools to do their job. When writing code, 49% use two 

or more tools, and 19% use three or more. 
In our interviews, we found several development teams 
experimenting with ﬁagile practices,ﬂ a collection of behaviors 

intended to make software development more efficient
2. Some 
teams were gingerly dipping a toe into the agile water, while a 

small number were jumping in with
 both feet (see Table 4).  48% 
of respondents reported that their team was using two or more of 

the eight practices, 32% three or more, and 20% four or more. A 

few respondents (3%) reported that their teams used seven or all 

eight of the practices. Most developers wanted to continue 

adopting agile practices (53% agreed that they thought their team 

ﬁshould adopt agile software development methodologies more 

aggressivelyﬂ) while a few were skeptical (14% agreed that their 

team should adopt 
less
 aggressively). 
Developers adopted specific agile practices when they felt their 
benefits were compelling. Developers shunned design documents 

in favor of face-to-face communication, designed minimally rather 

than up front, and employed unit testing. Developer leads reported 

preferring daily standup team meetings over weekly team 

meetings.  Daily meetings encouraged teammates to help each 

other and assisted the lead in responding to problems blocking 

individual developers™ progress. Several teams had gone further 
                                                                
 2 http://agilemanifesto.org/  
 by adopting an entire agile process, Scrum [11], and reported 
using radical collocation, collective ownership, and sprints.  
8. DESIGN RECOMMENDATIONS 
Several of the problems we observed might benefit from tool 
solutions, although further empirical work is first n
ecessary. 
Problem: 
Developers don™t write down knowledge in design 
documents, resulting in constant rediscovery of knowledge known 

by developers working on the code in the past. 
Solution: 
Reduce the cost of using design documents by (1) 
providing hyperlinks in code to design documents or (2) tools that 

capture informal whiteboard or paper designs. Two empirical 

questions that must first be answered are how readable informal 

notes would be for others and how much of what subsequent 

developers need to understand was ever explicitly considered by 

the original developer. 
Problem: 
Interrupted developers lose track of parts of their 
mental model, resulting in labor
ious reconstruc
tion or bugs and 
discouraging more frequent interruptions. 
Solution: 
Externalize developer™s task context Œ methods they™ve 
examined, decisions in progress, and other information Œ in a tool. 

This information could also be useful as documentation for future 

developers. The central empirical question is determining what 

information developers consider during a modification task. 
Problem: 
It is difficult to discover and consistently change 
clones. 
Solution: 
Embed hyperlinks between clone instances with editor 
support for navigating between clone instances. 
9. CONCLUSIONS 
Our exploratory study of develope
rs™ typical activities, tools, and 
problems led to a finding that is likely surprising to few Œ 

software development relies heavily on implicit knowledge. Yet, a 

detailed examination yielded more interesting findings Œ barriers 

preventing design document and email use, problems with 

interruptions, causes of duplication, and the deeply social nature 

of software development. We feel that wide-ranging, exploratory 

studies like ours have an important place within software 

engineering to keep tool development rooted in real problems 

developers face and fight the perceived irrelevance of academic 

software engineering research [8]. While many of our findings 

help inform tool development, many also need much more study. 

Finally, it not clear how this study of software development at 

Microsoft generalizes to software development in other 

professional environments. Given the diversity of environments Œ 

large software companies, small software companies, software 

developers in companies whose product is not the software itself, 

open-source development of commercial software Œ future work is 

needed to understand the generality of these findings. 
10. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Many thanks to Nachi Nagappan for his skills with statistical 
analysis, Miryung Kim for very helpful discussions including 

suggesting interview questions a
nd an initial form of our clone 
taxonomy, and Andrew Ko, Marwan Abi-Antoun, Jim Herbsleb, 

and Brad Myers for careful readings of earlier drafts and helpful 

suggestions.  The authors gratefully acknowledge support from a 
National Science Foundation Fellowship awarded to the first 
author and by NSF research grant IIS-0534656.  This paper is 

based on work carried out while the first author was an intern on 

the Human Interactions in Programming team at Microsoft 

Research. 
11. REFERENCES 
[1]
 de Souza, C. R., Redmiles, D., Cheng, L., Millen, D., and 
Patterson, J. 2004. Sometimes you need to see through walls: 

a field study of application programming interfaces. In 

Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on Computer 

Supported Cooperative Work
 (Chicago, Illinois, USA, 
November 06 - 10, 2004), 63-71.  
[2]
 Hertzum, M. & Pejtersen, A. M.  The information-seeking 
practices of engineers: searching for documents as well as for 

people. 
Information Processing and Management
, 36, 5, 761-778, 2000. 
[3]
 Kamiya, T., Kusumoto, S., and Inoue, K. CCFinder: a 
multilinguistic token-based code clone detection system for 

large scale source code. 
TSE, 28, 7 (Jul. 2002), 654-670. 
[4]
 Kiczales, G., Lamping, J., Mendhekar, A., Maeda, C., 
Videira Lopes, C., Loingtier, J.-M., and Irwin, J. Aspect 

Oriented Programming. In 
Proceedings of ECOOP
, 1997. [5]
 Kim, M., Bergman, L, Lau, T., and Notkin, D. An 
Ethnographic Stud of Copy and Paste Programming 

Practices in OOPL. 
International Symposium on Empirical 
Software Engineering
, 2004. [6]
 Kim, M., Sazawal, V., Notkin, D., and Murphy, G.C. An 
Empirical Study of Code Clone Genealogies. FSE 2005. 
[7]
 Moran, T. P. and Carroll, J. M., Eds. 
Design rationale: 
concepts, techniques, and use
. Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc, 1996. 
[8]
 Parnas, D.L. On ICSE™s ﬁMost Influential Papersﬂ. In 
ACM 
Software Engineering Notes
, 20, 3, July 1995, 29-32. 
[9]
 Perry, D., Staudenmayer, N., and Votta, L. G. People, 
Organizations, and Process Improvement. 
IEEE Software
, 11, 4, 36-45, 1994. 
[10]
 Rosson, M.B., and Carroll, J.
M. The Reuse of Uses in 
Smalltalk Programming. 
ACM Transactions on Human-
Computer Interaction, 3, 
3, 219-253, 1996. 
[11]
 Schwaber, K, & Beedle, M. 
Agile Software Development 
with Scrum
. Prentice Hall, 2001. 
[12]
 Singer, J., Lethbridge, T., Vi
nson, N., and Anquetil, N. An 
Examination of Software Engineering Work Practices. In 

Proceedings of CASCON ™97, 
209-223, 1997. 
[13]
 Weiser, M. 1981. Program slicing. In 
Proceedings of the 5th 
International Conference on Software Engineering
 (San 
Diego, California, United States, March 09 - 12, 1981), 439-

449. [14]
 Wright, G. and Ayton, P.  Eliciting and Modeling Expert 
Knowledge  In 
Decision Support Systems
, Vol. 3, 13-26, 
1987.