 Software Development Governance Challenges  
of a Middle-Sized Company in Agile Transition 
  Ilkka Lehto 
Helsinki University of Technology 
Software Business and Engineering Institute 
P.O. Box 9210 FI-02150 TKK 
firstname.lastname@tkk.fi 
+358 41 501 6167   Kristian Rautiainen 
Helsinki University of Technology 
Software Business and Engineering Institute 
P.O. Box 9210 FI-02150 TKK firstname.lastname@tkk.fi 
  Abstract  We studied how a middle-sized Finnish company 
employing agile methods governs its software product 

development. Through observations and interviews we 
followed the trace from strategic plans in the form of 
roadmaps to various backlogs and all the way to daily 

work. The governance roles, responsibilities and deli
v-erables seemed to be in place on different organiz
a-tional levels. However, closer inspection revealed 
challenges in the practical implementation. There were 
too many roles and hierarchy levels with information 

consistency problems in between. Prioritization of the 

high-level goals was unclear and made it difficult to 
plan and organize development work based on bus
i-ness value. The trace from high-level goals to more 
detailed plans was easily corrupted due to poor pla
n-ning practices. Progress monitoring of daily work was 
poorly done and not linked to high-level plans. Cons
e-quently, the required feedback loops were inadequate, 

making it impossible for management to take corre
c-tive actions in time. 
 1. Introduction  
For a software company it is crucial that the outputs 
of its processes meet the companyÕs strategic goals. 
Ensuring that this happens is the very essence of sof
t-ware development governance (SDG). SDG reaches its 
goals by defining organizational structures through 

establishing chains of roles, responsibilities and co
m-munication [1, 2]
. An important part of communication 
is feedback, which people need for successfully carr
y-ing out their responsibilities. 
Agile methods, e.g. Scrum [
3] and XP [
4], provide 
in their own way a predefined SDG model, but orig
i-nally assume a simple situation where a single team is 
developing one product at a time. However, when a 
larger organization wants to be agile and use agile 
processes, little guidance is provided for modifying the 
simple, basic ÒagileÓ SDG model to suit a more co
m-plex situation while still preserving the agile principles. 

Some literature has emerged in recent years to address 
agile in the large enterprise context, e.g.  [5-
8], but 
empirical research is still scarce on this subject. 
In this paper we present our initial findings on how 
software development is governed in a middle-sized 
software company that is going through a transition 

phase to adopt agile methods. 
We also present cha
l-lenges we have identified so far during our case study.  
Section 2 presents the used research methodology. 
A framework for depicting product planning and d
e-velopment in an agile context that we used to analyze 

the case company is presented in Section 3. The initial 

findings of our work in progress are presented in Se
c-tion 4. Section 5 concludes the paper with discussion 
and suggestions for future work. 
 2. Methodology  Our ongoing case study [
9] of a middle-sized Fi
n-nish software company started with a current state 
analysis in February 2008. The case company employs 
roughly 700 people. Our case study is conducted in a 
research and development organization, which has 

roughly 300 employees of which about half are sof
t-ware engineers. The company offers products and 

services in more than 20 language versions to co
n-sumer and enterprise markets. The products are based 

on common components and platforms. Typically there 
are more than 20 concurrent projects performed by 

teams on 4 sites in 3 countries. 
The companyÕs research and development organiz
a-tion started a transition to agile software development 
in 2003. This was done as process push by a manag
e-SDG™09, May 17, 2009, Vancouver, Canada978-1-4244-3736-8/09/$25.00  2009 IEEEICSE™09 Workshop36 rial decision. The change was motivated by a need to 
release products in a timely manner, increase the abi
l-ity of reacting to change and to get customer feedback 
earlier and more often. 
The research method used can be characterized as 
participative action research [
10]. Our cooperation with 
the company is coordinated by setting short-term goals 
in monthly meetings, where findings are also di
s-cussed. 
Our observations and interviews focused on the r
e-search and development organizationÕs largest deve
l-oper pool consisting of 5 collocated teams averaging 9 
people per team. The observations and interviews were 
digitally recorded and a case diary was kept. 
 3. Agile product planning and development 
framework 
 We constructed a framework (
!"#$%&'(
) to depict a
g-ile product planning and development. The framework 
is based on the Cycles of Control framework [11, 12]
, which is an extension of Scrum, which in turn is the 
basis for the product development process in the case 

company. We have used the framework as a support 

tool in our analysis of the case company by studying 

how roles, responsibilities, communication, and me
t-rics relate to the objects in the framework. 
The framework is divided into four levels. The three 
topmost levels Ð 
product
, release
, and 
iteration
 Ð re
p-resent the different stages of product planning and 
monitoring. The lowest level, 
heartbeat
, represents the 
development work done on a daily basis. 
Everything starts with a 
product
 a company is d
e-veloping. High-level plans for the product can be e
x-pressed, e.g., as business or technology goals, which 
should be prioritized and recorded as 
backlog items
 in 
a product backlog
. The high-level and long-term plans 
for the product are summarized and communicated in a 
roadmap
. 
When planning goes into more detail, the high-level 
backlog items can be split into more detailed backlog 
items, forming a hierarchical structure. The hierarchy 
of backlog items helps in preserving the Òbig pictureÓ 
of the product plans and forms the basis for progress 
monitoring. 
The target of software product development is ma
k-ing and selling a 
release
 of a product to customers. 
One or several backlog items from the item hierarchy 
should be chosen as 
release goals
 to guide the more 
detailed release and iteration planning. 
A release is developed incrementally in multiple 
it-erations.
 As a continuous planning practice release 
goals or other backlog items are split until they are 
small enough to be implemented in an iteration. The 
backlog items that are selected for implementation in a 
specific iteration are the 
iteration
 goals
 in the 
iteration 
backlog
. 
  ' In iteration planning, the 
tasks
 needed for achieving 
the iteration goals are planned and added to the iter
a-tion backlog. When tasks get done during the iteration, 
progress can be monitored and traced back through the 

backlog item hierarchy all the way to the high-level 
plans. 
 4. Findings  4.1. Software development governance 
 A solution manager
 is responsible for yearly upda
t-ing a productÕs roadmap for a three-year span. The 
roadmap presents the schedule for releases and high-
level business goals, which are called business themes. 
The roadmap planning sets the boundaries for planning 

the release projects. The 
executive team
 is a managerial 
board that inspects and approves the roadmaps. 
The solution manager, 
resource owner 
and
 project 
manager
, together with other stakeholders, prepare a 
release project proposal. The resource owner is the 

Òline managerÓ of a developer pool. Her responsibility 

is to plan projectsÕ resource allocation and balance 

teamsÕ workloads. The 
product council
 is a managerial 
board responsible for inspecting and approving all 
release project proposals and ensuring that the project 
Figure 1. Agile product planning and development framework 
37 portfolio is in line with the boundaries set by the roa
d-maps. 
The product council appoints a 
project steering 
group
 for each approved release project. The project 
steering group is responsible for ensuring that the r
e-lease project reaches its goals Ð expressed by the bus
i-ness theme(s) Ð with the allocated resources. The pr
o-ject steering group makes scoping decisions within 
these boundaries based on progress monitoring in 
monthly iteration demonstrations. If the release project 
is compromised, the issue is escalated to the product 

council. 
As the starting point of more detailed release and i
t-eration planning, the solution manager and project 

manager explicate the business themes as more d
e-tailed solution backlog items. Typically these are one-

liners in a spreadsheet called solution backlog. 
Releases are typically composed of multiple sof
t-ware components. Each component has an appointed 

technical expert called 
product owner
. Each product 
owner maintains a product backlog, which contains 
more detailed and technically oriented product backlog 
items for the component. 
Prior to iteration planning, the product owners copy 
the top priority product backlog items to a platform 

backlog, which is owned by the resource owner. Items 

are prioritized and modified to remove duplicates by 
the resource owner and the product owners. 
In iteration planning the top priority product bac
k-log items are assigned to the development teams and 
put in to team backlogs. In a later phase of iteration 

planning the teams plan the necessary tasks needed to 

accomplish the backlog items.  
 4.2. Challenges in communication 
 We observed two major challenges in communic
a-tion: lack of communication between product owners 
and teams; and lack of feedback loops. 
During our observations we noticed that in the lar
g-est developer pool there were times when all five teams 
were working on the same component. In this situation 

all teams needed time from the same product owner to 

clarify the team backlog items. This was difficult to 
schedule due to all the other product ownerÕs respons
i-bilities. Also, the opposite situation could be observed. 
Sometimes multiple product owners were requesting 

work from a single team, which disrupted the teamÕs 

work by too many meetings.  
The teams we observed had abandoned the task-
planning phase of iteration planning. Instead, they used 

product backlog items as such. We learned in an inte
r-view that in the early phases of the companyÕs agile 

transition the agreed practice was to try to make the 
product backlog items as equal in estimated effort size 
as possible. These were then used as such and the v
e-locity of a team was calculated based on the number of 
completed backlog items. This was used as a progress 

metric. However, this Òsize equalizationÓ is no longer 
done. Likewise, proper effort estimation and contin
u-ous re-estimation is not done. Therefore, development 
progress on the heartbeat level (
!"#$%&'(
) could not be 
monitored. Consequently, progress monitoring on the 

other levels was not based on true progress inform
a-tion, making it impossible for management to take 

corrective actions in time. 
Different people on many organizational levels used 
separate spreadsheets for managing backlogs as a part 

of release planning. While links existed between bac
k-log items in different spreadsheets, the links were not 
dynamic, which resulted in information inconsistency. 
Changes in one spreadsheet were not automatically 
reflected in other spreadsheets. This would have made 
tracing development progress back to business themes 

challenging even if the teamsÕ iteration planning pra
c-tices had been working properly.  
 4.3. Challenges in roles and responsibilities 
 We observed three major challenges related to roles 
and responsibilities: team structure that conflicted with 
agile principles; applying product owner role in a large 
and complex context; and lack of business theme pr
i-orities. 
Each team was composed of specialists of a certain 
aspect for the companyÕs products, e.g. user interface 
team. Integration and coordination of the work of all 
teams was needed to build the product. This caused 
handovers and communication overhead. Therefore 

additional coordination effort was needed from the 

project manager and the resource owner. Also, the 

simple backlog practices of Scrum did not work and 

caused workarounds, such as the hierarchy of backlogs 
described in Section 4.1. Another challenge related to 
this was that work could not proceed in priority order 

because the teams could only pick backlog items they 

had the skills to perform.  
The role of product owner as described in Scrum 
was considered to be too much for one person in the 
company. They had decided to split the responsibilities 
in three parts: the solution manager has commercial 

responsibility; the product owner has technical respo
n-sibility; and the resource owner has resource respons
i-bility. Although the plan looks good in principle, in 
practice it resulted in a coordination and communic
a-tion chaos manifesting itself as a seemingly endless 
amount of meetings, which frustrated everybody. Also, 

the teams were at a loss who to turn to when they 
needed specific information regarding a backlog item. 
38 The solution managers are responsible for clarifying 
the roadmapÕs business themes in the release project 
proposal. However, we observed that no priorities 
between the themes were set. This contributed to diff
i-culties in planning and organizing development work. 
As there were many approved business themes and no 
apparent prioritization between them, one result of this 
seemed to be that development work on most of the 

themes was done in parallel.  
 5. Discussion and future work 
 When we studied the case companyÕs software d
e-velopment governance, we discovered many cha
l-lenges. Two of them related directly to the functiona
l-ity of the SDG model: lack of feedback loops and lack 

of business theme prioritization. The rest were related 

to the companyÕs transition to agile methods. 
The teams had abandoned the task-planning phase 
of iteration planning. This made it impossible to mon
i-tor progress on a detailed level. Also, the depth of 

backlog hierarchy and lack of dynamic linking between 

the backlog items made it impossible to link develo
p-ment progress to high-level plans. This, combined with 
the excessive parallel work caused by the lack of bus
i-ness theme prioritization, increases the risk of release 
project failure. 
The prolonged agile transition seems to be the result 
of two decisions that contradict agile principles. The 
first decision was not to break the existing team stru
c-ture. Some of the challenges reported in Section 4 are 

the result of workarounds to support and coordinate the 
work of the teams. According to agile literature cross-
functional, self-organized feature teams are essential in 

agile software development, because they enable the 

lean principle of one-piece-flow [
13], provide flexibi
l-ity in assigning work, and reduce the need for coord
i-nation. For an unknown reason, feature teams were not 
introduced until October 2008. 
The second decision was to appoint product owners 
per component. Since the teams we observed were 
neither feature teams nor component teams, the teams 

could not have a dedicated product owner. This caused 

challenges in the communication and coordination 
between teams and product owners. This probably 
resulted in splitting the product owner responsibilities 

to three roles, which it seems to us made the commun
i-cation and coordination challenges even worse. In 

general, the product owner role has received very little 

attention in agile literature. We strongly urge that more 
research on this demanding role should be conducted. 
Next we will start working on the two challenges 
that hamper the functionality of the companyÕs SDG. 
Feedback loops need to be established. This includes 
proper task planning in the iteration planning phase 

and making the links from high-level plans to tasks 

dynamic. Excessive parallel development should be 

reduced to make the work more focused and effective. 
To provide a basis for this, business theme prioritiz
a-tion needs to be made. 
In February 2009 the case company initiated an o
r-ganizational change that will affect the product owner 
role. We will assist the company in the practical i
m-plementation by providing our insights through mon
i-toring the resulting effects and giving feedback for 

continuous improvement. In the same way we will 

closely observe how the new feature team concept 

works. All in all, we hope to gain insight on scaling 

agile practices in the large enterprise context. 
 6. References  [1] S. Chulani, C. Williams and A. Yaeli, "Software deve
l-opment governance and its concerns," in 
SDG '08: Procee
d-ings of the 1st International Workshop on Software Deve
l-opment Governance
, 2008, pp. 3-6.  
[2] S. W. Ambler and P. Kroll. (2007, Nov). Lean develo
p-ment governance. IBM Corporation, USA.  
[3] K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, 
Agile Software Development 
with Scrum
. Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall, 2002, pp. 
158.  

[4] K. Beck, 
EXtreme Programming eXplained
. Addison-
Wesley, 2000, pp. 224.  
[5] D. Leffingwell, 
Scaling Software Agility: Best Practices 
for Large Enterprises
. USA: Addison-Wesley, 2007, pp. 384.  
[6] G. Larman and B. Vodde, 
Scaling Lean & Agile Deve
l-opment: Thinkingand Organizational Tools for Large-Scale 
Scrum
. USA: Addison-Wesley, 2009, pp. 348.  
[7] K. Schwaber, 
The Enterprise and Scrum
. USA: Microsoft 
Press, 2007, pp. 176.  
[8] S. Ambler, "Agile Software Development at Scale,"  
Lecture Notes in Computer Science
, 2008.  [9] R. K. Yin, 
Case Study Research: Design and Meth
ods. ,Second ed., vol. 5, London: SAGE Publications, 1994, pp. 
192.  
[10] G. I. Susman and R. D. Evered, "An Assessment of the 
Scientific Merits of Action Research,"  
ASQ
, vol. 23, pp. 
582-603, December. 1978.  
[11] K. Rautiainen, C. Lassenius and R. Sulonen, "4CC: A 

Framework for Managing Software Product Development,"  
Eng. Manage. J.
, vol. 14, pp. 27-32, 2002.  
[12] K. Rautiainen, L. Vuornos and C. Lassenius, "An exp
e-rience in integrating strategic product planning and agile 

software development practices," in 
Proceedings of 2003 
International Symposium on Empirical Software Enginee
r-ing
, 2003, pp. 28-37.  
[13] M. Poppendieck and T. Poppendieck, 
Lean Software 
Development: An Agile Toolkit
. Boston: Addison-Wesley, 
2003, pp. 240. 
 39