 A Risk-Driven Method for eXtreme Programming Release Planning Mingshu Li 1,2, Meng Huang
 1,3, Fengdi Shu
 1, and J
uan Li 1,3 1Lab for Internet Software Technologies, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences 2State Key Laboratory of Computer Science, Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences 3Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences Beijing 100080, P.R. China 
{mingshu, hm, fdshu, lijuan}@itechs.iscas.ac.cn  ABSTRACT XP (eXtreme Programming) 
has become popular for IID 
(Iteration and Increment Development). It is suitable for small 

teams, lightweight projects a
nd vague/volatile requirements. 
However, some challenges are left 
to developers when they desire 
to practise XP. A critical one of 
them is constructing the release 
plan and negotiating it with customers. In this paper, we propose a 
risk-driven method for XP release pl
anning. It has been applied in 
a case study and the results show
 the method is feasible and 
effective. XP practicers can follow it to decide a suitable release 

plan and control the development process.  Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.9 [Software Engineering
]: Management ŒCost estimation
, Life cycle, Productivity.
  General Terms Management, Measurement, Economics, Experimentation. Keywords
 XP, release planning, risk, negotiation, decision 1. INTRODUCTION Recently, eXtreme Programming (XP) is a popular Iteration and 
Increment Development (IID) practice and successful in software 

development [1,2,3]. It is 
based around the development and delivery of small increments of functionality, customer 

involvement in the process, c
onstant code improvement and 
egoless programming [4].  
Release planning is the activity that stakeholders decide 
requirements implementation and delivery scheme in XP practice. 
It is the key point, where developers consider how coding can 

contribute to software system™s goals, since there are no detailed 

requirements and architectur
e design before system 
implementation. There are four st
eps during XP release planning: 
firstly, developers inquire custom
ers about the business value of 
each story that describes the customers™ needs; secondly, 
developers estimate the needed efforts for implementing those 

stories; thirdly, they analyze the technology risks in stories; and 

lastly, developers negotiate with 
customers about the release plan 
for the next iteration [5]. 
 The vague XP release pla
nning techniques often muddle practicers [6]. As a result, it is difficult for developers to make a 

suitable release plan in XP practice. They are often puzzled by 

many problems, such as how to 
assess stories™ business value, 
how to analyze the technology risks, how to get consensus by 

negotiation, etc. Some researcher
s reported that release planning 
had become the response to customers™ requests entirely and been 

uncontrollable because of the absence of integrated system™s 

viewpoint, inadequate negotiation 
among stakeholders and so on. 
Thus, many XP processes are full of reworks and wrong problem 

solutions [3,7,8,9,10,11]. 
In the paper, we put forward a 
risk-driven method for XP release 
planning which aims at three main vague areas in XP practice. 

Firstly, the vague techniques of 
XP release planning often lead 
stakeholders to a poor decision when they do not consider 

multiple possible release plans for the next iteration. Secondly, 

stakeholders want to balance 
development risks and productivity, 
but it is difficult for them to analyze the risks because of the 

vague techniques in risks analysis. Lastly, it is a very important 

work to balance development risks and productivity in process, 

but there are not enough guides or 
techniques for stakeholders to 
reach an agreement about a release plan.  
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
summarizes the related work. Section 3 presents the risk-driven 

method for XP release planning. S
ection 4 presents a risk-driven 
XP process. Section 5 reports 
a case study of the method. We 
conclude the paper in Section 6 with a summary and directions for 
future work. 2. RELATED WORK Release planning is one of the essential tasks in IID [6]. There are 
two kinds of release planning method for IID: predictive planning 

and adaptive planning [12]. Predictive planning means that 

developers make a detailed plan 
covering the whole software life 
cycle. On the contrary, according to the adaptive planning 

methodology, developers only make 
the detailed plan for a short 
time and keep a rough long-time pl
an. The detail plan covers a 
few release millstones or even only one iteration. Adaptive 

planning is more suitable for IID 
[12,13]. XP release planning is a 
typical adaptive planning. XP practicers plan release only for the 
 Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 

otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 

requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

ICSE'06
, May 20-28, 2006, Shanghai, China. 
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-085-X/06/0005...$5.00.  next iteration generally. The long-time plan keeps rough for easy 
adjustment. 
In the early research of release planning, researchers focused on 
the method of assessing requirement
s™ value and estimating cost 
[14,15,16]. Based on quantitive value evaluation and cost 

estimation of requirements, optimiz
ing methods are used to select 
suitable combinations from a
ll requirements [14,15,18] for 
iterations. Recently, some researchers concentrate on the 

inconsistent requirements™ value from multi-stakeholder 

viewpoints [17,19] and depe
ndencies among requirements [20,21]. They suggest that the inconsistent value and 

dependencies should be considered
 when the optimizing methods 
are used. However, these methods 
are not suitable for XP release 
planning. The premise of these me
thods is that there are detailed 
requirements and architecture design before implementation, 
which leads to a predictive plan 
naturally. In XP practice, this 
premise can rarely be satisfied [5].  
The vague descriptions of techni
ques in XP method always make 
it difficult to develop, negotiate, and decide a release plan. To 

improve it, [12] uses ﬁDot Voti
ngﬂ or architectural significance, 
risk and value score to make a release plan. But some issues are 

still unclear such as negotiation.
 When XP practicers use the 
method for release planning, they still feel difficult in deciding 

what information they should collect and how to make feedbacks 

to customers to reach the agreement about a release plan. Some 

problems caused by unsuitable rel
easing plan in XP practice are 
reported such as that developers are unable to finish project for 

absence of integrated system vi
ewpoints [9,10,22,23], inadequate 
negotiation during release planning [11], high development 

organization risks caused by ex
cessive dependence on personal 
experiences [8], and so on. Therefore, an exact method is needed 

for developers to follow during XP release planning.   3. RISK-DRIVEN METHOD FOR RELEASE PLANNING The risk-driven method for XP release planning is shown in 
Figure 1. It can be divided into three steps as follows: Firstly, developers construct a se
t of feasible release plans from 
the project profiles which include those original ideas about the 

system™s scope, cost, schedule, pr
oduct quality and so on. In this 
step, developers not only write XP
™s stories based on the system™s 
features as in general XP practice, but also combine stories into 

multiple feasible release plan
s according to their values, 
dependences, costs and available efforts per iteration. Some 
techniques, such as quantifying 
a story™s business value using 
Analytic Hierarchy Process 
(AHP) method and constructing multiple feasible release plans auto
matically, are integrated in our 
method to help developers in this step. Secondly, risks in each feasible 
release plan are analyzed. Risk 
analysis is used as the crucial t
ool when developers and customers 
plan releases. Risks are losses caused by uncertain things [27]; 

they maybe come from requirement
s, estimation or technologies 
and affect system scope, schedule or products quality.  
At last, stakeholders decide a certain release plan for the next 
iteration according with the result of risk analysis. If there are not 

release plans whose risks are accep
table, developers should trace 
back and negotiate with customers about project profiles. 
Furthermore, after the iteration is 
finished, its results will be used 
to adjust project profiles.  Constructing a 
set of feasible 
release plans  
Assessing risks in 
each feasible 
release plan
Adjusting 
Project 
Profiles
Is there any 
release plan 
whose risks 
acceptable? 
YESNOThe release plan is implemented in next iteration 
Project 
Profiles
Results of the 
iteration that 
will be used 
to adjust
 Project Profiles
Risk-Driven Method for XP Release Planning
Figure 1. Risk-driven method for XP release planning 
 The method can be not only used for each XP iteration, but also 
applied for long-time plans such as milestone plans and even 

software life cycle. For example, 
developers use the method to get 
a release plan first for long-tim
e milestone. Then, they use the 
method to get the first iteration™s 
release plan. And when the first 
iteration is finished, they can adjust the project profiles by the 

results of the iteration. The adjustments lead to a more suitable 

plan for next iteration and further milestones. Either planning for next iteration or for long-time milestone, the 
method can establish the links be
tween the overview of the whole 
project and essential activities 
of stakeholders. This helps 
stakeholders construct a succe
ssful software product under the 
circumstance™s constraints. 
3.1 Constructing Feasible Release Plans A feasible release plan means 
a group of requirements (stories) 
that can be completed in the next iteration under the iteration 

efforts and stories™ de
pendencies constraints. Usually, the feasible 
release plan is not unique. Since 
developers and customers always 
expect to complete as many stor
ies as possible per iteration, we 
have to define a criterion to eval
uate the business value of stories 
in a release plan under the effort
s and dependencies constraints. Accordingly, we can select those feasible release plans with 

higher business value as candida
tes. To construct multiple 
 feasible release plans and select those with high business value, 
developers should quantify every 
story™s business value, size, 
available efforts per iteration, 
and locate the dependencies among 
stories. 
The business value of a story is defined by customers. During 
release planning, the relative valu
e should be assessed. Analytic 
Hierarchy Process (AHP) method is a useful tool to evaluate the 

stories™ relative business value [24]. The stories™ relative values 

are evaluated by performing pair wise comparisons and checking 

result consistency. After customer
s evaluate the stories™ relative 
value by AHP, a number between 0 and 1 will be assigned to each 

story as a score that means the relative value of a story. And the 

sum of all scores is 1. In the paper, the symbol ﬁ
Viﬂ denotes story 
i™s business value. Man-hour is used as the measur
ement of size estimation in XP. 
We use 
ci to denote story 
i™s size, 
Ct denotes available efforts of 
No. t iteration. Although some researchers think 
the dependencies among stories are unimportant in XP release plan [5], we consider the 

dependencies as an important factor because a useful partial 

system should be delivered to customers after each iteration. The 

small release of each iteration should fulfill some customers™ 

business needs. Consequently, 
the dependencies among stories 
caused by business process should 
be considered during planning 
release.  The dependencies of st
ories, which mean the business 
process described by the stories, are denoted by 
d. If story 
i depends on story 
k, we endue 
dik=1. It means that story 
i cannot 
be implemented later than story 
k. If there is no dependency 
between i and k, we endue dik=0. For 
ki, dik=1.  The assumption is that there are 
n uncompleted stories in the 
storyboard. 
xi=1 denotes story 
i will be completed in the next 
iteration; otherwise, 
xi=0. Then, a function like formula (1) is 
designed to construct feasible release plans according to the 

criterion ﬁmaximizing business value per iterationﬂ. 
iniixVgMax1                                     (1) Dependencies and available effort 
constraints can be expressed by 
formulas (2) and (3): tiniiCxc1                                         (2) kixx,,kikixdx,},,1{,nki                         (3) Each solution of the function is an assignment combination of 
},...,{1nxx which means a feasible release plan. An algorithm is 
designed to find solutions. Firstly, the solution space is organized 
as Figure 2. From a node, e.g. node A, the left branch denotes a 
solution that includes 
xiˇù1; right branch denotes a solution that 
includes xiˇù0. A path from the root to a leaf denotes an entire 
solution. Xw denotes a path of the entire solution. In these paths, 
some are feasible solutions and others are not. 
},...,{1lxxX denotes an assignment combination of 
x1 ~ xl, called partial solution. Feasible partial solution (
FPS) means an 
X which 
satisfies formulas (2) and (3).  The algorithm is shown in Figure 
3. Deep First Searching (DFS) 
and backtrack are used in the algorithm. A feasible solution queue 

S is used to cache solutions when the algorithm is running. 
Supposing we want to construct top 5 solutions by 
g, there will be 5 Xw in 
S that are arranged in descending order according to the 
results of 
g. The solution in S whose result is the smallest is 
denoted by 
Xwmin
 and gmin denotes the result. When the algorithm terminates, there are five solutions in 
S. Then, the next step is to analyze risks in each solution. 
  Figure 2. A solution space Figure 3. Algorithm for finding solutions 3.2 Analyzing Risks of Feasible Release Plans  
The first step of risk analysis 
is to identify risks. Then the 
probability and loss of each risk are estimated. At last, all kinds of 

risks are combined to show the 
whole risks of a release plan.  
The risk taxonomy is used in identifying risks. Some studies have 
contributed effective risk ta
xonomies [25, 26]. Although those 
taxonomy tables are designed for tr
aditional development process, 
they can be revised for XP. Table 1 shows a risk taxonomy 

defined by us. XP practicers can 
add risk types and risk items 
according to their experiences. 
Probability and loss of a risk can be estimated quantitatively or 
qualitatively. Quantitative estimation requires a lot of time and 

cost, and sometime it is difficult for developers to collect enough 

data for quantitative analysis [26,27]. Thus, qualitative risk 
1ˇêDo  DFS  from 
i=1;  2ˇêIf  i  n,  xiˇù1  is added into  X,  and  X  is still a  FPS   then  add  xiˇù1  into X,  i=i +1,  goto 2   else goto 3 3f i  n,  xiˇù0   is added into  X,  and  X is still a FPS   then  add  xiˇù0 into  X,  i=i +1goto 2ˇ÷   else goto 5;  4ˇêCompare 
 gi  and  gmin    if gi > gmin       then delete  Xwmin  
from S,  add  Xi  into Sˇè               and re-order S;  5ˇêIf  for each  x  in  X: x=0  then exit;  analysis is more suitable for XP. Furthermore, risks maybe cause 
losses in multiple aspects of a software project. In our method, we 

use scope, schedule and product qua
lity as criterions of losses. 
Scope loss means that development activities are not toward the 

software system™s goals. Schedule loss means that the release is 

postponed. Product quality loss means that the product cannot 

fulfill the needs of functions and performance. 
Table 1. XP risk taxonomy 
Risk Type Risk Item Description 
Unstable story 
Story is volatile because of 
the volatile environment 
Requirements Risks Vague story 
Story is unclear in business 
goals or for system design 
Size 
Wrong estimation of story 
size 
Estimation 
Risks Team 
productivity 
Wrong estimation of team 
productivity 
Architecture conflict How to combine new 
stories into existent 

architecture Technology 
Risks Difficult implementation 
How to implement stories 
Personnel Risks Customers 
Customers are not domain 
experts in business  We use the qualitative risk estimating method provided in [27]. 
The degrees of ﬁLowﬂ, ﬁMediumﬂ and ﬁHighﬂ are used as the 

description for the probability and loss of risks, and then the Risk 

Exposure (RE) is defined according to Table 2.  Table 2. A qualitative method for risk assessment 
Probability Risk Exposure 
Low Medium High 
Low 
Minor Significant Critical 
Medium 
Significant Critical Unacceptable 
Loss High Critical Unacceptable Unacceptable 
 A release plan may have multiple risks. To compare differences 
among feasible release plans, RE should be accumulated 

according to the type of loss. Based on existent methods [27], we 

present a method to combine multiple risks by scores. Developers 

may use the score table (refer to Table 3) to accumulate RE, 

according to scope, schedule and product quality losses, 

respectively. The scores give a straight way for comparing 

multiple release plans. The risks, business value and needed 

efforts of each feasible releas
e plan are then submitted to 
stakeholders to help them make decisions. Table 3. Score for risk exposure 
Risk Exposure Score 
Unacceptable 4 Critical 3 
Significant 2 Minor 1 
3.3 Making Decision and Adjusting Project Profiles During making decision, if every release plan always includes a 
type of risks whose score is very
 high, it means there are crucial 
defaults in the project profiles. Then developers must go back to 

check the project plan and negotiate with customers about the 

project profiles. The scores™ cr
iterion of high risks comes from 
historical projects™ data and fo
rmer iterations™ results of the 
current project. A release plan is selected based on the project 

progress and risks scores. For 
example, in early iteration, 
developers should choose the rel
ease plan whose scope risk™s 
score is higher for understanding 
the software system™s goals 
more quickly. When near the m
ilestone, developers should choose 
the release plan with low risks scores to ensure a useful system at 

the milestone point. Although it shows in our method that
 constructing feasible release 
plans, analyzing risks and maki
ng decision are necessary for per 
iteration, it does not mean that st
akeholders should execute every 
activity from the beginning during the development process. In 

fact, if stakeholders affirm the early results of analysis such as 

stories™ business value and risks, these data can still be used in 

latter iterations until the events happen which cause the changes 

of the early analysis results. 
4. RISK-DRIVEN XP PROCESS When the risk-driven method is applied in XP practice, the XP 
process becomes a risk-driven process. To help developers apply 
the risk-driven method for XP rel
ease planning easily, this section 
introduces a specific XP process with the risk-driven release 

planning method applied, as shown in Figure 4. The activities and their inputs, out
puts, and steps are defined as 
follows: Activity 1: Defining stories 
(1) Input: Project Profiles, New Stories (2) Steps: 
a. Constructing stories based on the project profiles 
b. Building test scenarios (3) Output: Stories, Test Scenarios Activity 2: Constructing
 feasible release plans 
(1) Input: Stories (2) Steps: 
a. Estimating stories™ value and size as well as available 
effort and analyzing stories™ dependencies 
b. Making a set of feasible release plans 
(3) Output: Release Plans 
Activity 3: Analyzing risks and making decision 
(1) Input: Release Plans 
(2) Steps: 
a. Analyzing risks in each release plan 

b. Comparing analysis results and making decision 
(3) Output: Adopted Release Plan (in the next iteration) Activity 4: Adjusting project profiles 
(1) Input: Results of Risks Analysis, Results of Acceptance Test 
(2) Steps: 
 a. Negotiating with customers and adjusting project 
profiles to mitigate risks 
(3) Output: Guides of Project Profiles Adjustment 
Activity 5: Iteration 
(1) Input: Adopted Release Plan (2) Steps: 
a. Coding and unit test (3) Output: Latest Version Activity 6: Acceptance test 
(1) Input: Latest Version, Test Scenarios (2) Steps: 
a. Testing and collecting customers™ feedback 

b. Collecting new stories a
nd information of iterations™ 
accumulative efforts (project velocity) 
(3) Output: Small Release 
 
Following the process, develope
rs organize their development 
orderly in accordance with the method described in section 3. 

When they plan a release (from Activity 2 to Activity 4), all 

techniques for constructing feasible release plans, analyzing risks 
and adjusting project profiles will 
contribute to a sensible release 
plan. Moreover, the developers have the chance to adjust the 

project profiles and improve their project process according to the 

feedbacks. 

 Activity 1: 
Defining stories
Activity 2: 
Constructing feasible 
release plans 
Stories
Activity 3: 
Analyzing risks and 
making decision
Release PlansActivity 4:
Adjusting Project 
Profiles
Activity 5: 
IterationAdopted Release Plan
Activity 6: 
Acceptance testLatest Version
Project Profiles --Scope, Cost, 
Schedule, Quality and so on
Small ReleaseBUGResults of 
RisksAnalysis
 Figure 4. Risk-driven XP process 
5. CASE STUDY The proposed method was applied 
to a Web-based application 
project in our organization for verifying its feasibility and 

effectiveness. A team in our 
organization had developed the supposed system. This team (B) pr
actised XP without any specific 
release planning method. To mini
mize the influences of personnel 
experiences, a group of people who had never been involved in 

the project was organized in a team (A) to develop the project 

again. The data were established as comparable as possible by 

assigning similar background of personnel according to team B 

(refer to Table 4). The project data were collected and compared, 

and the result demonstrates that 
the proposed method in the paper 
is feasible and can help developers improve their XP practices. 5.1 Data Collection and Analysis The background of the case is summarized in Table 4. Table 4. Background of the case 
Project Characteristics Description 
Type of end product  Web-based application 
Development tools JBuilder 9, JDK1.4, Tomcat4, 
Mysql 

Bugrat, Winrunner 
QMP2.5, Firefly2.5 
A Developer team size 
B 6 developers A Developers™ experience in XP B 1 experienced 5 novice A Developers™ experience 
in end product B 6 experienced A Developers™ experience in coding B 6 experienced A 4 Iterations B 5 A release plan™s information of 
risks, business value and effort 
needed is presented to stakeholders. Table 5 is an example of such 

information used by team A for an iteration. Based on the 

information, stakeholders negotiate with each other and make the 

release plan decision for the next iteration. Both objective and subjective data were collected from team B 
and team A. The objective data are from the organization™s CASE 

tools, such as defect tracking, project tracking, source code 

analysis and test suite tools. A
ll these data are shown in Table 6 
and Figure 5. Furthermore, we 
collected developers™ subject 
feedback in team A by a questionnaire. Some questions are 

designed for developers™ opinions about the proposed method in 
the paper. There are four selections for every question: ﬁVery 

goodﬂ, ﬁGoodﬂ, ﬁFairﬂ, and ﬁPoorﬂ. There also are some open 

questions in the questionnaire fo
r developers™ to express their 
viewpoints about the method freel
y. The team A developers™ 
subject feedbacks are summarized in Table 7. 
One of the characteristics of the development process of team A is 
that the number of story changes declines rapidly. It means 

developers and customers catch th
e scope and constraints of the 
system and reach a consensus more quickly. We compare the rate 

of story changes (the number of stories that change in each 

iteration / total number of storie
s), as shown in Figure 6. The 
results indicate a lower rate of story changes exists in later 

iteration in the development process of team A using the risk-
 driven method for XP release planning. The result also can 
answer the question ﬁWhy in the 
similar team productivity, more 
efforts are needed in the previous XP practice of team B?ﬂ Table 

6 shows there are much more story changes in late phrase of the 
team B. The story changes cause extra needless reworks. 
Developers also agree that the proposed method in the paper is 

helpful in negotiating the project™s scope and available resources. Table 5. An example of risks, business value and effo
rt information provided for customers™ decision making 
Risks Score 
Feasible Release Plans Scope Schedule Product Quality Total 
Business Value 
(%) 
Effort Needed 
(Hour) NO. 1 17 21 35 73 37 289 
NO. 2 24 19 27 70 33 312 
NO. 3 29 16 33 78 21 210 
NO. 4 11 23 29 63 20 247 
NO. 5 18 19 28 65 19 188 
Table 6. Project data 
Release No. 
No Data Collected Case 
1 2 3 4 5 
Total A 3 3 2 1 / 9 
1 Calendar time (weeks) 
B 3 2 2 2 2 11 
A 613 703 476 199.5 / 1991.5 
2 Effort (man-hour) B 609 638 423.5 399 467 2536.5 
A 21.89 26.5 19.52 8.02 / 76.9 
3 KLOC implemented in the 
last release  
B 13.22 11.99 15.46 20.71 21.6 82.98 
A 35.7 37.7 41.0 40.2 / 38.6 
4 Team productivity 
(loc/hour) B 36.1 38.0 39.7 40.9 40.9 39.1 
A 7 4 1 1* / 13 
5 Numbers of story changes 
after iterationB 5 4 6 5 3* 23 
A 11 9 10 6 / 36 
6 Numbers of stories 
implemented 
B 10 10 8 2 4 34 
A 0 1 0 0 / 1 
7 BUG numbers after the 
acceptance test 
B 0 0 0 0 0 0 
* Preserved for futu
re implementation Table 7. Developers™ subject feedbacks 
Feedback of developers
 The risk-driven meth
od is helpful in Very good
 Good Fair Poor Speeding up release planning 3 3 0 0 
Balancing project scope and available resources 4 2 0 0 
Controlling project progress 2 3 1 0 
30.7%
10.0%
39.9%
16.9%
11.1%
35.2%
6.3%
1.9%
4.8%
10.4%
16.8%
6.5%
7.4%
2.1%
0%5%10%15%20%25%30%
35%40%45%
50%Spikescodingproject
management
pre-release
test
refactorunit test
development
other
team A, 100%
team B, 100%
 Figure 5. Comparison of task efforts distribution between team A and team B 
 19%
11%
3%3%
12%
18%
15%
9%15%
0%5%10%
15%
20%

25%
1st iteration 2nd iteration3rd iteration4th iteration5th iteration
team A
team B
 Figure 6. Comparison of story change rate between team A and team B 
 5.2 Lessons Learned We got at least three benefits through the risk-driven method for 
XP release planning in this paper:   The risk-driven method for XP release planning is well-
defined for XP practice. It 
can help XP practicers make 
better release plan decision. 
 Identifying and assessing risks 
during release planning can 
improve stakeholders™ understa
nding of the system™s goals 
and developers™ capacity. Ba
sed on scope, estimation and 
technology risks, stakeholders
 may make a balance between 
the system™s goals and available resources, and ensure the 

software development process 
towards correct goals within 
the schedule and resource constraints.  The method improves negotiation between customers and 
developers. Developers can 
construct multiple feasible 
release plans and expose their risk levels. The groundwork 

for negotiation is established 
by these release plans and 
information of the risks when
 developers and customers 
choose suitable release plans for XP iterations. Also, we noticed some weaknesse
s in the method. For example, 
since one story may be included in multiple feasible release plans, 

risk data can be reused during th
e risks analysis phase. However, 
we do not have related 
reuse scheme yet. Actually, developers in 
the case study already advised the method would be more 

effective if there were some data reuse mechanism. 
6. CONCLUSIONS There are no detailed requirements and architecture design before the system implementation in XP practice. Release planning is the 

key for successful development wh
ere the scope and constraints, 
design, and implementation are c
onsidered synthetically in a 
software system. However, the va
gue techniques in traditional XP 
release planning often muddle XP
 practicers. And developers 
often hesitate in making a release plan and negotiating with 

customers about the implementation order of stories in iterations. In this paper, we put forward a 
risk-driven method for XP release 
planning. XP practicers can follow it to decide a suitable release 

plan and control the development process. The features of the  
 method can improve XP practices
. Firstly, multiple choices of 
feasible release plans are provided for stakeholders to enlarge the 

scopes of the developers and cust
omers™ negotiations when they 
decide a release plan for the next iteration. Therefore, 

stakeholders can avoid making 
a poor decision based on a single 
candidate release plan. Secondly, 
risks analysis can improve the 
ability of the stakeholders to understand the circumstance and to 

collaborate with each others [28]. In our method, the scores of 

scope, schedule and product quality ri
sks provide clear criteria for 
stakeholders™ consensus when they are making release plans 

choice. The comparable risks™ scores, which differ from 

unstructured risks analysis method in traditional XP practice, 

reduce problems when release plans are negotiated. Thirdly, the 

method will make out of a risk-dri
ven XP process for developers 
to guide their XP practice. Furt
hermore, the method not only can 
be used for XP iterations, but al
so for long-time plans such as 
milestone plans and/or even soft
ware life cycle development with 
adaptive planning method. This ge
neral framework of the method 
suggests that it could also be 
used in other IID methods to 
improve their release planning. We have applied the method in a case study and the results show 
the method is feasible and effectiv
e. In the future work, we are 
going to study an approach of reusing risk analysis data and 

develop an integrated tool to improve the method™s usability. 
7. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research is supported by
 the National Natural Science 
Foundation of China under grant Nos. 60273026, 60573082 and 

the National ﬁ863ﬂ High-Tech Program of China under grant Nos. 

2004AA112080, 2005AA113140. Professors Qing Wang and Yongji 
Wang gave many constructive 
suggestions. Their works are highly appreciated. 
 
 
  8. REFERENCES [1] Macias, F., Holcombe, M., Gheorghe, M., A Formal 
Experiment Comparing Extreme Programming with 
Traditional Software Construction, Proceedings of the 
Fourth Mexican International Conference on Computer Science (ENC™03)
, 2003. [2] Abrahamsson, P., Koskela, J., Extreme Programming: A Survey of Empirical Data from a Controlled Case Study, 

Proceedings of the 2004 International Symposium on 
Empirical Software Engineering (ISESE™04)
, 2004. [3] Layman, L., Williams, L., Cunningham, L., Motivations and 
Measurements in an Agile Case Study, 
Proceedings of the 
Workshop on Quantitative Techniques for Agile Processes 
(QUTE-SWAP ™04)
, 2004. [4] Sommerville, I., 
Software Engineering, 6th edition, Addison-Wesley, 2000. 
[5] Beck, K., Fowler, M., 
Planning Extreme Programming, Addison-Wesley, 1st edition, 2000. 
[6] Paetsch, F., Eberlein, A., Maurer, F., Requirements 
Engineering and Agile Software Development, 12th IEEE International Workshops on Enabling Technologies 
(WETICE 2003)
, 2003, 308-313. [7] Orr, K., Agile Requirements: Opportunity or Oxymoron?. 
IEEE Software, 21, 3 (2004), 71-73. [8] Neill, C. J., The Extreme Programming Bandwagon: 
Revolution or Just Revolting?. 
IEEE IT Professional, 5, 5 (2003), 62-64. [9] Nawrocki, J., et al., Extreme Programming Modified: Embrace Requirements Engineering Practices,
 Tenth International IEEE Conference on Requirements 
Engineering, 2002. [10] Rand, C., Eckfeldt, B., Aligning Strategic Planning with Agile Development: Extending Agile Thinking to Business 
Improvement, Proceedings of the Agile Development 
Conference (ADC™04)
, 2004. [11] Cao, L., et al. How Extreme does Extreme Programming 
Have to be? Adapting XP Practices to Large-scale Projects. 

Proceedings of the 37th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2004. [12] Larman. C., 
Agile Iterative Development A Management™s Guide, Pearson Education, 2004. [13] Lehman, M. M., Ramil, J. F.,
 Rules and Tools for Software Evolution Planning and Management, Annals of Software 
Engineering, Vol 11, 2001,15-44. [14] Jung, HW. Optimizing Value and Cost in Requirements Analysis.
 IEEE Software, 15, 4(1998), 74- 78. [15] Karlsson, J., Ryan, K., A Cost-Value Approach for 
Prioritizing Requirements. 
IEEE Software, 14, 5(1997), 67-74. [16] Tran, T., Sherif, J.S., Quality Function Deployment (QFD): 
an effective technique for requirements acquisition and reuse, 2nd IEEE Software Engineering Standards Symposium, 1995. [17] Moisiadis, F., The fundamentals 
of prioritising requirements. 
(Web) Proceedings of Systems Engineering/Test and 

Evaluation conference (SETE2002)
. 2002. [18] Wiegers, K., 
Software Requirements, Microsoft Press, 2003. [19] In, H., Olson, D., Rodgers, T., Multi-Criteria Preference Analysis for Systematic 
Requirements Negotiation, IEEE International Computer Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC 2002)
, 2002, 887-892. [20] Carlshamre, P., Sandahl, K., Lindvall, M., Regnell, B., Dag, Johan N., An Industrial Survey of Requirements 

Interdependencies in Software Product Release Planning.   [21] Jackson, A., et al., Behind the Rules: XP Experiences. 
Proceedings of the Agile Development Conference (ADC
04), 
2004. [22] Glass, L. R., Extreme Programming: The Good, the Bad, and the Bottom Line,
 IEEE SOFTWARE, 18, 6 
(2001), 112-113. [23] Karlsson, J., Wohlin, C., Re
gnell, B., An Evaluation of Methods for Prioritizing Software Requirements, 
Information and Software Technology, 39, 14-15 (1998), 938-947. [24] Carr, M. J. Konda, S. L., Monarch, I., Ulrich, F. L and Walker, C. F., 
Taxonomy-Based Risk Identifcation, Software Engineering Institute, technical Report, CMU/SEI-93-TR-6, 
1993. [25] Simmons, E., Requirements Triage: What Can We Learn from a ﬁMedicalﬂ Approach?, 
IEEE  Software, 21, 4 (2004), 86-88. [26] Greer, D., Bustard, David W., Towards an Evolutionary 
Software Delivery Strategy ba
sed on Soft Systems and Risk 
Analysis. 
IEEE symposium on Engineering of Computer Based Systems, 1996, 126-133. [27] Boehm, B., Tutorial: Software Risk Management, IEEE Computer Society Press, 1989. 
[28] Boehm, B., Turner, R., Using Risk to Balance Agile and 
Plan-Driven Methods, IEEE computer, 36, 6(2003), 57-66.  