 Balancing Collaboration and Discipline in Software Development Processes Andréa Magalhães Magdaleno
1,21COPPE/PESC - System Engineering and Computer Science Program - UFRJ 
PO Box 68511, 21945-970, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil - +55 21 2530-8088 
2NP2Tec - Research and Practice Group in Information Technology - UNIRIO 
andrea@cos.ufrj.br ABSTRACTNeither traditional, agile or free/open software development models 
can be effective to all projects contexts. We claim that collaboration 
and discipline can be the driver to tailor software development 
processes to meet projects and organizations needs. This work 
proposes that process tailoring can be conducted through a context 
management approach. 
Categories and Subject DescriptorsD.2.9 [Software Engineering
]: Management Œ 
software process 
models.General TermsManagementKeywords
Software development processes, process tailoring, free/open 
source software, agile methods, collaboration, context management. 
1.INTRODUCTION 
Traditional, agile and free/open source software (FOSS) 
development models have the same goal: to improve software 
development, but they adopt different approaches. Traditional 
development, which is typically exemplified by maturity models, 
such as CMMI, seeks for predictability, stability and reliability [6], 
and is characterized by its orientation to planning and the emphasis 
on well-defined processes. Agile development, observed in Extreme 
Programming and Scrum, tries to quickly add value to business and 
adapt to changes [3]. In FOSS, the main objective is to guarantee 
users™ freedom, working according to the bazaar metaphor [10], 
where projects are collaboratively developed. Although a lot of 
variation inside these categories exists, in general, each of them has 
important characteristics and has impacted software development. 
Software organizations engage in a wide variety of projects with 
different characteristics, where traditional, agile and FOSS models 
are usually perceived as alternatives, but none of them will fulfill 
all requirements of a specific project or organization. Approaches 
that balance the underlying concepts in these different development 
models are necessary [4]. This need can be observed through the 
growth of processes tailoring by organizations, while decreasing the 
number of organizations that follow a reference model in a 
completely prescriptive manner. 
In this scenario, the research question investigated in this work is: 
how to tailor development processes, according to projects and 
organizations needs (context) considering collaboration and 
discipline as main drivers. The expected benefits are: increase the 
productivity of tailoring processes (reduction of the effort required 
to perform it), enhancing the quality and adequacy of processes 
generated, and reduce the risk of the resulted process not being 
adequate and used in practice. 
2.RELATED WORK 
According to the results obtained through a systematic review [7], 

several researchers have investigated the possibility of 
reconciliation among traditional, agile, and FOSS models. In 
general, the existing proposals involve the comparison and 
combination of the practices suggested by different models, aiming 
to produce a new hybrid one. 
However, the complexity of software development and the variety 
of existing methods make the task of comparing them, arduous and 
inaccurate. This kind of software development models combination 
limits the potential for synergy among them, possibly resulting in 
an incomplete method, where it is no longer possible to ensure that 
the resulting process actually has the desired characteristics. 
Boehm and Turner´s proposal [4] suggest the risk analysis of the 
project characteristics as a way to select the project adequate 
method. This proposal has similarities with this research work, but 
it focuses only on agile and traditional, without considering FOSS 
development. We also changed the focus from agility to 
collaboration aiming to go beyond the reconciliation of models. 
3.COLLABORATION AND DISCIPLINE 
Discipline refers to plan and direct process during design phase, 
while collaboration focuses on people interaction during process 
execution. Both are complementary and essential in any project, but 
in different proportions, depending on project characteristics.  
For a balanced mix between collaboration and discipline, it is 
necessary to understand how these aspects vary and distinguish the 
software development models. Regarding collaboration, we can 
consider the different levels of formality in communication, 
coordination, awareness and memory [8]. Regarding discipline, 
software models vary on emphasis and form of their processes. The 
traditional development is characterized by an emphasis on well-
defined and continuously improved processes. Both agile and 
free/open development use no description or explicit modeling of 
the process adopted. Instead, they deal with a set of general 
principles to guide the development. 
In order to explicit the collaboration and discipline, some 
instruments can be considered. To understand the 
collaboration
existing among 
people
 in software projects, 
social networks
 [2] 
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 
otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 
requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 
ICSE '10, 
May 2-8, 2010, Cape Town, South Africa  
Copyright © 2010 ACM 978-1-60558-719-6/10/05 ... $10.00 
331 appears as a promising path. A social network consists of a finite 
set of actors and the relationships among them. We can find several 
works on social network visualization and analysis, that points to 

social networks potential to explain how the collaboration occurs 
within a group and can help to calibrate the level of collaboration 
desired [11]. The 
discipline can be measured by regulating the 
level of control and formalism of 
processes
.Process lines 
[12] 
represent an important instrument due to its flexibility to support 
process tailoring and the regulation of the level of formalism. A 
process line can be understood as a set of processes in a particular 
domain or for a particular purpose, having common characteristics 
and built based upon common, reusable process assets [12]. 
Collaboration and discipline vary during all software development 
lifecycle. It is impossible to predict, as project starts, a process 
appropriate to all situations. Therefore, process tailoring must be 
continuously executed, considering the process enactment context.  
4.PROPOSED SOLUTION  
The proposed solution is to tailor software processes, considering 
projects and organizations specific needs for collaboration and 
discipline, through the use of a context management approach. 
Context is a complex description of the knowledge shared on 
physical, social, historical and other circumstances where actions or 
events happen in the real world [5].  
Two scenarios of context information use were selected. The first 
scenario is the activity of a project manager in defining a process 
for a new project. Scenario 2 consists of the activity of monitoring 
the project progress. These scenarios were chosen, based on 
literature and author™s experience, because they represent important 
moments, where project manager must be provided with 
information to make decisions about the project future. 
During scenarios execution, it is intended to offer an integrated 
visualization of similar contexts, of the process customized to the 
project, of the process actually executed, and of project social 
networks. These visualizations will help to increase project team 
awareness about the current state of collaboration and discipline.  
A computing infrastructure is being designed to support these ideas. 
In this infrastructure, context information may be gathered from 
different data sources and combined to tailor a software 
development process that balances collaboration and discipline to 
the development project. During project execution other context 

information would be generated and captured, thus collaboration 
and discipline balance could be continuously reviewed and updated. 
5.RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
As a starting point to establish relevant context information for 
software domain, Araujo et al. [1] suggest nine dimensions. We are 

particularly interested in organization, project and team dimensions. 
The former two dimensions are especially important considering 
that processes tailoring are realized in these two levels [9], and the 
team dimension is also relevant to our focus on collaboration. 
For each of these dimensions, it is possible to think about a set of 
context information, but to determine which is relevant may not be 
a trivial activity. Some examples of context information are: 
organizational structure, organizational culture, knowledge 
management, problem size, client relationship, requirements 
stability, team experience, group working experience and team 
proximity. This initial set of context information has been obtained 
from literature review and author™s experience. 
The research methodology of this work also includes the construct 
of a software process line, considering the development models. In 
addition, it is also important to investigate alternatives to implement 

the balance between collaboration and discipline. 
6.CONCLUSION 
The first result achieved in this research work was the 

characterization of software development models reconciliation, by 
conducting a systematic review of the literature. Another result 
obtained was the investigation of context representation models. 
The initial set of context information relevant to software 

development has been obtained and we intend to expand and 
validate this list through a survey with specialists (in academy and 
industry). In addition, the approach to link process line and social 
networks through context management has been detailed. Finally, 
the guidelines to identify the collaboration patterns in social 
networks were established [11]. 
Currently, this work is in the phase of designing the architecture of 
the proposed infrastructure. It includes: a social network module to 
offer collaboration analysis; a process line module to process line 
tailoring and visualization; a context management module 
composed by mechanisms to capture, store, retrieve, and visualize 
the context; and the balance module with the reasoning, to indicate 
the adequate mix of collaboration and discipline.  
Finally, all this solution should be validated to verify: the 
possibility to obtain and present the context information; if context 
information will be helpful in process tailoring; and if resulted 
process contributes to project success. This validation includes the 
conduction of some experimental studies, like case studies. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
This work is funded by CNPq under process nº. 142006/2008-4. 
REFERENCES[1] Araujo, R.M., et al. 2004. Context Models for Managing 
Collaborative Software Development Knowledge. 
Int.Workshop on Modeling and Retrieval of Context 
, 61-72. 
[2] Barabasi, A.L. 2003. 
Linked: How Everything Is Connected 
to Everything Else and What It Means for Business, Science, 
and Everyday Life
. Plume, Cambridge. 
[3] Beck, K., et al. 2001. Manifesto for Agile Software 
Development.  http://agilemanifesto.org/. 
[4] Boehm, B. and Turner, R. 2003. 
Balancing Agility and 
Discipline: A Guide for the Perplexed
. Addison-Wesley. 
[5] Brezillon, P. 1999. Context in problem solving: a survey. 
Knowledge Engineering Review 14
, 1, 47-80. 
[6] Chrissis, M.B., et al. 2006. 
CMMI: Guidelines for Process 
Integration and Product Improvement
. Addison-Wesley. 
[7] Kitchenham, B. 2004. 
Procedures for Performing Systematic 
Reviews. Technical report, Keele University. 
[8] Magdaleno, A.M., et al. 2009. A Maturity Model to Promote 
Collaboration in Business Processes. 
Int. J. of Business 
Process Integration and Management  4
, 2, 111-123. 
[9] Pedreira, O., et al. 2007. A systematic review of software 
process tailoring. 
Software Engineering Notes 32
, 3, 1-6. 
[10] Raymond, E.S. 2001. 
The Cathedral & the Bazaar
. O'Reilly. 
[11] Santos, T.A.L., et al. 2010. Identifying Collaboration 
Patterns in Software Development Social Networks. 
Infocomp - Journal of Computer Science
 (to appear). [12] Washizaki, H. 2006. Building Software Process Line 
Architectures from Bottom Up. In 
Product-Focused 
Software Process Improvement
. 415-421.332