 What You Always Wanted to Know About Agile  
Methods But Did Not Dare to Ask
Frank Maurer 
University of Calgary 
2500 University Drive NW 
Calgary, Alberta, T2N 1N4, Canada 
+1-403-220-3531 
maurer@cpsc.ucalgary.ca 
Grigori Melnik 
University of Calgary 
2500 University Drive NW 
Calgary, Alberta, T2N 1N4, Canada 
+1-403-210-9710 
melnik@cpsc.ucalgary.ca 
 
 ABSTRACT
 A fleet of emerging agile methods is both gaining popularity and 
generating lots of controversy. Real-world examples argue for 

(e.g. [4]) and against (e.g. [6]) agile methods. Several leading 

software engineering experts suggest that synthesizing the two 

(agile with traditional) may provide developers with a 

comprehensive spectrum of methods (e.g. [1], [2], [5]). This high-

level overview tutorial provides background to understand how 

agile teams are trying to solve modern software development 

issues.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors
 D.2.9 [
Software Engineering
]: Management Œ 
Life Cycle, 
Productivity, Programming Teams, Software Process Models. 
General Terms
 Management, Performance, Design, Economics 
Keywords
 Agile methods, eXtreme Programming, Scrum, Agile modeling, 
DSDM, Crystal, Lean 
1. AGILITY VS. TAYLORISM 
The principles of software engineering life cycles formulated by 

Waterfall methodology and its variants promote Tayloristic 

principles and strong conformance to a plan through upfront 

requirements gathering and upfront systems design. They also 

encourage strict Tayloristic division of labor and the use of role-

based teams (of business analysts, system architects, 

programmers, testers etc.) We argue that these factors plus the 

reliance on repeatability of the process are the main reason 

Tayloristic methods are failing in software development [3]. We 

further provide a detailed comparison of agile methods vs. 

Tayloristic methods. 
2. MAIN AGILE PRACTICES 
A brief overview of the main practices of individual methods 

(including eXtreme Programming, Scrum, Agile Modeling, 
DSDM, Crystal, Lean Programming) is given. In order to 
highlight agile methods strengths and limitations, some empirical 

evidence is presented and analyzed. 
3. DÉJÀ VU 
Participants will likely recognize that most ideas behind agile 

methods are not new (e.g., software inspections were introduced 

in 1970s, rapid prototyping Œ in 1980s). We will show how the 

conceptual foundation of agile methods and the way individual 

practices melted together, enhance these ﬁolderﬂ practices and 

exhibit a competitive advantage. 
4. CROSSING THE CHASM 
Participants will discuss what is needed for agile methods to cross 

the chasm from early adopters to the mainstream of software 

development. Among other topics, the tutorial addresses issues of 

knowledge sharing, project management, and social implications 

of agile methods. 
5. AUDIENCE 
This tutorial is aimed at developers, managers, QA specialists, 

business customers and academics who are new to agile met
hods 
and who would like to acquire basic knowledge of underlying 

agile values, principles and practices as well as to discuss Œ 

from a business perspective Œ the benefits of and issues with 

applying agile approaches. No prior experience with agile 

methods needed. 
6. SUMMARY 
Since all problems are different, all solutions and processes are 

situational. They depend on the context of the project and on the 

environment. Agile methods help to su
cceed in 
unpredictable 
environments, which are the reality today. They do it by 

encouraging continual realignment of development goals with the 

needs and expectations of the customer. Agile methods 

concentrate on significantly improving communications and 

interactions among all stakeholders, promote constant feedback, 

focus on ﬁclean code that worksﬂ, transparency, and merciless 

testing to achieve higher quality. 
7. PRESENTERS™ PERSONAL PAGES 
http://ebe.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/Frank.Maurer/ 
http://sern.ucalgary.ca/~melnik 
 Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

ICSE™05
, May 15Œ21, 2005, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 
ACM 1-58113-963-2/05/0005. 
   8. REFERENCES 
[1] Boehm, B. Get Ready for Agile Methods, with Care. 
IEEE Computer
, 35, 1 (Jan. 2002), 64-69. 
[2] Boehm, B. and Turner, R. 
Balancing Agility and Discipline: 
A Guide for the Perplexed
. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 
2004. [3] 
Chaos Report
. The Standish Group, West Yarmouth, MA, 
1995, 1997, 1999, 2001, 2003. [4] Highsmith, J. and Cockburn, A. Agile Software 
Development:  The Business of Innovation. 
IEEE Computer,
 34, 9 (Sep. 2001): 120-122. 
[5] Humphrey, W. Comments on eXtreme Programming. IEEE 
Computer Society Dynabook.  Online, retrieved Jan 23, 2005 

from 

http://computer.org/software/dynabook/HumphreyCom.htm 
[6] Rakitin, S. Letters to the Editor. 
IEEE Computer, 34, 12
 (Dec. 2001): 4. 
 