 Agile Methods: Crossing the Chasm   Frank Maurer Department of Computer Science,  University of Calgary Calgary, Alberta, Canada maurer@cpsc.ucalgary.ca   Grigori Melnik Department of Computer Science,  University of Calgary Calgary, Alberta, Canada melnik@cpsc.ucalgary.ca
  Abstract  An armada of emerging agile methods of software 
development (with eXtreme Programming and Scrum being the most broadly used) is both gaining 
popularity and generating lots of controversy. This 
high-level tutorial gives an overview of agile methods 
and provides background to understand how agile 
teams are addressing modern software engineering 
challenges. Analysis of empirical evidence is used to 
discuss strengths and limitations of agile methods in 
various contexts. The participants are introduced to 
the innovation diffusion models and environments, and discuss what is needed for agile methods to cross the 
chasm and move into the mainstream of software 
development.  1. Tayloristic foundations of software 
engineering  The principles of software engineering formulated 
by the Waterfall methodology and its variants are 
strongly rooted in the Tayloristic paradigm. Taylorism, 
or ﬁscientific managementﬂ Œ a movement in 
management theory introduced at the turn of the 20th 
century Œ represented amb
itious ideals: increased 
productivity through the application of quantitative analysis, scientific method and appropriate procedural 
modifications, and thereby reduced the cost of 
production while being able to increase the wage paid 
to the workers. Applied to software engineering, 
Taylorism promotes a strong conformance to a plan 
through upfront requirements gathering and upfront 
systems design. It also encourages strict division of 
labor and the use of role-based teams (of business 
analysts, system architects, programmers, testers etc.) 
These factors plus the reliance on repeatability of the 
process are the main reason Tayloristic methods are 
failing in software development [3]. 
 2. Agile movement  A more humanistic and collaborative approach to 
software development is ﬁagilismﬂ, which promotes 
ﬁindividuals and interactions over processes and tools, 
working software over comprehensive documentation, 
customer collaboration over contract negotiation, and 
responding to change over following a planﬂ [1]. It is 
recognized, that while there is value in the items on the 
right, the items on the left are valued more. Essentially, 
all agile methods encourage continual realignment of 
development goals with the needs and expectations of 
the customer. 
 3. Main agile practices  An overview of the main practices of individual 
methods (including eXtreme Programming [2], Scrum 
[3], and Lean Programming [5]) is given. Many of the 
practices are not fundamentally new (for example, 
software inspections were introduced in 1970s; rapid 
prototyping Œ in 1980s). A conceptual foundation of 
how these practices meld together and enhance these 
ﬁolderﬂ practices is discussed. Some empirical 
evidence is analyzed and 
the application of agile 
methods is elaborated by discussing their strengths and 
limitations in the context of existing research and 
industrial cases.  
Among other topics, the tutorial addresses the 
issues of knowledge sharing (in agile and Tayloristic 
teams), project management, quality assurance, and 
social aspects and implications of agile methods. The 
facilitators focus on value and people to help software 
development teams achieve higher velocity and deliver 
superior value to the customers. 
 4. Crossing the chasm  Several innovation diffusion models and 
environments that promote innovation and lead to 
sustainable leadership are 
presented. These include Rogers™ Technology Adoption Lifecycle [6], which 
defines five categories of adopters of innovation based 
on the normal distribution: innovators, early adopters, 
early majority, late majority and laggards. Moore goes 
further and argues for the existence of deep and 
dividing gap (chasm) that lies between early market 
success with visionaries and the mainstream 
acceptance by more pragmatic 
adopters [4]. To achieve market success with an innovation, the originator must 
find some way of leaping over this chasm (Figure 1) so 
that the process becomes mainstream. In facilitators™ 
opinion, agile methods are at the edge of this chasm 
from early adopters to the mainstream of software 
development. The tutorial participants will be engaged 
in a discussion of what contemporary actions are 
needed to cross this ch
asm and to supersede the 
outdated relic of Taylorism in software engineering. 
  Figure 1. Diffusion of Innovation.  5. Topical outline  The tentative roadmap includes but is not limited to 
the following topics: 
I. Agile methods overview: I.1. Motivation for agile methods: the current state 
of the industry; 
I.2. Introduction to agile methods Œ defining 
agility: chaordic perspective, collaborative 
values and practices, barely sufficient 
methodology; 
I.3. Agile methods vs. Tayloristic methods; 
I.4. Why agile methods may work; 
I.5. Sweet spots (for agile and Tayloristic); 
II. The big picture: crossing the chasm Œ getting to the 
mainstream. 
III. A survey of agile methods Œ practices/elements 
explained. IV. Knowledge sharing (agile vs. Tayloristic): 
IV.1. Implications of Media Richness Theory; 
IV.2. The role of externalised knowledge 
(documentation, experience factory etc.); 
IV.3. Continuous knowledge sharing. V. Agile project management: V.1.
 Business contracts; 
V.2.
 Team formation; V.3.
 Agile planning and estimation; V.4.
 Agile project tracking and coordination; V.5.
 Risk management. VI. Quality assurance: 
VI.1.
 Quality-as-value-to-some-person perspective; 
VI.2.
 The role of testing; VI.3.
 Traditional QA vs. agile QA; VI.4.
 Executable acceptance testing; 
VI.5.
 Test-driven development; VI.6.
 Dealing with para-functional requirements. VII. Initial empirical evidence. 
VIII. Conclusions.  7. Summary  Since all problems are different, all solutions and 
processes are situational and context-based. They 
depend on the context of the project and on the 
environment. Agile methods help to succeed in 
unpredictable environments, which are the reality 
today. They do it by encouraging continual 
realignment of development goals with the needs and 
expectations of the customer. Agile methods 
concentrate on significantly improving 
communications and interactions among all 
stakeholders, focus on ﬁcl
ean code that worksﬂ, transparency, and relentless testing to achieve higher 
quality. Yet agile methods are not a silver bullet and 
agile practices only work in context.  10. References  [1] Beck, K et al. Manifesto for Agile Software Development, 2001. Online: http://www.agilemanifesto.org 
[2] Beck, K. Extreme Programming Explained Œ Embrace Change, 2/e, Addison Wesley, Boston, MA, 2005.  
[3] Beedle, M., Schwaber, S. 
Agile Software Development 
with SCRUM, Prentice Hall, NJ, 2001. [4] Moore, G. Crossing the chasm. Harper Business, New 
York, NY, 1995. [5] Poppendieck, M., Poppendieck, T. Lean Software Development:  An Agile Toolkit
, Addison-Wesley, 
Boston, MA, 2003. [6] Rogers, E. Diffusion of innovations, 3/e. The Free Press, 
New York, NY, 1983.  