 Agile Methods: Moving towards the Mainstream  of the Software IndustryFrank Maurer Department of Computer Science, University of Calgary 2500 University Drive NW Calgary, Alberta, T2N 1N4, Canada +1-403-220-3531 maurer@cpsc.ucalgary.ca Grigori Melnik Department of Computer Science, University of Calgary 2500 University Drive NW Calgary, Alberta, T2N 1N4, Canada +1-403-210-9710 melnik@cpsc.ucalgary.ca  
 ABSTRACT A fleet of emerging agile methods 
of software development (with 
eXtreme Programming and Scrum being the most broadly used) is 
both gaining popularity and generati
ng lots of controversy. This 
high-level tutorial gives an 
overview of agile methods and 
provides background to understand how agile teams are trying to 

address modern software devel
opment challenges. Analysis of 
initial empirical evidence is used to discuss strengths and 

limitations of agile methods in va
rious contexts. The participants 
are introduced to the innovation diffusion models and 

environments, and discuss what is needed for agile methods to 

cross the chasm and move into the mainstream of software 

development.  Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.9 [Software Engineering
]: Management Œ 
Life Cycle, 
Productivity, Programming Teams, Software Process Models. General Terms Management, Performance, Design, Economics, Human Factors Keywords
 Agile methods, eXtreme Progra
mming, Scrum, Lean, Innovation 
Diffusion, Knowledge Sharing,
 Agile Project Management, 
Quality Assurance 
1. AGILITY VS. TAYLORISM The principles of software engineering formulated by the 
Waterfall methodology and its variants are rooted in the 

Tayloristic paradigm. Taylorism, 
or ﬁscientific managementﬂ Œ a 
movement in management theory introduced at the turn of the XX 

century Œ represented ambitious
 ideals: increased productivity 
through the application of quantitative analysis, scientific method 
and appropriate procedural modifications, and thereby reduced 
the cost of production while being able to increase the wage paid 

to the workers [8]. Applied to software engineering, Taylorism 

promotes a strong conformance to a plan through upfront 

requirements gathering and upfr
ont systems design. It also 
encourages strict division of labor
 and the use of role-based teams 
(of business analysts, system architects, programmers, testers etc.) 

These factors plus the reliance on 
repeatability of the process are 
the main reason Tayloristic methods are failing in software 

development [3]. 
We further compare Taylorism to more humanistic and 
collaborative philosophy of ﬁagilismﬂ, which promotes 

ﬁindividuals and interactions ove
r processes and tools, working 
software over comprehensiv
e documentation, customer 
collaboration over contract negotia
tion, and responding to change 
over following a planﬂ [1]. It is recognized, that while there is 

value in the items on the right, the items on the left are valued 

more. Essentially, all agile methods encourage continual 

realignment of development goals with the needs and expectations 
of the customer.  
2. MAIN AGILE PRACTICES An overview of the main prac
tices of individual methods 
(including eXtreme Programming [2], Scrum [3], and Lean 

Programming [7]) is given. Many 
of the practices are not new (for 
example, software inspections 
were introduced in 1970s; rapid 
prototyping Œ in 1980s). A conceptual foundation of how these 

practices meld together and enhance these ﬁolderﬂ practices is 

discussed. Some empirical evidence is analyzed and the 

application of agile methods is 
elaborated by discussing their 
strengths and limitations in the c
ontext of existing research and 
industrial cases.  Among other topics, the tutorial addresses the issues of 
knowledge sharing (in agile and Tayloristic teams), project 

management, quality assurance, and social aspects and 

implications of agile methods. Th
e facilitators focus on value and 
people to help software deve
lopment teams achieve higher 
velocity and deliver superior
 value to the customers. 
3. CROSSING THE CHASM Several innovation diffusion mode
ls and environments that 
promote innovation and lead to sustainable leadership are 

presented. These include Rogers
™ Technology Adoption Lifecycle 
    
 
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

ICSE™06
, May 20Œ28, 2006, Shanghai, China. 
ACM 1-59593-085-X/06/0005. 
  [9], which defines five categorie
s of adopters of innovation based 
on the normal distribution: innovators, early adopters, early 

majority, late majority and la
ggards. Moore goes further and 
argues for the existence of deep and dividing gap (chasm) that lies 

between early market success with visionaries and the mainstream 

acceptance by more pragmatic adopters [6]. To achieve market 

success with an innovation, the orig
inator must find some way of 
leaping over this chasm so that the process becomes mainstream. 

In facilitators™ opinion, agile methods are at the edge of this 

chasm from early adopters to the mainstream of software 

development. A discussion on wh
at contemporary actions are 
needed to cross this chasm and to supersede the outdated relic of 

Taylorism in software engineering, is to be held.  
4. TOPICAL OUTLINE The tentative roadmap includes but is not limited to the following 
topics: I. Agile methods overview: I.1. Motivation for agile methods: the current state of 
the industry; 
I.2. Introduction to agile methods Œ defining agility: 
chaordic perspective, collaborative values and 

practices, barely sufficient methodology; 
I.3. Agile methods vs. Tayloristic methods; 
I.4. Why agile methods may work; 
I.5. Sweet spots (for agile and Tayloristic); 
II. The big picture: crossing the chasm Œ getting to the 
mainstream. 
III. A survey of agile methods Œ practices/elements 
explained. IV. Knowledge sharing (agile vs. Tayloristic): 
IV.1. The Law of Diminishing Information; IV.2. Implications of Media Richness Theory; 
IV.3. The role of externalised knowledge 
(documentation, experience factory etc.); 
IV.4. Continuous knowledge sharing. V. Agile project management: V.1.
 Business contracts; 
V.2.
 Team formation; V.3.
 Agile planning and estimation; V.4.
 Agile project tracking and coordination; V.5.
 Managing releases; V.6.
 Iteration Zero and architectural spikes; 
V.7.
 Risk management. VI. Quality assurance: 
VI.1.
 Quality-as-value-to-some-person perspective; 
VI.2.
 The role of testing; VI.3.
 Traditional QA vs. agile QA; VI.4.
 Executable acceptance testing; 
VI.5.
 Test-driven development; VI.6.
 Dealing with para-functional requirements. VII. Initial empirical evidence. 
VIII. Conclusions.  5. AUDIENCE This tutorial is aimed at deve
lopers, managers, QA specialists, 
business customers and academics who are new to agile methods 

and who would like to acquire basic knowledge of underlying 

agile values, principles and practices as well as to discuss Œ 

from a business perspective Œ the benefits of and issues with 

applying agile approaches. No prior experience with agile 

methods needed. 6. SUMMARY Since all problems are different, all solutions and processes are 
situational and context-based. They depend on the context of the 

project and on the environment. Agile methods help to succeed in 

unpredictable environments, which are the reality today. They do 

it by encouraging continual rea
lignment of development goals 
with the needs and expectations 
of the customer. Agile methods 
concentrate on significantly improving communications and 

interactions among all stakeholde
rs, promote constant feedback, 
focus on ﬁclean code that worksﬂ, transparency, and relentless 

testing to achieve higher quality. Yet agile methods are not a 

silver bullet and agile practices only work in context.  
7. PRESENTERS™ PERSONAL PAGES Frank Maurer: - http://ebe.cpsc.ucalgary.ca/Frank.Maurer/
 Grigori Melnik: - http://sern.ucalgary.ca/~melnik
 8. REFERENCES [1] Beck, K et al. Manifesto for 
Agile Software Development, 
2001. Online: http://www.agilemanifesto.org [2] Beck, K. Extreme Programming Explained Œ Embrace 
Change, 2/e, Addison Wesley, Boston, MA, 2005.  
[3] Beedle, M., Schwaber, S. 
Agile Software Development with 
SCRUM, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2001. [4] Boehm, B., Turner, R. 
Balancing Agility and Discipline: A 
Guide for the Perplexed
, Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 
2003. [5] Chaos Report
. The Standish Group, West Yarmouth, MA, 
1995, 1997, 1999, 2001, 2003. [6] Moore, G. Crossing the chasm
. Harper Business, New York, 
NY, 1995. [7] Poppendieck, M., Poppendieck, T.
 Lean Software 
Development:  An Agile Toolkit
, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 
MA, 2003. [8] Rinehart, J.W. The Tyranny of
 Work. Academic Press, Don 
Mills, ON, 1975. [9] Rogers, E. Diffusion of innovations, 
3/e. The Free Press, 
New York, NY, 1983.  
 
 