 AHAA ŒAgile, Hybrid Assessment Method for Automotive, Safety Critical SMEs  Fergal Mc Caffery Dundalk Institute of Technology   & Member of Lero  Dundalk  + 353-42-9370522 Fergal.McCaffery@dkit.ie Minna Pikkarainen Lero, University of Limerick & VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland +358407539880  Minna.Pikkarainen@ul.ie Ita Richardson Lero Œ the Irish Software Engineering Research Centre University of Limerick +353-61-202765 Ita.Richardson@ul.ie ABSTRACT The need for software is increasingly growing in the automotive 
industry. Software development projects are, however, often 

troubled by time and budget overruns, resulting in systems that do 

not fulfill customer requirements. Both research and industry lack 

strategies to combine reducing 
the long software development 
lifecycles (as required by time-to
-market demands) with increasing 
the quality of the software de
veloped. Software process 
improvement (SPI) provides the first step in the move towards 

software quality, and assessments are 
a vital part of this process. 
Unfortunately, software process 
assessments are often expensive 
and time consuming. Additionally, 
they often provide companies 
with a long list of issues without 
providing realistic suggestions. The goal of this paper is to descri
be a new low-overhead assessment 
method that has been designed sp
ecifically for small-to-medium-
sized (SMEs) organisations wish
ing to be automotive software 
suppliers. This assessment method in
tegrates the structured-ness of 
the plan-driven SPI models of Capability Maturity Model 

Integration (CMMI) and Automotive SPICE
TM with the flexibleness 
of agile practices.  
Categories and Subject Descriptors Software and Software Engineering General Terms Management, Performance, Reliability, Security, Standardization. 
Keywords: 
Software Process Improvement, Agile Practices, 
CMMI, Automotive SPICE
TM, Assessment Methods, Safety-critical. 
1. INTRODUCTION Due to the nature of the final pr
oduct, many software industries are 
expected to produce high-quality software through the use of 

processes. For example, regula
tions within the medical device 
industry have existed for many years and the automotive industry is 

now moving in that direction. In the last decade, there been a 
significant growth in the production of automotive software Œ a 
growth which is expected to conti
nue Œ and this software must be 
developed faster and in a more cost effective way, but still in a 

quality environment. It is expected that the industry markets will 

require process maturity levels from companies to demonstrate the 

quality of their software. 
In many countries (Ireland and Finla
nd are the focus of this paper), 
there is a vibrant software indus
try with many small-to-medium 
sized enterprises (SMEs). The European Union definition states that 

a SME has less than 250 employees, turnover of less than 

•50million and is less than 25% owned by a non-SME. However, to 

survive and grow SMEs, must be aware of software opportunities. 

One such industry is the automotive industry. As software is 

becoming more safety-critical, automotive software suppliers need 

to aware of safety considerations
 such as those described in ICE 
61508 [22], ISO WD 26262 [24] and DIN 31000 [10].  
Assessments provide a valuable 
mechanism to start improvement 
initiatives towards achieving high quality software. The agile, 

hybrid assessment method for the automotive industry (AHAA) 

presented in this paper supports th
e integration of agile practices 
with the more traditional plan-driven practices that are associated 

with SPI in safety-critical compan
ies. The paper presents how this 
method was used within a SMEs so
ftware development organization and illustrates how ﬁgoal-basedﬂ
 improvements may be achieved 
through adopting a combination of plan-driven and agile based 

recommendations. Whenever automotive software is not safety-

critical it is feasible for the AHAA to recommend a combination of 

both plan-driven and agile based practices. However, in the case of 

safety-critical automotive software development (complying with 

ICE 61508 and ISO WD 26262) the AHAA will only recommend 

plan-driven practices. In section 2, process within automo
tive software SMEs is discussed. 
Section 3 presents the need for AHAA, the assessment method we 

developed. Section 4 describes its
 development, while Section 5 
presents the implementation of 
the assessment method within an 
SME, AutoSoft. In Section 6 we discuss feedback from the 

company, with conclusions 
presented in Section 9. 2. SOFTWARE IN AUTOMOTIVE SMEs According to [35] software was first introduced into cars in 1976 
and in recent years, there has been a substantial increase in 

automotive software. The number of 
electronic control units (ECUs) 
is increasing Œ consequently, more interfaces need to be developed 

between these ECUs. While much
 automotive software is not 
 Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit or 
commercial advantage and that copies 
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or 

republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 

permission and/or a fee. 

ICSE™08
, May 10Œ18, 2008, Leipzig, Germany. 
Copyright 2008 ACM 978-1-60558-079-1/08/05...$5.00.   safety-critical, for example, so
ftware within navigation and 
infotainment systems, safety-critical functions, such as braking, are 

becoming more software dependa
nt. Furthermore, the driver 
requires some safety-critical inform
ation, for example, the speed at 
which the car is travelling. While 
the driver can intervene in the 
execution of these functions, the increase in software dependence 

requires that operational safety
 must be accounted for when 
developing automotive software.   Figure 1 Œ Support processes for Electronic Systems and 
Software Development (Adapted from Schauffele and Zurawka, 
[39]) This has resulted in the imposition of safety regulations (for 
example, DIN 31000 within the automotive industry and many 

automotive companies have already faced challenges to develop 

complex software where the goal is to achieve high quality safety-

critical software components. Th
e implementation and improvement of software processes can be used to support the development of 

automotive software as illustrated in Figure 1. While core 

development processes are required, 
there is also a need for support 
processes such as configuration 
management, project management 
(including risk management),
 requirements management, 
subcontractor management and quality assurance. Due to the 

challenges of controlling the increased complexity that innovations 

bring, a HIS (Herstellerinitiativ
e Software) process assessments 
working group was ﬁfunded to establish a common approach for 

determining software capability/maturity of suppliersﬂ [18]. 

Consequently, there is an increas
ing requirement for the quality of 
software to be monitored and 
assessed throughout the development 
process.  2.1 Importance of the SME sector In Europe, and specifically in count
ries such as Ireland and Finland, 
where the researchers are based, th
ere is an increasing emergence of 
the small firm as a key component
 of the industrial profile of 
individual countries.  Information and Communications T
echnology is a growth sector 
which has been recognised stra
tegically by Government as 
important to the Irish economy. The success of the growth of this 

sector is attributed to a number of factors which include low 

corporation tax, an English speaki
ng workforce, the availability of a 
highly qualified and educated work
force, a strong indigenous firm 
base and deployment of EU struct
ural and cohesion funds to Ireland 
[12,13, 15, 44].  With 760 i
ndigenous software companies 
employing over 11,100 people, they 
provide 47% of employment in 
the Irish software sector [13].  
In Finland, software companie
s employ over 13,000 people [43]. 
Revenue in Finnish software co
mpanies increased at 2005 by 24.2 
% [41] and again in 2006 by 13 % [38]. In Finland, these increases 

can be attributed to both large and small software companies [41]. 

However, many SMEs are carryi
ng out sub-contract development 
and are supporting the needs of large embedded product 

development companies [30]. Evalua
tions have also shown that the 
critical success factor of the Finnish software industry will be 

support, increased know how and in
ternationalization, especially, 
among the SME sector [30].  
The increasing need for software in the automotive sector provides 
opportunities for SMEs to become software suppliers to the large 

automotive organizations. Our research has demonstrated that SMEs 

who wish to take up this opportunity
 need to demonstrate that their 
process is capable of producing high-quality software. Thus, they 

require a cost-efficient assessmen
t which supports their business 
requirements.  2.2 Use of SPI Models SPI initiatives can be based on 
various models such as the 
Capability Maturity Model (CMM) [31], more recently CMMI [7] 

or process standards such as ISO 15504 [23] and ISO 9001 [1, 42]. 

Implementation of changes identifie
d during SPI assessments enable 
organizations to reduce software
 development costs and time-to-
market [1,16, 42]. For example, 400 projects reported increased 

productivity and software developm
ent speed due to CMMI based 
improvement programs [16]. According to this study, 12% of the 

overall lead time in software product development and 49% 

reduction in defects was obtaine
d using CMM or CMMI based 
improvement programs. 
However, many compan
ies have refused to 
adopt the assessment part of these 
models as they tend to be too 
heavy and expensive for SMEs [14]. Furthermore, several 

organizations have adopted time 
consuming SPI programmes, the 
benefits of which will take a long time to be realized [17]. 
In the automotive sector, a challe
nge that faced the HIS process 
assessment working group was that each manufacturer had a 

different approach to evaluating suppliers™ capability/maturity [19]. 

For example, BMW and Porsche us
ed an internal questionnaire 
[19]. Based on the different requi
rements for a common assessment 
method, ISO/IEC TR 15504 [23] (S
PICE) has been adopted for 
supplier assessment within the HIS. From 2001 to 2006, HIS 

members have executed some 
200 ISO 15504 assessments [18]. 
According to [3] ﬁthe focus on software capability assessment has 

already provided significant business benefits for its use, but at the 

same time has highlighted the 
scale of the potential problem, 
particularly with suppliers of 
safety-critical embedded software 
system componentsﬂ. 
Automotive SPICE
TM is an initiative of the Automotive Special 
Interest Group (SIG), which is a joint special interest group of The 

SPICE User Group, and the Procurement Forum together with 

major automotive manufacturers [3]. One of the reasons behind this 

initiative is that the experience (gathered during assessments) 

indicates that there is a demand for an automotive specific guidance 

of the standard [19]. Automotive SPICE
TM consists of a Process 
Assessment Model (PAM) and a Pr
ocess Reference Model (PRM) [3]. The Automotive SPICE
TM Process Assessment Model is based 
on the ISO/IEC 15504-5 [23]. Thirty-one of the processes from 

ISO/IEC 15504 were selected for inclusion in Automotive 

SPICETM. Furthermore, from 2007, all HIS members will perform 
and accept only Automotive SPICE
TM assessments. Therefore 
 automotive assessments based on ISO/IEC TR 15504 will be 
replaced by Automotive SPICE
TM. The results of the assessments 
can be used for the identification of process improvements for a 

supplier as well as a criterion for supplier selection [3]. 
2.3 Suitability of Agile Approaches Agile approaches such as eXtreme Programming [4] and Scrum [40] 
have been increasingly used in companies as a way of addressing 

key problems in software developmen
t [25] such as: ﬁsoftware takes 
too long to develop, costs too 
much and has quality issues upon 
deliveryﬂ [21]. Although, agile soft
ware development practices have 
benefited some companies producing 
safety-critical software [11, 
46], Boehm and Turner [6] have argued that plan-driven approaches 

are better suited to these situati
ons. However, the way forward may 
be to combine suitable agile practices as part of a company™s current 

plan-driven software development activities [6, 33]. Although 

assessments are often characterized as a plan-driven technique for 

SPI and are rarely used within agile practices, Paulk [32] argues that 

ﬁAdopting the two methods (CMMI and agile) can create synergy, 

particularly in conjunction with other good engineering and 

management practices.ﬂ The first step in engaging in SPI is to assess the current state of the 
software development practices. 
A SPI path may be developed 
based upon a combination of this starting point and the business 

goals of the organisation [28]. Pro
cesses in SMEs must be catered 
for in a different manner than within large companies [37] as 

existing SPI assessment methods are very heavyweight and are not 

suited to the needs of SMEs. Furthe
rmore, they do not consider both 
plan-driven and agile practices. Small companies need specialized 

assessment methods because they do not have the same ability to 

invest in SPI as the bigger enterp
rises. However, they require high 
quality software and fast software production. [26].  
Organizational maturity indicators 
like CMMI levels, SPICE ratings 
or specific ISO standards have 
become important for software 
development. Customer organiza
tions often rely on them when 
selecting a supplier as the results of these assessments can serve as 

indicator of process maturity. At
 the same time, agile methods 
continue to gain popularity due to increasing speed and quality 

demands. It has been argued that the CMMI model is too heavy-

weight for software development 
projects adopting agile practices 
[36] and that its use would lead 
to an undesirable document-driven 
software development approach [9, 
20]. This presents a challenge to 
enable organizations relying on CMMI as an indicator for process 

maturity (which is supposed to tr
anslate into product quality) to also 
benefit from using agile methodologies like XP and Scrum. This paper presents how a light
weight assessmen
t method (AHAA) 
has been developed for the automotive industry. This method 

provides software development SM
Es an assessment of how their 
existing software development prac
tices will be required to change 
in order to become automotive software suppliers. The AHAA 

integrates the plan-driven SPI models of CMMI and Automotive 

SPICETM with agile practices. It has been specifically developed to 
provide a low cost way of introduc
ing software development SMES 
to the requirements of the automotive industry.  
3. NEED FOR AHAA One of the main goals of Lero 
(the Irish Software Engineering 
Research Centre) is to develop an
 automotive software development 
industry within Ireland. Additionally
, VTT (the Technical Research 
Centre of Finland) is interested in
 investigating the advantages that 
agile practices can bring to automotive software development. The 
Adept method [28] was previously
 developed to provide a light-
weight assessment of software pro
cesses (mainly against the generic 
SPI model of the CMMI [7], with some reference to ISO/IEC 

15504). In parallel to this, an agile assessment approach [33, 34] 

was developed to provide a way to identify agile based 

improvement solutions for Finnish 
software companies. The Adept 
method has now been integrated with this agile assessment 

approach, taking Automotive SPICETM process areas into account, 
producing AHAA. The overall objective is to encourage software 

SMEs to enter the automotive software supply market.  
AHAA enables software developmen
t organisations to gain an 
appreciation of the fundamental process areas from the CMMI
® and 
Automotive SPICE
TM SPI models through diagnosing strengths and 
weakness in their software devel
opment practices. It is different 
from other assessment methods as 
it also provides an organization 
with a combination of plan-drive
n and agile-based improvements. 
AHAA was designed to adhere to 8 of the 10 criteria outlined by 

Anacleto et al. [2], for the deve
lopment of lightweight assessment 
methods: low cost, detailed description of the assessment process, 
guidance for process selection, de
tailed definition of the assessment 
model, support for identificati
on of risks and improvement 
suggestions, conformity with IS
O/IEC 15504, no specific software 
engineering knowledge required fro
m companies™ representatives, 
and tool support is provided. Th
e two exceptions to the criteria 
outlined Anacleto et al. [2], are that no support is provided for high-

level process modeling and only the authors currently have access to 

method. AHAA also shares the fo
llowing requirements with Adept: 
improvement is more important th
an certification, a rating is not 
required, preparation time required 
by the company is minimised; 
assessment time is minimized, and 
companies should be enabled to 
select assessment in process areas that are most relevant to their 

business goals. While the focus of AHAA is to encourage software SMEs to 
become automotive software suppliers, the method provides an ideal 

opportunity to educate software SMEs in terms of generic SPI. 

Therefore, the assessment should not become ﬁa waste of timeﬂ if 

the company decided not to become an automotive software 

supplier. Consequently, AHAA provides automotive specific and 

non-automotive specific recommendations. The assessed company 

was supplied with feedback in relation to both CMMI
® and 
Automotive SPICE
TM process models which enables such 
companies to decide whether they wish to follow a CMMI or an 

Automotive SPICE
TM SPI path. Additionally, AHAA suggests agile 
based improvement solutions for automotive companies coping with 

high quality complex software development within the automotive 

business environment. AHAA provide
s the assessed company with 
a findings document presented in terms of CMMI
®, Automotive 
SPICETM processes and agile practices.  
4. DEVELOPMENT OF AHAA As AHAA is based upon relevant CMMI
® process areas, existing 
Adept questions were used as the foundation for the AHAA. 

Questions were added to enable 
coverage of relevant Automotive 
SPICETM processes and agile practices. Even though each 
assessment component adopts a CMMI
® process area name, it also 
contains questions providing 
coverage of Automotive SPICE
TM and 
agile practices.  
A key decision in the developm
ent of AHAA was ‚what process 
areas are most applicable?™. Process areas were included because: 
 A. Based on our previous research, they are process areas which 
provide a significant level of be
nefit to Irish SMEs software 
development organisations [5, 8, 29, 45]; 
B. They have been highlighted within automotive engineering 
literature as fundamental to the development of efficient 

software development [39]; 
C. They have process area counterparts included within the HIS 
subset of 15 process areas [19]; 
D. They were previously included in the Adept method [28]; 
E. They were previously included in the agile assessment 
approach [33, 34].  
Each of the CMMI
® process areas was analysed (See Table 1). 
Table 1. Suitability of CMMI® process areas for inclusion in 
AHAA CMMI® Process Area  A ? B ? C ? D? E ? 
Requirements Management Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Project Planning Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Project Monitoring & Control Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes 
Configuration Management Yes Yes Yes Yes  
Measurement & Analysis 
   Yes  
Process & Product QA 
 Yes Yes Yes  
Supplier Agreement Management 
 Yes Yes   
Requirements Development 
   Yes Yes 
Technical Solution 
  Yes Yes Yes 
Verification    Yes Yes 
Product Integration   Yes Yes Yes 
Validation 
   Yes Yes 
Organisational Process Focus 
     
Integrated Supplier Management 
  Yes   
Organisational Environment for Integration 
     
Organisational Process Definition 
     
Organisational Training 
     
Integrated Project Management 
     
Risk Management 
   Yes  
Decision Analysis & Resolution 
  Yes   
Integrated Teaming      
Organisational Process Performance      
Quantitative Project Management      
Organisational Innovation & Deployment      
Causal Analysis & Resolution      
 Table 1 illustrates that only three of the twenty-five process areas 
from the CMMI® model satisfied all five factors and these were 
therefore included in the first release of AHAA. As Configuration 

Management satisfied four of the fi
ve factors it was also included in 
this release. In addition to AHAA focusing on four CMMI
® process 
areas, related Automotive SPICE
TM processes and agile practices 
must also be assessed. Selection was as follows: 
Step 1
. Serially scan the chosen CMMI
® process areas against the 
following list of 15 HIS process areas and select related Automotive 

SPICETM processes:- 
 System requirements analysis; System architectural design; 
Software requirements analysis
; Software design; Software 
construction; Software integrati
on; Software testing; System 
integration; Software testing;
 System integration; System 
testing; Quality assurance; Configuration management; Problem 

resolution management; Change 
request management; Project 
management; Supplier monitoring. Step 2. Map relevant agile practices against the process area.  
As a result of performing these 
steps AHAA will provide coverage 
of 4 CMMI
® process areas, 5 Automotive SPICE
TM processes and several agile practices as illustrated in Table 2. To encourage uptake of AHAA assessment by software SMEs, on-
site interviewing is restricted to
 one day [28] thus minimising the 
time and cost associated with the assessment.  
Table 2. CMMI
®, Automotive SPICETM and agile linkages CMMI® Process Area HIS Automotive SPICE
TM Process  
Agile Practices  
Requirements 
management 
Software requirements 
analysis  

Change request management 
Stories; Product Backlog; 
Planning Game; Daily 

meetings; On-site customer; 

Self-organizing teams 
Project Planning 

Project 
Monitoring & 
Control Project management 
Problem resolution 

management 
Planning Game, Small 
releases, Tasks, Estimations, 

RetrospectivesUser Stories, 

Small Releases, Daily Stand 

Up Meetings Retrospective 
Configuration 
management 
Configuration management 
Continuous Integration  4.1 Scripted AHAA Questions Table 3 illustrates the breakdown of the scripted AHAA questions. 
When developing the interview questions we examined the base 

practices, checking the relevant in
terview questions from the Adept 
method to ensure coverage of 
their counterparts in agile and 
Automotive SPICE
TM. There is some commonality between related 
processes in CMMI
®, agile and Automotive SPICE
TM. However 
AHAA questions based solely upon a process within one model will 

not (in isolation) provide full cove
rage of this process within the 
other two models (this is illustrated in figure 2 for the project 

planning process).   Table 3. Breakdown of Scripted AHAA Questions 
AHAA Interviews No. of Adept 
(CMMI) Questions No. of New 
Questions No. of AHAA 
Questions Project Planning 
65 15 80 
Project Monitoring 
& Control 
36 17 53 
Requirements 
management
 23 37 60 
Configuration Management 
29 6 35 
Total No. of 
Questions 
153 75 228 
 4.2 Project Planning Within Adept 65 questions were used to provide coverage of the 
specific goals of the CMMI
® Project Planning
 process area. AHAA 
is more comprehensive in its cove
rage of Project Planning and has 
80 scripted questions for Project
 Planning (see Table 3). AHAA not 
only contains CMMI
® based questions but also 2 additional 
questions that are specifically related to the Automotive SPICE
TM Project Management
 process. Only the planning part of the 
Automotive SPICE
TM Project Management
 process may be mapped 
against the CMMI
® Project Planning
 questions. Five
 additional questions evaluate the company™s suitability to adopting an agile 

based approach to project planning, and 8 questions that are 

common for Automotive SPICE
TM and an agile based approach to 
project planning are also included. The key difference between 

plan-driven and agile-based project planning is that in the agile 

approach, planning is done iteratively during the software 

development life cycle [27]. Figure 2 illustrates that out of the 65 

scripted questions that are applicable to the CMMI model, 7 are also 

applicable to both the Automotive SPICE
TM model and agile 
practices, 32 are applicable to the Automotive SPICE
TM model, 19 
 are applicable from an agile based perspective, and 21 are only 
applicable to the CMMI model.  
  
 
 
 
 Figure 2. Breakdown of Project Planning Questions 
For example, estimating the scope of
 a project is an important part 
of project planning. The AHAA has 
15 scripted questions that are 
asked to gain an understanding of the company™s procedure for 

estimating the scope of a project (see Table 4).  These questions provide coverage of this topic in CMMI, 
Automotive SPICE
TM and agile. Six questions are asked which are 
only applicable in relation to agile
 practices and these questions are 
asked to determine if the scope of
 the project is estimated in an 
iterative manner and to gain an unde
rstanding as to who is involved. 
Two questions are asked that are 
based solely on the CMMI model 
and these are used to determine if
 consideration has been given to 
either adopting 3
rd party components or reusing existing 
components. Two questions are aske
d that are based solely on the 
Automotive SPICE
TM model and these are used to determine how 
the scope of the project was defined and what interfaces exist for the 

project. Three questions are applicable to CMMI, Automotive 

SPICETM and agile practices and they probe the size and suitability 
of tasks. A single question is 
applicable to both CMMI and 
Automotive SPICE
TM. This is used to gain an understanding of the 
boundaries of a project. One question which ensures that the task 

sizes are appropriate for regular
 monitoring, is common to both 
Automotive SPICE
TM and agile. Project Monitoring and Control, 
Requirements Management and Configur
ation Management questions were analysed in the sa
me manner, providing a list of 53, 
60 and 35 scripted questions respectively 
4.3 AHAA Stages  AHAA is composed of eight stages
 (see Figure 3). The assessment 
team consists of two assessors 
who conduct the assessment between them.  
Stage 1
 (Develop Assessment Schedule and Receive Site Briefing
) involves a preliminary meeting be
tween the assessment team and 
the software company wishing to undergo a SPI assessment. The 

assessment team discusses the main drivers for the company 

embarking upon an AHAA and establishes whether the company is 

interested in becoming an automotive software supplier. During 
stage 2
 (Conduct Overview Briefing
) the lead assessor provides an 
overview of AHAA for members of 
the assessed organisation who 
will be involved in subsequent st
ages. This session is used to 
remove any concerns that individuals may have. 
Stage 3
 (Analyse Key Documents
) provides a brief insight into 
project documentation. The primary source of data for AHAA is 
through a series of process area interviews conducted during 
stage 4. In this stage key staff members from the assessed organisation are 
interviewed. There are 4 interviews, one for each process area. 
Table 4. AHAA Questions for Estimating project scope 
Question CMMI Automotive 
SPICETM Agile  
How was the scope of work defined?  Yes  
What view do you have of the project 
overall scope (features that needs to be 

done)?   Yes 
How often is the scope of the project re-
planned and updated?   Yes 
How do you determine the boundaries of 
a project? 
Yes Yes  
How do you define the features for the 
overall product? Who is responsible? 
  Yes 
How do you prioritise the features for the 
overall product? How often is this 

updated?   Yes 
What features are defined in the next 
release, release after that etc.? 
  Yes 
Do you decompose the project into a set 
of tasks? (how often,
 for each release, for 
whole product)? 
Yes Yes Yes 
Who participates in the task definition? 
Who has responsibility? 
  Yes 
How do you decide on suitable tasks? Yes  Yes Yes 
What size are tasks decomposed to? Yes Yes Yes 
Are the tasks of a manageable size, to 
ensure that adequate monitoring is 

possible ?  Yes Yes 
Do you consider the acquisition of 3rd 
party components? 
Yes   
What interfaces do you have (both with 
sub-projects, suppliers and other parts of 

the organization) ? 
 Yes  
Do you consider the potential reuse of any 
products from this project? 
Yes   
 Each interview is scheduled to la
st approximately 1.5 hours. Each 
interview involves two assessors, and at least one representative 
from the company is present for each process area interview. 
Stage 5 (Generate Assessment Results 
and Create the Findings Report
) is a collaborative exercise between the assessors to develop the 

findings report using interview notes for each of the four assessed 

process areas. The resultant findings
 report consists of a list of 
strengths, issues and suggested actions for each of the process areas 
evaluated. Stage 6
 (Deliver the findings report
) involves presenting the findings report to participa
ting staff in the organisation. 
Stage 7
 (Develop a SPI Path with the Company
) involves collaborating with 
staff to develop a roadmap. This will provide guidance to the 

assessed company presenting practices
 that will provide the greatest 
benefit in terms of the company™s business goals. Companies 

wishing to become automotive suppliers are recommended to focus 

upon establishing working practices that will assist them in future 
Automotive SPICE
TM assessments. 
Stage 8
 (Re-assess the SPI Path 
and Produce a Final Report
) involves revisiting the assessed 
company approximately 6 months after the completion of stage 7 

and reviewing progress against the SPI path. The outcome of this 

stage is an updated SPI path and 
a final report detailing the progress 
that has been accomplished along with additional recommendations. 

This stage provides feedback and assistance to the assessed 

company after a period of time and also assists in compiling 

research material in terms of SPI experiences.  
  12  CMMI 
 Automotive SPICE 
Agile 7 25 5 2 21 8   Off-Site        On-site 
    
 
     1. Develop Assessment Schedule & Receive 
Site Briefing 
4. Conduct PA interviews
3. Anal
yse Ke
y Documents 
6. Deliver Final Re
port5. Generate Assessment Results &  
Create the final re
port 
7. Develop SPI Path with Company 
8. Re-assess SPI path & produce a 
progress report  
2. Conduct Overview Briefing 
 Figure 3. Stages of AHAA 5. AHAA IMPLEMENTATION  We implemented AHAA in an Irish
 software development SME, 
AutoSoft (a pseudonym). AutoSo
ft currently has 8 software 
development staff and works closely 
with its larger parent company 
in Denmark. However, AutoSoft
 develops non-automotive safety-
critical software and plans to enter the automotive sector in the near 

future. They want to understand th
eir current software development 
practices and the extent to whic
h these practices would have to 
change when entering the automotive software industry. They also 

sought a low-cost method to obtain guidance as to how they could 

deliver higher quality software in a more timely manner. AutoSoft 

was an ideal candidate for an AHAA.  
During stage 1 of the AHAA, the goals and schedule of the AHAA 
were determined, involving the a
ssessment team (2 people), the 
managing director and 2 project 
managers from AutoSoft. During 
stage 2 the lead assessor provided an overview briefing of the 

AHAA to the AutoSoft software de
velopment staff. The assessment 
team briefly inspecting a sample
 project plan, a requirements 
document, sample minutes from a 
project review meetings and a 
configuration management document 
(Stage 3). This enabled them 
to gain a basic understanding of 
documentation procedures within 
AutoSoft, which assisted the a
ssessors in developing additional 
questions for the process area interv
iews. All eight of the AutoSoft 
software development staff partic
ipated in stage 4 of the AHAA, 
with the assessment team interviewing 4 staff within each of the 

process area interviews.  
During Stage 5, held off-site, a
ssessment team wrote a findings 
report, listing strengths and issues for each of the 4 process areas. It 

combined plan-driven and agile 
based recommendations to address 
these issues which were based 
on the business goals that were 
highlighted in stage 2. The main
 business goal that emerged was 
that high quality software should be developed in a shorter time-

frame than was currently the case. The findings report was then 

presented to AHAA participants (stage 6).  
5.1 Project Planning Findings  The Project Planning process area 
contained more questions (80 
scripted questions) than any of the other process areas. Therefore, it 

was no surprise that the most st
rengths (10), issues (22) and 
recommendations (13) were produced for this process area (see 

Table 5). The action part of the table illustrates how plan and agile 

based suggestions (PPAct1-13) were
 provided to address each of the 
issues (PPIss1-22) that arose during the AHAA.  
Table 5. AHAA Project Planning Findings 
Strength   Description of Strengths 
PPStr1 
Evidence of high-level planning 
PPStr2 Project is decomposed into suitable tasks 
ŒﬁSplitting tasks into daily unitsﬂ 
PPStr3 Involvement of development sta
ff in developing project plans 
PPStr4 Known resources are allocated into the project plan PPStr5 Risk is considered during the planning phase 
PPStr6 Risks are identified on the critical path 
PPStr7 Good informal communication channels 
PPStr8 Understanding of interfaces and boundaries 
PPStr9 Efficient use of 3rd Party Components 
PPStr10
 Some evidence of component reuse  
Issue No. Description of Issues 
PPIss1 
No evidence of requirement
s in the Project Plan PPIss2
 Little evidence of the Project Plan be
ing updated e.g. to include change 
requests as the project progresses, scope etc. 
PPIss3
 Limited evidence of formal estimation approaches 
PPIss4
 Historical data is not used  
PPIss5
 Estimates based solely on knowledge/f
amiliarity of system components 
PPIss6
 Insufficient linkage between project budget and estimates 
PPIss7
 No usage of short iterations and milestones 
PPIss8
 The initial project plan does not contai
n the full set of resources required  
PPIss9
 Requirements are not always define
d in the initial set of resources 
PPIss10
 No use of continuous integration approaches 
PPIss11
 Fixed price projects Œ so no flexibility for planning Œ not based on any 
estimates 
PPIss12
 No systematic way of managing risk 
PPIss13
 No common risk list  
PPIss14
 Little evidence of mitigation at the planning stage  
PPIss15
 Little evidence of formal communication channels 
PPIss16
 Staff utilization load not properly unde
rstood e.g. how realistic is it to 
plan for an 7.5 hr day? 
PPIss17
 Knowledge and skills are not recorded and managed 
PPIss18
 Due to resourcing issues external sk
ills are sought rather than providing 
training PPIss19
 Reactive rather than planned approach to resourcing 
PPIss20
 Resources not always costed
 into the project plan PPIss21
 Resources tend not to be allocated in a timely manner 
PPIss22
 There is no strategy for component reuse 
Action 
No: 
Description of Actions Addresses 
Issue No: 

PPIss* 
Plan-
driven or 

Agile 
PPAct1 
Consider the use of historical data as 
input into the estimation process 
4, 5, 6, 11 Plan 
PPAct2 Consider the use of daily estimation 
procedures e.g. Make use of useful 

metrics 
3 Plan PPAct3 Plan on the basis of a shorter Œ more 
realistic (actual working time) day e.g. 

set aside time for ﬁskilling upﬂ etc. 
3,16 Plan 
PPAct4 Consider using incremental release 
delivery  
7, 10 Agile 
PPAct5 Perhaps use a senior member as an 
internal customer 
7 Agile 
PPAct6 Update the project plan iteratively 2 Agile 
PPAct7 Link requirements to the project plan 1 Plan 
PPAct8 Perhaps use Scrum product Backlog, 
sprint backlog and Sprint Planning e.g. 

Scrum would also assist with 

formalising communication procedures 
7, 15 Agile 
PPAct9 Consider the development of a risk 
management strategy e.g. include a 

common risk list and mitigations for 

risk items 
12, 13, 14 Plan 
PPAct10
 Consider developing a sk
ills database  17 Plan 
PPAct11
 Provide training opportunities for staff 
to skill-up  
18 Plan PPAct12
 Consider resources at the planning 
stage 8,9,14, 19,20, 
21 Plan PPAct13
 Consider strategy for the reuse of 
standard components 
22 Plan   As AutoSoft develops safety-critical
 software it is important that the 
software developed is traceable throughout the lifecycle and 

therefore this lends itself to the plan-driven aspects of the AHAA 

and therefore it is no surprise that 9 out of the 13 actions that were 

outlined as a result of the AHAA are plan-driven. The suggested 

plan-driven actions will improve the project planning areas of task 

estimation, requirements linkage, 
risk management, resourcing and 
component reuse.   As AutoSoft also wishes to improve the time-to-market of its 
software agile project planning re
lated actions were provided in 
order to improve this aspect. 
Therefore 4 agile actions were 
provided (PPAct4/5/6/8), see table 5. For example, the agile 

practices provided a systematic
 continuous planning procedure 
based on the time boxed iterations.  ﬁSoftware development life cycles need
 to be shorter in the whole 
automotive industry and it would be better if the whole company 

were involved in the change management processﬂ This was suggested by project memb
ers to assist them in keeping 
plans up-to-date and communicating them more systematically to 

the project stakeholders.  5.2 Project Monitoring and Control Findings The Project Monitoring and Control area was performed well 

(though informally) by AutoSoft producing 6 strengths, only 3 

issues and 6 actions from the AHAA (largely based upon the 53 

scripted questions).  From a project monitoring and cont
rol process perspective, 4 plan-
based and 2 agile-based recommenda
tions were provided as a result 
of the AHAA in order to address the 3 issues that were highlighted. 

The plan-driven recommendations were produced to address 

formalizing the project monitori
ng and control procedures of 
AutoSoft by tracking actual effort against planned effort and 

recording any deviations for futu
re reference. The agile-based 
actions encourage the usage of
 daily meetings and burn-down 
charts. Scrum practices were, 
for example, suggested as a 
mechanism to measure the project status, and to improve estimation 

and daily risk management in the 
software development projects.  ﬁThere is no formalized approach fo
r project monitoringﬂ ﬁthere 
are no metrics–it would be usef
ul to compare plans against 
results to understand how accurate the current estimation process 

is, at the moment, getting such feedback can be difficultﬂ 5.3 Requirements Management Findings The Requirements Management area 
was highlighted as an area of 
concern for AutoSoft. A representative from AutoSoft stated the 

following when asked about their requirements capture procedure: ﬁA list of requirements are provided
 by the parent company in the 
release document–we were not involved making this 

list–requirements produced by Aut
oSoft are our interpretation of 
these requirementsﬂ  This issue arises because AutoSoft currently applies a highly plan-
driven approach that does not involve direct interaction with the 

customer. In practice, this means that the customer requirements are 

defined by the parent company and delivered to AutoSoft in the 

form of a requirements docum
ent plus informal, ad hoc 
communications between the parent company and AutoSoft (see 

Figure 4). Even though, projects we
re generally well planned, the 
requirements were often at a high 
level and were not prioritized. 
Additionally, as the requirements are initially gathered by the parent 
company from the customer and this interpretation is then 
interpreted by AutoSoft there is a risk that incorrect requirements 

will be collected by AutoSoft. This
 causes a significant risk, as any 
misconception may not be highlighted until the customer provides 

feedback six months later, at wh
ich time six months may have been 
wasted developing the ﬁwrongﬂ product.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4. Plan-driven adopted by AutoSoft  
As a result of performing the AHAA on the requirements 
management process we produced
 3 strengths, 14 issues and 7 
actions (largely based upon the 60 sc
ripted questions) to address the 
highlighted issues.  AHAA provided 7 actions to addre
ss the 14 issues that were 
highlighted during the assessment 
of the requirements management 
process within AutoSoft. Five 
plan-based recommendations were 
provided to enable the company to improve their: requirements 

traceability; the quality of the requirements captured; handling of 

change requests (CRs); mechanis
m for ensuring that requirements 
records are updated. Additionally, two agile-based 

recommendations practices were 
provided. During the assessment 
analysis, it was found that custom
er requirement 
management and 
change request management are key challenges for the company.  
5.4 Configuration Management Findings Upon assessment of the Configura
tion Management process within 
AutoSoft using AHAA, 8 strengths, 
3 issues and 3 actions were 
identified (largely based upon the 35 scripted questions).  
Configuration management was generally a well applied process in 
AutoSoft. All work products we
re managed and controlled, 
although manually. The 3 actions that were suggested in order to 

resolve the 3 highlighted issues consisted of 1 plan-driven and 2 

agile-based suggestions. The plan
-driven suggestion encouraged AutoSoft to perform audits on the descriptions entered when items 

are changed in the Configuration Ma
nagement system to ensure that 
meaningful and standardized 
comments are always added. 
Additionally, we encouraged the 
usage of continuous integration 
and scrum as agile-based recommendations to improve the 

configuration management process in AutoSoft.  5.5 Summary of the Findings Upon analysis, the AHAA assessment revealed that AutoSoft may 
be able to significantly improve
 their software development 
practices by adopting a combinati
on of plan-driven and agile based 
recommendations. As AutoSoft devel
ops safety-critical software it 
is important to ensure that sufficient documentation is in place so 

that components may be traced throughout development and 

therefore plan-driven practices are required. However, as the 

company desires to increase its pr
oductivity, reduce the length of its 
Customer
Parent Company
Company A
Requirements
Document
Requirements
Document
Interpretation

Of 
Requirements
Design
Implementation
6 months
 software development lifecycle and become more competitive, 
AHAA suggests adopting a more hybrid approach. Twenty-nine 

recommendations were provided as 
to how AutoSoft could improve 
their software development 
practices, with 19 of these 
recommendations being plan-driven 
and 10 agile based. An assessed company can decide whether they will implement plan-driven 

recommendations only, agile ba
sed recommendations only or a 
combination of both.  For example, as a result of the AHAA recommendations we could 
amend some of AutoSoft™s curre
nt project planning, project 
monitoring and requirements management practices by combining 
both plan-driven and agile ba
sed recommendations. AutoSoft currently does not have an efficient estimation procedure in place 

and therefore we would encourage them to combine the plan-driven 

practices of making use of histori
cal data and planning on the basis 
of a shorter working day, and combining this with introducing daily 

stand-up meetings and burn-down char
ts (agile based practices) so 
that actual effort can be compared against planned effort on a daily 

basis. This will enable any deviati
ons to be monitored very closely 
and historical records of the actual task times may be recorded for 

future project estimation. This th
erefore will reduce the risk of both 
current and future projects.   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 5. Agile-based improvement suggestions for AutoSoft Figure 4 illustrated that requireme
nts management causes problems 
for AutoSoft. The AHAA recommendations enable this to be 

resolved through adopting a combination of plan-driven and agile 

based actions. For example, Au
toSoft may adopt plan-driven 
practices such as introducing re
quirements capture templates (to 
ensure that requirements are complete and verifiable) and 

developing a procedure for handling CRs, in addition to introducing 

the agile based practices of iterative software development cycles, 

backlog-based requirements databases, continuous
 requirements 
analysis and continuous requirements prioritisation with the 

customer and parent company (Figure 5).  
6. FEEDBACK FROM AUTOSOFT During the findings presentation, 
both management 
and developers agreed that the highlighted strengths and issues were an accurate 

reflection of company™s software development practices. Both the 

management and devel
opers of AutoSoft acknowledged that the 
AHAA recommendations were achievabl
e and if implemented they 
could bring benefit to both AutoSoft and the parent company 

(particularly as they both want to embark upon automotive software 

development in the future). As 
AutoSoft develops fixed price 
projects the AHAA improvement suggestions for increasing the 

quality of their software whilst decreasing their development time 

through adopting a combination of plan-driven and agile-based 
practices were of particular interest
. Furthermore, as AutoSoft is an 
SMEs, resource is a precious commodity and they welcomed the 

fact that the assessment did not require any preparation time from 

them.  
Senior management from Auto
Soft commented that the AHAA 
improvement recommendations were relevant and important to them for several reasons. First of all, they were satisfied that the AHAA 

provided them with realistic s
uggestions as to how customer 
satisfaction might be improved us
ing both requirements and project management. Secondly, the s
uggested movement towards 
incremental software developmen
t (encompassed regular iteration 
planning, daily team meetings and iteration reviews) will enable the 

company to respond better to cha
nge requests from the customer 
and the parent company. Additionally, AutoSoft™s future success 

depends upon being able to correctly estimate future projects. 

Adopting an incremental developm
ent approach combined with 
suggested plan-driven practices for 
sizing the effort of project tasks 
could enable the company to develop a capability for providing 

realistic estimates for future projects.  
The senior management from AutoSoft also stated that they 
intended championing these improve
ments and then rolling them 
out to their parent company so 
that the overall organisation could 
benefit from incorporating the new plan-driven and agile-based 

practices into their existing software development practices.  Following the AHAA findings presentation, AutoSoft 
representatives met internally to discuss developing a SPI path. 

They reviewed and prioritised all the AHAA recommendations, 

planning how they will be implemented in a new project (stage 7 of 

the AHAA). Having gone through this assessment cycle, senior 

management realised the importance of such assessments. 

Therefore, a criticism of the AHAA which they made was that they 

were only assessed 4 process areas. We
 have agreed to engage in an 
additional assessment involving othe
r software process areas (i.e. 
2nd release of AHAA). They also ha
ve requested that we re-assess 
their software processes within 6 months (perform stage 8 of the 

AHAA) so that they may obtain feedback in relation to their 

progress along their SPI path. This will also provide the assessment 

team with an opportunity to valid
ate their improvement suggestions. 7. CONCLUSION Automotive industries cope with th
e challenging demands of safety 
criticality and the increasing amount of electronic component 

software. This creates the opport
unity (especially for SMEs) to 
become software suppliers to large automotive companies. 

Therefore, SMEs need to adopt SPI
 approaches to assist them in 
improving the quality of software, the speed of software delivery 

and their ability to respond to change requests.  
Software process assessments can
 assure quality of development 
processes. Unfortunately, assessmen
ts are often too time consuming 
and expensive for SMEs. Another difficultly in adopting software 
process assessments is deciding which SPI model the company 

should be assessed against, as 
different manufacturers may adopt 
different SPI models and therefor
e have a different approach to 
evaluating the capability/maturity of a potential supplier. Both 

CMMI and SPICE are internationally
 adopted reference models for 
SPI. However, Automotive SPICE
TM has now been published to 
specifically meet the demands of automotive industry. In addition, 

agile software development methods
 have been shown to provide 
significant benefit in assisting orga
nizations to respond to changes, 
Customer
Parent Company
Company A
Product 
Backlog
Sprint Backlog
Continuous
Analysis
of 
Requirements

Change Requests

and Feedback
1-2 months
Design
Implementation
Testing
Integration
Sprint
Planning, 
Review
Design
Implementation
Testing
Integration
Sprint
Planning,
Review
Design
Implementation
Testing
Integration
Sprint
Planning, 
Review
–Daily estimation, monitoring, risk management
 to increase their software development speed and to increase 
customer satisfaction.  
This paper presented a lightwei
ght method for software process 
assessments which integrates CMMI, Automotive SPICE
TM and 
agile practices in an assessmen
t method called AHAA. The goal of 
AHAA is not to provide a certification rating but to provide a low-

resource assessment method which indicates to companies: the 

current state of their software processes; recommendations as to 

how they might improve; the status 
of their software processes both 
in terms of CMMI
® and Automotive SPICE
TM; and their suitability 
to becoming automotive software suppliers.  
From a research point of view AHAA enables both VTT and Lero - 
the Irish Software Engineering Research Centre to: 
 Gain an understanding as to whether existing software 
development practices within companies are more CMMI
® or 
Automotive SPICE
TM based;   Gain an understanding in relation to the strengths (profile) that 
both Irish and Finnish software companies possess 

particularly in relation to supplying software to the 

automotive industry;  
 Increase their knowledge of how
 to combine improving the 
time to market with the quality of safety-critical software;  
 Use some parts of AHAA within companies that are already 
following a path towards certification in CMMI or 

Automotive SPICE
TM but wish to use agile methods;   Use some parts of AHAA within companies that are already 
using agile methods but wish to follow a path towards 

certification in CMMI or Automotive SPICE
TM.  This paper presents how the AHAA was conducted in a safety-
critical software company. The company has since prioritised 

actions and are currently engaged in adopting a number of the 

recommendations as part of their so
ftware development practices. It 
also describes the 1
st release of the AHAA, providing coverage of 4 
CMMI® process areas, 5 Automotive SPICE
TM processes and 
relevant agile practices. In the future we plan to extend the number 

of process areas that may be assessed. We will initially extend the 

assessment to provide coverage of
 the remaining two process areas 
that are listed as being fundamental
 to the automotive industry [39]. 
These process areas will be Process and Product Quality Assurance 

and Supplier Agreement Management. The medium term aim will 

then be to provide coverage of each of the 15 Automotive SPICE
TM processes included in the HIS, with a long-term goal of providing 

coverage of all 31 Automotive SPICETM processes.  
8. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS This research is supported by 
the Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) funded project, Global Software De
velopment in Small to Medium 
Sized Enterprises (GSD for SMEs) grant number 03/IN3/1408C 

within Lero - the Irish Software Engineering Research 

Centre (http://www.lero.ie), the SFI
 Stokes Lectureship Programme, 
grant number 07/SK/I1299 and the ITEA Flexi project, funded by 

TEKES and Nokia Foundation in Fi
nland as a part of VTT, 
Technical Research Centre of Finland 9. REFERENCES  [1].
 Agrawal M, Chari K. 2007. Software Effort, Quality and Life 
Cycle Time: A Study of CMM Level 5 Projects.
 IEEE Transaction on Software Engineering 33: 145-155  [2].
 Anacleto, A, von Wangenheim. C.G, Salviano. C.F, Savi. R. 2004, ﬁExperiences gained from applying ISO/IEC 15504 to 

small software companies in Br
azilﬂ, 4th International SPICE Conference on Process Assessment and Improvement, Lisbon, 
Portugal, pp.33-37 (April 2004).  [3].
 Automotive SIG, The SPICE User Group, Automotive SPICETM Process Reference Model, 2007, available from http://www.automotivespice.com 
 [4].
 Beck, K. 2000. Extreme Programming Explained: Empbrace 
Change. Addison Wesley Longman 
 [5].
 Blowers, Rosario and Ita Richardson. 2005, The Capability 
Maturity Model (SW and Integrated) Tailored in Small 

Indigenous Software Industries, International Research Workshop for Process Improvement in Small Settings, 

Software Engineering Institute, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, 
U.S.A., October 19-20, 2005. 
http://www.sei.cmu.edu/publications/documents/06.reports/06sr001.html.  [6].
 Boehm B, Turner R. 2003. Balancing Agility and Discipline, 
Addison Wesley. 
 [7].
 CMMI Product Team, Capability Maturity Model
® Integration for Development, Version 1.2 (2006), 
http://www.sei.cmu.edu/publications/documents/06.reports/06tr008.html, Technical Report CMU/SEI-2006-TR-008  [8].
 Coleman, G. 2005, ‚An Empirical Study of Software Process 
in Practice™, in Proceedings of the 38th Annual Hawaiian 
International Conference on System Sciences, - Big Island, 

HI, p. 315c. January 2005. 
 [9].
 DeMarco T, Boehm B. 2002. The Agile Methods Fray. IEEE 
Computer 90-92.  [10].
 DIN 31000/VDE 1000, General Guide for Designing of Technical Equipment to Satisfy Safety Requirements, 1979. 
 [11].
 Drobka J, Noftzd D, Raghu R. 2004. Piloting XP on Four Mission Critical Projects. 
IEEE Software 70-75  [12].
 Enterprise Ireland Strategy Group. 2004, Ahead of the Curve: 
Ireland™s Place in the Global Economy, Dublin: Irish 

Government Publications.  [13].
 Enterprise Ireland., 2007. Software Industry Statistics 1991-
2005. (Accessed June 2007) 
http://www.nsd.ie/htm/ssii/stat.htm   [14].
 Fayad ME, Laitinen M. 1997, Process Assessment Considered 
Wasteful. 
Communications of the ACM 40: 125-128.  [15].
 Forfas (2004) Employment Survey. Online at www.forfas.ie 
(Accessed September 2007).  [16].
 Galin D, Avrahami, M. 2006,. Are CMMI program investment beneficial? Analysis Past Studies. 
IEEE Software 81-87  [17].
 Herbsleb J, Carleton A, Rozum J, Siegel D. 1994. Benefits of CMM-based software process improvement: initial results. 

Pittsburgh  [18].
 Herstellerinitiative Software (OEM Software) Dr. M. Daginnus etc http://www.automotive-
his.de/download/HIS_Praesentation_2007.pdf  [19].
 Herstellerinitiative Software, Working Group Assessment: 
HIS http://www.automotive-his.de/download/HIS-WG-

Assessments_v21.pdf  [20].
 Highsmith J. 2002. What Is Agile Software Development? 
Crosstalk 4-9.   [21].
 Holström H, Fixgerald B, Agerfalk PJ, Conchuir EO. 2006. Agile Practices Reduce Distance in Global Software 

Development, Information and Systems Management 7-18.  [22].
 International Electrotechnical Commission , IEC 61508: Functional Safety of Electrical/Electronic/Programmable 

Electronic Safety-Related Systems, 1998. 
 [23].
 ISO/IEC 15504-5: 2006 Information Technology Œ Process 
Assessment Œ Part 5: An exemplar Process Assessment Model 

, JTC 1/SC 7  [24].
 ISO TC 22 SC3 WG16 Functional Safety, Convenor Ch. 
Jung. Introduction in ISO WD 26262 (EUROFORM-Seminar, April 2007)  [25].
 Karlström D. 2002. Introducing Extreme Programming - An Experience Report. XP 2002, Alghero, Sardinia, Italy. 24-29. 
 [26].
 Kautz K. 1998. Software Process Improvement in Very Small 
Enterprises: Does it Pay Off. 
Software Process Improvement and Practice 4: 209-226.  [27].
 Larman, C. 2003, Agile & Iterative Development ŒA Managers Guide, Addison Wesley 
 [28].
 Mc Caffery. F, Richardson. I 
& Coleman. G. 2006,, ﬁAdept Œ A Software Process Appraisal Method for Small to Medium-sized Irish Software Development Organisationsﬂ. In: Proceedings of the European Software Process Improvement 

and Innovation Conference 2006, EuroSPI06, October, 
Finland.  [29].
 Meehan. B and Richardson. I. 2002,, ﬁIdentification of Software Process Knowledge Managementﬂ, Software Process: Improvement and Practice, Volume 7, Issue 2, June 2002, pp 47-56.  [30].
 Norden, K. 2004, Ohjelmistotuoteala näyttää positiivisia 
merkkejä, Tekes, 
http://www.tekes.fi/ajankohtaista/uutisia/uutis_tiedot.asp?id=
3604 (accessed 10.9.2007)  [31].
 Paulk M, Curtis B, Chrissis MB, Weber CV. 1993. Capability 
Maturity Modell for Software
, Version 1.1. Pennsylvania 
 [32].
 Paulk MC. 2001. Extreme Programming from a CMM Perspective. 
Software 18: 19-26.  [33].
 Pikkarainen. M and Mäntyniemi. A. 2006, "An Approach for 
using CMMI in Agile Software Development Assessments: 

Experiences of Three Case Studies," presented at SPICE 

2006, Luxenburg, 2006.  [34].
 Pikkarainen. M and Passoja. M. 2005,, "An Approach for Assessing Suitability of Agile Solutions:A Case Study," 

presented at The Sixth International Conference on Extreme 
Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering, Sheffield University, UK. 
 [35].
 Pretschner. A, Broy. M, Kruge
r. I.H and Stauner.T. 2006,, Software Engineering for Automotive Systems: A Roadmap, 

Future of Software Engineering, International Conference on 
Software Engineering, 2006.  [36].
 Ramachandran M. 2005. A Process Improvement Framework for XP Based SMEs. In Proceedings of the XP, Sheffield, UK. 

202-205.  [37].
 Richardson. I and von Wangemheim. C.G. 2007,, ﬁWhy are 
Small Software Organizations Different?ﬂ, Guest Editors™ 
Introduction, IEEE Software, January/February, 2007, pp 18-

22.   [38].
 Rönkkö, M. Eloranta, E.M. Mutanen, O.P. Kontio, J. Software Buisiness Lab., 2007, Suomalainen 
ohjelmistoliiketoiminta 2006 ja 2007, 

http://www.sbl.tkk.fi/oskari/2007_press_slides.pdf (accessed 10.9.2007).  [39].
 Schauffele. J and Zurawka. T. Automotive Software Engineering: Principles, Processes, Methods and Tools. U.S.A., SAE International (2005).  [40].
 Schwaber, K, Beedle M. 2002. Agile Software Development with Scrum. Prentice-Hall. 
Upper Saddle River, N.J.  [41].
 Spark Online Julkaisu, Turku Science parkin verkkolehti., 2006, Ohjelmistoyritysten kansainvälinen liiketoiminta 

kasvaa,http://www.turkusciencepark.
com/TSP/lehti.nsf/($Sear
ch)/4EBA02090435515FC22571D3001B4BCD (accessed 
10.9.2007)   [42].
 Stelzer, D, Mellis W. 1998. Success Factors of Organizationsl 
Change in Software Process Improvement. Software Process Improvement and Practice 4: 227-250  [43].
 Tietokone lehti, 2007, Softafirmat kilpailukykyisempiä, 
https://www.tietokone.fi/uutta/uutinen.asp?news_id=311969

&tyyppi=1 (accessed 10.9.2007). Sanoma Magazines, 

Finland.  [44].
 Trauth, Eileen M. 2000: The Culture of an Information Economy: Influences and Impact
s in the Republic of Ireland. Boston, MA., Kluwer Academic Publishers. (2000)  [45].
 Wilkie.F.G, McFall.D, & Mc Caffery. F. 2005, ﬁAn 
Evaluation of CMMI Process Areas for Small to Medium 
Sized Software Development Organisationsﬂ Software Process Improvement and Practice Journal: Issue 10: 2, June 2005, Pages 189-201 - Wiley Publishers. 
 [46].
 Wils A, Baelen S, Holvoet T, De Vlamincs K. 2006. Agility 
in the Avionics Software World. XP 2006, Oulu . 