 Lightweight vs. Heavyweight Processes: Is This Even the Right Question? Leon J. Osterweil University of Massachussetts Ijo@cs.umass.edu Philippe Kruchten Rational Software Canada pkb @ rational.com Martin Fowler ThoughtWorks fowler@acm.org Wilhelm Sch~.fer University of Paderborn wilhelm @ uni-paderborn.de Abstract Interest in the use of processes to provide assistance in soft- ware development activities remains at a high level. But the focus of attention has shifted in recent years. Early work em- phasizing the study of languages for defining processes was rapidly eclipsed by process evaluation and improvement work, most notably the Capability Maturity Model (CMM). As pro- cess improvement has matured as a strategy and philosophy it has also given rise to a strong reaction to the perception that it is unduly ponderous and constraining. Movements such as Ex- treme Programming (XP) have cast themselves as lightweight alternatives, emphasizing the primacy of freedom and flexibil- ity. Both philosophies and communities continue to grow in size, development, and depth of understanding. The goal of this panel will be to explore the differences be- tween these major approaches to the use of process in software development by bringing together leading articulate exponents of the approaches. Each panelist will be charged with present- ing a very concise characterization of the approach being rep- resented. But the focus of the panel will be on understanding the natttre of the differences in approach, and the reasons for these differences. Similarities will be sought as well. An underlying hypothesis of the panel is that the differ- ences in approach arise in large measure from differences in objective and differences in assumptions about the software development context. Thus, for example, one approach may be intended to support very long range organizational objec- tives, while the other may be more tactically oriented. One approach may assume that evolvability is an overriding objec- tive, while another may be more focused on speed to market. One may make stronger assumptions about the skills and train- ing of project personnel. The panel will attempt to delve into these issues to see if it may be possible to suggest criteria for suggesting which approach (and possible adaptation) should be selected for a given development situation. In a larger sense, the goal of this panel is to suggest the pos- sibility of a discipline of software process engineenng. Insofar as the panel is able to suggest that development situations can be used to guide the selection of process approaches to the pro- vision of assistance, might this then be an indication that pro- cess formalisms could play a role in subsequent specification of detailed processes, and evaluation of their effectiveness? The panel will react to this and related questions. While lively interchanges among the panelists will be stimulated and expected, similar interchanges with the audience will also be cultivated. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the flail citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to fists, requkes prior specific permission and/or a fee. 1CSE'02. May 19-25, 2002, Orlando, Florida, USA. Copyright 2002 ACM 1-58113--472-X/02/0005...$5.00. 649 