 Business Impact of Process Improvements Workshop  Frances Paulisch Siemens AG CT SE SWI Otto-Hahn-Ring 6 D-80200 Munich, Germany frances.paulisch@siemens.com Christof Ebert Vector Consulting Services GmbH Ingersheimer Straße 24 D-70499 Stuttgart  christof.ebert@vector-consulting.de   ABSTRACT The topic of the workshop ﬁBusiness Impact of Process Improve-
mentsﬂ is achieving tangible and 
sustainable business impact from 
process improvements. Focus is on approaches that are both practi-

cal and quantifiable. The kinds of
 process improve
ments addressed include, but are not limited to, the introduction of iterative, agile or 

"lean" approaches, improved requirements engineering, risk man-
agement, usage of process improve
ment reference frameworks, and 
improved quality control and assura
nce. Business impact should be 
illustrated through either increasing th
e value of what is delivered to 
the customer or reducing the cost (for example by reduction of re-

work effort). The audience will sh
are experiences how to reliably 
set-up, measure and achieve busin
ess-oriented process improve-
ments in order to increase return 
on investment in software engi-
neering. Categories and Subject Descriptors D.2.8 [Software Engineering]: 
Metrics - Complexity measures
, Performance measures, Process metrics, Product metrics 
 D.2.9. [Software Engineering]:
 Management - 
Cost estimation
, Time estimation
, Life cycle
, Productivity, Programming teams, Software process models (e.g., C
MM, ISO, PSP), Software quality 
assurance (SQA)
 General Terms  Process Management, Measurem
ent, Performance, Economics, 
Human Factors  Keywords
 Process improvement, business benefits, business impact, cost-
benefit analysis, agile and iterative development, effort estimation, 

QFD, ROI, cause and effect chains, performance, economics 1. SCOPE Software process improvement is 
key to align engineering with 
business needs. A lot of effort a
nd resources is put on process im-
provement, but not so often the effects are visible in the business 

scorecards. A majority of all improvement and reengineering pro-

grams fail to deliver value. The t
opic of this workshop is achieving 
tangible and sustainable busine
ss impact from process improve-
ments.  
 The goal of the ﬁBusiness Impact of Process Improvementﬂ (BIPI) 
workshop is to establish a forum 
where practical and quantifiable 
value in process improvement is re
viewed and consolidated to ad-
vance software engineering improvement programs.  Too often, there is too little connection to the impact for the busi-
ness and in such a way that the recommended approaches are able to 

be applied in practice.  We explicitly strive to serve as an appropriate forum for bridging 
the academic, research, business, 
and industrial practice communi-
ties.  BIPI-2008 looks to improvement dimensions such as:  State of the practice engineering methodology, such as 
model-driven development  Agile, lean or flexible engineering and management prac-tices 
 Incremental delivery 
 Iterative development  Improved communication and interaction with customers 
and end users  Strengthened requirements engineering   Using a maturity framework such as CMMI or SPICE 
 Quantitative and statistical management, such as Six 
Sigma 
 Better innovation management  World-wide collaboration with distributed engineering teams, suppliers, partners, and clients  Product life-cycle management 
 Quality control techniques.  
Assuming, as a basis that an organization has an at least repeatable 
process and has a basic measurement system in place, then the or-

ganization should be able to achie
ve and measure the business im-
pacts through either increasing the va
lue of what is delivered to the 
customer (such as better selection 
of requirements) or reducing the 
cost to deliver (such as reduci
ng rework). Improved effort estima-
tion, higher team motivation, s
horter time-to-market are further benefits that impact the business. 
 Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 
ICSE™08, 
May 10Œ18, 2008, Leipzig, Germany. 
ACM  978-1-60558-079-1/08/05. 

  Different empirical studies show
 that process improvement has 
profound impact on business Œ if done in a objective-driven ap-

proach. One important contribution of process improvement to busi-

ness success is highlighted by the periodic evaluations of project 

success by the Standish Group [1]. While in 1994 only 16% of all 

IT projects could be considered 
successful, for those projects fin-ished in 2006 it was already a success rate of 35%. The average cost 

overrun in 1994 was more than 100%, while today it is less than 

40%. Within 12 years a strong momentum is visible which was 

initiated and driven by a much stronger process focus than ever 

before. Process improvement increases project success rate. The 

following figure summarizes two l
ongitudinal studies done at Mo-
torola and Alcatel-Lucent during the past years [1]. Project perform-

ance was measured along the respective maturity level following the 

CMMI (horizontal axis) with the two dimensions of normalized cost 

of quality and normalizes delays at project end (vertical axis). With 

increasing process maturity Œ whic
h is an investment in process 
improvement Œ there is a tangible 
business impact in terms of re-
duced cost of quality and less delays. With such data being available 

from different organizations it is fa
ir to state that Œ if done well Œ 
process improvement has a strong bus
iness impact with sustainable 
ROI [2]. 
0%10%20%
30%40%50%
60%ML1ML2ML3ML4ML5
Cost of quality,
normalized
Delays,
normalized
To sum up our experiences, proce
ss improvement must always be 
driven from clear business objectives. Never start a process im-

provement activity with unclear objectives, or by simply saying that 

a certain CMMI maturity level must be achieved. It will fail and 

deliver mediocre results. Impr
ove project performance based on 
specified criteria of predictability, quality and productivity. These 

criteria must be derived from y
our business goals and should be 
approved or reviewed with your upper management. 
The participants will share expe
riences how to reliably set-up, 
measure and achieve business-orie
nted process improvements in 
order to increase return on investment in software engineering.  2. PRESENTATIONS The workshop format is a mix of 
presentations and goal-oriented 
discussions. It will include a keynote from Hakan Erdogmus (NRC) 

and the following presentations:  ﬁCapturing business benefits from process improvement: 
Four fallacies and what to do about themﬂ by Paul Ban-

nerman from NICTA (Australia)    ﬁStrategic alignment of so
ftware process improvement 
programs using QFDﬂ by André Luis Becker, Rafael 

Prikladnicki, and Jorge Luis Nicolas Audy from PUCRS, 

(Brazil)   ﬁA framework for software
 project estimation based on 
COSMIC, DSM and rework characterizationﬂ by Sha-

rareh Afsharian from University of L™Aquila and Ericsson 

Lab, Marco Giacomobono from 
Ericsson Lab, and Paola 
Inverardi from University of L™Aquila (Italy) 
  ﬁUsing opinion polls to help 
measure business impact in 
agile developmentﬂ by Hara
ld Klein and Sabine Canditt 
from Siemens AG (Germany) 
  ﬁTowards a Model for Cost-Benefit-Analysis of Quality 
Assurance in the Automotive E/E Developmentﬂ by Nico-

las F. Porta from Daimler AG (Germany) 
3. ORGANIZERS AND COMMITTEE 
Dr. Frances Paulisch is a software ﬁbest practiceﬂ evangelist at the 
Corporate Technology division of Siemens AG in Munich, Ger-

many. She is responsible for th
e ﬁSiemens Software Initiativeﬂ 
which enables the sharing of best 
practices related to software and 
quality throughout the Siemens enterprise. Three of the main current 

areas of interest are measurement of software-based systems, global 

software engineering, and require
ments engineering. She received 
her doctorate at the University of Karlsruhe in Germany. She is on 

the industrial advisory board of the IEEE Software magazine. Fur-

thermore, she is a member of the IEEE and the German ﬁGesell-

schaft für Informatikﬂ. Dr. Christof Ebert is managing director at Vector Consulting Ser-
vices, where he is implementing process improvement activities 

with business impact world-wide. Pr
ior to that, he held engineering 
and management positions at Alcatel for more than a decade, most 

recently as Director of Engineer
ing with global responsibility for 
software technologies, engineering 
processes and tools. A senior 
member and distinguished visitor of IEEE, Dr. Ebert authored sev-

eral books. He currently chairs the IEEE Intl. Conf. on Global Soft-

ware Engineering (ICGSE) steering 
board. He is engaged in stan-
dardization activities, lectures at Un
iversity of Stuttgart and serves 
on editorial boards of several scien
tific journals and as a frequent 
keynote speaker at conferences.  
The Program Committee consists of:  Rob Austin, Harvard Business School, USA  Ton Dekkers, Shell, Netherlands  Hakan Erdogmus, NRC, Canada  Harald Klein, Siemens AG, Germany 
 Marek Leszak, Alcatel-Lucent, Germany 
 Pat O'Toole, PACT, USA 
 Roman Pichler, Pichler Consulting, UK  Wolfgang Strigel, independent consultant, Germany 
 Rini Van Solingen, TU Delft, Netherlands 4. FURTHER INFORMATION All further information on this workshop can be found at the URL: http://www.bipi-ws.org  
[1] Ebert, C., and R.Dumke: Software Measurement. Springer, Hei-
delberg, New York, 2007. [2] Performance Results of CMMI®-Based Process Improvement. 
CMU/SEI-2006-TR-004. August 2006 