 Lean Software Development 
  Mary Poppendieck Poppendieck.LLC mary@poppendieck.com   Abstract  Lean Software Development is the application of the principles of the Toyota Product Development System to software development.   Toyota has been 
extremely successful developing complex new vehicles, 
which include a vast amount of embedded software, in 
a very short time and always on time.  This tutorial 
examines the underlying engineering principles Toyota 
uses to develop vehicles and shows how they can be 
applied to software developm
ent.  When correctly applied, lean software development results in high 
quality software that is developed quickly and at the lowest possible cost.  Moreover, the success of many of 
the practices of Agile Software Development can be 
explained by understanding the principles of Lean 
Software development.  1. Introduction  As global competitiveness comes to the software 
development industry, the search is on for a better way 
to create first-class software rapidly, repeatedly, and 
reliably.  Lean initiatives in manufacturing, logistics, 
services, and product development have led to 
dramatic improvements in cost, quality and delivery 
time; can they do the same for software development?  
The short answer is ﬁAbsolutely!ﬂ   Of the many methods that have arisen to improve 
software engineering processes, Lean is emerging as 
one that is grounded in decades of work understanding 
how to make processes better. Lean thinking focuses 
on giving customers what they want, when and where 
the want it, without a wasted motion or wasted 
minute.   
This one day tutorial provides an introduction to 
applying lean principles to software development.  It 
focuses on these seven lean principles: 1. Eliminate Waste 
2. Build Quality In 
3. Create Knowledge 
4. Defer Commitment 
5. Deliver Fast 
6. Respect People 7. Optimize the Whole 
 As a group, these principles provide guidance on 
how to deliver software faster, better, and for less cost 
Œ all at the same time.  
 2. Summary of Contents 
 The following is an outline of a one day tutorial. 
 2.1. History of Lean  This section discusses the pillars of the Toyota 
Production System:  Just-in-Time Flow and Stop-the-
Line quality.  It discusses the charter of a QA function 
in a lean environment and how all of these concepts 
apply directly to software development. 
 2.2. Waste  This section discusses the fundamental lean concept 
of waste and how to look for waste in a development 
system (as opposed to a production system).  It covers 
the seven wastes of software development.   
The class will do a value stream mapping exercise: 
groups of about seven people will draw a value stream 
map representing the actual experience of one person 
in the group.  Several groups will present their map to 
the class, and it will be critiqued by the presenters. 
 2.3. Quality  This section will present the case for test-driven 
development, automated unit and acceptance testing, 
continuous integration, and nested synchronization.  It 
will be focused not so much on how to do it as why it 
is fundamental in a lean environment.   
 This section will also cover how to achieve 
regulatory compliance (FDA, SOX, etc.) using the 
recommended approaches. 
 2.4. Knowledge  This section will cover the rationale behind 
delaying commitment and present methods of 
preserving knowledge so that teams do not have to re-
learn what was once known.  It will discuss the 
benefits of set-based design, a counter-intuitive approach which involves exploring multiple options 
instead of focusing on a single solution.   
 2.5. Speed  This section will discuss the application of queuing 
theory to software development.  It will demonstrate 
why long queues are detrimental to effective 
development and show how to avoid them.  It will also 
show why rapid cycle time leads to higher quality and 
reduced cost.  2.6. System 
 This section will discuss why it is not sufficient to 
simply focus on software development, and show how 
to shift the focus of development to the overall 
objective of the effort:  the product or process 
supported by the software.  In addition, the section will demonstrate how decomposing measurements leads to 
sub-optimization, and propose aggregate 
measurements which have been shown to drive 
effective behavior. 
 3. Why Lean is Important 
 Lean Software Development provides the theory 
behind agile software development practices and gives 
organizations a set of principles from which to fashion 
software engineering processes that will work best in 
the context of their customers, their domain, their 
development capability, and their unique situation. 
Mary and Tom Poppendieck have taught dozens of 
classes on Lean Software Development and have 
written two books explaining the material they teach in 
their classes. These classes and books have led many 
organizations to reexamine and restructure software 
engineering practices, resulting in dramatic 
improvements in the quality, cost, and development 
speed of products and processes containing software. 
 4. Presenters  This tutorial will be presented by Mary 
Poppendieck and Tom Poppendieck. 
 4.1. Mary Poppendieck  Mary Poppendieck has been in the Information 
Technology industry for over thirty years. She has 
managed software development, supply chain 
management, manufacturing operations, and new 
product development. She spearheaded the 
implementation of a Just-in-Time system in a 3M 
video tape manufacturing plant and led new product 
development teams, commercializing products ranging 
from digital controllers to 3M Light FiberŽ.   
Mary is a popular writer and speaker, and coauthor 
of the book 
Lean Software Development
 [1], which 
was awarded the Software Development Productivity 
Award in 2004. A sequel, 
Implementing Lean Software 
Development [2], was recently published.    4.2. Tom Poppendieck  Tom Poppendieck has 25 years of experience in 
computing including eight years of work with object 
technology. His modeling a
nd mentoring skills are 
rooted in his experience as a physics professor. His 
early work was in IT infrastructure, product 
development, and manufacturing support, and evolved 
to consulting project assignments in healthcare, 
logistics, mortgage banking, and travel services. 
Tom holds a PhD in Physics and has taught physics 
for ten years. He is coauthor of the book 
Lean Software Development [1], which was awarded the 
Software Development Productivity Award in 2004. A 
sequel, 
Implementing Lean Software Development [2], 
was recently published.       