 The Impact of Process Choice in High Maturity Environments: An Empirical 
Analysis 
  Narayan Ramasubbu, Rajesh Krishna Balan 
Singapore Management University 
[nramasub,rajesh]@smu.edu.sg 
  Abstract 
 We present the results of a 
three year field study of 
the software development 
process choices made by 
project teams at two leading offshore vendors. In 
particular, we focus on th
e performance implications 
of project teams that chos
e to augment structured, 
plan-driven processes to implement the CMM level-5 

Key Process Areas (KPAs) with agile methods.  Our 

analysis of 112 software projects reveals that the 

decision to augment the firm-recommended, plan-
driven approach with improvised, agile methods was 
significantly affected by the extent of client knowledge 

and involvement, the 
newness of technology, and the 
project size. Furthermore this decision had a 

significant and mostly positive impact on project 

performance indica
tors such as reus
e, rework, defect 
density, and productivity. 

 1. Introduction 
 The choice of software development process is 
considered to be a crucial fa
ctor in building systems on 
time and with high quality. As a result, there are 
numerous software development process frameworks 
and methodologies available for software teams. The 

comparative strengths and weaknesses of the prevalent 

software development processes have been extensively 

studied in prior research [for e.g., 1, 2, 3, 7, 16, 20, 21]. 

However, there is no one universally applicable or 
unanimous choice of development process. In the face 
of such diversity, software development organizations 
continue to invest heavily in software process 
improvements by standa
rdizing their development 
processes [10]. This stan
dardization, i.e., minimizing 
heterogeneity by adopting one uniform process across 

the firm, has been shown to lead to benefits of 

improved productivity, quality and cycle time [4, 12, 

13, 14].  
Firms that have achieved reasonably high levels of 
process standardization are usu
ally said to be operating 
at high levels of process maturity as exemplified by the 

CMM level-5 [24] and Six-Sigma firms [19]. The two 
institutions used for this study were both assessed at 
CMM level-5. As such, they mandated the use of a 

highly structured, plan-based approach for the 
operationalization of all the CMM Key Process Areas 
(KPAs). Our goal is to in
vestigate the performance 
outcomes of project teams that deviated from this 

mandate by adopting an agile approach to the 

implementation of the CMM KPAs in their projects. 
 While there have been commentaries and 
theoretical arguments from other scholars [7, 8, 9, 11, 

17, 18, 20, 25, 28], this study is a first step in the 

direction to empirically test the “balanced process 

hypothesis” 
[8], and investigate the performance 
impacts of process diversity, albeit in the narrow 
context of offshore software development. Using data 
collected from 112 software projects from two leading 
offshore software development firms, we empirically 

test the hypothesis if augmenting the standard plan-

driven development processes with agile methods leads 

to superior project performance. Also, through field 
research we uncover the dominant factors specific to 
offshore software development that propelled some 
project teams to choose a 
non-standard approach to 
their development processes over the standard 
processes recommended by their firms.  

 2. Research sites: high process maturity 
environments  Consistent with the research goals of this study, 
we sought to observe the development process choices 

at firms that employ rigorous, standardized processes, 

and at the same time provide room for improvisations. 
We obtained permission to conduct our research at 
development centers of two different leading offshore 

software firms that fit our criterion. The development 

centers involved in our study had been assessed to be 

operating at the CMM and People CMM (PCMM) 
level-5, and had won several awards for superior 
ICSE™09, May 16-24, 2009, Vancouver, Canada978-1-4244-3452-7/09/$25.00  2009 IEEE529 quality management practices.  Thus, this setting 
provided an ideal environment for conducting our 
study on development process choices. 
The CMM specifies a series of actions that a 
company can perform to optimize and streamline its 
internal processes (across all aspects of the company). 

The Level-5 certification is the highest certification 
level and indicates that the company has been assessed 

as having highly optimized processes across 24 Key 
Process Areas (KPA). Companies are free to 
implement these KPAs using any process they want as 

long as they satisfy the goals specified by the CMM. 

Further details about the CMM certification process 

can be found elsewhere [22]. 
Both firms were equivalent in terms of the total 
number of employees (about 25,000) and annual 
revenues (about two billion USD) at the start of this 
study. Both firms have a centralized Software 

Engineering Process Group (SEPG) that is responsible 

for governance of development processes. The SEPG 

teams at both the firms invested heavily in 
standardizing the developmen
t processes prevalent at 
the firms. The standard, firm-wide recommended 
processes, at the time of this study, at both firms, were 

highly structured, plan-based approaches for each of 

the KPAs of the CMM. Any non-standard processes 
employed by individual projects needed prior approval 
and were actively monitored by the SEPGs. To 

maintain flexibility, tailoring of the standardized set of 
processes (to use more agile methods for specific 

KPAs for example) was allowed at the individual 
project level. However all process tailoring was closely 
monitored by Software Quality Assurance (SQA) 
personnel who were part of the project team. The SQA 

personnel at both the firms reported directly to the 

SEPG managers and not to the respective project 

managers. We discuss th
e process choice variation 
across the projects in more detail in Section 3.1.1. 
Through an analysis of the weekly reports 
submitted by the SQA personnel in charge of 

individual projects, we observed the incidents of non-

compliance to standardized development processes. 

While the individual SQA personnel were authorized 
to intervene and correct deviations due to human errors 
and lethargy, voluntary and systemic deviations had to 
be discussed at the organizational level SEPG 
meetings. It was through our participation in these 

internal, non-compliance meetings that we discovered 

that some managers wanted to augment the heavily 
structured, documentation oriented, plan-based 
processes widely prevalent at the firms with agile 

processes.  
In particular, several project teams were using 
agile processes to operationalize the CMM KPAs 
instead of the standardized process templates 
recommended by the SEPG. Since these deviations did 
not affect the overall strategic mandate of the firms, 
which was to be a “CMM level
-5” company, the top 
management at our research sites did not see such non-
standard process choices as an immediate threat. 
However, they were curious to understand the 

implications and performance outcomes of these non-
compliances in the long run. This coincided well with 

our research interest, and hence our research goals 
struck a chord with the interests and motives of the 
executives at our research sites. 
Thus, we set out to answer the following open 
empirical questions at our research sites:  
1. Are there specific conditions that encourage the 

shift from standardized processes to non-standard 
software development processes? 
2. Do the non-standard approaches that mixed plan-
based processes with agile methods lead to 

significant improvements in eventual project 

performance? 
 3. Modeling the causal links: process choice 
and performance 
 The first empirical research question raised in the 
study deliberates the reasons 
for the adoption of non-
standard developm
ent processes that augment plan-
based approaches with agile practices, and the second 
question seeks to analyze the causal effects due to the 
adoption of non-standard development processes. 
However the research setting in this study does not 
facilitate experimentation 
– recall that we are only 
observing real world projects that are being consumed 

by real customers who pay for the software application. 
Hence experimentation, especially induced by external 
researchers, is not feasible. In the absence of 

experimental data, we use observational data collected 

through our field research. We then employ a 

propensity score stratification analysis method to infer 

the causal relationships raised by our research 
questions. This method has been utilized by 
researchers from other fields to investigate causal 

effects using observational data [33]. We 

operationalized our research method in the following 

steps: 
  Step-1: Through interviews, discussions, non-intrusive 
observations, and surveys we identify the 

possible list of factors th
at drive the adoption of 
the non-standard process implementations at our 

research sites.  
Step-2: After collecting data on 
the variables identified 
in step 1 and statistically verifying them, we 
estimate the probability of a project team 
530 adopting a non-standard process. This is called 
the propensity score for a project. 
Step-3: We separate the sample of our projects into 
“treated” (the projects that adopted non
-standard 
processes) and “controls” (the projects that 
selected the standard processes). Using the 

propensity scores calculated in step 2, we 
“match” the individual projects in the “treated” 

sample with similar projects in the “controls” 
sample.  
Step-4: By statistically comparing the performance 
outcomes of the “treated” projects with the 
matched projects from the “controls” group (i.e., 

projects with similar propensity score have a 

similar probability of adopting a non-standard 
process), we draw inferences on the 
performance impacts of the process choice. 
 3.1. Observational data collection 
 Our data collection effort 
was spread across a 
three year time period. In this period, we followed 112 
software projects from start to finish, and gathered 
detailed data on the software processes and project 
performance of each of these projects. For the first 

eleven months of the data collection period, one of the 
authors was present in the field and observed project 
activities on a day-to-day basis using a non-intrusive 
approach. For the rest of the three year data collection 

period, we conducted separate weekly teleconferences 
with a volunteer from each firm’s SEPG department. 
These volunteers helped us collect regular process and 

performance data for each of the projects that were 
being studied. The volunteers were neutral observers 
and were not affiliated with any of the projects in our 

sample.  Out of the 112 projects, 34 project teams 

employed non-standard process. 
We obtained the data required for this study 
through interviews, surveys as well as from the internal 
process databases maintained by the quality division of 
each firm. As part of the CMM process, each project 

was required to accurately and consistently report the 

data used for this paper. We randomly sampled 

portions of the data at regular intervals to check for 
accuracy and consistency (either directly when we 
were onsite or through the help of the volunteers). In 
addition, the data for all the 
112 projects used in our 
study was audited, and verified as correct, by the 
quality control group of each firm. Furthermore, except 

for the data from the 34 projects that followed non-
standard software 
development processes, all data used 
in this study was audited by external agents as part of 
the regular CMM level-5 compliance checks. We are 
thus confident that the data
 used in this paper is 
reliable and of high quality and that we have a rich 
understanding of the context in which these software 
projects were executed.  
In the rest of the section, we describe the 
individual variables used for this analysis. These 

variables were intentionally 
chosen with an aim to 
practically deploy the methodology developed in this 

study in real projects.  

 3.1.1. Development process choice variable. 
When a 
new software project is initiated, the project manager, 
along with the development team, can choose to follow 

the standard develo
pment process that is prevalent in 
the firm or follow a new or non-standard development 
process for the project. As mentioned earlier, at both 
our research sites the standard company approved 
process for implementing each of the CMM level-5 
KPAs was a highly structured plan-based approach.   
Project teams that choose to follow non-standard 
development processes had to seek permission from 

the central Software Engineering Process Group 
(SEPG). At the time of our data collection, 34 projects 
had been formally approved to use non-standard 
processes to implement the CMM level-5 KPAs for 
their projects. All of the non-standard processes used 

were agile methods 
– some projects used versions of 
agile RUP while others used
 versions of XP or 
SCRUM.  
Each of these 34 projects used different process 
choices across different KPAs (i.e., none of the 34 
projects used similar processes across all 24 KPAs 
compared to every other project). Hence, to obtain 
statistically significant results, we grouped all the 34 
projects that used a non-standard process for at least a 

KPA together. By doing this, we are still able to 

meaningfully quantify th
e performance impact of 
choosing at least one non-standard process for the 

project. The variable ‘Development Process Choice’ is 
thus a binary variable that specifies the development 
process that was used. The non-standard development 

process is assigned the value of 1 and the standard, 

firm-recommended development process is assigned 

the value of 0.  
We plan to collect more data about projects using 
non-standard processes in the near future and then use 
the larger data set to tease out 
the effects of particular 
process choices on particular 
KPAs in future research. 
 3.1.2. Performance outcome variables. 
For this work, 
we use five different performance indicators to 
quantify the goodness of the software development 

process chosen. These performance indicators were: 
 1)  Development productivity
: Development 
productivity is defined as the ratio of software 
531 code size in KLOC to the total development effort 
in person-hours.  
2)  Defect Density: 
Defect density
 is defined as the 
number of unique problems, per KLOC, that 
were reported, before project signoff, by 
customers during the acceptance tests and 

production trials. It is calculated as follows:  
 3) Reuse: Reuse in this study is measured as the 
amount of project code, measured as a percentage 

of the total project code size, which was obtained 
from the central generic code libraries maintained 
by the two data collection sites. 
 Reused modules 
and objects were easy to 
find and count as every 
project we studied explicitly tagged reused code 
with unique identification. This was to make it 

easy to find and replace generic code where 
necessary. 
4) Rework: 
It is measured as the percentage of total 
actual project hours spent on fixing bugs reported 
by customers during acceptance tests and during 
the warranty period.  
5) Project Management Effort: 
This variable is 
measured as the percentage of total actual project 

hours spent on project management activities. This 

data was retrieved from the internal time sheets of 

the project manager.  
 3.1.3. Client specific knowledge.
 Client specific 
knowledge was measured through a project manager 
survey before the start of the project. The survey had 
the following six items measured on a 7-point scale (1 

indicated no knowledge at all while 7 indicated 

complete knowledge): 
 1. How well do you know the project objectives of the client? 
2. How well do you know the 
business processes of the 
client? 
3. How well do you know the bu
siness rules of the client? 
4. How well do you know the IT infrastructure of the client? 
5. How well do you know the IT norms and standards 
followed by the client? 
6. How well do you know the interoperability constraints of 
the client’s IT infrastructure?
   These survey items were adapted from prior 
information systems and management studies [26, 27]. 
The average score of the six survey items provided the 

score for the ‘client specific knowledge’ variable. 
  3.1.4. Extent of client involvement.
 This variable is 
the estimated percentage of time (relative to the total 
project time) that the client would spend with the 
development team. This information was extracted 
from the contractual agreement documents signed by 
the client and the offshore 
vendor at the start of the 
project.  
 3.1.5. Design and technology newness. 
The design 
and technology newness variable measures how 
familiar the project team is with the technology and 

design concepts needed for 
a new project. This variable 
was measured through a survey that was administered 
before the start of each project. We reused the survey 
questionnaire previously used by Takeishi [26] to 

measure design and technology newness. 
 To measure the design newness, the technical lead 
of each project (not the project manager) was asked to 

answer the 
following question: “For this project that 
you are starting out, please rate the design newness 
involved using the following 5-
point scale.” The five 
provided answers were: 
 1. No modification of design involved. 
2. Some modification (changes were less than 30%) of 
design that had been already developed at your 

company. 
3. A medium scale modification (30
–60%) of design that 
had already been developed at your company. 
4. A major modification (more than 60-80%) of design 

that had already been developed at your company. 
5. Radically different design that is new to your 
company. 
  To measure the technical newness, the technical 
lead was asked the following question:  “For the design 
choice you have made for this project, please rate the 
technology used to implement the design using the 

following 5-
point scale”. The 5
-point scale went from 
(1) I am very familiar with the technology to (5) a 

completely new and unfamiliar technology. After 

verifying (through factor analysis) that the individual 
scores for the two-sub items contributed to a common 
construct, we averaged the scores of the two sub-items 

to obtain the overall score for design and technology 
newness. 
  3.1.6. Estimated project effort. 
Estimated project 
effort is the total person-hours estimated for the 
project. We obtained this, at the start of the project, 
from the project manager’s project planning and 
estimation charts.   
 3.1.7. Allocated team size.
 Team size is the headcount 
of the number of persons allocated for the project at the 
start of the project.  
 3.1.8. Estimated code size. 
Estimated code size is the 
estimated KLOC of the project. This was measured, at 
Defects Density=
DefectsCode Size ( KLOC)
Defects Density=
DefectsCode Size ( KLOC)
532 the start of the project, from the project planning and 
estimation charts of the project manager.   
 3.1.9. Data without any variance.
 We collected the 
professional work experience of the team members, the 
professional work experience of the project managers 

and the attrition rate of employees in the projects from 
the human resource department of the firms. However, 

these variables demonstrated no significant variance 
across the projects and we thus did not utilize them in 
our empirical analysis.  
The average professional wo
rk experience of the 
team members in our sample was 36 months, the 

average professional work 
experience of the project 
managers in our sample was 108 months and the 
average attrition rate in th
e project sample was 6.2%. 
We believe that the high maturity of PCMM practices 
and industry best practice human resource policies 

implemented at the firms could be one reason for the 

lack of significant variance of these parameters in our 

sample.  
 3.2. Propensity score from the empirical data 
 After we collected our data, we developed the 
empirical formulations to calculate the propensity 
scores (i.e., the probability of a project team adopting a 
non-standard software process) needed to validate our 
model. Equation 1 presents our final regression model 

with the coefficients and an error term. 
 Development 
process 
Choice 
 = 0  1* (client specific knowledge) + 
2* (extent of client involvement
3 * (design and technology newness)
4*  (estimated project effort) 
5* (allocated team size
6* (estimated 
code size) + 
1 …....
(Eq. 1)
                                          
 4. Results of analysis 
 In this section, we present the results of our 
propensity score analysis. We first show the validity of 

our model (using historical data 
– in this case, the data 
from all 112 projects) and then use the model to show 

the performance implications of using a non-standard 
process. 
 4.1. Results: validation of model 
 In this section we provide validation results for our 
propensity score model. We used the logistic 
regression method to estimate the coefficients of 

Equation 1 as the depend
ant variable (development 
process choice) is a binary variable. The summary 
statistics of the variables that were used to estimate the 
regression coefficients are presented in Table 2 and the 
regression results are presented in Table 1.  
Overall, the results of our regression analysis 
indicate that our empirical specification for 
determining the probability of a particular project 

adopting a non-standard dev
elopment process is valid. 
The model Chi-Squared statistic value is significant at 

1% level, indicating that our model is statistically 

valid. Unlike linear regressions, the coefficients 
obtained from logistic regr
ession are difficult to 
interpret directly. This is because the values of the 
coefficients indicate the extent to which a unit increase 

in each of the corresponding input variables would 

increase the log odds of the dependent variable 

(development process choice).
 To make it easier to 
visualize the true relationships between the input 
variables and the dependent 
variable, we plotted the 
following five graphs: for each of the five significant 
input variables (allocated team size did not have a 

significant effect on the results), we kept the other 

variables at their mean levels (shown in Table 2), and 
plotted that variable against the probability that the 
variable would result in choosing the non-standard 

development process choice. These graphs are shown 

in Figures 1 to 5.  
 From our empirical results, we observe that larger 
projects (in terms of develo
pment effort and code size) 
(Figure 4 and 5) as well as project teams that had a 

larger extent of client-specific knowledge (Figure 1) 

demonstrated a lower probability to adopt the non-

standard development process
es. This result seems to 
be reflective of the risk minimizing strategies of the 
project teams when they are faced with large projects 
and with familiar clients. We also observe that the 

projects using completely new technology and design 

(Figure 2) were more likely to use the non-standard 

development process. This empirical result indicates 

that the project teams at our r
esearch sites responded to 
external risks such as dealing with newer technology 

and design by adopting more agile processes. 
In addition, our empirical results show that when 
clients were involved to a larger extent with the project 
teams (Figure 3), they were less likely to adopt agile 
development processes. This result is surprising given 
that the agile process manifesto emphasizes customer 
centricity. When we analyzed this result further, 
through discussions with managers and executives at 

our research sites, we learnt that larger client 

involvement in offshore (and outsourced) software 
development might also mean that the clients wanted 
more control. When viewed from the project control 

and monitoring perspective, our empirical results make 
intuitive sense as plan-based methods are a natural 
choice when the emphasis is on detailed documentation 
533 to help monitoring and auditing. We further discuss 
this in Section 5. 
 Probability-values are shown in parentheses; results significant at 5% 
are indicated by **; results significant at 1% are indicated by ***. 
Other values, which are not in bold, are not statistically significant. 

The model chi-squared statistic indicates that the goodness-of-fit of 
our model is high. We use a two-tailed hypothesis test for deriving 
all the p-values (i.e., we did not assume any positive or negative 

direction of the result while testing). 
Table 1. Regression Results 
 Figure 1. Effect of Client Specific Knowledge 
  Figure 2. Effect of Design and Technology Newness 
 Figure 3. Effect of the Extent of Client Involvement 
Figure 4. Effect of the 
Planned Project Effort 
 Figure 5. Effect of Estimated Code Size 
  Finally, our empirical results show that the best 
predictors of process choice, in terms of probability of 
choice being made, are the design and technology 

newness metric  (Figure 2), the planned project effort 

(Figure 4), and the client specific knowledge metric 

(Figure 1). The other two indicators (estimated code 
size (Figure 5) and extent of client involvement metric 
(Figure 3)) have much smaller but still statistically 
significant effects. 
0510152025301234567Client Specific KnowledgeProbability of Non-Standard Process Choice (%)01020304050607080901001234567Design & Technology NewnessProbability of Non-Standard Process Choice (%)01234567020406080100
Extant of Client Involvement (Person Hours)Probability of Non-Standard Process Choice (%)Variables 
Process Model Choice
 Client specific knowledge 
-.546***   (0.000) 
 1 Extent of client 
involvement 
-.003***   (0.000) 
 2 Design and technology 
newness 
1.905*** (0.000) 
 3 Estimated project effort 
-.001**     (0.029) 
 4 Allocated team size 
.0185        (0.864) 
 5 Estimated code size 
-.001***   (0.000) 
 6 Constant 
-.527         (0.878) 
 7 Model Chi-Squared 
Statistic 63.18*** (0.000) 
Observations 
112 
0102030
40506070809010020003000400050006000700080009000
Estimated Project Effort (Person Hours)Probability of Non-Standard Process Choice (%)00.511.522.533.544.55500100015002000250030003500
Estimated Code Size (KLOC)Probability of Non-Standard Process Choice (%)534  4.2. Results: process choice matters 
 Following the statistical validation of the 
propensity score calculation model, we estimated the 
probability of adoption of
 non-standard 
development 
processes for all the projects in our sample. Then we 

stratified our project sample in to 1) a treated sample 

which consisted of the projects that adopted the non-
standard development proc
esses and 2) a control 
sample that consisted of the projects that adopted the 
firm recommended standard 
plan-driven development 
processes. We then proceede
d to test the hypothesis if 
the performance outcomes of the projects in the treated 

sample were different from those in the control sample.  
The first step in this analysis was to identify 
projects that are equivalent to
 each other, except for 
their process choice decision. This matching step is 
important because, as mentio
ned before, our data is 
collected from field research and not through 
experiments. We did not have full control over all 

experimental parameters 
and thus cannot be 
completely sure that the cho
ice of development process 
was not being impacted by unknown variables. As 
such, a simple mean difference test between the two 
samples could yield biased results as there may have 

been hidden influences affect
ing the choice of process.  
To account for this possible non-random 
influence, we utilize our validated empirical model of 
process choice to calculate a propensity score (a 
measure of how close things “match”) for each project. 

Using these propensity scor
es and a set of matching 
algorithms (Kernel matching, nearest neighbor 
matching, stratification matching, difference-in-
difference method) we match each project in our 

sample to its nearest equivalent. We then place all 
projects in equivalent sets based on their propensity 
scores, and then compare the performance indicators of 

projects in the same set that have different software 
development choices. By doing this matching step, we 
are able to compare equivale
nt projects (across the six 
input variables) and minimize the influence of 
unobserved variables similar to a controlled lab 
experiment.  
Table 3 shows the results of comparing the 
performance indicators of proj
ects within each set that 
have different development process choices.  
  Performance 
Variable 
Treated 
Sample 
Value 
Matched, 
controls 
Sample 
Value 
Difference 
P-Value 
Productivity 
101.234 
27.846 
73.388 
0.057* 
Defect 
Density 
0.007 
0.002 
0.006 
0.003** 
Rework 
1.224 
5.290 
-4.066 
0.003** 
Reuse 
22.857 
6.000 
16.857 
0.014** 
Project 
Management 
Effort 
11.982 
4.964 
7.017 
0.178 
Results significant at 5% are indicated by *; results significant at 1% 
are indicated by **. Other values, which are not in bold, are not 
statistically significant. We use a two-tailed hypothesis test (i.e., we 
did not assume any positive or negative direction of the result while 
testing).  Higher scores are better for Productivity and Reuse with 
the opposite being true for Defect Density and Rework. The unit for 

each of these variables is the same as shown in Table 2.  
 Table 3. Effect of Non-standard Process Choice 
 Variable 
Unit 
Mean 
Std. Dev. 
Min 
Max 
Model Input Variables 
Client specific knowledge 
Unit-less measure. (7 is best, 1 is worst) 
4.36 
1.96 
1 7 Extent of client involvement 
% of total project hrs 
22.68 
18.75 
0 100 
Design and technology 
newness 
Unit-less measure. 
(5 is best, 1 is worst) 
2.58 
1.28
 1 5 Estimated project effort 
 Person-hours 
4864.24 
4970.68 
17 27231 
Allocated team size No. project personnel 
11.51 
7.49
 2 36 
Estimated code size KLOC 
169.74 
404.99 
0.37 
3200
 Process Performance Indicators 
Productivity 
KLOC / total project hours 
213.04 
1470.93 
0.16 
12923.42 
Defect Density 
Total Delivered Errors / KLOC 
0.01 
0.02 
0.00 
0.18 
Rework 
% of total project hrs 
10.00 
7.00 
0.00 
27 
Reuse 
% of total project KLOC 
22.31 
27.13 
0.00 
100 
Project Management Effort 
% of total project hrs 
10.08 
9.83 
0.14 
55.44 
Table 2. Summary Statistics of 
the Variables Used in the Analysis 
 535 Our results from this analysis indicate that projects 
that adopted a non-standard development processes, by 
augmenting plan-driven processes with agile methods, 
performed significantly better than their counterparts 
(treatment = 1 is non-st
andard development process 
choice) in terms of improved productivity, and higher 
reuse levels. However, we do see a minor increase in 
the defect density levels in 
the projects that chose the 
non-standard development processes. At the same 
time, we also notice that the required effort to fix these 
errors, as captured by the rework performance variable, 

significantly reduced. We did not notice any significant 

differences between the samples in terms of project 

management effort spent on the projects.  
These results are significant as they show that, 
even in high process-maturi
ty environments, deviating 
from the established processes can result in significant, 

non-trivial project performance improvements. Project 

managers could thus use this model, at the start of the 

project, to decide if changing some of the processes 

used for the KPAs would result in better project 
performance. Currently, our model only tells a 
manager whether using a non-standard process would 

result in performance improvements over the standard 

process. In the future, we plan to augment our model to 

provide specific process choi
ces (i.e., use a particular 
process for a particular KPA).  

 4.2. Results: summary 
 Overall, our empirical analysis supported the 
“balanced process” hypothesis that augmenting plan-
driven processes with agile methods can lead to 
improved performance. Also, we showed that five of 

the six input variables have significant effects on the 
project’s performance. These five
 input variables, 
which can be measured at the start of a project, can be 
reliably used to predict the development process choice 

(standard plan-driven or 
non-standard agile) that 
should be used by a starting software project. Finally, 

these results serve as a rigorous empirical support for 
prior theoretical arguments advanced by other scholars 
[for e.g., 7, 9, 17]. 

 5. Discussion 
 In this section, we discuss the robustness and the 
limitations of this study as well as provide some 
intuitive explanations for some
 of the observed effects. 
 5.1. Robustness of model 
 We checked the robustness of our empirical model 
and coefficients in the following ways: first, we 
clustered our data accordin
g to the firm the samples 
came from and obtained robust variance estimations 
for the coefficients of the propensity score model. 
Next, we performed checks for multi-collinearity and 
the effects of outliers before finalizing the results [6]. 

All these checks indicated that our final model and 

coefficients were robust. We conducted additional 

checks and sensitivity an
alyses to ensure the 
robustness of the propensity scores and treatment effect 
results shown in Table 3. First, we ensured that in each 
matching category of projects, the mean propensity 

score was not different between the treated and control 

samples. Secondly, while analyzing the treatment 

effects, we compared our results by employing 

different matching algorithms (kernel matching, 
nearest neighbor, stratification). Our results did not 
significantly vary according to the matching algorithm 
we used.  
Breakdown point indicates that the significance level is > 0.1 
Table 4. Sensitivity of Treatment Effects 
 Finally, we checked the sensitivity of our results 
using the Rosenbaum bounds method [5], the results of 
which are presented in Table 4. In this sensitivity 

testing method, the probability (log odds) of 

differential assignment due to unobserved factors 

(Gamma) is repeatedly varied to increase the bias 
introduced in our empirical model. The increased bias 
Gamma 
Upper-
bound 
significance 
level 
Lower 
bound 
significance 
level 
Model 
break down 
point 
Productivity 
1 (typical bias) 
0.057
 0.057
  1.5 (moderate 
bias) 
0.149
 0.014
 Break 
down point 
2 (High bias) 
0.246 
0.004 
 Rework 
1 (typical bias) 
0.003 
3 No Breakdown 
1.5 (moderate 
bias) 
0.00
 0.014
 2 (High bias) 
0.000 
0.03 
Re-use 
1 (typical bias) 
0.014 
0.014 
No Breakdown 
1.5 (moderate 
bias) 
0.040
 0.002
 2 (High bias) 
0.090 
0.000 
Defect Density 
1 (typical bias) 
0.023
 0.023
  1.5 (moderate 
bias) 
0.072 
0.004
  2 (High bias) 
0.131
 0.009
 Break 
down point 
536 eventually breaks down ou
r model and the treatment 
effects completely vanish (i.e., the upper-bound 
significance level becomes > 0.1). The sensitivity 
analyses of our model, shown in Table 4, indicate that 
the model developed in this study is robust and does 
not breakdown within reasonable ranges of the 

artificially introduced bias. In particular, the model 
only breaks down at 1.5 bias or higher 
– not at regular 
1.0 bias levels. This shows that the model is quite 
robust to normal data variations. 
  5.2. Qualitative insights of results 
 In this section we provide some qualitative 
insights on how the adoption of agile methods to 
implement some of the CMM KPAs, helped the project 
teams to perform better. In 
addition to project size 
related factors, client specific knowledge, client 

involvement in the projects, and the design and 

technology newness were the other important 
considerations that project 
teams at our research sites 
used in deciding whether to adopt agile methods.  
 5.2.1. Impact of newness. 
Our observation of the 
project teams revealed that the main problem they 
faced when given a project involving new clients or 

new technology was the inadequacy in the 
organizational process templates to address their 
specific needs. For example,
 we noticed that the cost 
and effort estimation formulas and guidelines 
developed by the in-house SEPG teams were not able 
to handle projects that involved heavy use of the 
emerging scripting languages and business process 

modeling languages. Projects that involved porting and 

integrating business applications across multiple 
enterprise environments (for example, applications 
integrating SAP’s Finance and Control module with 

Siebel’s CRM system) also had considerable difficulty 

in using the firm recommended estimation tools. The 

Mean Error in Estimation (MRE) when using the 

firm’s standard estimation templates for the 34 projects 
that chose the non-standard approach was more than 
50%. (Note that the MRE was calculated by us only 

after the respective
 project closure ev
ent to corroborate 
our insight).     
We noticed that teams faced with such situations 
benefitted when they adopted agile planning methods. 
For example, some project teams chose a rapid time-
boxing-based planning approach (in-depth task 

planning only for very short term activities; tasks in the 

longer term planned only in broad strokes). With this 
planning method, individual team members faced more 
uncertainty over their tasks in the project. However, 
overall as a team, they had more opportunities to help 
each other and conduct community-based learning 
programs. We believe that these community-based 
learning interventions during the course of the project 
could have contributed to the better performance of 

these teams (as observed in the aggregated results). A 

detailed analysis on such performance enhancing 

learning methods can be found in [23].  
 5.2.2. Impact of client’s perceptions on control. 
In 
understanding the rol
e of the client’s involvement in 
influencing the process choices of teams, we observed 

that the client’s perception on control of offshore 

software development played 
a key role. Control refers 
to the set of mechanisms designed to manage the 
processes and individuals such that the desired 
objectives are achieved [15]. At our research sites, we 
noticed that the clients who preferred behavioral-
control mechanisms over outcome-based control 

mechanisms were more involved with the offshore 

team members. Use of behavior-control mechanisms 
emphasize the specification of detailed procedures for 
tasks and the monitoring of adherence to these 

procedures. On the other hand outcome-based control 

mechanisms specify only the final goals of the projects 

and the monitoring of whether the final project goals 
were met. Thus, behavior-controls expect a plan-driven 
approach and hence we notice that the project teams 

that dealt with clients emphasizing these control 

approaches had lesser propensity to choose non-

standard process approaches.  
 5.3. Putting the model to practice 

 We believe that the process choice model 
developed in this paper can be put to general practice 
at most software engineering process groups. The 
necessary prerequisites for operationalizing our model 
for real world projects are 
threefold; First, the firm 
adopting our model should have historical project 
performance and process data that can be used to 
estimate our model in the firm’s particular context 
(e.g., generate company specific coefficients for the 
regression model shown in Section 3.2). Second, there 

is a need to diligently tr
ack the process variations 
implemented at the firm (to determine standard and 
non-standard process choices). Finally, detailed data 
collection (to obtain the project
-specific inputs to the 
model), through both surveys and objective data 

gathering, is necessary even before a project’s 

development activities are initiated. These 

requirements suggest that project teams wanting to 

adopt the models and methods described in this paper 
need to be operating in a reasonably mature process 
537 environment where change
s and process deviations 
happen in a controlled environment.  
 5.4. Limitations of study 

 This study has a number of limitations which we list 
and discuss in this section. 
 5.4.1. Domain specificity. 
First, the empirical context 
of the study might limit the generalization of our 

results to the types of firms we measured: highly 
mature offshore development firms that specialize in 
developing custom enterprise business solutions. It is 
not clear if these results will apply to other 

organizational scenarios. Further, we studied only 
software development projects, and our sample did not 
include data from other types of software activities 
such as maintenance or reengineering.  
 5.4.2. Binary coding of process choices. 
In this paper, 
we limited our treatment of process choices to a binary 
decision 
– standard and non-standard process. In 
particular, as long as a par
ticular project changed any 
of the firm mandated implementation mechanism for 

the 24 CMM KPAs, we considered it a non-standard 

process. We did this to primarily build a simple, 

parsimonious empirical model to capture the causal 

effects of process deviations on performance. This 
approach allows us to focus on the validity and 
viability of the broader phenomena of interest: whether 
augmenting structured, plan-based methods with agile 
processes can lead to positive outcomes. This approach 

is still useful for managers to determine the effects of 

one process choice over another. We are working on 
techniques to remove the binary limitation in our 
model 
– allowing us to handle a much richer set of 
process choices. 
 5.4.3. Non-unified process model. 
In this paper, we 
presented a model that examined values for the six 
process performance indicators based on the chosen 
development process. However, these values still have 

to be manually interpreted before a final decision 

regarding the viability of the chosen process can be 

made. Hence, to obtain best r
esults, project managers 
will have to understand the relationships between the 

five performance indicators 
when using this model. 
We are currently develo
ping methods that can 
automatically combine the five performance indicators, 

accounting for the individual risks and tradeoffs, using 

a theoretically sound formulation, and output a single 
clear indication of whether the selected process is 
beneficial or otherwise. These automatic methods 
would, in particular, allow the 
model to be easily used 
by all project teams in a company 
– with no regard for 
their technical competency or management 
capabilities.  
 5.4.4. Limitation of vendor focus. 
Accounting for the 
individual risks and tradeoffs faced by a project team 
beyond the development environment factors included 

in our model necessitate a client-vendor dyadic study. 

We could not get the approvals to collect individual 
customer data in detail and hence could not perform 
the required dyadic study. We thus limited this paper to 

analyzing process choice impacts using influencing 
factors drawn solely from the vend
or’s development 
environment.
   7. Conclusion  In this paper, we analyz
ed process deviations in a 
highly structured, plan-dri
ven offshore development 
environment to empirically test the 
“balanced process” hypothesis, i.e., if augmenting plan-driven 
development processes with
 agile methods lead to 
superior project performance outcomes. We first 
discovered, through our field research, the key factors 
that influence process choice
 decisions in offshore 
software development. We 
then developed a propensity 
score based empirical model to analyze the causal 
linkages between process choices and five key project 
performance outcomes. Our results show that 

augmenting the highly structured plan-driven processes 
employed in offshore software firms with agile 
practices can lead to superior performance outcomes. 

This study also shows that it is possible for software 
managers to decide a-priori on the development 
process choice that is most 
likely to achieve relatively 
better performance for their projects.   
We are working on better understanding the 
individual risks and tradeoffs that each process 

deviation brings to the fore by conducting a detailed 
field test of our model at the two firms. This will allow 
us to understand a) how to combine various 

performance indicators to obtain process choice 

decisions, and b) the effort 
of specific process choices 
on specific projects/KPAs. To accomplish this, we are 
taking a longitudinal study approach by observing the 
long term effects of the process choices made by the 
teams at these firms.  

 8. References 
 [1] I. Aaen, J. Arent, L. Mathiassen, and O. 
Ngwenyama, "A conceptual map of software 
process improvement," 
Scandinavian journal of 
information systems, 
vol. 12, pp. 123-146, 2001. 
538 [2] P. Abrahamsson, J. Warsta, M. T. Siponen, and 
J. Ronkainen, "New directions on agile 
methods: a comparative analysis," in 
25th International Conference on Software 
Engineering
, Portland, OR, 2003, pp. 244-254. 
[3] P. J. Ågerfalk and B. Fitzgerald, "Flexible and 
distributed software pr
ocesses: old petunias in 
new bowls?: Introduction," 
Communications of 
the ACM, vol. 49, pp. 26-34, 2006. 
[4] M. Agrawal and K. Ch
ari, "Software effort, 
quality, and cycle time: a study of CMM level 5 
projects," 
IEEE Transactions on software 
engineering, 
vol. 33, pp. 145-156, 2007. 
[5] S. O. Becker and M. Caliendo, "Sensitivity 
analysis for average treatment effects," 
The 
Stata Journal, 
vol. 7, pp. 71-83, 2007. 
[6] D. A. Belsley, E. Kuh, and R. E. Welsch, 
Regression Diagnostics: Identifying influential 
data and sources of collinearity
. New York: 
John Wiley & Sons, 1980. 
[7] B. Boehm, "Get ready for agile methods, with 
care," IEEE Computer, vol. 35, pp. 64-69, 2002. 
[8] B. Boehm and D. Port, "Balancing Discipline 
and Flexibility with the Spiral Model and 
MBASE," 
CrossTalk, 
vol. Dec 2001, pp. 23-28, 
2001. 
[9] A. Cockburn, "Selecting a project's 
methodology," 
IEEE Software, 
vol. 17, pp. 64-
71, 2000. 
[10] B. Curtis, "The gl
obal pursuit of process 
maturity," 
IEEE Software, 
vol. 17, pp. 76-78, 
2000. 
[11] M. Deck, "Managing process diversity while 
improving your practices," 
IEEE Software, 
vol. 
18, pp. 21-27, 2001. 
[12] D. E. Harter, M. S. Krishnan, and S. A. 
Slaughter, "Effects of process maturity on 
quality, cycle time, and effort in software 
product development," 
Management Science, 
vol. 46, pp. 451-466, April 2000 2000. 
[13] D. E. Harter and S. 
A. Slaughter, "Quality 
Improvement and Infrastructure Activity Costs 
in Software Development: A Longitudinal 
Analysis," 
Management Science, 
vol. 49, pp. 
784-800, June 2003 2003. 
[14] J. Herbsleb, D. Zubrow, D. Goldenson, W. 
Hayes, and M. Paulk, "Software quality and the 
capability maturity model," 
Communications of 
the ACM, vol. 40, pp. 30-40, June 1997 1997. 
[15] L. Kirsch, S. V, D.-G. Ko, and R. L. Purvis, 
"Controlling information systems development 
projects: the view from the client," 
Management 
Science, 
vol. 48, pp. 484-498, 2002. 
[16] D. H. Kitson and S. M. Masters, "An analysis of 
SEI software process assessment results: 1987-
1991," in 
15th International Conference on 
Software Engineering
, Baltimore, MD, 1993, 
pp. 68-77. 
[17] M. Lindvall and I. Rus, "Process diversity in 
software development," 
IEEE Software, 
vol. 17, 
pp. 14-18, 2000. 
[18] M. Lycett, R. D. Macr
edie, C. Patel, and R. J. 
Paul, " Migrating agile me
thods to standardized 
development practice," 
IEEE Computer, 
vol. 
36, pp. 79-85, 2003. 
[19] P. S. Pande, R. S. Neuman, and R. R. 
Cavanagh, 
The six sigma way: How GE, 
Motorola, and other top companies are honing 
their performance
: McGraw-Hill Professional, 
2007. 
[20] M. C. Paulk, "Extreme programming from a 
CMM perspective," 
IEEE Software, 
vol. 18, pp. 
19-26, Nov 2001 2001. 
[21] M. C. Paulk, "How ISO 9001 compares with the 
CMM," 
IEEE Software, 
vol. 12, pp. 74-83, Jan 
1995 1995. 
[22] M. C. Paulk, B. Curtis, M. B. Chrissis, and C. 
V. Weber, "Capability Maturity Model," 
IEEE 
Software, 
vol. 10, pp. 18-22, 1993. 
[23] N. Ramasubbu, S. Mithas, M. S. Krishnan, and 
C. Kemerer, "Work dispersion, process-based 
learning, and offshore software development 
performance," 
MIS Quarterly, 
vol. 32, p. 
in 
press, 2007. 
[24] D. J. Reifer, "Profiles of Level 5 CMMI 
Organizations," 
Journal of defense software 
engineering, 
vol. 2007, p. 
http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/crosstalk/2007/01/07
01Reifer.html
, 2007. 
[25] D. J. Reifer, "XP and the CMM," 
IEEE 
Software, 
vol. 20, pp. 14-15, 2003. 
[26] A. Takeishi, "Knowledge partitioning in the 
interfirm division of labor: The case of 
automotive product development," 
Organization Science, 
vol. 13, pp. 321-338, 
May-June 2002 2002. 
[27] A. Tiwana, "Knowledge partitioning in 
outsourced software development: A field 
study," in 
International conference on 
information systems, Seattle, 2003. 
[28] L. Williams and A. Cockburn, "Agile software 
development: it's about 
feedback and change," 
IEEE Computer, vol. 36, pp. 39-43, 2003. 
  539