 Using Return on Investment to Compare Agile  and Plan-Driven Practices in Undergraduate Group Projects P.J. Rundle Department of Computer Science, Heriot-Watt 
University 
Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, UK +44(0)131 449 5111 paul@paulrundle.com R.G. Dewar Department of Computer Science, Heriot-Watt 
University 
Edinburgh, EH14 4AS, UK +44(0)131 449 5111 rick@macs.hw.ac.uk   ABSTRACT In this paper we describe our 
experiences of introducing agile 
practices into undergraduate group work by comparing the results 

to more traditional plan-driven groups. When considering whether 

to adopt an agile or plan-driven 
project management strategy in a 
commercial context, Return On Investment (ROI) is an important 

factor. We have adapted the ROI model to our analysis to assess 

what affect a chosen development approach has on the outcome of 
the groups™ projects. In our i
nvestigation we observed seven 
software teams as they implemented a business information 

system. Two groups adopted agile 
practices, including fortnightly 
iterative delivery; the other groups were controls. We found that 

being labelled agile did not necessarily imply that a group™s 

practices were more agile. Also, it was unclear whether the so-

called agile groups delivered a better ROI than their plan-driven 

counterparts. Categories and Subject Descriptors K.3 [Computing Milieux]:COMPUTERS AND EDUCATION K.6.1 [Computing Milieux]: MANAGEMENT OF 
COMPUTING AND INFORMATION SYSTEMS - Project and 

People Management General Terms Management, Measurement, Economics, Experimentation. Keywords
 Agile, plan-driven, undergraduate groups. 1. INTRODUCTION Many project management tec
hniques and methodologies have 
fallen in and out of favour in the field of information systems 

development during the few decades in which IT has been applied 
to business problems [1], [2]. 
Early development projects (pre-
1960s) were typically technology-centric and though the 

programmers employed were well suited to solve the low-level 

problems of the day, it became necessary to conceive formal 

methodologies incorporating best practice as the scale and risk of 

software projects grew. Structured methods emerged in the 1960s 

and 1970s, leading to the acceptance of the Systems Development 

Lifecycle [3]. Prescriptive methods
 such as SSADM appeared in 
the 1980s, driven by failing projects in the public and private 

sector. However, it became clear that these techniques were not 

always effective as two issues arose. First, a heavyweight 

approach expended significant effort in areas which do not 

contribute to the final product, for example comprehensive 

technical documentation. Secondly, an inflexible engineering 

approach does not recognise that often the only thing that never 

changes in a competitive marketplace is change itself [4]. 
In ‚Balancing Agility and Discipline™, Boehm and Turner divide 
the methodologies prevalent today into ‚agile™ and ‚plan-driven™ 

[1]. Since these two terms seem to be the least misleading we 

have come across, and the most suited to this investigation, they 

shall be used throughout. Agile methods include XP and DSDM, 

whereas plan-driven methods such as SSADM are typified by 

their waterfall lifecycle.   
The Department of Computer Scie
nce at Heriot-Watt University 
has, for many years, run a group project in the penultimate (third) 

year of the undergraduate course
 from October to May. Students 
are pseudo-randomly placed in one of (in 2004/2005) seventeen 

teams. Consideration is made of each student™s previous grades in 

order for the groups to be of similar mixed abilities. Every student 

has already completed courses in
 various disciplines; including 
Java, databases, HCI, logic, ne
tworking, business, etc. Groups 
consist of 6 or 7 students and 
each group is given a different 
fictitious system specification, for example, a booking system for 

a garage or a production control system for a manufacturing 

company. Each group is allocated a proxy customer from a 

member of academic (faculty) staff. The customer clarifies 

requirements and is involved in 
the assessment. Each group is 
also allocated a nominal ﬁproject managerﬂ from academic staff 

that may offer further guidance and also contributes to the 

assessment. However, this project
 management role is generally 
peripheral and we make no furthe
r reference to it in our study. 
Assessment of, and feedback on, this
 work is triggered by a first 
deliverable in December (primarily requirements documents). In 
 Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted 
without fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for profit 
or commercial advantage and that 
copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy 

otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, 

requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. 

ICSE 2006
, May 20-28, 2006, Shanghai, China. 
Copyright 2006 ACM 1-59593-085-X/06/0005...$5.00.  the following February, the second deliverable is mainly design 
documentation. Final documenta
tion, a presentation and a 
prototype demonstration are delivered to the customer towards the 

end of the academic year. Some peer review also contributes to an 

individual student™s mark. As a re
sult of this assessment regime, 
the general pattern of development has been, anecdotally at least, 

plan-driven. This paper reports on an experiment
al intervention that enabled us 
to compare plan-driven and agile approaches in developing 

business systems in the context of these undergraduate group 

projects. In both the public and private sectors, Return On 

Investment (ROI) is an objective measure of success, yet it 

difficult to find a comparable instrument with which to assess 

undergraduate development where there is necessarily diversity in 

specifications, customers, a
ssessors, group dynamics, etc. 
However, we have adapted the no
tion of ROI by investigating the 
quantifiable impact of the 
groups™ developments on their 
customers™ expectations and 
off-setting this value against 
estimates of effort. 
We continue by describing the background to the competing 
methodological approaches and some
 related studies, before we 
mention the procedural and ethical considerations that underpin 

our own study. Finally, we present our findings and suggest future 

work. 
2. BACKGROUND Traditional, plan-driven methodologies are allied with 
engineering, advocating thorough re
quirements gathering, system 
design and implementation in rigid sequence; all accompanied 

with extensive documentation. Suppor
ters of this approach assert 
the need for effort in the planning activities to minimise setbacks 

in the implementation stage and to improve quality in the 

delivered artefacts [5].  
Amid mounting resistance to the plan-driven approach, Boehm 
had published the Spiral Model in 1988, which proposed an 

incremental approach to developm
ent, involving cyclic stages of 
requirements planning, 
risk assessment, prot
otyping and software 
design/implementation [3].  
Later, we saw the rise of DSDM, Extreme Programming, etc. as 
new members of the agile stable. However, these had their critics 

and were variously described as naïv
e or ‚quick and dirty™ [2]. To 
counter such allegations, advocat
es of lightweight development 
met and agreed to use the term ‚agile™ to refer to their common 

values. Hence, in February 2001 the Agile Alliance was born [6]. 
There is a wealth of literature ex
tolling the virtues and failings of 
agile and plan-driven approaches. Here are some resources for the 

interested reader [7], [8], [9], [10], [11]. But our focus here is not 

to feed this debate; instead we wish
 to consider what the affect of 
these two approaches might be
 on the development work of 
undergraduates working together in small groups. Several studies of agile methodologi
es have been conducted in an 
undergraduate setting over the last 
few years. Reichlmayr [12] 
states that while it is important
 to understand the waterfall model, 
such an approach to undergradua
te projects denies students the 
opportunity to experience common occurrences in the software 

development lifecycle. An agile approach can incorporate events 
such as requirements change a
nd allow students to appreciate 
process improvement and refactoring.  Reichlmayr™s study was conducted 
at the Rochester Institute for 
Technology (RIT) using undergradua
tes and has a lot in common 
with our own study. RIT™s project is compulsory for second year 

students. Teams of five or six are 
allowed, but in contrast to our 
students, they can choose thei
r team mates. Although many 
students go on to study software e
ngineering in greater detail, for 
some this is their only experience 
of a development project within 
RIT. Again, this is in common with our students.  As is the case in Heriot-Watt,
 the RIT project conventionally 
follows a waterfall approach, although the duration was only one 

semester; considerably less than the Heriot-Watt project, which 

lasts over 30 weeks including Christmas and Easter breaks. In 
addition, students at RIT did not have the opportunity to gain 

detailed mid-project feedback. In
 contrast, our students do get 
some broad feedback on the requirements and design deliverables.  In designing the project to be more agile, Reichlmayr took a 
subset of principles from the Agile Manifesto rather than adopting 

a specific methodology. These included: deliver working software 

frequently; face-to-face communication; simplicity; and team 

reflection. These principles appear to have been selected on the basis that 
documentation could not be omitted, presumably because it is 

important for assessment. As at 
Heriot-Watt, time (delivery date) 
and cost (number in team) are fixe
d and it is only the scope that is 
open to negotiation between the cu
stomer and development team. 
In Reichlmayr™s study, students 
were required to build unit and 
acceptance tests and to adopt Eclipse and CVS. In our study, no 

tool sets are mandated, although 
coincidentally, instruction is 
provided on Eclipse and CVS. At 
RIT, releases were made in 
weeks five, eight and ten, with week ten being the final 

deliverable.  A key problem identified by Reichlmayr was the reluctance of 
some groups to embrace agile behaviour and so work only on 

tasks required to implement the 
current iteration. Groups were 
seen to code ‚hooks™ ready for fu
ture iterations, and even include 
functionality which was not requested by the customer. Unit 

testing was also difficult to sell, however JUnit was used by some 

students.  Reichlmayr concludes that agile 
techniques were effective in the 
teaching of this course. Delivering iteratively provided an 

opportunity for reflection and continuous integration aided 

collaboration. Continuous integration raised the students™ 

appreciation of the need to test throughout and user stories 

increased awareness of risk management and customer priorities 

[12].  
Germain and Robillard conducted si
milar research at Montreal 
University, although this study
 involved measurement of 
cognitive activity throughout the lifecycle in order to determine 

the distribution of effort between activities on RUP-like and XP 

projects [5]. Students were gi
ven a requirements specification 
which had to be implemented 
within 45 days. Following this 
deliverable, a further specification was presented which involved 
architectural changes to the original system and had to be 

delivered within 15 days. This res
earch showed that the XP teams 
spend significantly longer involved with implementation activities 
 such as coding, testing and inte
grating, whereas RUP teams spend 
more time on pre-coding activities. Wh
ilst this is c
onsistent with 
general expectations, Germain and Robillard felt that the disparity 

was smaller than they had anticipated. Furthermore, it was 

concluded that RUP activities do not reduce the effort spent on 

implementation. One important factor was the transfer of 

knowledge from agile teams Œ who 
started implementing earlier Œ to plan-driven teams, specifically in the area of servlet 

technology; a social issue which may have advantaged plan-

driven teams. 
In terms of the relevance of introducing agile practices to student 
group work, Melnik and Maurer believe that it can promote 

professional skills that might otherwise not be addressed [13]. 
3. METHOD We now return to the detail of our own study. After the students 
had been allocated to groups, all teams were offered the 

opportunity to be part of this re
search. In the end, we recruited 
two groups to deliver in an agile manner and five controls 

working in a plan-driven manner. 
This plan-driven behaviour was 
typical of that which happened in previous years and constituted 

minimal intervention on our part.  To compare the two approaches, 
we measured ROI throughout the project lifecycle by evaluating demonstrable functionality 

alongside customer requirements, versus team effort.  During the period when all groups were preparing their second 
deliverables, and before devel
opment began in earnest, we met 
the two agile groups to provide more information on how to adopt 

agile methods and how this would wo
rk in the context of the their 
projects.  Also at this time, we arranged to meet the customers of thel seven 
participating groups to assign values
 to all aspects of the system. 
This was achieved by taking the functional specification Œ 

produced as part of the first deliv
erable Œ and annotating this with 
values based on the customer™s perception of how much a given 

feature would be worth to their 
fictional business. These values 
were not monetary amounts, as 
this would have been very 
difficult for customers to quantify accurately or consistently. 

Instead, we suggested that customers start by allocating 100 

points to one feature, and then a
ssign subsequent features values 
relative to this. These figures we
re untimely normalised across all 
groups.  Agile groups were given a copy of the value-annotated 
specification to increase their comprehension of the customer™s 

needs and to be used as a base
 for planning development. Non-
agile control groups were not made 
aware of these values in order 
to maintain their plan-driven philosophy of attempting to 

implement the full system to the specification, rather than 

prioritising development in an agile manner.   
Groups who volunteered to ﬁgo agil
eﬂ delivered iterations in two 
week timeboxes, whereas plan-d
riven groups worked to the 
deliverable schedule with no extra mid-project iterations. Agile 

teams met their customer at the end of an iteration to assess 

achievements, receive feedback and 
prioritise features for the next 
iteration. Measurements were take
n at these iteration meetings to 
gather results on the ROI realised. An iteration review involved 

the customer assessing parts of the system that had been 
developed in the previous itera
tion and deciding on percentage 
values for the completeness and fitness-for-purpose of the 

delivered functionality. A percentage-based approach was easily 

understood by the customer a
nd group, and gave quantified 
feedback to the group. It was made clear to the customer that 

when measuring delivered functionality, the customer should 

focus on business value achieved rather than level of effort 

expended by the group. As an an
ecdotal example, a customer 
gave 20 percent complete for a 
sign-up page on one application 
because, although the functionality was perfect, she was not 

happy with the design and stated th
at it would demean the brand.   With respect to cost, a copy of the source code was taken, 
allowing us to measure level of effort expended during an 

iteration. Statistics were run on th
is source code using the SLOC 
Count tool [14]. This was then used in a COCOMO II calculation 

to derive a cost figure based on 
a notional monthly developer cost 
of £1,708 [15]. 
In contrast to the two week data collection cycle for the agile 
groups, a less frequent (6-8 week) cycle was adopted for the five 

plan-driven control groups. Meetings and measures of effort and 
value were conducted in the same 
way as before. However, plan-
driven groups were given minimu
m notice of the assessment point 
in order that they did not attempt to deliver a working iteration or 

engage in customer contact that
 they otherwise would not have 
had. As it happened, working al
pha prototypes were available 
from the non-agile groups at these stages so that there was a code 

base to measure costs against and an application for the customer 

to assess for value. If this had not been the case, a stereotypical 

zero value would have been recorded by the plan-driven groups at 

the interim measurement point. 
Whilst our aim was for agile and plan-driven groups to work 
strictly in accordance with their adopted project management 

style, clearly this variable was out
 of our control due to individual 
behaviour and group dynamics. For 
instance, plan-driven control 
groups may have naturally, or inadvertently, chosen to adopt agile 

practices, or their customers 
may have dema
nded software delivery in an iterative manner, w
ithout formally or consciously 
subscribing to agile. In acknowledgement of this issue, we 

gathered data on the level of a group™s agility in questionnaires 

administered during the measurem
ent meetings. In other words, 
we have measured agility explicitly, rather than making the 

assumption that groups who opted for iterative delivery would be 

the most agile. We asked each group the following questions and 

corroborated some of the answers 
with similar questions to the 
customer to check consistency. 
1. As a percentage of the total, how much time did you spend 
working on the project, face-to-face, with two or more other 

team members? 
2. Did you ever seek to integrate ALL code to view the 
complete system at a given point? 
3. How often did you meet the customer face-to-face? 
4. If the customer requested ame
ndments, did you take these on 
board? 
Table 1 shows the agility ratings (0.85-1.15) that were associated 

with the standard answers the groups provided. Given the lack of 

a published model suitable for this 
situation, we have followed the conventions used by COCOMO to
 inform our choices for these 
ratings.  Table 1. Level of Agility Rating for Questionnaire  Rating Factor Low agility    >     >    >    >    >    >    High agility
  0.85 0.95 1.05 1.15 
Q1 < 30% 30%+ 40%+ 50%+ 
Q2 Little integration 
until end Some parts 
occasionally Most parts regularly, but 

not as a whole 
Whole system 
often Q3 Once a term Monthly Fortnightly Weekly 
Q4 No, stuck to 
spec. Took on some 
requests Took on many 
requests Compromised 
Each group completed one questionnaire at each audit point while 
they were being assessed for costs and value delivered. The 

average rating factor for each question was taken and the product 

of these average answers provided an agility rating for the group 

over the course of the project. 3.1 Ethical Considerations The group project contributes to each student™s grade so any 
discrepancies in marks created as
 a result of changing the group™s 
project management stra
tegy has an ethical 
dimension. However, 
the project contributes to less than five percent of the total degree 

grade, minimising any potential downside.  
Openly forcing agile methods upon groups would also have 
opened up the possibility of appeal if the team felt their final 

grade had been negatively impacted, or competing groups had 

been positively advantaged.  As a result, agile groups were 

volunteers and were allowed to opt out at any time. 
Another difficulty was the participation of non-agile control 
groups; what would motivate them to
 be a part of this research 
given that there was no perceived benefit from doing so? With the 

agreement of the academic res
ponsible for administering the 
group projects, the control groups were compulsorily recruited 

rather than being volunteers. Any 
disadvantages were considered 
negligible enough for this approach to be defensible in light of the 

potential worth of the study.   
Finally, intellectual ability of participants is a potentially 
important factor in team success. For this reason, it was important 

to measure the intellectual ab
ility of each group. These ability 
metrics were group averages of each member™s recent grades. 

Since the group identities we refer to in this paper are not the 

same as those used by the sta
ff and students at the university, 
there is no way to match grades to groups, never-mind 

individuals. 4. RESULTS As we have said, we understood that the level of group agility was 
outside of our control. The re
sults from the questionnaires we 
administered to address this issue are given in Figure 1. 0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
AB(agile)
CDEFG
(agile)
agility ratin
g Figure 1. Group agility derived from questionnaires From Figure 1, the so-called agile groups (B and G) were 
somewhat ﬁagileﬂ, but the practices and attitude adopted by 

groups A, E and F exhibit higher 
levels of agility based on their 
subjective responses.  Turning now to the value delivered throughout the project, Figure 
2 shows that group E outperformed the others, managing to 

implement almost all custom
er demands. Groups F and G 
performed well, reaching around 70 percent of the allocated 

value. Group A can be seen to accrue value very rapidly between 

the two measurement weeks in a manner consistent with 

stereotypical plan-driven development, where the system becomes 

usable and valuable as compone
nts are integrated. Ironically, 
Figure 1 showed group A as the most agile. So-called agile groups 

B and G can be seen to deliver ‚quick-wins™ in the early stages of 

the project, before stalling duri
ng March and April, perhaps due 
to the Easter break. Nevertheless, the value created by these agile 

groups during January and February supports the view that even 

early iterations do have some customer value. 
0%10%
20%30%40%
50%
60%
70%80%90%100%28-Jan-05
17-Feb-05
09-Mar-05

29-Mar-05
18-Apr-05
08-May-05

28-May-05
group A
group B
group C
group D
group E
group F
group G
Cumulative  value delivered 
 Figure 2. Cumulative value delivery throughout the project 
lifecycle, as a percentage of the total value allocated by the 

customer 
Before we address ROI, the counter
point to value is cost, and so 
Figure 3 shows how this parameter 
varied over time. Here we can 
see the so-called agile groups are 
fairly typical in this population 
and that two non-agile outliers (groups D and E) have incurred 

higher costs than the others.  020,000

40,000
60,000
80,000
100,000

120,000

140,000
28-Jan-05
17-Feb-05
09-Mar-05
29-Mar-05
18-Apr-05
08-May-05
28-May-05
Cumulative Cost (£)
group A
group B
group C
group D
group E
group F
group G
 Figure 3. Cumulative COCOMO
 II costs of development 
during the project lifecycle 
To analyse ROI in the context of these student projects, we have 
made the assumption that the total customer value of each project 

is the same. Therefore, ROI is th
e percentage of value realised, 
relative to the cost of construction. By dividing the percentage 

value ultimately delivered to the customer by the cost of that 

development, we arrive at a m
easure of ROI; namely the amount 
of value delivered per pound spent. Naturally, a higher ROI is 

advantageous, as it indicates that
 the group are able to deliver 
valuable functionality at low cost.  
To illustrate this point, Figure 
4 shows the average ROI, with 
agile group G outperforming their peers. However agile group B 

did not fare so well with one of the lowest ROI figures. A graph 

of ROI over the lifecycle was also considered but it gives us little 

more insight. Visually contras
ting Figure 1 and Figure 4 does not show any obvious dependency,
 although plotting ROI and 
subjective measures of agility
 does show a weak positive 
correlation, even if we discount
 group G as an unrepresentative 
outlier. 0.0000
0.0010
0.0020
0.0030
0.0040
0.0050
0.0060
0.0070
0.0080
0.0090
AB(agile)
CDEFG
(agile)
Percentage value delivered per pound
 Figure 4. ROI Œ Value (in percentage terms) delivered per 
pound spent on development 
Due to space restrictions, we can only summarise some of our 
other findings. For instance, there is a somewhat predictable 

(although slight) positive correlation between the grade a group 
received for the project and the value they delivered. There is also 
an equally slight (although interesting) positive correlation 

between a group™s grade and their level of agility. 
5. CONCLUSIONS In comparing groups working on undergraduate development 
projects, we attempted to measure the effect of different 

development strategies on th
e outcomes. Specifically, we 
compared agile and plan-driven a
pproaches. We intervened in the 
approach of the volunteer groups we designated as agile, but left 

the control groups fallow, assuming they would adopt a more 

plan-driven approach.  The first surprising results cam
e from questionnaires where it 
appeared that being designated agile, and as such having extra 

tuition on agility, did not make a group exhibit more agile 

practices. 
We then looked at Return On Investment (ROI) as a measure of a 
group™s performance. This was achieved by comparing the value 

the project delivered to a proxy customer, against the cost of that 

value as measured by COCOMO
 metrics. Whilst independent 
consideration of value and cost
s did not highlight any startling 
differences between the two types of group, when we looked at 

ROI, one of the two so-called ag
ile groups did seem to deliver a 
much higher ROI than the other groups. Of course, this value may 

have been a chance and unrepresentative outlier, particularly 

considering the other so-called agile group had one of the lowest 

levels of ROI in the sample. 
One explanation of the apparent similarity of outcomes for the 
two approaches could be that some inter-group communication 

happened that we were not aware of. Also, the control groups 

would have been aware that something was afoot during the 

recruitment phase of the study. In addition, all students had been 

exposed to some classes on agile
 methods during their time with 
us leading up to this project. Any one of these factors could have 

biased the results. 
However, as observed by Hirsch [
16], ﬁAgile development is best 
viewed as an evolution of plan 
driven development and not as a 
radical departure from previous pr
acticesﬂ. In other words, we 
should not be so surprised there is less of an impact on the work 

of the students than we had initially assumed. 
In terms of future work, it would certainly be advisable to repeat 
this study with a larger sample size. Since we have some evidence 

that there is no major impact on the outcomes, next time it might 

be more ethically acceptable to instruct a larger number of groups 

to adopt an agile approach, rather than relying on volunteers. 

Also, we did not get a summativ
e appraisal of the students™ 
experiences, as per Melnik and Maur
er [13]. This would be useful 
in future studies to capture a qualitative dimension. Some measure 
of group coherence or team spirit might also help explain our 

findings. From an educational perspectiv
e, we hope that the study has 
raised awareness amongst student
s and that it might indicate 
implications to educators. Alt
hough we feel it is too early to 
propose ROI as an assessment instrument, we found no evidence 

to suggest it would not be a fair measure if used appropriately. 
 6. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS Our thanks go to all the student pa
rticipants for their cooperation. 
Thanks also to Helen Ashton, 
Patrick Green, Andrew Ireland and 
Nick Taylor for their support and advice. 
7. REFERENCES [1] Boehm, B. and Turner, R. Balancing Agility and Discipline. Addison Wesley, 2003. 
[2] Avison, D. and Fitzgerald, G., Information Systems Development: Methodologies, Techniques and Tools. McGraw Hill Higher Education, 2002. [3] Hughes, B. and Cotterell, M., Software Project Management, 4th edition, McGraw-Hill Publishing Co.. [4] Beck, K. Extreme programming explained: embrace change, 2nd edition, Addison-Wesley. 2004. 
[5] Germain, É., and Robillard, P. N. Engineering-based 
processes and agile methodologies for software development: a comparative case study. 
J. Syst. Softw. 75, 1-2 (Feb. 2005), 17-27. [6] The Agile Alliance. Manifesto for Agile Software Development. http://www.agilemanifesto.org. 2001, last accessed 22/2/06. 
[7] Lippert, M. L., Roock, S., and Wolf H. Extreme 
Programming in Action. John Wiley & Sons. 2002. 
[8] Boehm, B. Project Termination Doesn™t Equal Project Failure. IEEE Computer. 33, 9 (Sept. 2000), 94-96. [9] Little, T. Value Creation and Capture: A Model of the Software Development Process. IEEE Software. 21, 3, (May/Jun, 2004), 48-53. 
[10] Morgan, M. J. Controlling So
ftware Development Costs. Industrial Management and Data Systems. 94, 1, (1994), 13-18. [11] Holcombe, M. XP After Enron Œ Can It Survive?. In 
Proceedings of 4th International Conference on Extreme Programming and Flexible Processes in Software 
Engineering (XP2003)
 (Genova, Italy, May 25-29, 2003). 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science 2675, 1-8. [12] Reichlmayr, T. The Agile Approach to an Undergraduate 
Software Engineering Course Project. 33rd ASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference, (Boulder, CO, Nov 5-8, 2003) 3, S2C- 13-18. [13] Melnik, G. and Maurer, F. A cross-program investigation of students' perceptions of agile methods. In 
Proceedings of the 
27th international Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE '05) (St. Louis, MO, USA, May 15-21, 2005). ACM 

Press, NY, 481-488. [14] Wheeler, D. A. SLOC Count Users Guide. http://www.dwheeler.com/sloccount/sloccount.html, 2004, last accessed 22/2/06. 
[15] Boehm, B. et al. 
Software Cost Estimation with COCOMO II. Prentice Hall PTR. 2000. [16] Hirsch, M. Moving from a plan driven culture to agile 
development. In Proceedings of the 27th international Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE '05) (St. Louis, 
MO, USA, May 15 - 21, 2005). ACM Press, NY, 38-38. 
 