 Panel: eXtreme Programming: Helpful or Harmful? Hossein Saiedian Electrical Engineering & Computer Science University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66045, USA Establishing a process for software development is a growing concern in industry. To alleviate the concerns, a relatively large number of pro- posals and models have been introduced since late 1980s, including CMM, SPICE, Unified Pro- cess, OPEN, as well as the more recent and emerging agile methodologies such as eXtreme Programming, SCRUM, Feature Driven Develop- ment (FDD), and Win-Win Spiral. All of these models and methodologies define a set of 'best' practices, some of which, espe- cially in the case of agile methodologies, are con- sidered controversial and against the tradition- ally accepted 'best' practices. Nevertheless, agile methodologies have become very popular. There are obviously some heated debates about which model or methodology is the most effec- tive one. Among the emerging agile method- ologies, eXtreme Programming has probably be- come most popular, thought many times project characteristics may determine which methodol- ogy, or sometimes, a combination of methodolo- gies, to be used. The concerns over the selection of the most ef- fective methodology (or best practices) is also re- flected in debates within the software engineering education circles. Here, the software engineering educators will have to decide which methodology is the right one for teaching the next generation of software engineers, or integrating into the soft- ware engineering education curricula. An excel- lent report [ 1 ] provides a brief review of several such methodologies as well as evaluative research and instructional issues related to agile methods and their potential impact. This panel provides two opposing views vis-h- vis incorporating agile processes, and in partic- ular eXtreme Programming, into software engi- neering education. The panel will be conducted slightly different from the traditional approaches. It will include normal paper presentations by the authors, followed by plenary debate. The first paper (authored by Lars Benedix, G/Sel Hedin, and Boris Magnusson) presents an experience from using eXtreme Programming to teach software engineering concepts in an under- graduate course with over 100 students. The au- thors' experience is very positive. The second paper (authored by Jean-Guy Schneider and Lor- raine Johnston) conclude that introducing an ag- ile process such as eXtreme Programming in soft- ware engineering education is not a straightfor- ward task and the corresponding practices may run counter to educational goals. The paper presentations will serve as authors' position statements. Discussion and debate will follow. References [1] G. Hislop, M. Lutz, J. Naveda, W. Mc- Cracken, N. Mead, and L. Williams, Integrat- ing Agile Practices into Software Engineer- ing Courses, Computer Science Education, 12(3): 169-185, Swets & Zeitlinger, 2002. 0-7695-1877-X/03 $17.00 © 2003 IEEE 718 