  MEETING INDUSTRY – ACADEMIA 
RESEARCH COLLABORATION CHALLENGES WITH 
AGILE METHODOLOGIES
 Anna Börjesson Sandberg Ericsson Gothenburg, Sweden anna.sandberg@ericsson.com 
Ivica Crnkovic Chalmers University of Technology 
Gothenburg, Sweden ivica.crnkovic@chalmers.se
  Abstract—Continuous and long-term collaboration between industry and academia is crucial to develop front-line research 
in context-dependent areas like software development where 
both practitioners and researchers are searched for data collection, analysis and results. Despite many mutual benefits, 

this collaboration is often challenging, not only due to different 
goals, but also because of different pace in providing the results. 

The software development industry has during the last decade 
aligned around and organized their development adopting agile 
methodologies. For the researchers, 
the agile methodologies are 
a topic for a research, rather than a means of performing the 

research itself. We can state a question, whether the agile 
methodologies can be a good common ground for enabling successful research collaboration between industry and academia? This paper reports on a longitudinal industry – academia research collaboration case, which has stepwise 
adapted SCRUM over a six-year period. The implementation of 
SCRUM and the collaboration successes and challenges are 
presented, and findings are discussed.     Keywords: industry-academia research; agile methodologies; 
collaboration; case study  I.INTRODUCTION  Speed and responsiveness are today essential for being 
successful in software development as the prerequisites are 
continuously changing [1]. Under these circumstances, in-depth understanding of software development requires being 

in midst of the situations as they are taking place. Doing 

research on related topics requires therefor close collaboration between the researchers and the practitioners. The need for 

close research collaboration is today understood ([2][3][4] 
[5]) but practical ways to organize such collaborations are still 

challenging. As industry and academia leans on different governing variables [6] (e.g. publishing in academia vs. 
measure of market success in industry) it is important to find the practical ways to facilitate 
the needed close collaboration. 
The software development industry has during the last 
decade aligned around agile methodologies [1], where practical methods around roles, ceremonies and artifacts facilitate stepwise growth of va
lue with opportunity to adjust 
to changing requirements. The research performance in 

academia in software engineering has thorough research 
methods when it comes to studying phenomena and 
identifying problems, setting research questions, providing research results, and perform the validation, typically in an iterative way [7], but they have hardly a formally-defined 
process around timing, efforts and collaboration. In general, 
both industry and academia start with a problem or challenge that are not well understood, work in a continuously-changing 

environment, and the goals are achieved through iterative steps. These similarities can be a fair motivation to ask the 
question whether agile methodologies can be a good common ground for a successful collaboration in research between industry and academia. Further, is it possible to apply certain agile practices established in industry, e.g. SCRUM? If yes, 
which adaptations should be introduced to which extent and for which type of collaboration? What is the dynamic of the 

deployment of the different agile practices? These are the questions that are scrutinized and discussed in this paper. The 

discussion is based on a longitudinal case study with several 
partners, both companies and universities.   
This paper describes the deployment, the use, and the 
dynamic of utilization of SCRUM, the most widely used agile 
methodology in industry today. We report on a longitudinal 
industry – academia (I-A) research collaboration case, which 
has stepwise adapted SCRUM 
over a six-year period. We 
analyze the pace of its deployment, and its influence on the 
success of the projects. We also analyze a case where multiple 
research projects are performed in collaboration between several companies and research groups, and the effects of the synchronized performance in collaboration within and between the projects. The paper is organized as follows. In section  II we discuss the challenges of I-A collaboration, in section III we give an 
overview of our case study and define the research questions. In section IV we explain our research approach. Section 
V and VI describe collaborations in the case study within a project and between the projects, section VII discusses the analyzed data, and section VIII presents the findings and lessons learned. The study is concluded with the validity perspectives 
in section IX, related work in X, and conclusions in XI. 
II.COLLABORATION CHALLENGES The foundation for successful research between industry and 

academia collaborations lies in the possibility to create an 
overlap between the key activities and goals that both want to 
address. Industry is focused on identifying business critical problems and then address them with beneficial solutions. In 
parallel, academia is focused on identifying problems where 

there is a knowledge gap and then address these with new 
knowledge that contributes to the general body of knowledge. 
Figure 1 shows the research model (adopted from [7]) for 
industry and for academia. The 
two lines of activities, from industry and from academia, are indeed overlapping, but to make this overlap work in practice, a number of practices (i.e. 

collaboration ceremonies) need to be in place, which both parties agrees about and thrives over. 2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice Track978-1-5386-2717-4/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICSE-SEIP.2017.20712017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice Track978-1-5386-2717-4/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE-SEIP.2017.20732017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice Track978-1-5386-2717-4/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE-SEIP.2017.2073 While it is relatively easy to agree on the problem and 
solutions, viewpoints differ regarding variables such as relevance, rigor, time horizons, and planning practices. Research has characterized these viewpoints also as success factors in collaboration management and software 

engineering research [5], but the practical methods to overcome the differences are still challenging. 
One example of a collaboration challenge 
is how to get 
started a research project. Once having a good interest match 
between a researcher and practitioner [2], they have to agree 

about the research question(s). While the practitioner might 
not even see the need to define a specific question to meet the problem, the researcher is not satisfied with just a question 
matching the problem unless it also will contribute to new 
knowledge. Another example of collaboration challenge is about how to work jointly during the period of understanding the problem. The practitioner is used to a close collaboration where knowledge grows informally
 as the work evolves. The researcher is more used to formal procedures where data is collected and then analyzed possibly without any involvement from the practitioners during the analysis (for example when 

applying systematic literature study). A third collaboration 
challenge example is about how to organize and execute the joint work
 – different paces, deadlines and focused work is practiced in academia and industry.  Finally, we can refer to a challenge how to communicate with different stakeholders
. The practitioner is well aware about the need to share the 
development results continuously to the closest stakeholders to enable their fast utilization, but does not pay a high priority of sharing the results to boarder community. The researcher is often more used to share its result in workshops informally discussing preliminary results with other researchers that are not necessary close stakeholders, and later publish the results, which obviously require larger lead time.  
While all these examples are indeed challenging when it 
comes to managing one collaboration initiative, there is 
another key challenge when to deal with many related research initiatives, i.e. scaling I-A research efforts such as 
                                                             
1 http://www.software-center.se
 running several research projects between several industrial 
and academic partners. These initiatives need to have the 
attention from their stakeholders to assure the right involvement, commitment, approval and deployment. As the stakeholders now come both from both industry and academia, the joint access is difficult both from timing and 
time perspective.  
III.THE CASE STUDY The Software Center
1 is a consortium between academia and industry with its headquarter in Gothenburg Sweden, started 
in 2011 and during six years, the center has grown from seven to fifteen partners; ten from industry (Ericsson, Saab, Volvo Group, Volvo Cars, Axis Communication, Tetra Pak, 
Grundfos, Jeppesen, Verisure, and Siemens), and five 

universities (Chalmers University
 of Technology, University 
of Gothenburg, Malmö University, Linköping University, 

and Mälardalen University), gathering about twenty 
researchers and at least the three times more practitioners. 
The characteristics of all companies are that they are not pure 
software companies, but rather enterprises developing software-intensive systems, 
and facing increasing influence of software in development efforts and in providing novel 
features. The companies are classified as large international enterprises, with a high competence in system and software development, and accustomed to collaborate with academia 
partners in different research projects. The Software Center’s 
mission is to in the light of the current rapid digitalization 

strengthen and transform software-intensive systems industry 
into modern world-leading software companies in terms of 
business models, architectures, ways of working and organizational setup. The Software Center has built its 
current successful progress on several different principles such as frequent partner interaction, transparency of outcome, close collaboration, industry funding, industry 
decisions, and academia research design. The research 
projects are grouped in four themes – continuous delivery,   Figure 1. Overlap between industry and research activities 
727474 continued architecture evolution, ecosystems, and metrics. The research projects are executed in form on six-months 
long sprints, concluding with result reporting, and then the decisions from the steering committee whether the projects will continue, increase or decrease the efforts, or be closed 
down. Typically, several industrial partners are engaged in each project, and one research group, but it could be several. The projects are mostly proposed by the researchers, though 
it could be discussed or even initiated by industrial partners.  
In our case study we pay the attention to fully understand the area ‘close collaboration’ realized through research projects that applied agile methodologies, concretely adopted 
SCRUM [8]. SCRUM is an iterative and incremental 
methodology widely used in industry, since it enables close face-to-face and online collaboration of team members, and it increases speed and flexibility in software development. 
SCRUM makes use of a number of roles and key ceremonies 
to reach its goals. Key roles are teams, scrum masters and product owners, while key ceremonies are ‘sprint planning’, ‘daily stand’, ‘sprint demo’ and ‘sprint retrospective’. The 
roles and ceremonies are used in a sprint workflow where a sprint is restricted to a fixed duration, normally between one to four weeks. Each sprint starts with a 
sprint planning event that aims to make an estimated commitment for the sprint goal. Each sprint ends with a sprint demo and sprint retrospective that reviews progress to show to stakeholders and identify lessons and improvements for the next sprints. 
The daily stand ceremony helps the team to respond to changes and navigate towards the goal. As SCRUM is 

designed to manage responsiveness, disciplines outside 
software development have started to use the it.  
This model has been adopted in Software Center for 
collaborative research projects, with some changes: projects may last several years, a sprint is six months long, the number of teams are lower (3-4 teams), as well as the team sizes – 3-4 members). The results obtained each sprint are realized as 
values for industrial partners, and publications primary for 
the research partners. Figure 2 shows the SCRUM process 
and its key elements as a standard used in industry, and adopted in the Software Center.  Our study is focused on how the collaboration challenges described in section II are met in such constellation.  
Concretely we analyze utilization and adoption of SCRUM, 

which we express with the following research question: 
Q1.What are the advantages and challenges in using 
SCRUM in collaborative research projects between 
industry and academia? In addition, we analyze the dynamics of deploying of 
SCRUM in an I-A collaboration, since while this process 
model is commonly used in industry, it is not known as a possible model for performing research activities. We define 
the following research question: 
Q2.What is a possible introduction pace of SCRUM in 

industry-academia collaboration? Finally, the case study enables us to analyze effects of using SCRUM in several collaborative 
research projects with many 
stakeholders. Here we state the question: 
Q3.Which synergy effects and which challenges are 
appearing in extended collaboration in the industry-academia research projects? These questions are discussed through a case study described below. IV.
THE CASE STUDY RESEARCH APPROACH  In the current study we applied Collaborative Practice Research (CPR) [9] that includes insiders (practitioners) and 

outsiders (researchers) working in close collaboration in a research team that can take advantage of bringing their 
specific knowledge of identification, analysis, and 
interpretation together. The two authors have had the roles as 

an insider and an outsider and then played the roles accordingly [10]. The insider has been an active partner to the studied case since it was started and has deep insights to the 
needs within in industry as well as the conducted projects. The outsider has joined the studied case three years ago with a long experience as a researcher, but with less detailed knowledge of the different projects. This set-up of roles made it possible to criticize and discuss relevant data. The authors took an iterative approach in the analysis phases to be able to scrutinize all data carefully. Th
ey both thrive over the topic of understanding how industry and academia can come closer  Figure 2. Key elements in SCRUM 
737575 and by that generate front-line research in context depending areas. The CPR approach includes case studies ([11][12]) and 
this is the method used in this longitudinal study performed during two years, analyzing a period of six years. The information collection included several different methods 
and sources to triangulate data and avoid possible biased influence (see TABLE I). The insider has participated 

actively in the steering committee and project meetings, and had influence on strategic decisions and concrete activities, 
having mostly the perspective from the industry side. The 
insider was also included into projects works from time to 
time. The outsider performed the questionnaires and semi-structured interviews with the researchers and practitioners. 

During the study the insider and outsider had regular meetings discussing the results in several iterations. In total 
three questionnaires have been performed, two with the researchers (2015, and 2016), and one with the industrial 
participants (2016).  The questions to the researchers were related to researchers’ satisfaction of the collaboration and 
research results, while questi
ons to the practitioners were 
related to the research result relevance.
2  TABLE I INFORMATION ELICITATION Form and 

source Action 
Direct involvement Directly involvement in ~15 research projects and 
in the Steering Committee. Minutes of meetings Formal notes on discussions and decisions made 
during governance meetings. Participatory 
observations Taking part of action where problems are 
discussed and analyzed in different projects. Development documentation Analysis of project meeting protocols, project 
presentations, project plans, project decisions, final reports. Collaboration questionnaires Two questionnaires about research appreciation of the result and one questionnaire industry about appreciation of the way of working. Open-ended, 
semi-structured interviews 10 informal interviews or discussions with 
practitioners and researchers based on the questionnaires. Workshops and 
analysis meetings 2 workshops with discussions with researchers and practitioners about the results from the questionnaires. V.COLLABORATION ANALYSIS Table II shows the I-A collaborative projects during the history of Software Center. The table shows the number of concurrent projects, number of partners involved in them, the 

size of the project in terms of active members, and activities 
in form of workshops. Further, the number of the 
characteristics of SCRUM, i.e. ceremonies are presented: 
sprint planning, monthly stands, demonstrations, and 
retrospective activities. Finally, the table shows the outcome 
in form of research results 
in from of publications, and the 

results taken over from industry.    
                                                             
2 the questionnaires and answers can be found at: www.goo.gl/P2c867   When analyzing the Software Center data from Table II, 
and from of other data sources as specified in Table I, between 2011-2016 we can identify that the collaboration has 
evolved in two major steps. The first phase, setting the pace, occurred from the start of the Software Center in 2011 until 
mid-2013. The second phase, extending the use of collaboration ceremonies, occurred from mid-2013 until 
2016. Below we describe the two phases in more detail. A.Phase 1- Setting the Pace 
Already from the start it was obvious that the Software Center should be built on principles of close collaboration. The center early defined one important principle: ‘working in 6-
month sprints’. The idea was th
at all research collaboration projects are defined and reported within a 6-month time frame to assure stepwise and 
visible progress that provided continuous interest from stake
holders. Initially, researchers 
and practitioners came together in specially organized events 
where the practitioners described their software development 
challenges around a number of themes (e.g. architecture and metrics). Researchers then approached the practitioners 
where they wanted to continue discuss potential ideas. In this way the different collaborations were initiated.  
Each researcher (or researcher team) then proposed a 
research project for the upcoming 6-month sprint based on the joint ideas from the researcher and collaborating industry partners. All incoming proposals were refined and decided upon in an organized governance structure where the industry partners decided upon what proposals they wanted to finance. In the end of each sprint all collaborating partners and 
interested stakeholders came together in a major reporting workshop, where all research project results were presented. 

The same workshops were used to discuss both evolving and new research projects for the next upcoming sprint. Setting the pace with 6-month sprints has shown to be 
beneficial. The joint sprint pl
anning by every research project as well as the joint demo in th
e end of every sprint, facilitate the close collaboration. The sprint planning ceremony assures cross industry and academia agreement as well as a plan for how to reach a specific goal. During the demos (e.g. reporting workshops), which today gather around 100 different collaboration partners from both industry and academia, the results are widely presented and disseminated. These two very important collaboration ceremonies form the basis for a 
continuous close collaboration where skilled people within 

different disciplines can come together and solve intricate challenges for the future. This way of working faced also some challenges. Researchers report that the sprint concept can be challenging for the researchers due to time limitations to utilize resources 
on short notice as well as having time to report on the study. Also, industry partners have identified challenges related to the time limitations where there are relatively short periods 
(one week) between project proposals are available until they 
should be decided about. 
 747676 B.Phase 2- Extending the use of collaboration ceremonies 
By time  the number of research projects grew (see Table II 
column 3). To handle scale, it was needed to organize the different research projects that were closely connected. As the Software Center was formed around several themes, these 
were then used to get collaborating partners in different 
projects together. This way of organizing the projects also contributed to having stronger research projects (i.e. more precisely defined research questions, industry partners and researchers) to be able to come up with stronger results (more data sources and more thorough analysis). These theme 
coordination meetings (i.e. Monthly Stands) filled the 
function of regularly coming together to respond to changes and handled issues during execution towards the set-up goals. 
By time, the potential of learning and doing better in the next sprint became attempting to all involved. One of the founding professors already from the start practiced mini-retrospectives in the end of every sprint demo, to be inspired 
from potential improvement ideas. This helped evolve the Software Center by understanding how to organize demo events in ways even more attractive for all stakeholders. Gradually more and more research project practiced retrospectives in the end of every sprint to do better in the upcoming sprint (see Table II, column Retrospective). Making use of monthly stands and retrospectives have 
increased both the collaboration opportunities and the improvement opportunities. Finding ways to regularly come 
together to solve a challenge or get better at something is very 
important for stakeholders (i.e. practitioners and researchers) 
who does not meet normally in the every-day business life. 
It is still challenging to get many researchers to gather 
around the same research question and the organize the research accordingly. The current collaboration ceremonies 
help researchers come together in individual projects, but so far there are few signs of projects where more than a few 

researchers join forces to understand larger development challenges cross many companies. It is likely so that other 
practices are required to enable further cross-project collaboration where researchers and practitioners can come 
together to discuss potential broader projects. 
C.Overall acceptance of SCRUM 
In two questionnaires with the researchers the overall goal 
was to understand appreciation (or not) of using SCRUM and 

in particular sprints of six-months periods. For the question about appropriateness of the Sprint model the answers were in majority positive with 89% of answers “good, very good, 
excellent” (see Figure 3.). TABLE II.R
ESEARCH 
PROJECTS WITHIN 
SOFTWARE 
CENTER 
2011-2016 


˚˜˙˝#
$%








˘
ˇ




ˇ


˛
˚˜









 ˛
!"


#
˙ˆ˘
$%
ˇ
˛
#&"


˛


˙
)*
˛


&˙+˘
',

˛˛
3˛˛
,
4˛5

ˆ


˛˛
3˛˛
,
4˛8˚
9˛
2,

˛˛
3˛˛
,
4˛8:8



˛˛
˛˛
,
4˛8

7,

˛˛
˛˛
˛˛
,
4˛8"



˛˛
˛˛
˛˛!
4˛8
,˜
/,

˛˛
˛˛
˛˛!
4˛˛
"˙


˛˛
˛˛
˛˛!
4˛8!
=,

˛˛
˛˛
˛˛!
4˛8˚
9


˛˛
˛˛
˛˛!
4˛
8

ˆ˛
(*)
 THE PROJECT OUTCOMES
: HTTP
://WWW
.SOFTWARE
-CENTER
.SE/DIGITAL
ASSETS
/1580/1580347_
SW_CENTER
_DELIVERABLES
_REVB
.PDF
 757777  Figure 3. Appropriateness of Sprint model  The most characteristic positive answers were: 
-“The short period grants companies’ interests, which are 
more open to take a 6 months risk.” 
-“The sprint model is critical for frequent feedback and 
validation of results. Also, it allows a healthy redirection 
of projects if necessary and it stimulates research results in a very positive way. Finally, it is great fun to have 
report results every sixth months as well as to lick off something new every sixth months. The rhythm it brings to the research process in unique and very rewarding.” 
-“Good for keeping industrial relevance.” The cautious and negative answers (despite dominated positive grading) were: 
-“… however, the sprint w
ithout a corresponding backlog (i.e. a concrete long-termed plan agreed by the 
companies) is not so useful.” 
-“Reporting results frequently have benefits but development, execution and reporting of results every 6 months puts, in my own view, limitations on what type 
of research that can be done.” -“… bad for long term research goals with e.g. involving 
PhD students.” -“It is good, but expectations are high and unclear.” The second important and to some extent a controversial element in the SCRUM process 
has been shown to be the decision process for the project start and its possible termination. The decision is given by a body of industrial partners based on a short proposal written by the researches 

and already informally discussed with the industrial partners. These decisions are of course very important, not at least for 

the researchers, which mean for them new projects funded or 
not. The question about the project decision process was 
stated as a question whether the decision process is good or not for the research of the academia partners. Figure 4 shows the answers. The majority is neutral or positive, while two 
researchers (of 15) had a negative opinion.  
The answers explained in a positive manner: 
-“It forces us to formulate projects with clear and concrete benefits for the companies, which is good.” -“Companies get to see what is available and commit 
resources to the projects they like. As such the process also serves to weigh the value of the presented research.” -“Projects should be frequently evaluated to stay relevant. 
Also, the selection process allows very useful feedback from the companies as they all engage in the process, 
read the project descriptions and share their thoughts with us in an impressive way.” 
The negative comments were the following: 
-“At now I honestly did not understand how the selection works, nor could grasp from the companies if our 
proposal was appealing or not.” -“About the selection process itself, I believe there is not 
always clear relation/correspondence or there are even discrepancies between: how well a project is doing, in terms of topic and results relevance and impact for the company partners, and the feedback/decision from the selection process.” 
-“About the selection process itself, I believe there is not 
always clear relation/correspondence or there are even discrepancies between: how well a project is doing, in terms of topic and results relevance and impact for the company partners, and the feedback/decision from the selection process.” 
-“Not transparent, frustrating for researchers and industry partners. Facilitates rumors.” 
  Figure 4. Satisfaction with the project start decision process  Here we see that the process itself is not questioning but rather the transparency of the decisions, and the rationale 

given for the decisions. (After the presentation of the 
answers, the Steering Committee decided to increase the transparency of the decision process).  The other questions we refer to here are related to the industrial relevance and the importance of the work for the researchers. The answers show if the SCRUM approach can 
be used for the research that is important for all partners. The 
summary of the answers is presented in Table III: 
TABLE III    THE RESEARCH RELEVANCE  Question Answer 
Is the research in Software Center important for you? Yes 70% (4 and 5 in the scale 
1-5), 30% neutral Is Software Center important for increasing your network? Yes 75% (4 and 5 in the scale 1-5) Is the research at Software Center for you of the high excellence?   Highest 18%, High 35%, OK 
35%, Low 6%, Poor 6% 
We note here that we did not analyze the scalability of the 
projects and interrelations between them. The projects were 





ˇˆ
˙˝ˇˆ˚˜ˇˆ˜˚!ˇ"#ˇ˚$˚%&
''











˘ˇ
˝
˝



˝ˇ

%767878 basically running independently, and during the workshops some mutual activities have been initiated, but not in a 
systematic way. 
VI.
EXTENDED COLLABORATION
 The six-month-sprint-approach enables synchronization of several projects running in parallel and executed by 
different companies, research groups, and universities. When 
using a six-month-sprint-approach combined with a number of collaboration ceremonies, more collaboration 
opportunities occur apart from the ones in the pure research 
projects. Several positive collaboration synergies reveal once 
the pace of ceremonies are regularly executed. While the 

initial Software Center ambition was to increase the 
excellence in I-A research projects, several different levels of collaborations occur that are making use of different 
collaboration ceremonies. While the most obvious 
collaboration level is the one in the research projects (see Figure 5, #2) where practitioners and researchers come to 
together, five other collaboration levels also seem to be of high value. Leaders from industry and academia come together (see Figure 5, #1) in classical governance meetings and sprint demos, where they learn to appreciate each other’s strengths and respect their different governing variables. 
Practitioners from different companies come together (see 
Figure 5, #3) to listen and learn from each other from the ‘horse’s mouth’, where they get practical guidance and understanding of the same challenges from new perspectives. Researchers from different universities (see Figure 5, #4) 
come together to discuss and evolve ideas, where joint interests can pave the way for future stronger research 
projects. Leaders and practitioner within one company (see 
Figure 5, #5), particularly large 
and/or distributed companies, come together and learn that company internal needs often are the same and can be improved by jointly coming together. Researchers within one university (see Figure 5, #6), 
particularly large universities, come together via the different 
collaboration ceremonies, where they learn more about each other’s research topics and increase spontaneous new ideas. 
The different collaboration levels make use of different collaboration ceremonies (Figure 5, columns 3 – 8). This 
increase of collaboration between different stakeholders 
within industry and academia is in
 itself beneficial for the in-
 depth understanding of all aspects that are required to accelerate the adoption of novel approaches to software development. Again, the practical ways (i.e. the collaboration 
ceremonies) to meet and collaborate is key to assure continued, increasing and successful research projects.  When studying the company presence at the quarterly 
steering committee meeting we found that almost 90% of the industry partners took part at every meeting. During six years one company left the center, due to closing the business, all others stayed and new joined in spite of variation in market position. However, as the center is growing there are challenges related to scalability. From the interviews, we 
have learned that researchers claim that it is very difficult to 
manage to present and discuss deeper insights during the 10-

minutes slot given at the demo ceremony. At the same time, just extending the time for the 
demo requites too much total 
time that many participants are not ready to give. 
VII.
DISCUSSION A.The positive effects of SCRUM 
The need for time-boxed and coordinated sprints to manage speed and responsiveness are similar. The sprint 
length differs, but the beat in itself where all collaboration 
ceremonies can be executed in a sufficient pace is as valuable in industry as for I-A research projects. The foundation of having teams consisting of both 
researchers and practitioners that work as a unit towards a jo
int goal is similar. In the case 
of Software Center, the team members, in particular the 
researchers, most often are allocated for more than one project. This fact underlines the importance for synchroni-
zation between the projects. The sprint planning ceremonies meet the challenge of agreeing about what to do, how and when in order to reach the goal. The challenge of regularly   Figure 5. Different Collaboration Levels 
777979 coming together to mitigate practical problems during 
executions are the same, even though they are less frequent (monthly stand) in I-A research project compared to industry 
projects (daily stand). The challenge of having their 
stakeholders updated and interested is the same and is met 
with demos, but again with different frequencies. And finally, 
anything that can be repeated can be improved with retrospectives. This statement is as valid for I-A research 
projects as for pure industry development projects where retrospectives are most useful to learn and do better. B.The challenging parts of SCRUM use 
There are however several challenges that were 
repeatedly appeared during the projects executions. When 
discussing with the researchers a number of issues were brought up. The most common ones are related to the 6-
months sprint length (too short)
, researchers’ availability (too 
little time) and researchers’ motivations in doing demos 
(since it can require quite some efforts, that is not visible as a 
real research contribution). The researchers that were a part since the start of the Software Center, and also in similar 
research collaboration prior to that, do not see these issues as 
particularly challenging, so it is obvious that overcoming 
these challenges are related to how used you are to work in 
this fashion. Furthermore, almost none of the challenges are directly related to the collaboration ceremonies. Other 
challenges that are brought up by the practitioners are related to difficulties of making the re
search projects stronger and having publications closely connected to research results.   
C.What was not used from SCRUM 
While most of the elements from SCRUM have been used 
and possibly adopted in the Software Center I-A collaboration, there are several elements that have not be used, either on purpose, or so far.  Product owner (product owner creates a prioritized wish 
list called a product backlog) has not been explicitly defined. In the projects it was assumed that the main (senior) 

researcher is the product owner. However, this role is not 
used on purpose due to a strong interest for the results of both industrial and academic partners, and not precisely defined product backlog. Having in mind that the these are the research projects, it has been acceptable that each sprint does not need to start with the precisely defined product backlog. 
Product backlog (a list of things that need to be done in the project) is for the same reason not required. Some of the 
projects used product backlog, but in a more informal and 

non-transparent way. An absence of a product backlog may 
however cause some uncertainties in the projects (as we have 
seen in a few comments in the questionnaires.) 
SCRUM master
 (accountable for removing impediments to the ability of the team to deliver the product goals and 
deliverables) is not defined in the Software Center projects. It is assumed that this is the main researchers (so the same 

person as the product owner) which might has some negative consequence on the project work efficiency, but so far a need for an explicate role in the projects has not been identified. 
D.The evidence of the research results The results provided by the center in a form of values for 
the companies are shown by a continuous increase of projects and partners. The results in the form of the research 

achievements, in particular in
 number of publications, are not 
presented in this paper, but the internal sources list publications of more than 200 research papers (including peer reviewed workshop, conference papers and journal articles), 
which shows at least a high publication productivity. The list 
of artifacts transferred to the companies indicate also a high 
acceptance (see TABLE II), and a high value perception of 

the research results. This perception is confirmed by the 
industrial partners by their answers in the questionnaire. This 
perception also address the general criticism around I-A 
collaborations about lack of research relevance [13]. The usage of the results within industry has often been vague. VIII.
THE FINDINGS  Finding practical ways to come together for collaboration is necessary to facilitate successful I-A research. The need to be 
responsive towards the business environment and act with speed is as vital in research as in development. When pace 
and requests on the development changes, so does the pace 
and requests on researching development. Research set-ups striving for close collaboration between industry and academia can benefit from taking the following findings 
which we list in a form of recommendations. 
1.Organize research in sprints. Research projects organized in six months sprints tend to be attractive for both industry and academia. 2.Utilize collaboration ceremonies
. SCRUM ceremonies 
help researchers and practitioners to frequently and 

regularly meet and communicate.  
3.Appreciate getting close.
 See all collaboration ceremonies as opportunities for input to even more 
research rather than cumbersome time consuming events that prevents the research. 4.Plan the research jointly. Start the research work by coming together and plan the sprint. Assure a jointly 
needed research question that opens up for mutual activities and understandings. 5.Find the pace for reconciliation. 
All collaborations need 
reconciliations. In development, a daily 15 minutes stand 
is recommended. In research contexts, meeting up weekly or monthly is maybe more in line with a 6 months 
sprint approach. 
6.Thrive over accomplishments together. Having demos where everyone is invited to listen to everybody creates 
an urge and willingness to create more success jointly. 
7.Learn continuously from previous sprints. Any activity 
that is repeatable is an object for being improved. Six months sprints is an excellent activity to do retrospective 

on to do even better in next sprint. 
8.Look beyond the pure research project. Every opportunity where leaders, researchers and practitioners 
come together is an opportunity to maintain and grow ongoing and upcoming research projects.  788080 9.Scale up! Increasing number of projects and number of 
stakeholders (companies and universities) running in 
parallel sprints increase the outcome.  A typically successful research project within this case study utilize all the benefits of the identified collaboration ceremonies, while they at the same time have found a distinct 
match between the problem and the knowledge gap. They 

tend to plan thoroughly from the start, so that participation all project member can participate and contribute as plan. IX.
VALIDITY In a longitudinal case study [14] there are several threats to validity; we analyze constructive validity, internal and external validity, and the reliability of the research results. 
The constructive validity can be jeopardized by lack of relevant information, in particul
ar from the past.  This threat 
has been managed via three different measures: insider/outsider roles, triangulation and iterative analysis. The access to the internal documents of different types, such 
as minutes of meetings from the projects and steering committee meetings, the documen
ted project results, in a combination with surveys and 
interviews compensated the 
problem of variation of information accuracy during the 

period of six years. The outsider role helped in analysis of the collected data. The analysis was done in two iterations 
followed by three surveys, and the interviews as feedbacks to the survey results.   The internal validity is threatened by the changes that 
occurred during a longitudinal study where individuals moved, changed tasks, made careers, resigned etc. For this reasons the recent data collected during the case study period (last two years) are more accurate, due to more available sources. Since the character of work did not changed radically but rather evolutionary during six yes, it was 

possible to assume that similar conditions were valid during the entire period and that no hidden variables, that later disappeared, determined the results. While one can expect 
that the initial period was characterized more by the variation 
in project and collaboration work, it was still possible to 
extract relevant data for the analysis such as efforts from the 
researchers, number of the projects, the results provided, 

which gave enough accurate input for the analysis. The external validity, i.e. gene
ralization of the result, is always challenging in context specific research approach and here the time-period make it extra challenging. The generality 
in respect to the domain is ensured since companies from different business and engineering domains, as well as researchers from different universities were involved in the 
projects. The geographic distribution might threaten the overall generality, although most of the companies belong to 

international enterprises, the project participants were from the local business units, and certainly had the Scandinavian 
culture in which a cooperation between industry and academia is quite established phenomenon, and in general is 
functioning very well. That certainly helped in collaboration. 

In a similar way, a tradition of
 flat organizations, direct                                                              
3 Anthony Finkelstein, The Golden Rules of Successful University Industry Collaboration, http://blog.prof.so/2013/01/collaboration.html contacts, and shared responsibilities contribute to the successful and effective collaboration. The behavior of companies and universities could be different in other 
geographical areas. In a similar way, we cannot generalize 
the results for SMEs, though SMEs are usually more flexible 
in collaboration than large international companies, so we 
could expect similar results. Fu
rther, we can state a question 
whether any type of research would show similar behavior. 
The research at Software Center is relayed to architectural concerns, integration and deliver issues, and software evolution. Possibly another type of research, e.g. constru-ctive, may require some adaption in form of long-term goals. Finally, we can ask whether the collaboration ceremonies are suitable only for I-A research or could they also be applicable 
for any kind of research project? Our case study only provide data for the first, and for specific types of the projects.  
The reliability of this study was easier to ensure, since the 
data collected are directly related to the results, and data were 

available from different sources, including internal and the 
public available data. X.RELATED WORK  In [15] some of the results from Software Center are 

presented, and there sporadically the working methods are discussed, but not in a systematic way, and not focusing on the research methods.  There is a plenty of literature about 
agile methods and SCRUM, their application and adoptions 
in different contexts in industry [16][17][18][19]. There is, however, very little evidence in 
the literature about utilizing agile methodologies or principles in I-A collaboration. In a previous work of one of the authors [2] a set of best practices in a I-A collaboration are identified, including those related 
to support the collaboration (such as addressing activities that ensure the result, communicating the process and the results, 
and funding small projects), and those that are based on the agile principles to be applied in research (such as organizing 
“get-togethers”, and attending to concrete needs and goals). In [20] several I-A collaboration projects using agile methods are analyzed showing which practices are mostly used (e.g.  
acceptance testing, small releases, sustainable pace). There is a large body of literature describing successful (I-A) 
collaboration in the domain of software development, and the findings are sometimes related to use of agile principles. In 
[21] success factor in an I-A 
collaboration are discussed, and those related to agile principles are “short term results and 
impact on industry”, “researcher has a visible presence in industry”, and “regular meetings”, and in [22] these findings are empirically evaluated. In [23] it was shown that even the 
successful I-A research collaboration, with findings and the results that are useful for industry are not enough for a 

successful technology transfer. In his blog
3 Finkelstein identifies “golden rules” for a successful collaboration, one 
of them is “share strategy and timelines”. The absence of evidences of using agile methods in I-A collaboration calls for empirical analysis of successful collaboration and identification of practices related to agile principles. 798181 XI.
CONCLUSION In this paper we have discussed three questions related to use 
of SCRUM methodology in I-
A collaboration research projects. The three questions (Q1: What are the advantages 
and challenges in using SCRUM in collaborative research 
projects between industry and academia?,  Q2: What is a 
possible introduction pace of SCRUM in industry-academia 
collaboration?, and Q3: Which synergy effects and which 
challenges are appearing in extended collaboration in the industry-academia research projects?) were answered through a longitudinal case study. The case study has shown a successful adoption of SCRUM 
in I-A collaboration. There are several factors contributing to this success that was shown: Successful research between industry and academia lies in the possibility to create an overlap between the key 
activities that both partners want to address. Embracing 
collaboration ceremonies facilitate I-A research colla-
boration. Frequently and regularly coming together is key for 
being responsive towards upcoming requests and this responsiveness increases both quality and speed of the deliverables. The trust between the collaborating partners 

increases and by that, a willingness to continue the 
collaboration over time. We have 
also seen that the activities synchronization between the pr
ojects provide positive effects on the knowledge sharing and technology transfer, increase the acceptance of the achieved results, and in general increase the enthusiasm to continue and extend the cooperation. 
The presented case can further be studied to provide new 
evidence related to the type of the research projects and the relevance and excellence of the research results. Additionally, roles of the researches and the industrial partners in relation to the product owner and scrum master can be analyzed. Also the scalability factor can be studied – 
how much partners and research group scale up in the collaboration? What would be the optimal number in respect 
to achieved results in short and long term. It is also likely that other principles beyond SCRUM 
can be beneficial for I-A 
collaborations, but these are still to be researched. Finally, a 
question whether SCRUM (or ot
her agile methodologies) is suitable as a research approach for other types of research, so 
not only for I-A collaboration, might be further studied, as it may lead to new forms of research. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT We would like to thank the dir
ector of the Software Center, Jan Bosch for valuable discussions taking this paper forward. REFERENCES [1]C. Larman and B. Vodde, Scaling Lean and Agile Development: Thinking and Organizational Tools for Large-Scale Scrum, 2009, Pearson Education [2]A. Sandberg, L. Pareto, and T. Arts, "Agile Collaborative Research: 
Action Principles for Industry-Academia Collaboration," IEEE Software, vol. 28, 2011, pp. 74-83. [3]A. Sandberg, “Academia-Industry Collaboration: Getting Closer is the 
Key” pp. 29-36, book chapter in Continuous Software Engineering. [4]T. Gorschek, C. Wohlin, P. Carre, S. Larsson, “A Model for 
Technology Transfer in Parctice”, IEEE Software, vol. 23, No. 6, 2006  
pp. 88-95. [5]E.M. Mora-Valentin, A. Montoro-Sanchez, and L.A. Guerras-Martin, 
“Determining Factors in the Success of R&D Cooperative Agreements between Firms and Research Organizations,” Research Policy vol. 33, no. 1, 2004, pp. 17–40. [6]A. Van de Ven, “Engaged Schoolarship: A Gudie for Organization and Social Research”, Oxford University Press, Oxford (2007) [7]M. Shaw, “What makes good research in software engineering?", International Journal on Software Tools for Technology Transfer, Springer, vol. 4., no.1,2002,  pp. 1-7 [8]K. Schwaber and M. Beedle, Agile Software Development with SCRUM, 2002 [9]L. Mathiassen, Collaborative Practice Research. Information, Technology & People, Vol. 14, No. 4, pp. 321-345 (2002). [10]Bartunek, J.M. and Louis M.R. (1996) Insider/outsider Team Research, 
Qualitative Research Methods Vol. 40, Sage Publications. 
[11]P. Runeson, and M. Höst, “Guidelines for conducting and reporting 

case study research in software engineering”, Empirical Software Eng, 2009, Vol. 14:131 [12]T. Barnes, I. Pashby, and A. Gibbons, “Effective University-Industry 
Interaction: A Multi-case Evaluation of Collaborative R&D Projects,” 
European Management J., vol. 20, no. 3, 2002, pp. 272–285. 
[13]V. Garousi, K. Petersen, B. Ozkand, Challenges and best practices in 
industry-academia collaboration in software engineering: A Systematic Literature Review, Information and Software Technology, July 2016. 
[14] L. McLeod, SG. MacDonell, B. and Doolin, Qualitative research on 
software development: a longitudinal case study methodology, Empirical Software Engineering, 2011, vol. 16 (4), pp. 430-459 
[15]J. Bosch (editor) Continuous Software Engineering, Springer, 2014. 
ISBN 978-3-319-11282-4 [16]Tore Dybå, Torgeir Dingsøyr, “Empirical studies of agile software development: A systematic review”, Information and Software Technology, Volume 50, Issues 9–10, 2008, pp. 833-859 [17]T. Dyba and T. Dingsoyr, "What Do We Know about Agile Software 
Development?," in IEEE Software, vol. 26, no. 5, pp. 6-9, Sept. 2009. [18]E. Hossain, M. A. Babar and H. y. Paik, "Using Scrum in Global Software Development: A Systematic Literature Review," 2009 Fourth 
IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering, 
Limerick, 2009, pp. 175-184. [19]S. Nerur and VG:l Balijepally. 2007. Theoretical reflections on agile development methodologies. Commun. ACM 50, 3 (March 2007), 79-83 [20]W. Chookittikul, J. L. Kourik and P. E. Maher, "Reducing the Gap 
between Academia and Industry: The Case for Agile Methods in Thailand," Information Technology: New Generations (ITNG), 2011 Eighth International Conference on, Las Vegas, NV, 2011, pp. 239-
244 [21]C. Wohlin, A. Aurum, L. Angelis, L.
 Phillips, Y. Dittrich, T. Gorschek, H. Grahn et al. The Success Factors Powering Industry-Academia 
Collaboration. Software, IEEE 29, no. 2 (2012): 67-73. [22]P. Grünbacher and R. Rabiser. 2013. Success factors for empirical studies in industry-academia collaboration: a reflection. In Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Conducting Empirical Studies in Industry (CESI '14). IEEE Press, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 27-32 [23]M. Larsson, C. Norström, A. Wall, I. Crnkovic, Technology transfer: 
why some succeed and some don't. In Proceedings of the 2006 international workshop on Software technology transfer in software engineering (TT '06). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 23-28. 
DOI=http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1138046.1138055 
  808282