  Leveraging Crowdsourcing For Team Elasticity: An Empirical Evaluation at 
TopCoderRazieh L Saremi 
School of Systems and 
Enterprises Stevens Institute of 
Technology Hoboken, NJ, 07030, USA +1 (510) 260-3274 
rlotfali@stevens.edu 
 Ye Yang 
School of Systems and 
Enterprises Stevens Institute of 
Technology Hoboken, NJ, 07030, USA +1 (201) 216-8560 
ye.yang@stevens.edu  Guenther Ruhe 
Software Engineering Decision Support Laboratory University of Calgary Alberta, Canada +1 (403) 220 7692 
ruhe@ucalgary.ca 
 David Messinger 
Topcoder 201 S Capitol Ave 
#1100, Indianapolis,  
IN, 46225,  
USA +1 (978) 590-3344 
dmessinger@topcoder.com 
  Abstract—There is an emergent trend in software development 
projects that mini-tasks can be cro
wdsourced to achieve rapid 
development and delivery. Fo
r software managers requesting 
crowdsourcing services, it is beneficial to be able to evaluate and 
assure the availability and performance of trustable workers on 
their tasks. However, existing rating systems are facing 
challenges such as providing limited information regarding 
worker’s abilities as well as potential threats from workers’ 
gaming or cheating the systems. To develop better 
understanding of work
er performance in software 
crowdsourcing, this paper reports an empirical study at 

TopCoder, one of the primary software crowdsourcing 
platforms.  We aim at investigating the following questions: How diverse 
are crowd workers in terms of 
skill and experience? How fast 
do crowd workers respond to a task call? How reliable are 

crowd workers in submitting tasks? And how much does CSD 
benefit schedule reduc
tion? The main results of this study 
showed that on average, (i) 59% of workers respond to a task 

call in the first 24 hours; (ii) 24% of the workers who registered 
early will make submissions to tasks, and 76% of them 
exceeding the acceptance
 criteria; and (iii) an overall average of 
1.82 schedule acceleration rate is observed through organizing 

mass parallel development in 4 software crowdsourcing 
projects. Such empirical evidences are beneficial to help 
exploring resourcing options and improve team elasticity in 
adaptive software development.
 Keywords- Agility, Elasticity, Crowdsourced software 
development, Worker performance, 
Worker availability, Velocity, 
Topcoder 
 I.  INTRODUCTION 
 Software development is rarely done in an isolated 
environment; instead it increasingly depends on the 
collaboration among different gr
oups of stakeh
olders [1]. 
Such collaborative development processes frequently face 
challenges from rapidly evolvi
ng requirements, conflicting 
stakeholder needs and constrain
ts, as well as unanticipated 
human factors. Adaptive developm
ent methodologies have 
been widely adapted to address these challenges and create 
solutions quickly [2].  Greening defines 
Agility
 as the capability of an actor to 
adopt to the changes fast and provide solutions to achieve 

goals in such a changing environment, and 
Elasticity as the capability to respond to required change [2]. In practice, 
many adaptive method
ologies rely heavily on individual and team’s capability in identifying and adapting to changes. 
Several issues have been reported related to resources 
dependency in agile practices. For example, on the one hand, 
agile development teams typically face fixed or inflexible 
resource, because hiring developers with the required agile 
skills and mindsets is very pricy; On 
the other hand, not all 
members are self-motivated and able to manage their own 
tasks, therefore lack of individual commitments is an 
outstanding issue in agile teams [3]. 
As an emergent new paradigm, Crowdsourced Software 
Development (CSD) has been increasingly adopted in recent 

decades [4,5,6]. CSD is reported to be attributed with 

significant cost-savings, quicker 
task completion times, 
formation of expert communities, hi
gher amount of creativity, 
and access to a pool of workers with different skill sets with 
availability of 24 hours per day [4,7]. Consequently, 
leveraging crowd workforce in CSD 
has great potential to not 
only increase worker availability, but also 
allow companies to 
recruit best talents on demand. A
nother benefit of applying 
CSD is reducing time to market, 
due to worker abundance. We 
believe the advantages of CSD would help to address the 
above resource issues and improve team elasticity in adaptive 
software development. 
For adaptive teams to
 leverage CSD to increase team 
elasticity, it is critical to
 understand crowd worker’s 
sensitivity and performance to
 the tasks and rate of task 
elasticity and success. However, there is a lack of empirical 

investigations on the impact of
 worker’s response to new tasks and reliability of submissions in
 the crowd sourcing market 
and project scheduling as well as effect of crowd workers on 

project agility in CSD.  
In this study, we aim at approaching these gaps by 
investigating the following questions:  2017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice Track978-1-5386-2717-4/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEEDOI 10.1109/ICSE-SEIP.2017.21012017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice Track978-1-5386-2717-4/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE-SEIP.2017.21032017 IEEE/ACM 39th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software Engineering in Practice Track978-1-5386-2717-4/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEE
DOI 10.1109/ICSE-SEIP.2017.2103 (i) How diverse are crowd workers in terms of skill and 
experience?  
(ii) How fast does crowd respond to a task call?  
(iii) How reliable are the crowds in submitting tasks? 
(iv)How does crowdso
urced software development 
benefit schedule reduction?  
We report the design and analys
is results of an empirical 
study based on real-world data gathered at the TopCoder 
website. TopCoder is the largest software development 
crowdsourcing platform with an online community of over 
1M crowd software workers [8]. As one of the most successful 
CSD platforms, TopCoder has over 1million registered 
workers from over 190 count
ries, averaging 30 thousand 
logins every 90 days, 7 thousand challenges hosted per year 
and 70 million dollars in ch
allenge payouts [8]. This fact makes a great available pool of workers and mini-tasks to 

study team elasticity for crowd software projects. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section II 
introduces the background and related work; Section III 
presents the design of the research conducted; Section IV reports the empirical results to answer the four stated research 

questions. Section V discusses the results and challenges in 
adopting CSD; and finally, Section VI gives a summary and 
outlook to future work.  
II. BACKGROUND AND
 RELATED WORK 
A. Worker reputation system 
One of the main issues 
related to crowdsourcing is how much to trust unknown crowd workers [9]. Due to diversity 
of workers with di
fferent individual skill levels, it is not 
practical for requesters to evaluate all the worker’s 
trustworthiness [9], and there is no single metric reflecting 
the overall record of 
worker interaction in the pool of workers 
[10]. 
In order to solve this pr
oblem, crowdsourc
ing platforms 
employ different reputa
tion systems to manage crowd rating 
based on their participation hist
ory. For example, HITs rate is 
used in Amazon Mechanical Turk 
[10], and developer rating 
is used in TopCoder [8]. However, 
such rating only provides 
limited knowledge about worker’s preference and 

performance, and could be unreliable if the workers try to 
cheat the platform. One example in Amazon Mechanical Turk 

is rank boosting [10, 11], 
where workers are mostly 
registering for easy tasks or fake tasks that they are uploading 

themselves in order to increase 
their rating. Another example 
is distorted pursuit [9], in
 which workers quickly submit a 
possibly correct answer in order increase their benefits instead 

of working on the task and submitting acceptable answer. In CSD platforms, for ex
ample, TopCoder adopts a more 
complicated reputation based system which is a numeric 

worker rating system based on El
o rating algorithm [12], Elo 
rating is a method for calculating the relative skill levels of 
players in competitor-versus-competitor games. Based on 

this numeric rating and a 5-
level rating scheme, TopCoder 
divides worker community into 5 groups. The 5 worker 
groups are defined into 5 belts of Red, Yellow, Blue, Green 
and Gray, which corresponds to 
the highest skillful workers 
to the lowest ones [8]. The numeric ratings are with respect 
to three different task categories including algorithm, 
marathon matches and devel
opment [12], following 
sophisticated calculation algorithm. In addition, TopCoder 
employs a Reliability metric to reflect crowd worker’s 

reliability on successfully completing the tasks. It is 

measured based on the ratio of the number of successful 
submissions to tasks over the most recent 15 registered tasks 
of a crowd worker.  
Table 1 shows the distribution 
of workers belonging to 
different rating belts in the TopCoder dataset used in this 
study. It is shown that, among the total of 5062 workers, more 
than 90% of the workers are 
in Gray belt, which is non-experienced group. The other 10% of workers are more 
experienced solid workers. 
TABLE 1: SUMMARY OF DIFFERENT WORKER BELTS
 Belt Rating Range (X) # Workers % Workers 
Gray 
X<900 4557 90.02% 
Green 
900<X<1200 146 2.88% 
Blue 1200<X<1500 273 5.39% 
Yellow 
1500<X<2200 78 1.54% 
Red 
X>2200 8 0.16% 
B. Worker behaviors analysis  
Some studies have looked at worker behaviors from 
qualitative perspectives. For ex
ample, Eickhof et. al [14] 
discussed that unreliable workers
 are not very interested in 
taking novel tasks which requires creativity and abstract 

thinking. Kittur et al. [15] argu
ed that the best way of 
avoiding unreliable workers an
d assuring good
 amount of 
quality is that the task should be 
uploaded in a way that both 
trustable and unreliable workers take tasks at the same time. 
Sorokin et. al [16] demonstra
ted that more expensive tasks 
would result higher quality s
ubmissions by attracting reliable 
delicate workers.  
Other studies focus on analytical-based worker 
evaluation system, i.e. analyzi
ng worker’s reliability with 
respect to specific task context. Two typical contextual 

factors that influence on worker behaviors are: the amount of 
award which reflects task complexity and task type which 
reflects the required skillset [17,18
]. Ye et.al [9] proposed a 
trust model based on these tw
o factors to optimize worker 
identification via an evolutionary algorithm. The result can 

distinguish honest workers and dishonest workers when both 

have high overall task taking rates.  
C. Challenges of CSD There are many aspects that make CSD different and 
more challenging in evaluating crowd worker trust than 
general crowdsourcing.  
First, tasks in CSD are inherently more complex than 
general crowdsourcing tasks
, require specific experience w.r.t. certain programming languag
e(s), technologies and 
development and/or deploymen
t platforms. In addition, on 
average, most tasks have a duration of half month from first 

day of registration to the subm
ission deadline, which is much 
longer than gene
ral crowdsourcing tasks such as image 
102104104 labeling or receipts transcribing. Therefore, it is critical to 
assess and attract workers with the desired experience and 
skillset to take the tasks [3]. 
Second, from software managers’ point of view, utilizing 
external, unknown, uncontrolla
ble, crowd workers would put 
their projects under greater uncertainty and risk compared 
with in-house development [4, 5, 7, 17]. In many cases, 

workers may register for more than one task at a time and 
drop the ones they can’t comp
lete [18] before the submission 
deadlines. A task with many unreliable workers is subject to 
high risk of failure or cancellati
on. Intuitively, it will be 
expected that higher rated workers would represent more 

experienced and reliable workers. However, there is no 
empirical evidence supporting that.  
Third, existing studies have 
reported va
rious other 
challenges regarding CSD adoption, including task 

decomposition, communication 
and coordination, quality 
assurance, and so on [4, 6, 24, 26]. However, there is a lack 
of study on empirical analysis of CSD adoption at the project 
level.  These above challenges drive our motivation towards 
further empirical investigatio
n on comparison of various 

characteristics of different ra
ting group workers in CSD 
projects, and the effect on team elasticity at project level. 
III.
 RESEARCH 
DESIGN 
 A. Empirical Evaluation Framework 
Driven by the resource related
 challenges in software 
development, we design four evaluation studies to provide 

empirical evidences on feasibility and benefits of CSD. The 
evaluation framework is illustrated in Fig 1. 
As Fig 1 shows, first we investigate workers’ characteristics 
in the platform, the result led
 us to analyzing workers’ 
availability to take a task and successfully return the result. 
At this point we need to understand workers’ performance to 
understand team elasticity. And finally, we will discuss on 
benefits of applying CSD in terms of schedule acceleration. 

All these steps will be discussed in details in section III-D. 
The four research questions in this study are:  
RQ1 (Worker’s Characteristics):
 How diverse are crowd 
workers in terms of skills and experience?  
This research question aims at providing general 
overview of worker characteristics 
in terms of membership 
age, reliability, skill ratings etc.  
RQ2 (Worker’s Availability):
 How fast do crowd workers 
respond to task calls?  
The worker’s availability in response to a task will be 
measured in the number of registrants for tasks as soon as a 
task is uploaded in platform. Also, reliability of task 
submissions can be measured by 
the number submissions 
received and the highest score of the submissions.  
TABLE2: SUMMARY OF METRICS DEFINITION
 Metric Definition 
Task attributes 
Duration (D) 
Total available time from registration date to 
subm) 
Task registration start 
date (TR) 
Time when task is available on line for 

workers to register 
Task submission end 

date (TS) Deadline that all workers who registered for 

task must submit their final results 
Award (P) 
Monitory prize (Dollars) in task description. 
Worker attributes 
# Registration (R)  
Number of registrants that are willing to 

compete on total number of tasks in specific 
period of time. Range: (0
# Submissions (S)  
Number of submissions that a task receives 

by its submission deadline in specific period 
of time. Range: (0, #registrants] 
Submissions Ratio  
(SR) The ratio between the number of tasks a 
worker submitted and the total number of 

tasks that a worker registered. Reliability (RE)  The percentage of successful task submissions 

in a worker’s most recent 15 task registrations. 
Range: (0, 1) Years of Membership  
Year since a worker become a member. 
Rating (R) Platform reputation rating of a specific 

worker. Range: (0, 
Worker-task pair level attributes 
Worker registration 

date (WR) 
Date and time that a worker registered for a 

task. Worker Submissions 

date (WS) 
Date and time a worker submitted for a task. 
Registration order (RO) Rank of a worker’s arrival time at a task by 

his registration date Score (SO) 
Point value of submission evaluated through 

peer review. Range: (0, 100] 
RQ3 (Worker’s Performance):
  How reliable are the 
crowd workers in submitting tasks?  
The consistency of worker pe
rformance will be measured 
using relative velocity and submissions quality, indicating 
percentage of submissions dura
tion usage by workers to 
submit a task and the quality of the submission for each task.  
RQ4 (Schedule Acceleration):
 How does crowdsourcing 
benefit schedule reduction?  
This question aims at deriving empirical evidence on 
comparing project schedule esti
mation of TopCoder projects.  
   Figure. 1:  Main flow of proposed framework and relationship to research 
questions 
103105105 B. Dataset and  Metrics 
The gathered dataset contains 403 individual projects 
including 4907 component development tasks and 8108 
workers from Jan 2014 to Feb 2015, extracted from 

TopCoder website [8].  
Tasks are uploaded as compet
itions in the platform, where 
Crowd software workers would register and complete the 

challenges. On average, most of the tasks have a life cycle of 
one and half months from first day of registration to the 
submissions deadline. When th
e workers submit the final 
files, it will be reviewed by experts to check the final results 
and grant the scores.  
In order to analyze uploaded mini tasks in a project, we 
categorized the available data and defined the following 
metrics, as summarized in Table 2. (i) Task attributes describe the basic quantitative 
characteristics of a task including total associated 
award and total number of uploaded tasks in a 

limited period of time;  
(ii) Worker attributes measure workers’ overall 

submission ratio, reliability, year’s membership, and 

rating; (iii) Worker-task pair level attributes include all worker’ 

registration and submis
sion dates, final scores, 
worker’s registration order for each task. 
C. Dataset preparation 
The first step is to remove wo
rkers who never registered 
or submitted any task in 
their membership history. This 
reduced number of active workers to 5062 workers.  
Second, because it is our interest to study worker’s 
behaviors and performance in responding to task calls, we 
calculate, for each worker-task pair, the worker’s registration 
order on that task. As shown in Table 2, this is derived from 
the rank of worker arrival at a task, i.e. his/her registration 
time. For example, if a worker has registered for 10 tasks in 

our dataset, then he/she will 
be characterized through 10 
registration orders. Third, workers are grouped to di
fferent rating belts per 
TopCoder’s definition [8], and we calculate the rating belt 
level metrics as defined in Table 2.  
We will use this data set ge
nerated from the third step in 
the analysis of RQ2 and RQ3. To drive answers to RQ4, we 
identify 4 large CSD projects in our data set, and use them as 
representative projects. Table 3 summarizes the overview 

information of the 4 projects. 
D. Empirical Studies and design 
Four analysis are designed based on the above metrics and 
proposed research questions. Specifically, we are interested 
in investigating the following analysis in CSD: 
1) RQ1 (Worker’s Characteristics) 
To perform the empirical analysis after data cleaning, 
workers were sorted based on re
gistration order per task. 
Then we clustered workers based on 5 different belts per Top 
coder’s definition of work
er rating, i.e. Red, Yellow, Blue, 
Green and Gray, which are representing the highest skillful 

worker to the lowest one [8]. Rati
ng belt is showing the skill 
level and success rate of 
workers in platform. Crowd 
worker’s reliability of competing 
on the tasks is measured 
based on last 15 competition 
workers register and submit for. 
For example, if a worker submitted 14 tasks out of 15 last 
registered tasks, his reliability is 93
% (14/15). Top coder 
considers workers with a minimu
m reliability rate of 80% to 
be eligible to get a bonus (12
 submissions out of 15 
registrations). 
In this part, we will be an
alyzing the impact of years of 
membership and reliability on worker’s behavior per rating 
belt.  2) RQ2 (Worker’s Availability)
 We investigate two aspects 
of worker availability: 1) how 
fast they respond to task calls? 2) how reliable are they in 
completing tasks? Worker availab
ility in response to a task 
call in CSD is derived usin
g two measures: worker’s 
registration order and average submissions rate per 

registration order in the platform. 
Since the average number of registrants per task is 18 
[31], we will analyze th
e availability of workers with 
registration order less than or equal to 20. Average response 
time (day) to new task call per registering order per belt as 
well as average submissions ratio per registering order per 

belt is a good measure 
to analyze worker’s availability. To analyze worker’s availability, we will use following 
definitions: 
Def. 1: Response time, RT
i, k, measure the speed of a worker 
i arrival on task k, derived from the difference in the number 
of days between the task’s registration starting date, i.e. TR
k and the worker’s 
registration date on the task, i.e. WR
i, k: RTi,k = WR
i,k - TR
k Eq.-1 Def. 2: Average Response Time of workers in the same 
registration order i, i.e. ART
i, is the average respond time of 
n worker with the same registration order i. 
ARTi = 


 Eq.-2 Def. 3: Average Submissions Ratio, ASR, is the average 
submissions ratio of workers from the same rating group. 
ROS(i) = 
 Eq.-3 3) RQ3 (Worker’s Performance) 
Workers Relative Velocity and Quality would be used to 
analyze worker performance and responsiveness in task 
taking and their reliab
ility in submit tasks in the platform and 
task completion rate in this 
analysis. The related measures are 
defined at below. 
Def. 4: Relative Velocity, i.e. RV
i,k, measures the ratio 
between a worker i’s actual duration on completing a task k 
and the allowed task duration of task k.  
RVi, k = (WSi,k – WRi,k)/(TSk – TR
k) Eq. - 4 
104106106 Def. 5: 
Average Relative Velocity ARV(i) measures the 
average of RV ratio between actual duration and allowed 
task duration of workers from 
the same rating group. 
ARV(i) =˘ˇ



Eq.-5 Also, the quality of task submissions is the second 
important factor in analyzing worker’s performance.  
Def. 6: Quality Q(i) of worker i 
is defined as the average 
score SO(i) of worker i pe
r registration order per belt.  
Q(i) = 
 Eq.-6 Def. 7: Average Quality AQ(i) in the same registration 
order, average quality Q(i) of
 worker per registration order 
per belt.  
AQ(i) = 


 Eq.-7 4) RQ4 (Schedule Acceleration) 
In order to study the schedule acceleration effects of 
crowdsourcing, we select four large CSD projects (in terms 
of the total number of tasks, we
 assume projects with 100 
uploaded tasks or more are big enough to relatively have long 

release time) in our dataset as subject and calculate the total 

CSD effort for these projects; then we choose three baseline 
software schedule estimation 
models to derive representative 
nominal schedule from the effo
rt data of the 4 CSD projects. 
It is our assumption that the derived nominal schedule will 

reflect the corresponding in-hous
e development schedule to 
complete a project with similar 
amounts of effort. Finally, we 
compare the results w
ith the actual crowdsourcing schedule. To calculate the total CSD effort, 
we use the combination 
of the effort from the top-2 workers with higher submissions 

scores to represent the effort for each task. More specifically, 
the effort for a CSD task is defined as: 
Def 8: Effort spent on each task is measured by the 
weighted sum of the top-2 workers’ effort spent on the task, 

with corresponding weights of 80% and 20%, respectively. 
Worker’s effort is measured by the number of days between 
his registration date and his subm
ission date.  If there is only 
one active worker, the effort would be calculated based on 
that worker’s actual effort only. 
Next, we select three baseline 
schedule estimation models 
which are commonly used in industry, for deriving 

corresponding nominal schedules to be compared with CSD 
project duration. Most software schedule estimation methods 
adopt an underlying arithmetic model for predicting duration 

from development effort, which contains some model 
constants C and exponent D as follows:  
Duration = C*(Effort)
D The first is schedule estimati
on model in COCOMO II 
[19], which follows the basics
 model shown t bellow: 
Duration_I = 3.67*(Effort
0.28)*(SCED%) 
Since we are deriving a nominal schedule, the SCED% is 
assumed to be 100%, meaning no schedule compression or 
stretch-out will be considered. The second model is CORADMO [20], which is a sub-
model in the COCOMO 
II family, specialized for agile 
software development pr
ojects. To reflect the schedule 
acceleration effects in agile development, CORADMO 
assumes a square root relati
onship between duration and 
effort, instead a cubic root relationship as that in the 
COCOMO II model: 
Duration_II = Effort
0.5 The third model is proposed by McConnel [21], similar to 
COCOMO II but with different model constant parameters: 
Duration_III = 3.0*(Effort
0.33) Finally, we analyze schedule acceleration rate per project 
in CSD, based on the fo
llowing definition:  
Def 9: Schedule Acceleration Rate, SARi, is the ratio of 
estimated nominal duration if fo
llowing traditional in-house 
development, i.e. Duration_I, II, 
and III, and the actual CSD 
duration for each project. 
The results are presented next. 
IV. EMPERICAL 
RESULTS
 A. Overall Worker Characteristics (RQ1) 
At project level, a total of 403 projects were further 
decomposed into a total of 4907 mini tasks, across 14 

different challenge types [18]. The average number of 

workers per task is about 18, th
e average task price is about $750, and the average task duration is about 16 days. As 

shown in Figure 2, 80% of the tasks have less or equal to 14 

registrants, with 3 or less subm
issions. 13% of all tasks in our 
data base receive more than 20
 registrants (650 tasks). 
We further look at the worker
 distribution on the top 5 
task types, including Code, First2Finish, Assembly, Content 
Creation, and UI Prototyping
. Figure 3 shows the worker 
distribution results, in five different rating belts, for these top 

5 task types, which accounts for 94% of all tasks. The left 
vertical axis shows the percentage of workers in each rating 
belt, and the right vertical ax
is reflects the unit price for tasks. 
The dotted line shows the average unit prices of the top 5 task 
types. 
 Figure 2. Cumulative density plot of #Submissions and #Registration per 
task As illustrated in Figure 3, Gray 
workers, with the lowest 
rating among all groups, are most
ly (i.e., 48%) interested in participating in coding, while Red workers as highest rated 

workers prefer to apply for first2finish challenges. Almost 

35% of Red workers are concentrated in First2finish task 
105107107 types, none of them applied for UI prototype challenges. 
Yellow workers are mostly interested
 in assembly tasks with 
23% of workers and less interested in content creation. It is 

also observed that the Green 
and Blue categories have very 
similar task preference patterns.  Another important aspect in
 software crowdsourcing is 
worker’s reliability. According to 
Figure 4, Green and Blue 
category workers contain more than 50% members with 
reliability above 0.5 (which means 50% of the time they 
successfully deliver jobs.). Additionally, there are about 20% 

of members with reliability above 0.8. Yellow and Red 
groups, though with relative hi
gher rating, have only 20% of 
their members with reliability above 0.5 and 0.3, 

respectively.   Figure 3. Workers belt contribution in top 5 task types 
Another important aspect in
 software crowdsourcing is 
worker’s reliability. According to 
Figure 4, Green and Blue 
category workers contain more than 50% of members with 
reliability above 0.5 (which means 50% of the time they 
successfully deliver jobs.). Additionally, there are about 20% 
of members with reliability above 0.8. Yellow and Red 

groups, though with relative hi
gher rating, have only 20% of 
their members with reliability above 0.5 and 0.3, 

respectively.  We run repeated measure one-way ANOVA test on the 
worker’s reliability data from the five groups. Based on 

ANOVA test results, the work
er’s reliability is significantly 
different across the five 
groups (i.e. p-value is 0.005). 
Finding 1.1: Workers from
 different rating groups 
(denoted in different color columns) have somewhat different 

preferences in task selection in 
terms of task types, prices, 
and durations. 
Finding 1.2:
 Workers from different rating groups have 
absolutely different experien
ce level and reliability 
distribution. Workers joining after year 2010 are mostly 

experienced workers with strong interest and motivations; 
however, workers with higher ratings are more skillful, not 
necessarily more reliable than wo
rkers with lower ratings. 
B. Worker Availability: How quickly workers respond 
to task calls? (RQ2) To derive empirical evid
ence on worker availability in 
CSD, we focus on the first 20 clusters, i.e. worker-task pairs 
with registration orders below 20. In each rating group, we 
calculated the average response time (in days) for each 
cluster. Figure 5 shows a line chart of average response time 

and registration order for all 
five rating groups. The results 
show that the average response 
time for th
e top-20 registrants is not exceeding 1 day (i.e., 23.57 hours).  
  Figure 4. Cumulative density of worker’s reliability across five rating 
groups  
On average, 59% of workers respond to a task call within 
the first 24 hours after task being up
loaded; 48% of the first 
5 workers in Green, Blue and, yellow belts are registering 
within the first 12 hours. Gr
ay category is relatively slow in responding to task calls, and 65
% are responding in the first 
days, 18% are still registering in the second day. It is 

observed from Figure 6 that fo
r workers from Green and Blue 
group, the response time is not 
very sensitive to registering 
orders, which means the workers are very motivated to 
register for new uploaded tasks, even though they are aware 
of potentially dozens of compe
titors. Another interesting 
observation is that, first and 
second registrants in the Red 
group tend to respond to tasks immediately after it is 

uploaded. The reason for the fl
uctuation in Red group is 
because of the small sample size of this group, which only 

contains 8 workers. 
 Figure 5. Average Response Time (ART) per day in dependence of the 
order of registration (up to 20 workers per task)  
The result of the ANOV
A test showed that worker 
registration order is significantly different across all 5 groups 

(i.e. p-value is 0.000). 
Figure 6 shows the relationship between average 
submissions ratio w.r.t. registration orders. There is a general 

trend of decrease in submissi
ons ratio as registration order 
goes up from 1 to 20. This is a clear evidence of the strong 

motivation in completing ta
sks and winning prizes among 
106108108 early registrants. On average, more than half of early 
registrant workers (first and second registrants) have 
submitted tasks. As it is illustrated 
in Figure 6 that workers in 
higher belt are not actively su
bmitting for tasks where they 
are not among the early registrants, i.e. with a registration 
order greater than 12. Work
ers in Gray, Green, Blue, and 
Yellow categories are following the same pattern; however, 

workers in Blue and Yellow categories are facing more 
fluctuated trend.  
More specifically, first registrants in the Yellow category 
have an average submissions ratio of 60%, by going up in 

registering order the rate is d
ecreased to 20% for the 20th 
registered worker. The subm
ission ratio for the first register 
order in Blue category is about 39% and it gradually drops to 
10% for the 20th 
registrant.   Figure 6. Average submission ratio per registration order (AROS) per belt  
Among all the belts, Gray and Green members seem to 
have smoother patterns. First 
registration order for these 
clusters has 25% and 45% submissions ratio, respectively. 

Submissions ratio in both categ
ories is decreasing to 10% for 
the 20th registrant. In the 
Red category, the average 
submissions ratio for top 3 regi
strants is 60% which drops to 
20% for the 4th registran
ts. Statistical analysis supports that 
average submission ratios for the five group are significantly 
different (i.e. p-value at 0.000067).   
Finding 2.1:
 The average response time for the top-20 
registrants is not exceeding 
1 day (i.e. 23.57 hours). 
Finding 2.2:
 59% of workers are registering for a new 
task within 24 hours of upload
ing; and 48% of the first 5 
workers in Green, Blue and, yellow belts are registering 

within the first 12 hours. 
Finding 2.3:
 There is a decreasing trend of submissions 
ratio in reverse to registration order.  
C. Workers performance in task submissions (RQ3) 
Figure 7 shows the average relative velocity of workers 
for different rating belts, 
which measures the percentage of 
acceleration in task completion. Interestingly, lower rated 
workers are using less time; while higher rated workers, 
required higher amount of time to
 submit. This can be due to 
different task choices, different
 worker motivation patterns, 
or individual skills. On average 34% of the workers can complete the 
requested tasks within only 10% of allowed time for 
submissions, and 60% of workers are submitting the final 
files by using 70% of total submission duration. More 
specifically, 20% of Red group workers are using less than 
40% of duration to submit, while 
this rises to around 40% of 
Blue and Green groups. It takes almost 35% of Yellow group 
workers and increase to 70% of Gray group workers. 
However, results of ANOVA test do not support that 
rating clusters are significan
tly influencing workers’ 
velocity, i.e. p-value is 0.14, which is greater than 0.05. 
Moreover, the quality of worker’s submissions is another 
important factor in task 
success. We can measure quality 
based on final score that workers
 granted per submissions.  
 Figure 7. Average Relative Velocity (ARV) in different belt categories 
Figure 8 shows the cumulati
ve distribution of average 
score per belt for workers with registration order less than 20. 
As it is illustrated higher rated belts are granted higher scores. 
Almost 50% of Gray members are granted score of 0, which 
 Figure 8. Evolution of Average Quality (AQ) in different belts 
means they never have any subm
issions or they have granted 
0 as their score, there is a slow increasing trend up to score of 

35 for 65% of members, and only 25% of gray members 
granting score higher than 85
. In Red category, around 18% 
of members are either receiving scores less than 69 or 
dropped the task out. The granted score increased to 90 for 
next 2% of the population and there is a sharp rise for net 80% 
of members with score of 100. 
In Yellow category, almost 
20% of workers are granting scores less than 80, then scores 
gradually increase to 100 for next 80% of 
population. Almost 
the same patterns happen for members of Green and Blue 
workers, however, they experience a slower rising trend than 
the Yellow ones. ANOVA test showed th
at worker quality of 
107109109 submission is significant different across all 5 groups (i.e. p-
value is 0.00). Finding 3.1:
 Average relative velocity to complete tasks 
within 80% of allowed duration. 34% of the workers can 

complete the requested tasks within only 10% of allowed 
time. 
Finding 3.2:
 Higher rated workers are more reliable in 
task submissions quality, on average 86% of higher rated 

workers (Red and Yellow) successfully deliver products 
passing reviews (i.e. granted scores above 75 out of 100), 

while the number is less than 50%
 for the workers from the 
other lower rating groups.
  D. Schedule Accelaration (RQ4) 
For the purpose of our study, we conducted comparison 
analysis on the four biggest projects of this data set in 

different periods of time in terms of uploading the number of 
tasks.  Table 3 summarizes results from the analysis on schedule 
acceleration effect in four CSD projects (Part III-D-4).  

“The “Effort (worker-day)” row sh
ows the effort aggregated 
from individual submitter’s effort 
on all tasks within a CSD project. The “Effort (worker-month)” row converts the 

previous effort into a unit of worker-month by dividing 22 
(i.e. usually 22 workdays per month as defined in COCOMO 

II [19]). The “Actual CSD Duration” row shows the duration 
from the beginning of the first task to the end
 of the last task within a project. The next three rows provide the estimated 
representative durations following the three baseline models 
as discussed in Section 3.4.4, assuming the same project 

being developed in traditional methodologies other than 

CSD. Then the next three rows are the calculated SAR by 
comparing the estimated 
duration with the actual CSD duration. TABLE 3.  DERIVED SCHEDULE AND SCHEDULE ACCELERATION RATIO
 Project I II III IV 
Effort (man-day) 6005.7 11037.2 8552.7 13841 
Effort (man-month) 273 501.7 388.8 629.1 
Actual Duration 
(months) 
9 13 11 14 
Duration_I 17.7 20.9 19.5 22.3 
Duration_II 16.5 22.4 19.7 25.1 
Duration_III 19.1 23.3 21.5 25.2 
SAR_I 2 1.6 1.8 1.6 
SAR_II 1.8 1.7 1.8 1.8 
SAR_III 2.1 1.8 2 1.8 
Average SAR 1.97 1.
7 1.87 1.73 
The last row shows the average SAR for each project, 
ranging from 1.7 to 1.97. This indicates an overall average 

SAR of 1.82 (the mean of the four-project level average 

SAR), with standard deviation of
 0.1258. These results reflect 
that the duration of crowdsourcing software projects is 

significantly reduced, i.e. 
by a factor of 1.82 compared with 
the nominal schedule if foll
owing with traditional in-house 
development methodologies.  Thi
s indicates a huge potential 
of schedule shortening in cro
wdsourced development if with 
properly design and governance. Finding 4.1:
 Compared with traditional methodology, the 
duration of CSD projects are gene
rally shortened, by a overall 
schedule acceleration factor of 1.82. 
Moreover, team elasticity in CSD 
is highly flexible, Table 
3. This indicates a viable option for teams facing resource 
shortage that their team elasticity could be improved if they 
can attract crowd workers who are responding in first couple 

of days. 
V. DISCUSSION AND EVALUATION
 A. Worker Availability and Performance The empirical findings reported above provides insights 
for software managers, platform providers, and researchers 
that might help them
 to better understand worker 
performance and propose solutio
ns to better governance in 

CSD.   Finding 1.1 and 1.2 confirm the intuition that workers 
from different rating groups 
have very different preferences 
in task selection and reliability distribution. Obviously, 

different rating groups are associated with different expertise 
and experience levels. As 
summarized in Finding 2.1, the 
average response time 
for the top-20 regi
strants is less than 1 
day (i.e. 23.57 hours), and this 
implies the great potential for 
organizations to immedia
tely tap into talents beyond 
traditional boundaries. The evidence in Finding 2.3 shows the 
strong motivation in completing tasks and winning prizes 
among early registrants, with 
more than 50% of submission 
rate among the first two registrants. This result does not 
support Top coder assumpti
on of 90%-96% success rate with 
having more than 1 registrant [22]. However, it is still 

promising for organizations to take advantage of software 

expertise in the crowd in successfully delivering requested 
software solutions. 
In terms of crowd worker performance, finding 3.1 
provides additional support 
for the rapid delivery effect 
attributed to CSD. On average 34
% of the workers can 
complete the requested tasks wi
thin only 10% of allowed 
time; and 80% of workers can complete within 70% of 

allowed time. When considering the quality of delivery from 

the crowd workers, as anticipated, higher rated workers are 
more guaranteed to make satis
factory submissions (Finding 
3.2). Though, the data also show that workers in lower rated 
belts are more reliable in adopting to change and following a 
more stable submission pattern. Hence, it suggests additional 
insights for CSD tasks decomposition in a way that can better 

attract early registrants and leverage various patterns of 
different rating groups. 
Understanding how workers with different experience 
respond to different types of tasks, different prices, and 

different durations will help managers in planning for 
crowdsourcing.  B. Team Elasticity  
As shown in Finding 4.1 and 4.2, the SAR results were 
derived from comparison between the nominal duration of a 
typical, corresponding traditional in-house projects and the 
108110110 duration of the crowdsourced projects. The average SAR of 
1.82, ranging f
rom 1.7 and 1.97, shows the duration of CSD 
projects are generally shortened by 82%.  
According to one of the author’s experience with 
TopCoder projects, this num
ber is reasonable yet 
conservative. In a recen
t report [23], it is reported with a total 
schedule acceleration rate of 3 through CSD, based on an 

interview study conducted in one TopCoder’s client 
organization. One of the possible reason for this difference is 

that in our study, the corresponding management overhead 

within the requesting company is not includ
ed as we don't 
have access to such data. Considering the additional in-house 

management and coordination effort, the estimated schedule 
of the corresponding nominal 
in-house development would 
most likely be longer, and the resultant schedule acceleration 
ratio would be even greater. 
Based on findings from RQ
4, we are interested to 
investigate the relationship between team elasticity and 

schedule acceleration effects. We define the measure of team 
elasticity as follows: 
Def. 10: Team Elasticity (TE) is the ratio of the maximum 
number of registrant for project
 tasks per week divided by the 
minimum number of registrants per week, across the total 
project duration. 
Then we conduct additional analysis on team elasticity of 
the 4 projects used in RQ4, and the results are summarized in 

Table 4. Pearson correlation analysis result shows there is a 

0.76 coefficient between team elasticity and average SAR, 
which indicates a high correlation between degree of team 
elasticity and schedule acceleration potential.  
This indicates CSD may help organizations with 
integrating elastic using external human
 resource to reduce cost from internal employment and exploring the distributed 
production model to speed up
 the development process [21].
 This can lead the project manager to a better flexible resource 
allocation rate in terms of di
versity of skills, budget and schedule planning. 
TABLE 4.  TEAM 
ELASTICITY VS
. SCHEDULE 
ACCELERATION 
RATIO Project Project I Project II 
Project III Project 
IV #tasks 156 306 177 277 
# Reg / #Sub 2174 / 428 
4136 / 807 
4222 / 494 
2412 / 867 
Team Elasticity  187 14.42 8.5 33.3 
Average SAR 1.97 1.
7 1.87 1.73 
C. Challenges in a
dopting CSD  
Although CSD has been increasingly adopted in practice, 
there are some open issues blocking the scale-up of CSD, 
such as task decomposition, communication, process 

alignment, quality assurance, and legal IP issues [4, 24, 25]. 
Among these, the communication and process alignment 
concerns seem to be of high relevance in adaptive software 

development, considering the fact that coordinating workers 
is difficult among distributed global crowd.  
In most cases, organizational 
coordination techniques can 
be applied to crowd work as well. CSD platforms generally 
provide various kinds of communication, collaboration, and 
coordination services and support among the requesters, 
providers, and platform ven
dors [24, 25]. In a recent 
qualitative study [25], Machado et. al. identified 36 
collaboration barriers and 30
 communication practices in 
CSD. They also concluded a mapping between these barriers 

and practices. Further investigation on the relationship 

between them is needed in order to provide facilitating 
methods and techniques to enhance CSD communications. 
As to the challenge in aligning the process of in-house 
agile processes with CSD processes 
raised in [4], the result 
of an average task duration of 16 days seems slightly 

inconvenient to fit into 
agile cycles. However, in practice, 
CSD projects on TopCoder actually had a mix bag with agile 

processes. Some agile teams use TopCoder for extra velocity 

on their teams to go beyond their normal workload by 
offloading tasks to TopCoder if they are in a 2-week sprint.  
In addition, since 2015 TopCode
r employed a new type 
of tasks, First2Finish, which is to award the first acceptable 

submission only, and the task will be closed after that, 
possibly before its planed subm
ission deadline. This new task 
type is increasingly adopted a
nd will benefit to shrink CSD 
task timelines to fit in
to typical agile cycles.   
D. Limitations 
First, the study only focuses on
 competitive CSD tasks on 
the Topcoder platform. Many more platforms do exist, and 
even though the results achieved are based on a 

comprehensive set of abou
t 5000 development tasks, the 
results cannot be claimed externally valid. There is no 

guarantee the same results would
 remain exactly the same in 
other CSD platforms. 
Second, there are many different factors that may 
influence workers’ decision in task selection and completion, 
e.g., motivation patterns, achievem
ent level w.r.t particular problem domains, availability at the time, etc. These are not 

considered in our current study because of data shortage. 
What is reported in this study are overall characteristics on 
various worker rating belt category.  
Third, the data we analyzed in schedule acceleration 
effect was limited to the four sample projects. The estimated 

schedule was based on a representative total effort by 

aggregating the crowd worker individual effort for 
submitting tasks. This assumption 
may not be valid because 
the team member relationship is competitive, but in-house 
team is collaborative.  
Fourth, acceptance of results still needs to be proven. 
Most of the findings are 
observational (“as it was/is”). First 
steps towards using the observational insights for actual decision-making haven been made in [6].  
Fifth, in analyzing SAR, we did not consider management 
overhead in the Effort. This factor will increase the task 
scheduling and consequently larger SAR for both traditional 
and CSD methods. 
Last, as shown in Table 1, the numbers of members in 
each rating belt vary significantly. For example, the number 
109111111 of red workers is very few, and the number of gray workers 
which consists of almost 90% of the total members. While 
this confirms the typical deve
loper resource pyramid, the data 
scarcity in the red group may bring 
limitations in the results. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS
 Crowdsourced Software Development (CSD) is an 
emerging paradigm that has been increasingly adopted. 
Leveraging crowd workforce in 
CSD has great potential to 
increase team elasticity and rapid delivery. For adaptive teams 

to leverage CSD to increase team elasticity, it is critical to 
understand crowd worker’s sensitivity and performance to the 
tasks and rate of task elasticity and success. 
This paper reports an empirical study to address that end. 
Based on the available empirical data and related research, 
we developed a set of research questions about the impact of 

worker performance with di
fferent skill and experience level. 
The evaluation studies were 
conducted on a set of 4902 
competitive crowdsourcing t
asks extracted from Top coder 
platform. The main results of
 this study showed that on 
average, (i) 59% of workers respond to a task call in the first 

24 hours; (ii) 24% of the workers who registered early will 

make submissions to tasks, and 76% of them exceeding the 
acceptance criteria; and (iii) an overall average of 1.82 
schedule acceleration rate is observed through organizing 

mass parallel development in 4 software crowdsourcing 
projects. Such empirical evidences are beneficial to help 
exploring resourcing options and 
improve team elasticity in 
adaptive software development.  
As ongoing and future work, we are considering 1) more 
data collection on crowd deliverables and develop better 
understanding about the quality of CSD products, e.g. defects 
and trustworthiness aspects; 2) investigate on task 
descriptions and mine task dependency patterns within CSD 
projects and their relationship 
to CSD success; 3) develop 
facilitating techniques to support
 decisions during task 
scheduling phase, e.g. 
CSD process simulator. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
 This research was partially supported by the Natural 
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, 
NSERC Discovery Grant 250343-12 (Third author). 
REFERENCES
 [1] A. Fuggetta, Software process: A Roadma
p, in: The Future of Software 
Engineering, ACM Press New York, 
New York, USA, 2000, pp. 25-
34. 
[2] D. Greening A. Fuggetta, “Agile Ba
se Patterns in the Agile Canon”, 
2016 49th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences. 
[3] R.Hoda, J.Noble, S.
Marshall,” Self-organizing roles on agile software 
development teams”. IEEE Trans. So
ftw. Eng. 39 (3), 422–444,2013. 
[4] K.-J. Stol and B. Fitzgerald, “Two’s 
company, three’s a crowd: A case 
study of crowdsourcing software development,” in roceedings of the 
36th International Conference on Software Engineering, 2014.  
[5] K. R.Lakhani, L. B.,Jeppesen, P. A.Lohse, J. A.Panetta, “ The value of 
openess in scientific problem solving”. HBS Working Paper Number: 

07-050, Harvard Business School, 2007. 
[6] Y. Yang, M. R. Karim
, R. Saremi and G. Ruhe,” “Who Should Take 
This Task? – Dynamic Decision Support for Crowd Workers”, to 

appear in: Proceedings  ESEM 2016. 
[7] Lakhani, K.R., Garvin, D.A. and Lonstein, E.
 2010. TopCoder (A): Developing Software through Crowdsourcing, Harvard Business 

School 610-032, 2010. 
[8] Topcoder website: http://www.topcoder.com 
[9] B. Ye, Y. Wang, and L. Li
u. CrowdTrust : A Context-Aware Trust Model for Workers Selection in Crowdsourcing Environments. IEEE 

ICWS 2015, 2015. 
[10] C. Eickhoff and A.P. de Vries. Increasing Cheat Robustness of 
Crowdsourcing Tasks. Information Retrieval To appear, 2012 
[11] P. Ipeirotis, “Be a top mechanical turk worker: You need $5 and 5 

minutes,” Blog: Behind Enemy Lines, 2010. 
[12] https://www.topcoder.com/member-onboarding/understanding-your-
topcoder-rating/ [13] N. Archak. Money, glory and cheap talk: analyzing strategic behavior 
of contestants in simultaneous crowdsourcing contests on 

TopCoder.com. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on 

World Wide Web, WWW ’10, pages 21–30, New York, NY, USA, 
2010. ACM. [14] C. Eickhoff and A.P. de Vries. Increasing Cheat Robustness of 
Crowdsourcing Tasks. Information Retrieval To appear, 2012 
[15] A .Kittur, E.Chi, B.Suh,”Crowdsourcing user studies with mechanical 
turk: 26th annual SIGCHI conference on human factors in computing 
systems (pp. 453–456). 2008,ACM 
[16] A.Sorokin, D.Forsyth,” Utility data annotation with amazon 
mechanical turk”,In Computer vision and pattern recognition 

workshops. CVPRW’08. IEEE 
computer society conference on IEEE 
(pp. 1–8) , 2008. 
[17] H. Yu, C. Miao, Z. Shen, C. Leung, Y. Chen, and Q. Yang, “Efficient 

task sub-delegation for crowdsourcing,” in AAAI, pp. 1305–1311, 
2015. 
[18] Y. Yang, R.L. Saremi,  “E
ffects of Award on Worker Behaviors in 
Crowdsourcing ”, Benjin,Chaina, ,Imperical software engineering and 
measures, ESEM 2015. 
[19] B. Bohem, C.Abts, A.Chulani,” software development cost approach- 

A survay”, Annal od software engineering 10 , 2000 
[20] D.Ingold, B.Boehm,” A Model for Estimating Agile Project Schedule 
Acceleration”, International Conference on Software and System 
Process. Pages 29-35. New York, NY, USA. 2013. [21] S. Mcconnel “Software estimation: Demystifying the Black Art”, 

2006, Microsoft Press [22] A. Begel, J. Bosch, M. A. Storey, “Social networking meets software 
development: perspectives from github, msdn, stack exchange, and 

topcoder.” IEEE Software, vol. 
30 (1), 2013, pp. 52-66. 
[23] http://crowdsourcing.topcoder.com/tei 
[24] X. Peng, M. Ali Babar and C. Ebert, "Collaborative Software 
Development Platforms for Crowdsourcing," in 
IEEE Software, vol. 
31, no. 2, pp. 30-36, Mar.-Apr. 2014. 
[25] M.Leticia, J.Kroll, S.Marczak, R.Pikladniki, "Breaking Collaboration 

Barriers through Communication Practices in Software 

Crowdsourcing." Global Software 
Engineering (ICGSE),11th International Conference on. IEEE, 2016. 
[26] K.Mao, L.Capra, M.Harman,Y.
Jia,”A Survey of the Use of 
Crowdsourcing in Software E
ngineering.”,Technical Report 
RN/15/01, Department of Computer Science, University College 
London,2013.
 110112112