 eXtreme Programming at Universities - An Educational Perspective Jean-Guy Schneider, Lorraine Johnston Swinburne University of Technology School of Information Technology P.O. Box 218, Hawthorn, Victoria 3122, Australia {jschneider, ljohnston} @ swin. edu.au Abstract To address the problems of traditional software devel- opment, recent years have shown the introduction of more light-weight or "agile" development processes (eXtreme Programming being the most prominent one). These pro- cesses are intended to support early and quick production of working code by structuring the development into small release cycles and focus on continual interaction between developers and customers. As such software development processes become more popular, there is a growing demand from industry to introduce agile development practices in tertiary education. This is not a straighOCorward task as the corresponding practices may run counter to educational goals or may not be adjusted easily to a learning environment. In this paper, we discuss some of these issues and reflect on the problems of teaching agile processes in tertiary education. 1. Introduction Imagine translating a book from Chinese into English, and the book changes overnight, the paper and pencil change while you are writing. The accepted practices in- volved in Software Engineering (SE) seem to change al- most as fast as this. Therefore we have tended to place too much reliance on traditional process models to "explain" to students the best way to engineer software. However, ex- perience has shown that education in "traditional" software development practices, such as the water-fall approach, will not always endow students with the appropriate knowledge and understanding for the workplace. We need therefore to question whether it might be ap- propriate to teach our students about more light-weight pro- cesses. From an academic point of view, we have to ask: Ł Should we introduce the practices of agile develop- ment processes in tertiary education? Ł If so, how should they be introduced to avoid contra- dicting our educational goals? This paper considers issues with using eXtreme Program- ming to educate students in Software Engineering. The rest of this paper is organized as follows: in Sec- tion 2, we briefly introduce the main principles and prac- tices of eXtreme Programming. In Section 3, we further outline the background of our study and define educational objectives for Software Engineering courses at a tertiary in- stitution. In Section 4, we evaluate the practices of eXtreme Programming with regards to the previously defined educa- tional objectives. Based on these observations, we come up with a few recommendations for software engineering cur- ricula in Section 5. We conclude this paper in Section 6 with a summary of the main observations and suggest issues for further investigation. 2. eXtreme Programming in a Nutshell eXtreme Programming is a so-called agile software de- velopment methodology [4], conceived and developed to address the specific needs of software development con- ducted by small teams in the face of vague and changing requirements [1, 3, 8]. It is a light-weight methodology combining a set of existing software development practices in such a way that developers are freed from "unnecessary work" (e.g. extensive documentation) and can concentrate on the main purpose of software development: writing qual- ity code. This is mainly achieved by a highly iterative and incremental process starting with a simple design that meets an initial set of requirements and is constantly evolved to add needed flexibility, removing unneeded complexity. In essence, it attempts to produce the "simplest possible solu- tion" fulfilling current requirements. Furthermore, eXtreme Programming assumes there is always a customer on-site, enforces pair programming [1], and promotes automated testing as well as continuous integration. 0-7695-1877-X/03 $17.00 © 2003 1EEE 594  3. Educational Objectives Software Engineering aims to support the building of software on time and within budget. While definitions of "Software Engineering" abound, there is a general consen- sus that it deals with the application of engineering pro- cesses to the development of large-scale systems. In such a development, typically no one person can carry all the details of the system in their heads, teamwork becomes a hallmark, and process issues need careful consideration. In building an aircraft, one can specify the properties of the required product, design a solution, and test a small scale model in a wind tunnel to establish the suitability of some of the properties of the final system. In principle, this is simple for a tangible product like an aircraft. The very fact that software is intangible means that the only evidence of development is in the artifacts that are produced--code, specifications, reports, etc. For software systems, the complexity grows with size, and alternative development techniques become necessary. The concept of scalability is often one that escapes young aficionados of software development. Similarly, it is a somewhat foreign idea that a complex system does not lend itself to a haphazard approach for development, and re- quires good management. Additionally, time and resource constraints usually limit the scope of the systems on which students can work. Therefore, the Software Engineering curricula must be carefully crafted so that students can learn about large-scale problems and solutions during the course of their study, in a situation where there is little opportunity to expose them to sufficiently large and complex systems. 3.1. Focusing the educational aims The IEEE-CS and the ACM have jointly proposed a body of software engineering knowledge (SEEK) [13], as an appropriate basis for the education of software engineers. Each of the defined topic areas in SEEK is addressed briefly here, in terms of its relevance for young software engineers. Fundamentals. The underpinnings of Software Engi- neering lie in Mathematics and in the foundations of Com- puting and Engineering. This includes the ability to deal with abstraction and to understand the concept of models. Most students would have little difficulty comprehending the reason for including these topics in an SE program. Professional Practice. While one could debate exactly what "Professional Practice" should encompass, it is fair to say that students need to learn about the ethical and so- cial aspects of their profession, as well as more business- oriented aspects such as contracting models. Software Requirements. Empirically, we know that an inadequate consideration of the perspectives of all stake- holders leads to rework later on. Hence, it is important to consider all relevant viewpoints up front, including the per- spectives of both the end-user and the client. Students fre- quently need reminding of the importance of these issues. Software Construction. Students tend to regard this topic as the key part of software engineering endeavours. Software Design. Small systems can usually be modified more easily than complex systems. Students need to under- stand at least the need for design documentation to commu- nicate the design, and the need for capturing design ratio- nale. Beyond that, there is an urgent need for more instruc- tion in architecture and related issues such as component- based systems and the use of patterns. An area often not discussed is that of interaction design, and the resulting user interface. Omitting this from curricula promises to produce a generation of software engineers who do not understand that functionality is not everything in a software product. Given basic functionality, the marketplace differentiates on quality attributes such as task efficiency, learnability, ease of use, aesthetics, and engagement. Software Verification and Validation. Without exten- sive exposure to larger systems and to the theory of testing, the perception Of students is that verification and validation equate to testing, or even debugging. However, students need to learn about traditional approaches such as white- and black-box testing, test planning, and testing to see if the desired non-functional properties have been met. It is also important that new engineers develop skills with and under- standing of, not only testing, but also other verification and validation techniques such as inspections. Software Evolution. Most newly-graduated software en- gineers are likely to find themselves employed, not on de- veloping new systems, but on maintaining existing systems. Therefore, they need analytical skills enabling them to iden- tify where and what changes are needed. For this, they need a good understanding of the architecture of the system, as well as clear ideas on the role of regression testing. Software Engineering Process. The concept of "Pro- cess" goes hand-in-hand with that of management. Without a strong framework of required activities, students tend to espouse, and indeed use, ad hoc work practices. Software Quality. Quality is said to be noted in its ab- sence, rather than in its presence. Unfortunately, it is often then too late to fix the problem. Therefore, students need a solid understanding of the techniques and methods that can help produce a quality product. However, there is the prob- lem that the techniques for ensuring quality in a large-scale product often seem to be an overkill for the size of products students confront. It may sometimes be necessary to impose processes which are not entirely suitable, purely from the perspective of exposing students to large-scale techniques. 595  Software Engineering Management. Many undergrad- uate students have little experience of managing anything. Some are of the age and mind-set to rebel against author- ity, and it is difficult for them to suddenly have to consider how a project is managed. Additionally, they often have lit- tle experience in a workplace and are unaware of expected behavioural protocols. This can have implications for how they interact and organise a team-based project. Richard- son [12] observed that teaching SE to undergraduates was a difficult proposition owing to (i) their lack of comput- ing experience, (ii) their lack of academic maturity to deal with ambiguity and conflicts between reality and theory, and (iii) their underdeveloped interpersonal skills. Young people usually have very good memories, and trust in their own ability to recall information. In this context, it is of- ten difficult to convince students about the value, let alone necessity, of software configuration management. In class, students tend to work on "toy" examples, and configuration management seems simply an unnecessary overhead. Like any other engineering discipline, to be efficient in a production environment, tools as well as specific techniques and methods are needed. Students need motivation to learn to use the tools, but also need to understand both the ra- tionale for their use and the principles on which they are built. It is good for them to be exposed to specific tools, but it is also important that they realise the range available. This becomes an issue of education for understanding and application of knowledge versus training to use a specific product, the latter being a non-extendable position. 3.2. Putting it together in a project Isolated topics in software engineering only provide the basis on which to build an understanding of the develop- ment of large-scale systems. The real learning takes place when the topics are not seen as isolated entities, but are put together in a real project. That is, when students are re- quired to interact with a real user to discover the client's real problems, the pieces start to fall into place. For ex- ample, why should one trace where the requirement orig- inated? Or, later, why should a design decision be docu- mented? As any parent knows, it is in the experience itself, that the best learning takes place. Most undergraduate soft- ware engineering programs have a final project to provide the capstone of the studies. In the discussion that follows, the context is that of a team-based, final year project. 4. eXtreme Programming and Education As mentioned previously, eXtreme Programming (XP) has been conceived for software development conducted by small teams of a maximum of 12 to 15 team members [1]. As this is also the maximum number of students we would consider as useful for final year software engineer- ing projects, using XP as the development process would certainly be a feasible approach. Recent work has shown that despite its success, XP does not address some important issues of software development [17] or should not be used for larger-scale and/or safety- critical systems [4]. Although further investigation of the (non-)applicability of XP for real-world software projects is certainly an important issue, this is beyond the scope of this paper. In this section, the focus is on evaluating some of the practices used in XP with regards to the previously defined educational objectives (see Section 3), with a special focus on two-semester software projects. eXtreme Metaphor. In [1] Beck says that XP is princi- paily nothing new, but "takes a set of common sense princi- ples and practices to extreme levels." Most of these princi- ples and practices are fairly well-known, were part of other software development methodologies, and have been taught in the context of a variety of courses before. Unfortunately, some of these principles have previously not reached the required level of acceptance with students, e.g. the importance of testing (i.e. writing test cases before writing code), the focus on producing quality software in the first place, and the importance of coding standards and configuration management. We noticed there is definitely a better acceptance and understanding of these practices when they are introduced in an XP-like context. The eXtreme metaphor is the main contributing factor here as practices previously considered as being tedious become trendy. Pair Programming. Probably the most extensively inves- tigated practice of XP is pair programming. Several encour- aging experience reports have been published in both indus- trial and academic settings (e.g. see [1, 5, 7, 11, 18]). In particular, there is empirical evidence that a pair of devel- opers working on one computer can produce better quality software faster than the pair working separately. However, we argue that this observation only holds if pair programming is done in the "right" environment with appropriately trained people. XP assumes all developers have reasonable programming skills, are capable of work- ing in pairs, and are willing to do so. One of the authors adopted pair programming some years ago in a large class of first year computing students (app. 500 students). The goal was to improve programming skills as it was thought students would help each other learn by discussion. Inevitably, the stronger one of the pair did most of the work, the weaker one usually failed the later ex- amination, and only where there were well-matched pairs was the goal reached. We also noted different personality types and/or genders had a significant impact on pair pro- gramming performance. Unfortunately, there is little evi- dence that researchers have considered this yet. 596  Educational systems seem to be primarily based on a scheme where good marks are most highly 
rewarded, and many students are uncomfortable leaving this framework. In an 
XP environment, however, an ego-less attitude is re- quired as people have to favour team success over personal rewards and assist other team 
members improve their work- ing skills. These issues require a level of maturity to accept. Process and Discipline. Agile methodologies are consid- 
ered to be light-weight and 
impose less process burden upon the developers, which are some of the reasons why 
they have become so popular. 
However, the practices of any ag- ile methodology must be applied in a disciplined way for projects to succeed. 
The relevance of discipline in XP is captured by Smith [15]: "XP is not a free form, anything goes discipline--it focuses [... ] on a particular aspect of software development and a way of delivering value, and is quite prescriptive about the way 
this is to be achieved." It is in 
the nature of young university students that they are less likely to enjoy prescriptive development methods and prefer approaches which leave them more freedom to explore. Furthermore, experience has shown that they have 
the tendency to struggle if they have to work in a disciplined way over a longer period. The combination of these two observations leads to a situation quite accurately described by one of our colleagues as "students dislike process, but they like discipline even less." Hence there is a big risk that 
a light-weight development methodology such as XP cannot be successfully applied 
in an educational environment. We therefore argue that a less flexible development pro- cess with 
more guidance is better suited to the educational environment than a process based on "less process, more discipline?' The latter should only be applied if all partici- pants have the necessary experience and maturity, and fully understand the consequences of choosing a light-weight de- velopment process. This was best summarized by another colleague: "XP is for professionals, not students." Distribution and Availability. One of the main 
practices of XP (and most other agile development processes) is that the development team is co-located, preferably even in a single office. The physical arrangement of the office needs to facilitate, or even encourage, brainstorming, joint discus- sions, pair programming, etc. [1, pp. 78]. Furthermore, it is assumed all developers are on-site most of their work time. Unfortunately, such an environment is fanciful in most universities. More often than not, laboratory space is a lim- ited resource, and as many machines as possible are put into one room, making them very 
crowded and noisy. Joint working is therefore awkward and, unsurpfisingly, students prefer working at home. Furthermore, as most students have part-time jobs and their timetables are relatively disjoint, it is often difficult to find suitable times for scheduling joint working sessions outside timetabled classes at all. Hence, student software projects are probably more aligned with distributed projects than 
co-located ones. Thus, one of the main prerequisites for applying XP is not fulfilled and the 
benefits of a joint working environment are lost, in particular the warm communication paths [4]. As a result, stricter rules for documenting project activities have to be put in place and the 
whole process immediately be- comes more heavy-weight. There are efforts 
to adapt XP practices to distributed work environments (e.g. a recent ar- ticle by Kircher et al. [9]), but the necessary changes and the resulting consequences are not yet fully understood. At our institution, we happily acquired a laboratory with a small number of workstations especially set up for the needs of two project teams. Interestingly, one team de- cided to 
do most of their design and coding there and scheduled their 
joint working sessions based on their 
re- spective timetables (mostly late afternoons or evenings). The other team's members, however, used the room infre- quently, preferred to work at home, and for collaboration relied on phone 
calls or internet technology (instant messag- ing, email, online chat, etc.). They occasionally organized coding sessions at one of the students' homes. Encourage- ment of the second team to use the laboratory more seems to have failed because of ignorance of the benefits of joint working sessions. They reverted to "the way we have been working throughout the previous years of our studies?' On-site Client. A similar problem arises with regards to having an on-site customer. Considenng that this is often wishful thinking 
even in industry projects, 
with students' 
timetables it is probably a fair assumption that being able to contact the client by email or phone 
during working hours is as "ideal" a situation as we can 
hope for. We have noted on several projects that clients do not fully understand the benefits of regular developer-client in- teractions. They do not want to be 
"bothered" by giving feedback to all team members, and they often 
ask for a li- aison person for interaction. Also, students are loathe to be continually contacting the client: "we do not want to 
bother our clients with small or trivial issues all the time." As a result, students often spend quite some time in get- ting certain aspects of the system "perfect" and understand- 
ably get frustrated 
when they receive negative feedback on what they thought was completed work. The issue of not having feedback when needed is magnified by the problem of students working at home, alone and/or 
at night. Being able to talk to the client 
earlier and more freely would cer- tainly help to 
rectify these kinds of problems. Development Cycles. XP is a highly iterative and incre- mental development process with iterations taking one to two weeks and 
a new release coming out every month or two. In fact, short development cycles are crucial for suc- cessful projects [1, 3]. 
Each iteration is supposed to add 597  functionality of a certain value to the customer. To achieve these kinds of development, XP assumes that developers can work exclusively on the project for 40 hours a week. In an educational setting, we do not have the luxury of having students exclusively available for 40 hours project work each week; an average of 10 to 15 hours per week is much more 
likely. To gain the same amount 
of value added per iteration or release 
as in 
an ideal setting, we end up with 
iterations of four to six weeks and release cycles of six to eight months! Considering that 
student projects generally run over a period of one to two semesters, this is neither a practical nor an acceptable option. To keep the cycles short(er), one must reduce the scope of each cycle. However, it is doubtful whether any significant value can be added to the software with these kinds 
of cycles, and 
we end up with 
a situation which is not really acceptable, either. Project Deliverables. The authors of the Agile Software Development Manifesto [2] claim that "running software is considered to be the most important deliverable" of a soft- ware project and "working software is the primary measure 
of progress." There are very good 
reasons why this applies to certain types of projects (and possibly not to others), but we must question the relevance in an educational context. There is no doubt that having running software at some stage in a project is desirable and reflects progress. Addi- tionally, it provides both satisfaction that meaningful work has been done and the necessary motivation 
to keep work- ing. However, the lessons learned during 
a software project are at least 
as important as running software and must be considered as a kind of deliverable, too. Unfortunately, the desired learning 
can often only 
be achieved by making mistakes, analyzing the resulting problems, and rectifying them. This takes time, and 
during this period, there is no progress which can 
be measured in terms of working code. Furthermore, we believe that code being the main de- liverable sends the 
wrong message to students. If we con- sider the cooperative game principle of Cockburn [4, pp. 31], then code only 
addresses the first goal of the soft- ware development game (i.e. deliver useful, working soft- ware), but neglects the second goal (i.e. prepare for the next game). There are many kinds of (larger-scale) projects where more than just running code is required, e.g., re- engineering projects where extracting and documenting the design of an existing legacy system is a necessary step for any forward-engineering activity [6]. Finally, one cannot equitably assess a team of develop- ers (either individually or 
as a group) on running software alone, as issues such as personal initiative, dedication to quality work etc. are not 
judged to the required level of accuracy. Other "products" of the development process are needed. The reader should note this does not only apply to educational contexts, but also to situations in industry where promotions are based on any such assessment schemes. Perception. Students without the required level of matu- rity to fully understand what is important in software devel- opment and the 
consequences of certain practices, can be mislead by agile development practices as they only tend to see "what can be omitted?' As an example, we orga- nized a complementary lecture on agile software develop- ment (given by an expert in the field) to the final year soft- ware engineering students halfway through semester one of their two-semester project. In the following team meeting with one of the teams, a student commented that "we should have chosen XP as our development process; then it would not have been 
necessary to write a requirements specifica- tion?' As it turned out, misconceptions in the requirements resulted in that team running into trouble in semester two. It can be said that development processes such as 
XP cer- tainly have their benefits and 
can have a positive impact in an educational context. 
However, there are important edu- cational goals which are 
not met and, therefore, 
changes to the process have to be made in order to address these goals. 5. Recommendations SE education aims to produce software engineers with the knowledge and skills to adapt their practices in an ever- 
changing environment. This is distinct from training them as experts in the techniques and processes 
which are cur- rently most popular and being touted as "the way to go?' While XP has many positive aspects, many of its tenets are not compatible with the real environment of most 
students. Some of the difficulties 
lie with the 
prior educational ex- periences of students. There are problems when the stu- dent mindset pfioritizes outcomes in the order (i) a pass in a course, (ii) a good grade in a course, (iii) the learning expe- rience, and (iv) helping another student. A re-engineering of this mindset is necessary before the practices of XP can work well. The question of how to refocus the student ex- perience is being considered by many educationalists, but clearly an early focus 
on teamwork and cooperation 
is im- portant for 
SE studies. Instilling the concept of "ego-less working" at an early stage 
is a key element, the introduc- tion of learning communities [16] another. Location and scheduling problems are difficult to over- 
come in an academic environment. 
Leverage may possi- bly be found with additional research into distributed light- weight methods, and their application to educational situa- tions. Currently the co-location issues are difficult to solve. 
One way to present a large-scale project to students is to offer a team-based maintenance project, where extensions are needed. This has some overlap with the idea of the Real World Laboratory at Georgia Institute of Technology [14]. If the base system is sufficiently large and 
complex, many of the large-scale objectives can be met. Students must view 598  the system at various levels of abstraction, and identify the location for change from the existing system artifacts. They must design and implement the changes, performing all the relevant levels of testing, and "plan" for future changes. Where there is little 
or no existing 
documentation, apart 
from in the code itself, students become very aware 
of how much planning for 
change went into the original product. They will more likely agree that running software alone should not be the criterion of a well-engineered product. In academia, 
it is 
appropriate to place the primary em- phasis on process, rather 
than product, which does not al- ways delight the management-averse students. If the goal is to have students learn techniques suitable for large-scale development, then we must simulate at least the develop- ment of a complex system. It may be necessary to impose on their project work a regime which otherwise would not be the development process of choice for that system. Rather than learn to apply only XP techniques, it is preferable that students are exposed to a set of techniques that help them manage a variety of projects (from small to large-scale), introduced the ideas in the context of the posi- tive and negative issues associated with any process 
model, and given guidelines how to select a process model for the particular situation. The Crystal methodologies [4] is a process-kit which could be used 
for this purpose, the Ra- tional Unified Process [ 10] another. Education includes giving students a set of tools to craft a solution. Part of the collection of knowledge and skills needed by 
new engineers is the ability to tailor a process to suit their needs. Teaching students how to tailor their pro- cesses is likely to have a more beneficial effect than seeing a light-weight development process such as XP as the answer. 6. Conclusions Agile development processes like XP are increasingly popular in industry. However, in tertiary institutions, there is little teaching experience of agile processes beyond pair programming. Further evaluation is needed to gain neces- sary insights. As discussed, some practices of XP can be used in a learning environment, others negate educational goals. Curriculum changes are needed so that students em- brace a less self-centred philosophy than is currently the case. Consequently, we believe 
that eXtreme Programming as it stands does not lend itself for use in tertiary education. References [1] K. Beck. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change. Addison-Wesley, 1999. [2] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. van Bennekum, A. Cockbum, W. Cunningham, M. Fowler, 
J. Grenning, J. Highsmith, A. Hunt, R. 
Jeffries, J. Kern, B. Marick, R. C. Martin, S. Mellor, 
K. Schwaber, J. Sutherland, and 
D. Thomas. Manifesto for Agile Software Development. Available at http://agilemanifesto.org/. [3] K. Beck, M. Fowler, and J. Kohnke. Planning Extreme Pro- gramming. The XP Series. Addison-Wesley, 2000. [4] A. Cockburn. Agile Software Development. 
Addison- Wesley, 2001. 
[5] A. Cockbum and L. 
Williams. The Cost and Benefits of Pair Programming. In G. 
Succi and M. Marchesi, editors, Extreme Programming Examined, 
The XP Series. Addison- Wesley, May 2001. [6] S. 
Demeyer, S. Ducasse, and O. Nierstrasz. Object-Oriented Reengineering Patterns. 
Morgan Kaufmann/dPunkt, 2002. [7] M. Holcombe, M. Gheorghe, and E Macias. Teaching XP for Real: some initial observations and plans. In Proceed- ingsof the Second International Conference on Extreme 
Programming and Flexible Processes in Software Engineer- 
ing (XP2001), 
pages 14-17, Cagliari, Italy, May 2001. [8] R. Jeffries, A. Anderson, and C. Hendnckson. Extreme Pro- 
gramming Installed. 
The XP Series. Addison-Wesley, 2000. [9] M. Kircher, 
P. Jain, A. 
Corsaro, and D. Levine. Distributed eXtreme Programming. In Proceedings of the Second Inter- 
national Conference on Extreme Programming 
and Flexible Processes in Software Engineering (XP2001), 
pages 66--71, Cagliari, Italy, May 2001. [10] P. Kruchten. The Rational Unified Process: 
An Introduction. Object Technology Series. Addison-Wesley, Second edition, 2000. [11] M. M. Mtiller and 
W. F. 
Tichy. Case study: Extreme pro- gramming in a university environment. In H. A. 
MUller, editor, Proceedings ICSE 2001, pages 537-544, Toronto, Canada, May 2001. IEEE Computer Society. [12] W.E. Richardson. Undergraduate Software Engineering Ed- ucation. In G. A. 
Ford, editor, Proceedings of the Second 
SEI Conference on Software Engineering Education, 
LNCS 327, pages 121-144, Falrfax, Virginia, Apr. 1988. Springer. [13] Software Engineering Education Knowledge (SEEK). Sec- ond Draft, available at http://sites.computer.org/ccse/, Dec. 2002. [14] D. M. 
Smith. Real World Laboratory. 3 semester project at Georgia Institute of Technology, refer to http://www.cc.gatech.edu/classes/RWL/Web. [15] J. Smith. A Comparison of RUP and XP. White 
Paper, Rational Software Corporation, 2001. [16] V. Tinto. Colleges as 
Communities: Taking Research on Student Persistence Seriously. The Review of Higher Edu- cation, 21(2): 167-177, 1998. [17] D. Turk, R. France, and 
B. Rumpe. Limitations of Agile Software Processes. In Proceedings of the Third Interna- 
tional Conference on Extreme Programming 
and Flexible Processes in Software Engineering (XP2002), 
pages 43--46, Alghero, Italy, May 2002. [18] L. A. Williams and R. R. Kessler. The Effects of "Pair- Pressure" and "Pair-Learning" on Software 
Engineering Ed- ucation. In S. A. Mengel and P. J. Knoke, editors, Proceed- ings of the Thirteenth Conference on Software Engineering 
Education & Training, 
pages 59-65. 
IEEE Computer Soci- ety, Mar. 2000. 
599 