 Best Practices in eXtreme Programming Course Design Kai Stapel FG Software Engineering Leibniz Universität Hannover Welfengarten 1 30167 Hannover, Germany +49 - (0)511 - 762 7463 kai.stapel@inf.uni-hannover.de Daniel Lübke FG Software Engineering Leibniz Universität Hannover Welfengarten 1 30167 Hannover, Germany +49 - (0)511 - 762 19672 daniel.luebke@inf.uni-hannover.de Eric Knauss FG Software Engineering Leibniz Universität Hannover Welfengarten 1 30167 Hannover, Germany +49 - (0)511 - 762 19680 eric.knauss@inf.uni-hannover.de  ABSTRACT Teaching (and therefore learning) eXtreme Programming (XP) in a 
university setting is difficult because of course time limitations and 

the soft nature of XP that require
s first-hand experience in order to 
see and really learn the methods. Fo
r example, iterations are either 
shorter or fewer than appropriate. In this paper we present the 

properties to tune when designi
ng an eXtreme Programming course. 
These are the properties we gathered
 by conducting three XP labs as 
part of our software engineering 
teaching. Within this paper we 
describe our set-up as well as th
e important properties. Lecturers 
and teachers can use this property system and combine it with their 

own constraints in order to de
rive a better XP lab for their 
curriculum. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors K.3.2 [Computers and Education
]: Computer and Information 
Science Education Œ curriculum, computer science education, 
information systems education. General Terms: Management, Design, Human Factors. Keywords
 Extreme Programming, Lab Design, Agile Development. 1. INTRODUCTION Agile development, nowadays mo
stly represented by eXtreme 
Programming (XP), is being used mo
re and more in industry. That 
is why at least one agile devel
opment practice should be in the 
repertoire of a university level 
student in a computing major. However, it is hard, if not impossible, to realistically teach all 
relevant parts of XP in a Univers
ity setting. This is mostly due to 
time and resource limitations. So 
the main differences between 
educational and real XP projects ar
e that educational projects have 
either few but long or many but 
short iterations, simpler project objectives, and inexperienced progr
ammers. Nevertheless, the goal 
is to get most out of an XP course for the student in terms of a 

realistic XP experience and XP learning outcomes. In this paper we present how we tried to fulfill this goal and what 
we changed in course design to 
make things better. After putting 
this contribution in context with 
other educational XP papers we 
present a detailed description of our existing designs of XP 

laboratories. The experiences gain
ed when conducting these XP labs are condensed in a property system which is being presented along 

with other best practices for eXtreme Programming course design. 2. RELATED WORK There are many other educational pa
pers concerned with XP course 
design and XP course experiences [1-5]. Most of the presented 

teaching and research is concerned with pair programming, as this is 

the most prominent XP practice. Probably that is because it is fairly 

easy to let students program in pair
s instead of letting them program 
alone. According to Sherrell and Robertson [3], Williams and 

Kessler [4] and Hanks et al 
[5] students benefit from pair 
programming when learning programming, because they feel that 

they are more productive, their morale is higher and they are more 

confident in their programming solu
tion. Besides that, students feel 
that pair programming makes them 
better at working with others 
[1]. 
Most commonly, classes, lectures and labs are concentrating on a 
selection of aspects, or even on a single aspect. For example, 

Astrachan et al [6] tried to create a lecture for XP, which 

concentrated solely on some practices like pair programming and 

refactoring, and Johnson and Caris
ti tried to integrate XP with 
software design [7] in their classes. 
The main difference between our approach and most other 
approaches to teach eXtreme Programming is that we do not focus 

on a single aspect alone but instead we try to make it a holistic XP 

experience for the students. To achie
ve this we decided to make the 
course a block course (8 hours a day in consecutive work-days). The 

advantage of this is that learning of most of the XP practices (see 

section 3.1) is more effective 
when experiencing them non-stop. 
Schneider and Johnston [2] state that
 in most university settings it is 
not possible to get students to work co-located and continuously 

because of disjoint timetables and the lack of suitable laboratories. 

Luckily, we have an especially
 equipped computer room and 
timely-flexible students. 
Our approach is influenced by Holc
ombe et al. [8] who also tried to 
set-up a more realistic project. In their case they had to teach XP to 

more students than we did, whic
h led them to simulate a whole 
software company. 
Permission to make digital or hard copi
es of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted w
ithout fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or comme
rcial advantage and that copies bear 
this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or 

republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 

permission and/or a fee. 

ICSE™08
, May 10Œ18, 2008, Leipzig, Germany. 
Copyright 2008 ACM  978-1-60558-079-1/08/05...$5.00.  3. EXISTING DESIGNS OF OUR XP LABS Within this section we present our approach for teaching XP in a lab 
environment. This includes the objec
tives we want to convey to the 
students, the lab set-ups we ha
ve tried and modified, and the 
required and resulting student qualifications. 3.1 Learning Objectives The XP lab is one of the advanced classes that can be chosen by 
computer science master student
s. Beforehand, students had to 
participate in two programming cl
asses (Scheme and Java), the 
lectures ﬁFoundations of SEﬂ and ﬁS
oftware Qualityﬂ as well as to 
perform a simulated software pr
oject that is based on a rigid 
software development process [9] 
in their bachelor studies. While 
XP and other agile methodologies are introduced in the lecture 

ﬁFoundations of SEﬂ, the XP lab is
 a much more suitable form to 
introduce and teach XP and the feeling of agile methods.  
Consequently, the main purpose of 
the XP laboratory is to let the 
students experience
 and conduct an agile development project. In 
that way they are able to 
feel the differences to process-driven 
development from a project particip
ant™s perspective. After taking 
the XP course, students should be 
able to judge which development 
style better suits a given development task, and whether they feel 

comfortable in participating in agile projects or not. Part of the XP 

experience is Œ besides the realistic
 XP environment Œ that students 
learn to perform and utilize XP practices [10] adequately. In 

contrast to lectures and other cl
asses, our lab aims to convey the 
objectives practically. This is important because many properties of 

agile projects must be experienced in order to appreciate the 

advantages of doing so and to identif
y pitfalls that seem to be easy 
in theory [11]. Hence, the main learning objectives are to practically 

experience the following XP practices: 
1. Planning Game:
 Students learn how to divide 
requirements into User Storie
s and how to prioritize and 
estimate the costs of these stories. While such tasks seem 

to be easy in theory, dealing with dependencies in the 

planning game is normally a challenge for inexperienced 

developers like students. 2. Small releases:
 Students learn the benefits of small 
releases that already offer value to the customer and how 

to technically put a system into production including 

packaging. 3. Metaphor:
 Students learn how to develop a metaphor 
that helps every team member to better understand how 

the whole system works. 
4. Simple design:
 Students learn the benefits of simple 
software design which improves their ability to change 

the system quickly and accommodate it to changing 

requirements. 5. Testing: Students learn how to use unit test frameworks 
and the test-first approach to build high quality software 

and to recognize the advantages of well-tested code when 

making changes.  6. Refactoring: Students learn to refactor the software to 
remove duplication, improve
 communication and simplify 
the code base. Especially refactoring large systems can be 

troublesome and is a worthy experience that can only be 

made in long lasting projects. 7. Pair programming:
 Students learn and experience the 
principles of pair programming, the advantages of writing 

software with a partner and the social challenges that are 

associated. 
8. Collective code ownership:
 Students get to know the 
advantages of collective code ownership and the 

challenges that arise with pa
rallel updates and changes to their own code by other team members. 
9. Continuous integration:
 To counter conflicting updates 
to the code base, students learn to integrate and build the 

software frequently. 
10. 40-hour week:
 In contrast to normal life in university, 
students experience to work continuously for 40-hours per 

week in a designated team room. 11. On-Site Customer:
 Students have to interact with a 
designated On-Site Customer who is available full-time to 

answer questions. 12. Coding standards:
 Students experience the importance 
of uniform coding conventions throughout the team 

especially when combined with collective code 

ownership. Other important non-XP-specific learning objectives are:  General programming: 
The students improve their 
general programming skills by practical experience. 
 Team work: 
The students learn how to deal with 
differently skilled developers as well as social and 

technical problems faced by all teams 
3.2 Different Lab Set-Ups To realize the described learning objectives we started with a block 
course project that is integrated as a lab into the curriculum. Over 

the years we enhanced the set-up to improve the learning experience 

and to provide a realistic project 
experience. To achieve this, the 
student feedback was gathered by
 using a light-weight post-mortem 
technique called LIDs (li
ght-weight d
ocumentation and reuse of experiences) [12]. In addition, we documented the experiences of 

the tutors responsible for the lab. 
This allowed us to improve the lab 
set-up over time.  Preparation
Block Course
Post-Mortem
LIDs
Teachingbasic
XP skills
Basis forimprovement
Basis for
improvement
CaptureExperiences
and Feedback
 Figure 1: Feedback with LIDs for the XP Labs 
Thereby, the basic project set-up remained the same as illustrated in 
figure 1. A preparation class conveys
 the principles of agile methods 
and XP practices to the students. Afterwards, a multi-day block 

course is conducted, which is the ma
in part of the lab. The students 
have to develop an application for a customer using the XP 

practices. The On-Site Customer is played by a tutor. Another tutor 

performs the coach role. The experiences of the lab are documented 
 in a LIDs session afterwards. The experiences are used to further 
improve and adjust the next year™s lab set-up. 
Our first lab (in the year 2005) was a 3 day project that was 
accompanied by an introduction to XP. The introduction consisted 

of 2 lectures with 4 hours each. Besides a theoretical introduction 

into the XP practices and tips, agile hours [11] and practical 

introductions to the Eclipse IDE, 
refreshers for Swing and JUnit, using stubs for testing, and ANT were integrated into the lectures. The main part was, however, the 3 da
y project. In this first attempt, 
each of the iterations lasted half a day resulting in 1 prototype phase 

and 7 iterations. The project took place in a designated computer 

room that was blocked exclusively for 3 days.  
In this first attempt to conduct the 
XP lab, the XP team consisted of 
16 developers, one On-Site Custom
er, and one XP coach. The coach 
was also responsible for answeri
ng technical questions regarding 
Java and other technologies. On-S
ite Customer and coach were 
performed by staff members of 
the software engineering group 
while the students were developers
. Students had to work in pairs 
and the use of test-first was cont
rolled by using test coverage 
metrics, which were published to the team.  
Within the lunch break, the whole team including staff members ate 
pizza in a separate room designated to the team only. Moreover, 

after each day a small meeting was held in which every student had 

to offer his opinion on the day and 
his/her impressions. In this way 
we achieved a good team spirit. While the main objectives of training XP practices and experience 
the ﬁfeelingﬂ of an XP project were achieved, the initial set-up had 

some drawbacks.  
 The iterations were very short leading to extremely fine-
grained story cards that were too technical. This was both 

the impression of the attending tutors as well as the 

feedback given by the students. 
 The overall project was very short. According to the 
students, the team did not work well before the third day. 

As a result, the team did not reach its productive state. 
 The team size was too large. This led to many team 
members that were unwilling or unable to offer their 

opinions in discussions. There 
were too many students to 
effectively have common 
sessions at whiteboards. 
Especially, technical ﬁgroupﬂ
 discussions were always 
dominated by the same 3 students. 
We tried to address these issues in the second lab that was 
conducted one year later. We ex
tended the lab duration by doubling 
the associated credit points. Thereby we achieved a 7 day project 

with one day for the prototype and 6 iterations of one day each. We 

hoped to fix the problems with iteration length and the team 

building time this way. Due to personnel constraints we could not 

reduce the team size because we only had one On-Site Customer. 
Interestingly, the second set-up wo
rked worse than the first. The 
iteration length of one day seems to
 be an unsatisfying length. The 
story card size for such an iteration seems to be too large for being 

technical as with half day iterations but too short for being really 

customer-value driven. Moreover, 
that year™s students were much 
more unwilling to communicate and to solve internal problems. Due 

to the increased number of days we could not eat pizza every day. 

Instead, most lunches were in the university™s cafeteria which is 

more anonymous than a separate 
room. Thus, lunch breaks did not 
reach the team building effect as in the previous project. While in 
the first lab the lunch discussion was mainly dominated by spare 

time topics, the second group had nearly no talking at all. Although 
we expected positive effects of the increased iteration length and 

overall project duration the second attempt was worse than the first. 

This was also stressed by the fact 
that some students tried to avoid 
their accountability by hiding in the large team. Failed acceptance 

tests, deleted tests in the reposito
ry and non-working software were 
attributed to anonymous ﬁotherﬂ team members. 
A year later the XP lab was offe
red again. This time, we added 
another 2 days to the project length which was critical because 9 

blocked days for a project means 2 weeks off from normal 

university classes for the students.
 By introducing a second On-Site 
Customer with a second project we were able to split the group and 

reduce the team size to eight students per team. In order to reduce 

the staff™s workload both teams shared the same coach. To improve the project and to better reach the learning objectives, 
we further increased the iteration length to two days while keeping 

all other things the same. In order to supervise and support two 

projects with one coach, the second project started one day later as 

illustrated in figure 2. Consequen
tly, the coach supervised only one 
planning game each morning, because the teams alternatively 

started their iterations.  Prototype
Iteration 1
Iteration 2
Iteration 2
Iteration 1
Prototype
Project A
Project B
Day 1Day 2Day 3Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Plan Game
Plan Game
Plan Game
Plan Game
Iterat
Prototype
Iteration 1
Iteration 2
Iteration 2
Iteration 1
Prototype
Project A
Project B
Day 1Day 2Day 3Day 4
Day 5
Day 6
Plan Game
Plan Game
Plan Game
Plan Game
Iterat
 Figure 2: Interleaving Schedule for Two Concurrent Projects 
 On a side note, we organized the lunch differently: Only the first 

and last days of the projects were ﬁpizza daysﬂ in the designated 

room. The other lunch breaks had to be organized by the students 

themselves. The organization requires communication between the 
students to select food and locations.  Using this set-up we have reached the best project and learning 
experiences in our opinion and feedback so far. The iterations are 

long enough to implement reasonabl
e story cards and small enough 
to fit many iterations and therefore many planning games into the 

lab. 4. XP LAB DESIGN EXPERIENCES Within this section we present 
our XP laboratory design property 
system. Based on our experiences, 
it helps lecturers planning to 
teach XP to align the lab set-up with the learning objectives. 

Additionally we give further hints 
and note worthy details at the end 
of this section. Thus, we 
conclude this section with 
recommendations and best practices. Our experiences stem from obser
vations we made during the 
various XP labs, the feedback of the students conducted in the LIDs 

after each lab, and some software metrics that were recorded on 

each check-in (tracking records). 
  4.1 XP Lab Design Property System We performed an eXtreme Programming laboratory three times in 
the past three years. Each time we modified some constraints in 

order to improve the XP experien
ce for the students. Some changes 
turned out to really have a positive impact on the learning 

objectives. Table 1 summarizes our experiences made when 

changing laboratory settings and the impacts of these changes on the 

learning objectives (see section 3.1). The results can be used as a 

framework for lecturers who are planning an eXtreme Programming 

course in a university-like setting. 
The arrows in the table-cells represent the effect of the modification 
(row) on the learning objective (column). An upward arrow 

indicates a positive effect and 
a downward arrow indicates a 
negative effect. In other words: an upward arrow means that the 

modification makes the learning 
outcome more successful; vice 
versa for the downward arrow. For example, giving 
technical support helps the students to learn how to use a 
metaphor right, 
whereas 
long iterations usually are bad for the 
pair programming experience (since students tend to not switch pairs voluntarily 

during an iteration). The last two columns show the effect of the 

modifiers on two other non-XP lab se
tup relevant outcomes, namely 
student motivation and tutor workload. In the following paragraphs 

we give extended descriptions of 
some important modifications that 
we consider particularly importa
nt (marked bold in the table). 4.1.1 Block Course We think that it is very important to teach agile development in a 
block course. Otherwise the project climate, the team building and 
the whole XP experience will not really be conveyed. Many of the 

XP learning objectives also benefit of a block course. Experiences 
regarding pair programming, collec
tive code ownership, continuous 
integration, and On-Site Customer are more intense, i.e. the 

implications of those practices ar
e better visible. Moreover, block 
course scheduling is the only opti
on to demonstrate the importance 
of a 40-hour week. In a regular course the students would not get to 

feel how exhausting it can be to pair program 8 hours a day, 5 days 

a week. We assume that a block 
course would foster overall team 
work and typically would improve
 student motivation. This was 
also the feedback of the students. They think that the block course is 

a lab type that is well-suited for conveying XP. In our opinion the 

only downside is the very high tutor workload during a block 

course. Tutors working as coaches
 hardly get to do other things 
during the whole time of the course. 4.1.2 More and Longer Iterations 
In a university setting it is almost impossible to have realistic 
iteration lengths (between 2 and 6 weeks) 
and at the same time a 
realistic number of iterations. So if you want to teach division of 

requirements into User Stories a
nd cost estimation of these User 
Stories, you need at least a couple 
of iterations. That is why shorter 
iterations typically are used. We tried three different iteration 

lengths: half-day, one day, and two day iterations. The 
longer the iterations are, the more realistic the XP experience is. That is mostly 
due to the fact that User Stories should be of a size so that they can 

be completed in one iteration and a
dd customer value to the system 
when finished. With short iterations User Stories need to be smaller 

so that they can be completed. 
Otherwise, the planning game fails 
because estimation cannot level off. The problem with small User 

Stories is that they usually desc
ribe technical goals and do not add 
significant value to the software. Therefore, the customer is not 

interested in them and the acceptance test at the end of an iteration 
Modifiers
 better
 worse
 ! Reinforce
bold
 see text
Learning objectivesRealistic XP environment1. Planning Game2. Small releases3. Metaphor4. Simple design5. Testing6. Refactoring7. Pair programming8. Collective ownership9. Continuous integration10. 40-hour week11. On-site customer12. Coding standardsGeneral programmingGeneral team workOther effectsStudent motivationTutor workload






!!Lunch together
Block Course
Longer iterations
More iterations
Small team size (8-12)
Customer interest
Technical support
Technical feedback
Progress feedback
Table 1: eXtreme Programming Lab Design Property System 
 becomes unrealistic. Hence, it is important to find a good 
compromise between the number of iterations and iteration length.  Table 2: Percentage of Story Cards with User Goals 
 # Cards containing 
User Goals 
# Cards containing technical goals Percentage of 
User Goals Lab 2006 
20 48 30 %
Lab 2007 
25 25 50 %
Table 2 shows the effect of longer iterations on the quality of User 
Stories. It is based on the tracking records from the last two labs. In 

2006 the iterations lasted 1 working day. To maintain project 

manageability, we had to break down many real User Stories (story 

cards describing user goals) into 
Technical User Stories (technical 
tasks). Thus, only 30 % of the im
plemented story cards described 
customer-value. By contrast 50 % of the story cards delivered in 

2007 represented user goals. That is
 due to the longer iterations we 
performed that year. 
Based on this evaluation we suggest 
at least a 2-week block course 
with 5 or more two-day iterations. 
That is the set-up with which we 
had positive experiences. This can be
 demonstrated with the metrics 
concerning real User Stories presen
ted above and the test coverage 
that will be presented later on. 4.1.3 Small Team Size It is important to have a sm
all team size between 8 and 12 
developers [10]. We found that th
is is especially true for XP 
novices. In our observation, overa
ll communication and team work 
went better in a team of 8 people th
an in a team of 16. Furthermore, 
team spirit builds up faster in small teams. All together, a small 

team leads to a better pair progr
amming experience, since switching 
pairs is easier and more frequent. 4.1.4 Technical Support Technical support is important for all XP 
practices, especially with 
testing. Students tend to avoid te
st-first programming quite quickly 
if they do not get help in the beginning. 
Technical feedback on the 
other hand is important so that th
e students get to know right away 
when they do not follow the XP practices correctly. 
Technical support is also good for student motivation. If they get 
quick help whenever they get tangled up, they have more moments 

of success and hence memorize the things learned better. By 

contrast, technical feedback ha
s no distinct impact on student 
motivation. If the students already are motivated then technical 

feedback is good. But if they are not motivated, then technical 

feedback might make things worse. Continuously pointing out the 

programming mistakes of an unmotivated student will probably not 

make him feel good and hence demotivate him even more. The 

same holds for progress feedback. It is difficult to efficiently enforce test-first development when 
supervising a larger group of student
s. We were very successful by 
creating test coverage reports for every check-in. At the end of the 

day or when significant drops in the test coverage occurred we 

discussed the testing behavior. 
The number of test cases, test 
methods and assert statements ar
e also good indicators. Making the 
coverage reports public and hin
ting towards strict test-first 
compliance is a good way for encouraging students to follow the 

test-first paradigm. Normally probl
ems due to badly tested code 
arise at the end of the project. Such incidents are not optimal from a 

project™s point of view but are 
important for demonstrating the 
necessity of test-first and well-te
sted code when implementing new 
functionality and refactoring. A typical
 test coverage curve of one of the XP labs is shown in figure 3. Line-Coverage
50%
55%
60%
65%
70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%
14710
13
16
192225
28
31
34374043
46
49
52User Story
Lab 06 Figure 3: Test Coverage of One XP Lab 
The coverage was extremely bad with
 the first story cards (2 to 5) 
but increased when the students got more accustomed to test-first 

development. To the end of the project, the quality decreased 

suddenly. It was detected that te
sts had been deleted by looking at 
the corresponding check-in and the num
bers of test methods. Such 
behavior has to be countered by th
e XP coaches who have to insist 
that tests are fixed and checked-in. However, in this case the 

changes were at the last day. 
Moreover, enforcing too much and 
pushing the metrics too hard back
-fires quickly. Students will test 
after coding in order to achieve 
better coverage reports. The quality 
of the resulting tests is worse than
 of tests written beforehand. For 
example, we had to tell students to 
keep up testing in the second lab. 
The result was to write tests for ex
isting code later on in order to 
improve the coverage metrics. While the coverage metrics 

improved, the new tests did not c
ontribute to finding errors when 
changing code. Line-Coverage
50%
55%
60%
65%

70%
75%
80%
85%
90%
95%
100%
123456
Iteration
Lab 05Lab 06Lab 07 Figure 4: Test Coverage of All XP Labs 
Figure 4 shows the test coverage of
 all XP labs we conducted. In 
2005 test coverage was oscillating,
 indicating that time was too 
short (3 days) to reach the productive state. In 2006 coverage 

steadily increased but did not reach a very high level. That is one 

indicator supporting our opinion that 2006 was our worst set-up so 

far. Finally, in 2007 our lab tuning seemed to work. The test 

coverage was on a continuously high level. 
Another XP practice that is hard
 to use is the metaphor. In our 
experience, the effective use of a metaphor is probably the most 

complicated XP practice. Even if students find a suitable metaphor, 

it is typically not used frequently
 during development. Therefore, 
the coach has to steer the finding and usage of a metaphor.   4.1.5 Lunch Together Having lunch together is very good for team building. The 
programmers get to know each other faster. This leads to a better 

team spirit right in the beginning of the project. Towards the end of 

a project it might be better to let the people decide where and with 

whom to have lunch since they have been working together every 

day all week long. 
Lunch has been reported to improve the team spirit by all students in 
the labs. One interesting observation we made during lunch with the 

whole team was that the students did not talk a lot about project 

relevant things, so that there was no impact on, e. g., collective 

ownership, refactoring, or codi
ng standards as one might have 
thought beforehand. However, in our experience, the supervisors need to check first 
whether the location fosters discussion or students are sitting in a 

way that hinders communication. 
Furthermore, the location should 
be reachable in a short time-frame so that not much time is wasted 

in travel. 4.2  Recommendations and Best Practices During our last three XP laboratorie
s we gathered more experiences 
than we could present in the previous section, where the main focus 

was on learning objectives. Other in
teresting observations and best 
practices are worth mentioning. 4.2.1 Let the Developers Write User Stories We found that it is difficult to es
timate for the next iteration when 
most of the User Stories of the last iteration are not finished. In this 

case the learning objective 
1. Planning game is more important than 
the demand that a User Story has to add customer value when 

finished. In order to give the students the chance to complete a User 

Story during a short iteration the User
 Stories have to be smaller. 
This can be achieved by breaking the mainly functional 

requirements (real User Stories)
 down to more technical ones 
(Technical User Stories). 
A problem with that might be that the customer needs to be able to 
negotiate with the developers on a technical level. In a university 

setting this usually is the case, since staff members who are acting 

as the customers normally have a similar educational background 

like the students. But this does not mean that the customer can write 

the story cards by himself before
hand. The XP experience requires 
developer integration when creating 
the User Stories. We made the 
mistake of letting the customer write the User Stories beforehand in 

our first and second XP lab. This 
led to a high number of story cards 
that needed to be split up or restructured during the project. In the 

last lab (2007) the developers wrote the story cards in collaboration 

with the On-Site Customer. That y
ear the cards did not have to be 
split up that often. That is why we are recommending letting 

developers write the User Stories. 4.2.2 Be Careful with GUI Testing In our last XP lab the students ha
d to test-first their whole program, 
including the GUI. It turned out that writing tests for GUI elements 

that only test for the existence of these elements is not worth the 

effort. Rather, these GUI existence 
tests caused a lot of trouble, like 
non-deterministic tests caused by the 
fact that the Java Swing API is 
not thread safe and the student
s who generally were GUI novices 
did not consider that when creating the tests. That is why we 

propose to write scenario-like tests 
in JUnit together with the Robot-
Class. A test for example simulate
s the entering of data, pressing of 
buttons, and checks whether all UI elements have the correct values. 
Such tests can be written before 
starting coding the UI although the 
coding chunks necessary for fulfilling a test case become 

considerably larger than with te
st-first for logic-related classes. 4.2.3 Let the Students Develop New Software The task of one of the teams of our last XP course was to extend an 
existing piece of software. It turned out that the students really had 

trouble in getting acquainted with the system. A major problem was 

that the software was not fully 
tested and when writing new tests 
bugs were discovered in the old pa
rt. Not getting started right away 
was not good for student motivati
on. So we recommend letting the 
students develop entirely new software when teaching them XP the 

first time. 
4.2.4 Tutors Have Time to Do Other but Easy Tasks In our most current XP course we 
had an independent student record some information flow metrics, like how many times do the 

developers talk to the On-Site Cu
stomer or to the XP coach. Figure 
5 and Figure 6 show the customer use over a period of five days. In 

the first diagram the student noted every 15 minutes whether 

someone of the development team 
was talking to the customer or 
not at the very moment of the observation. From that it can be 

derived that on average the customer is busy working with the 

development team 17% of the time he
 is on-site. That means that the 
tutor acting as the On-Site Customer can still work on other things 

more than 80% of his regular work-time. He just needs to be 

available to the developers all the time. 
customer use
0%10%
20%
30%
day 1day 2day 3day 4day 5
used
 Figure 5: On-Site Customer Use in Percent of Time a Day 
customer use
010203040day 1day 2day 3day 4day 5
times a day
 Figure 6: On-Site Customer Use in Number of Times a Day 
The second diagram (Figure 6) depi
cts the total number of times the 
development team was talking 
to the customer at one day 
independent of the duration of the talks. On average the developers 

are talking to the On-Site Customer 26 times a day with 

considerably fewer questions in the beginning. 
To summarize, on one hand the tutor acting as the On-Site 
Customer has a lot of time to do other things (80% of the work-day) 

but on the other hand he or she is being interrupted very often (26 

times a day). The workload of the 
coach is similar. Thus, the tutor 
can do many but fairly easy, interruptible tasks alongside. 
4.2.5 Make Intense Theoretical Introduction 
In order to quickly get started into the project it is beneficial to 
introduce the practices beforehand. For explaining and training the 

planning game, we made good experi
ences with Agile Hours [11] 
 and Extreme Hours [13] to prepare the students and to not waste 
much time on the basics in the first planning game. 4.2.6 Do Not Advertise XP Labs as Programming Classes 
Another positive effect of the XP block course is that the students 
dramatically improve their overall programming skills. Most of the 

students in our courses did not get to practically utilize their 

theoretical programming know-how before the laboratory. So the 

XP lab was their first chance to really learn GUI programming and 

the importance of mocking when programming test-first. The 

intense programming experience during the course leads to the fact 

that the students really memorize the new things learned. To sum it 

up, an XP lab is also good to
 practice general programming. 
However, advertising the XP 
Lab as a programming class will 
attract the wrong students, i.e. those who cannot program and are 

not necessarily interested in XP, and will shift the focus from XP 

even with interested students. 
Therefore, we recommend looking at 
the programming skills of the students and help them with coding 

and design during the lab, but do not 
officially advertise the lab as a 
programming class at all. 5. CONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK In the preceding contribution we presented our experiences and best 
practices gained in the three different eXtreme Programming labs 

we conducted within the last three years. We started with a detailed 

description of the design of the c
ourses. After that, our experiences 
with the modification of some sel
ected lab setup attributes were 
presented, focusing on their imp
act on the XP learning objectives. 
We also included some Œ in our 
opinion Œ interesting other best practices like time and frequency 
of On-Site Customer usage. By blocking time for the laboratory we achieve good results and a 
more realistic XP feeling than w
ith classes that are scattered over 
the semester. However, blocking tim
e hinders the students to attend 
other classes and should not extensively be used. 
By tweaking the properties of the XP lab we could improve the 
overall learning outcome over the years. We generalized the 

tweakable properties and offered a 
matrix as well as a description 
for estimating the impact for other 
interested parties who also want 
to conduct such projects. The XP lab has been a very successful class in the computer science 
curriculum so far and we will continue to conduct as well as to 

improve it. The property that will be subject to change next is the 

type of application to be de
veloped. Until now we have only 
developed classical graphical applications. Because user interface 

testing is troublesome 
especially for novices to test-first, other 
application types may be suited better for the lab. 
All in all, practical projects are 
welcomed by students very well. 
The XP lab is one of the most favored labs by students of our 

faculty. Unfortunately, capacities have not been sufficient to let all 

interested students participate. But 
XP is not only entertaining, it is a 
worthwhile experience for students that will improve overall 

programming experience and social skills while also conveying 

important XP concepts and practices. 
6. REFERENCES [1] Cliburn, D., 
Experiences with pair programming at a small college. Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges, 2003. 19(1): p. 20-29. [2] Schneider, J.-G. and L. Johnston. 
eXtreme Programming at Universities - An Educational Perspective. in International Conference on Software Engineering. 2003. Portland, Oregon, USA: IEEE Computer Science. 
[3] Sherrell, L.B. a
nd J.J. Robertson, Pair Programming and Agile Software Development: Experiences in a College Setting. Journal of Computing Sciences in Colleges, 2006. 22(2): p. 145 
- 153. [4] Williams, L. and R. Kessler, 
Experimenting with industrie's "Pair-Programming" model in
 the computer science 
classroom. Journal on Computer Science Education, 2001. [5] Hanks, B., et al., 
Program quality with pair programming in CS1. ACM SIGCSE Bulletin, 2004. 36(3): p. 176-180. [6] Astrachan, O., R.C. Duvall, and E. Wallingford. 
Bringing Extreme Programming to the Classroom. in XP Universe 2001. 2001. [7] Johnson, D. and J. Caristi. 
Extreme Programming and the Software Design Course. in XP Universe 2001. 2001. [8] Holcombe, M., M. Gheorghe, and F. Macias. 
Teaching XP for real: Some initial observations and plans. in XP2001. 2001. Sardinia, Italy. 
[9] Lübke, D., T. Flohr, and K. Schneider. 
Serious Insights through Fun Software-Projects. in EuroSPI 2004: European Software Process Improvement Conference
. 2004. Trondheim, Norway: 
Springer. [10] Beck, K., 
Extreme Programming Explained. 2000: Addison-Wesley. 
[11] Lübke, D. and K. Schneider. 
Agile Hours - Teaching XP skills to Students and IT Professionals. in Profes 2005. 2005. Oulu, Finland. [12] Schneider, K. 
LIDs: A Light-Weight Approach to Experience Elicitation and Reuse. in Product Focused Software Process Improvement (PROFES 2000)
. 2000. Oulo, Finland: Springer. [13] Merel, P., 
eXtreme Hour at: 
http://c2.com/cgi/wiki?ExtremeHour. 2001, Peter Merel.  