 Panel: Science of Design
Kevin Sullivan 
University of Virginia 
Department of Computer Science 
151 Engineer™s Way, Charlottesville VA 22904-4740 USA 
+1 434 982-2200
 sullivan@cs.virginia.edu
 Jeff Magee 
Imperial College 
Department of Computing 
180 Queen™s Gate, London SW7 2BZ, UK 
+44 207 594 8269 j.magee@imperial.ac.uk
ABSTRACT
 In this session, leading scholars of design will share perspectives 
on a 
science of design
 for software and software-intensive 
systems. The session will include presentations by the panelists 

and dialog among the panelists and with audience members. 
Categories and Subject Descriptors
 D.2.0 [
Software Engineering
]: General. 
General Terms: 
Design. 
1. OVERVIEW 
The build-out of software-intensive systems that started about 
fifty years ago has transformed the world™s economies, 

institutions, and cultures. Rapid growth and change will surely 

continue. The frantic pace of discovery and innovation to date 

has, in some ways, hindered reflection on what we™ve enabled, 

what kind of software-intensive society we wish to promote for 

our descendants, and what new knowledge and perspectives we 

will need in order to design systems in ways to foster the 

creation and preservation of a healthy, prosperous, open society.  
This year™s panel features leading scholars of software-intensive 
system 
design
Šbroadly construedŠwho will present 
perspectives on prospects, problems and priorities for a 
science 
of design
 focused on software-intensive systems
. Issues include 
the goals of such a science; the phenomena that are its subject; 

the form and testing of its theories; major open problems; the 

relationship of such a science to current research in the field; 

short- and longer-term challenges in developing and teaching an 

effective theory and practice of design; and intellectual and 

societal benefits expected to emerge from research in this area. 
2. PANELISTS 
The three panelists are Mary Shaw, Carliss Baldwin, and 

Michael Jackson. Kevin Sullivan will moderate.  
Mary Shaw
 is the Alan J. Perlis Professor of Computer Science 
and Co-Director of the Sloan Software Industry Center at 

Carnegie Mellon University. She has been a member of this 

faculty since completing the Ph.D. degree at Carnegie-Mellon in 

1972.  Her research interests in computer science lie primarily in 

the areas of software engineering, particularly value-driven 
software design, appropriate dependability, and software 
architecture. 
Carliss Y. Baldwin
 is the William L. White Professor of 
Business Administration at the Harvard Business School. A 

specialist in corporate finance and real options theory, Baldwin 

received a bachelor's degree in ec
onomics from MIT in 1972, 
and MBA and DBA degrees from Harvard Business School in 

1974 and 1977 respectively. She is active in Harvard's Ph.D. 

program in Information, Technology and Management, jointly 

sponsored by the Business School and the Division of 

Engineering and Applied Science. With Kim B. Clark, she is 

involved in a multi-year project to study the process of design 

and its impact on the structure of the computer industry. She and 

Clark have authored
 Design Rules: The Power of Modularity
, the first of a projected two volumes on this topic. Volume 2, in 

progress, will focus on
 The Institutions of Innovation
.  Michael Jackson
 has worked in software development since 
1961. He developed the JSP program design method, chosen as 

the standard for UK Government software development, and he 

played the leading role in developing the JSD method of system 

analysis, specification and design. Since 1990 he has worked as 

an independent consultant. From 1990 to 2002, in conjunction 

with Dr Pamela Zave, he also worked as a part-time researcher 

at AT&T Bell Laboratories (now AT&T Research Laboratories) 

in New Jersey, USA. This work focused on the feature 

interaction problem, and on principles and techniques for 

specifying telecommunications and services, and resulted in the 

DFC (Distributed Feature Composition) virtual architecture for 

telecommunications services. His most recent work has focused 

on the analysis and structure of software development problems, 

using an approach based on the idea of problem frames. 

Problem frames can be regarded as patterns, in the problem 

space rather than in the solution space, with a major emphasis 

on the composition of identified sub-problems. 
Kevin Sullivan
 is associate professor and VEF Faculty Fellow 
in Computer Science at the University of Virginia. He received 

his Ph.D. in Computer Science and Engineering in 1994 from 

the University of Washington. His interests are in the structures, 

properties, and value of design, with a particular emphasis on 

issues of modularity and integration in design and dependability 

as a user-perceived property. 
3. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
Kevin Sullivan™s efforts to organize this panel session were 
supported in part by the U.S. National Science Foundation. 
  
Copyright is held by the author/owner(s). 

ICSE™05
, May 15Œ21, 2005, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 
ACM 1-58113-963-2/05/0005. 
 