 Governance of an Agile Software Project 
  David Talby 
Hebrew University of Jerusalem 
davidt@cs.huji.ac.il Yael Dubinsky 
IBM Haifa Research Lab dubinsky@il.ibm.com  Abstract  Effective governance of agile software teams is 
challenging but required to enable wide adoption of 
agile methodologies, in particular 
for large-scale 
projects. In this paper we apply a full lifecycle 

governance model to agile projects, focused on the 

iteration level. The concept is demonstrated via a case 
study of a large-scale, enterprise-critical software 
project that implemented agile practices. We analyze 

three governance events, including the metrics that 

triggered the event, the decisions taken and the follow-

up to ensure resolution. We conclude that governance 
iterations can be naturally unified with agile 
development iterations, resulting in a lean governance 

mechanism that identifies and resolves issues in an 

effective and timely manner.  1. Introduction 
 One of the prevailing points of criticism against 
agile software development is that it leaves little place 
for external oversight of projects. The 
Whole Team
 practice [1] short-circuits common communication 
barriers by putting the customer, developers, business 
analysts and testers all in the same room and team.  The 

team is then empowered to decide what to deliver and 
even how to adjust its development process over time 
using a retrospective practice [11]. This changes the 

traditional roles of project and program managers, by 

making some of the communication and coordination 

aspects of these roles redundant. 
Senior managers and program managers usually 
supervise multiple projects simultaneously, cannot dive 

into the details of each project, but are still expected to 

keep all projects on track by identifying and resolving 
alarming issues as they occur. Providing effective 
governance mechanisms that enable them to monitor 

projects effectively is thus a key success factor for the 

adoption of agile methodologies and the realization of 

their business value. This is particularly critical in 

large-scale software projects that are not released to 
end users in short time intervals, regardless of being 
developed in short iterations. 
Successful large-scale agile software development 
must therefore reconcile agile principles 
– including 
whole, self-organizing teams 
– with enabling proper 
governance, which in the scope of this paper involves 
answering the following questions: 
 How do we know on an on-going basis that an 
agile project is on track, and effectively identify 

and resolve alarms? 
 How do we know if and to what extent the agile 
practices improve the software development 
productivity and quality of a given team? 
This work presents an application of a recently 
proposed full-lifecycle model of software project 
governance [7] to agile projects. The subject of 

research is a large-scale software project developed by 

the Israeli Air Force [12]. Our data comprises of 

quantitative and qualitative data, from interviews and 

questionnaires assessing current state and goals at the 

outset, through to metrics collected by the team. 

Focusing on the level of the single iteration, we show 

that agile practices can be implemented in a way that 

naturally incorporates the full governance lifecycle. 
This paper is organized as follows. Section 2 
provides background of software project governance, 

and describes its key stages in an agile context. Section 

3 presents a case study for which we describe the 
governance of one agile team using metrics that were 
designed for that project. The data was collected in its 

first three releases (12 iterations). Moreover, data from 

the retrospective process was used in order to add the 

team’s perspective. In Section 4 we analyze the case 
study through the roles and responsibilities that were 

involved. In Section 5 we conclude. 
 2. Governance of Software Development in 
an Agile Environment  
 Governance of software development is a relatively 
new and evolving field [3,5,8,9] that in a sense has 
emerged from the IT governance arena [2,4,13,15]. 
SDG™09, May 17, 2009, Vancouver, Canada978-1-4244-3736-8/09/$25.00  2009 IEEEICSE™09 Workshop40 Governance in general is defined by the Webster 
dictionary as exercise of authority, control, and 

arrangement [14]. This definition relates well to top-
down ‘
command 
and control’ situations that are 
common in traditional organizations. In the last decade, 
the agile approach to software development [1,10,11] 

promotes the use of self-managed teams, thus enabling 
the exploration of software development governance 
and its effectiveness in bottom-
up ‘empower and 
reflect’ situations
 [8]. Given a specific software project, governance of 
software development is an iterative process concerned 
with the project goals and how they are expressed in 
the decisions made by the different roles involved with 
the project. Such decisions are based on policies that 

are defined and metrics that are collected accordingly. 
Using the metrics data gathered, role holders can 
participate in decision making as per their decision 
rights. Adjusting the governance iterations to the short 

development iterations enables on-going reflection on 
the governance events 
– events that highlight key issues 
in development, and how governance mechanisms such 
as policies and metrics assist relevant roles in making 

decisions to solve and follow up on these issues. 
An agile iteration, in all major agile methodologies 
consists of these main parts [1,10]: 
 Planning session – the project team listens to the 
customer’s 
requirements that are prioritized for 
this iteration and distribute the development tasks 
that are derived from a high level design among 
teammates. The development tasks are estimated 
to assess the iteration scope. 
 Development days
 – the project team works to 
complete the committed tasks. During this time a 
re-planning session may occur in case there is a 

need to change the iteration scope 
– for example 
defects that should be fixed during the current 

iteration, or wrong estimates that lead to 

reprioritization of customer requirements.  
 Presentation and feedback – the project team 
presents the customer with the developed features 
of the iteration. Metrics are also presented 
– the 
most common are ones that relate to team velocity 

and progress. 
 Reflection session
 – the project team reflects on 
the ending iteration and decides on action items to 

improve accordingly. Reflection can relate to 
technical, social or organizational issues. 
Each iteration is part of a complete release, so each 
reflection session is typically immediately followed by 
the next iteration’s planning session.
 It is a natural 
“lean” 
idea to implement governance 
of an agile software project by unifying the agile 
iterations and the project’
s governance iterations. The 
definition stage of the governance lifecycle happens first 
before development begins, when the team first decides 
on its work procedures and metrics. The 
activation
 stage happens during the development days, in which 
work is done and metrics are captured. The 
assessment
 stage happens in the presentation and reflection 
sessions, with the reflection having the formal role of 

being the 
definition stage for the following iteration. 
In the scope of this paper we do not address 
governance across releases. Governance at the iteration 

level has two goals: 
 Ensure alignment with the iteration goals
: The 
level of governance abstraction is low and is 
focused on the current development iteration that is 
2-3 weeks long. 
 Effectiveness for a specific team and problem: 
Effective governance
 must deal with current, 
relevant issues in order to show improvement in the 
short term 
– the very next iteration. Key traits are 
flexibility and appropriateness. 
 3. Case Study: Governance of an Agile Project 
 The software project under research in this paper is 
a large-scale, enterprise-critical system, intended to be 
used by a large and varied user population. The project 

was developed within the Israeli Air Force for internal 

use. In the first release the team had a coach and 15 

members, out of whom 7 were full-time developers and 

8 were business analysts, architects, developers and 

testers who devoted between 30-60% of their time to 

the project. By the third release the project team grew 

to 15 full time members. 
In what follows based on a brief description of the 
definition stage of the governance of this project, we 

present three specific governance events. They show 

how data that is gathered by governance mechanisms 
can be regularly assessed after each iteration, affecting 

the team
’s behavior right afterwards. 
  3.1. The Governance Definition Stage 
 The decision to use Extreme Programming (XP) as 
this project’s development methodology was the result 
of a one-year effort 
– meant to change the established 
waterfall development process in order to enable more 
rapid response to customers’ 
requests, required changes 
and new requirements. Following training, a workshop 
and a pilot, this was the first large-scale agile project to 

launch, and while upper management fully supported 
the change, it was considered risky and thus closely 

supervised. 
41 XP practices contradicted many of the existing work 
procedures and templates used in the organization, and 
so the team was given a waiver on most of the existing 
regulations. However, this required the team to 
establish a strong governance framework: it was 

allowed to design its own work processes, as long as it 

could show management that the project 
is managed 
– effectively run and under control. 
The team’s succ
ess to do so not only enabled better external oversight, but 

also addressed the challenge of internal governance 
– helping the team members make the switch to the agile 

practices and way of thinking. 
In addition to establishing a planning, development, 
presentation, feedback and reflection cycle as described 
in the previous section, 
the project’s 
leadership defined 
a set of metrics [6,12]. The formal role of tracker was 
established in the team, as responsible for the quality 

and continuity of measurement. Metrics were presented 
to the customer as an integral part of each iteration
’s summary meeting. 
Since the metrics 
– whose details are elaborated in 
the next section 
– were designed for the iteration level 
and for the needs of this specific team, they achieved 

multiple governance goals. First, they ensured external 
observers that the project was making good progress 
and that key risks were under control. Second, it 

educated team members on what aspects of their day-

to-day behavior were deemed most critical to focus and 

improve on. And third, it enabled data-driven decision 
making, making that stage of the governance lifecycle 
easier for a new, diverse team. 
 3.2. Governance Events 
 We present three events in which an alarm was 
triggered and resolved by the pro
ject’s governance 
mechanisms defined above. Each event demonstrates 
one of the core metrics that were used to track healthy 

progress. In each event: 
 The alarm was raised during the iteration summary 
meeting when metrics are reviewed. 
 Action items to resolve the issue were discussed 

and decided at that iteration’
s reflection meeting. 
 The next iteration’s summary meeting 
two weeks 
later is used to verify that the issue is resolved, and 

find out what needs to be addressed next. 
 Event I: Re-plan the release scope Burn down is a well-known metric used to measure a 
team’s progress towards commitments made to the 

customer during the planning stage. In the project 
under research the risk that this metric addressed was 
that the team would get bogged down in perfecting 
minor features 
– adding more complexity and 
increasing the product size, at the expense of other 

major requirements. 
To address this, the project was divided into two-
month-long releases 
– a variant on the XP quarterly 
planning practice. Each release began by allocating 

resources to it, and then planning the deliverables for 

that release based on a high-level estimate of how 

much effort each one would take. The sums of 

estimated remaining work and remaining resources 

define the starting point of the rele
ase’s burn down 
chart – see for example week 0 in Figure 1, which 
shows the project’s burn down for the first release.
 Once the release planning is done, the plan becomes 
a commitment to the customer. It is also used to 

coordinate with other teams 
– for example, state that 
the project will be ready for integration in two months’ 

time. Therefore, when remaining work does not shrink 

at the same rate as remaining resources 
– as happened 
for example at the end of the second iteration (week 4 

in Figure 1) 
– an alarm was raised. 
  Figure 1: Burn down by week in the first release 
 Such a growing gap in a burn down chart can mean 
that the team is not delivering as fast as expected, or 
that there was a significant estimation error when a 

commitment for the release was made. In the case of 

the second iteration, it was a combination of both: The 
four week old team was still evolving the development 

and build environments, and inefficiencies still existed; 
on the other hand, some of the high-level commitments 

which were assumed (and estimated) as simple 

experienced feature creep during the release. 
These facts were uncovered during the iteration 
summary meeting in which the customer was present. 
The discussion and reflection that followed resulted in 
two decisions: One was to reach for the help of senior 

engineers from other projects about the development 

environment and continuous build system, and the 

second was to reevaluate some of the new feature 
42 requests with the customer to make sure that the team is 
not realizing the risk of perfecting minor features. 
As the burn down chart shows, these combined 
actions had the impact of reducing the remaining work 
to within the available resources within two weeks. 
This was reviewed by the team at the summary meeting 

of the third iteration, at the end of week 6. 

 Event II: Extend testing resources The pulse metric was designed to monitor the risk of 

people sticking to their “pre
-agile” habits of coding on 
a private branch and integrating with the rest of the 

team only late and when a delivery is due. 
The practice of continuous integration means that in 
addition to maintaining a continuous build, the 
developers check in code into the shared integration 

environment at least once per day. Since this was a 

change in personal work habits for a majority of the 

team, the number of check-ins per days into the 

integration branch 
– defined as the 
pulse
 metric 
– was 
measured and discussed in each iteration summary. 
The team’s goal was to maintain a healthy, steady 
pulse 
– checking in regularly during the iteration, in 
contrast to having quiet periods followed by a surge of 
integration efforts towards the end of the iteration. 
Figure 2 shows the pulse metric on a daily basis 
during the third iteration of the first release. While the 
pulse for software code is reasonable, an alarm was 

raised regarding the automated acceptance tests. 

Basically, one person was writing acceptance tests in 

the team, and was doing the majority of that work in 

the last two work days of the iteration, with check-ins 

happening on the very last day. In this case, that person 

raised an alarm even before the metrics were viewed 
– after working over the weekend still not all new code 
was tested, and even if it were such a work style was 
not sustainable. 
This urgent issue trigge
red the project’s governance 
mechanism 
– after the metrics were viewed in the 
morning, this was chosen as the subject of that 

afternoon’s reflection meeting. In this case the team 

decided to fight for more testers to be available to it, 

train some of the developers to write acceptance tests, 

and allocate tasks in the next iteration to complete the 

testing of the new features which were not yet fully 

tested. These tasks received priority not only by the 

team but also by the customer, who is present when 
metrics are discussed and shares the interest of 
maintaining a fully tested code base, especially when 
the project is young. 
  Figure 2: Pulse metric, daily in the third iteration 
 Figure 2 does not show the problem being solved in 
the following iteration. To see this we can look at 
Figure 3 that is explained as part of event III and 
presents the product size metric. After the minor 
increase in product size in iteration 1.3 there is a major 

leap in 1.4, which is the cumulative result of catching 
up on the missing 1.3 tests plus new fully tested 
features that are developed in 1.4. 
 Event III: Insist on delivery every iteration
 The product size metric was designed to monitor the 
risk of not producing a customer-ready deliverable at 
the end of every iteration. Up to this project, the 
standard in the development organization was that new 
projects took months before delivering the first 
customer-facing features 
– and even then, those were 
“code complete” and not fully tested and ready for 

delivery. 
Therefore, it was decided that the key velocity 
metric measuring the team’s progress will not be in 

story points, work days or lines of code 
– and instead 
be based on the size of the automated acceptance tests 
suite. This was measured by the number of test steps 
that passed an automated test run on the integrated 
code base. This metric was intended to send several 

messages to the project team: Only tested features 

count, only customer facing features count, and only 

integrated code counts. When the project started, one 

profe
ssional tester was assigned to it, and the team’s 
main goal for the first iteration was to deliver a greater 

than zero product size. 
Figure 3 shows the 
product size
 metric over the first 
three releases. This metric raised an alarm once during 

the project: in iteration 2.3, the only one in which the 
metric declined compared to the previous iteration. 
 43  Figure 3: Product size metric across three releases 
 This was the obvious subject for the reflection 
meeting at the end of iteration 2.3 
– a team’s inability
 to deliver more value to its customer every iteration is a 
severe issue. The reason for this decline was 
the team’s 
dependency on one high performing tester, who over 
time took it upon herself to write, maintain and run a 
majority of the team’s acceptance
 tests. In the middle 
of iteration 2.3, this person was reallocated to help with 
an emergency in another project. At that point the team 

had less than a week 
– in which they had other 
committed work 
– to find a solution to this problem, 
which didn’t happen
 until the iteration ended. 
That reflection meeting focused on discussing ways 
to remove the team’s dependency on that one tester in 
order to deliver. Developers and business analysts 

committed to write, maintain and run acceptance tests 
on their own. One person was appointed to distribute 
this workload and tackle roadblocks. The team decided 

to invest in getting trained on writing and running tests.  
As Figure 3 shows, in the following iteration the 
product size was once again up, surpassing iteration 
2.2. From that point on the team regained its velocity 
and continued a steady increase in product size. 
Towards the end of the third release another tester 
was allocated to the team on a full time basis. At that 

point the team members still chose to do some testing 

on their own and train new developers on acceptance 

testing, to prevent recreating a dependency on one 

person to achieve the team’s goal
s. 
 4. Role and Responsibilities  
 The role scheme and the responsibilities of each role 
holder differ among teams and organizations. Roles 
and responsibilities are continuously used and 
sometimes shaped according to governance events that 
occur. In this part we relate to the roles and 

responsibilities that were involved in the three 
governance events described in Section 3. Using this 
perspective enables a closer look at decisions that are 
made as part of the development process and the 
decision rights that are used.  
In 
Event I, two decisions were made with respect to 
the release scope of requirements. The first decision is 

to add more role holders 
– experts from other projects 
– to serve as consultants. This means that role holders 
who are responsible remain, and can still be consulted 

in addition to the new role holders who do not have 

direct responsibility. The second decision was to re-
plan the release scope. This was done by the business 
analysts and team leaders together with the customer 

who was accountable for the release requirements.  
In 
Event II
, the decision was to increase the 
resources available for developing automated 
acceptance tests. Before this decision was made, the 
main tester was solely responsible to develop and run 

the complete set of acceptance tests. After this event, 
developers were assigned to write tests and were 

responsible to develop and run them.  
In 
Event III, it was discovered that the decision 
made in Event II was not enough. Although more 
people developed and ran tests, they did not take full 
responsibility for the entire set of tests, in particular 
those that were maintained by the main tester. So it 
happened that when that tester was urgently asked to 
help in another project, the tests were not maintained 
and run and this resulted in a poor delivery. The 
decision therefore strengthened the previous one by 

specifically emphasizing collective responsibility to 
maintain and run the tests before the end of each 
iteration, in order to deliver a high quality product on 
time, every time. Making this decision increased the 
commitment of the other team members and eliminated 

the dependency on the tester. 
  5. Summary 
 This paper presents a case study on governing an 
agile project. We relate to the different governance 
stages and mechanisms, including an examination of 
the roles and responsibilities that are involved. 
We found that governance is tight and effective 
when performed at the level of each development 
iteration. The governance mechanisms are used to steer 

the development process and increase the quality of the 

developed product. In addition, we found that 

governance events can shape the responsibilities of role 

holders and hence improve the role scheme in use. 
In this paper we examine governance at the level of 
single iterations. In future work we intend to analyze 

governance at the release and full project level. This 
would require looking at a longer time scale and at 
release- and project-level metrics and events. 
44 6. References 
 [1]
 Beck, K. & Andres, C. (2004). 
Extreme programming 
explained: second edition
. Boston, Massachusetts: 
Addison-Wesley. 
[2]
 Broadbent, M. (1998). 
Leading governance, business 
and IT processes: the organizational fabric of business 
and IT partnership
, Findings Gartner Group, 31 
December 1998, document #FIND-19981231-01. 
[3]
 Cantor, M. & Sanders, J. (2007). 
Operational IT 
Governance
. Retrieved from: 
http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/rational/library/ 
may07/cantor_sanders/index.html 
[4]
 Chulani, S., Williams, C., Yaeli A., Wegman M. N., & 

Cantor M. (2006). 
Understanding IT governance: 
definitions, contexts, and concerns 
(Research Report 
RC24064). IBM. Retrieved from: 
http://domino.research.ibm.com/library/cyberdig.nsf/ 

papers/38905EEA124CDDFB852571FE00569CCE/ 

$File/rc24064.pdf  
[5]
 Dahlberg T. & Kivijärvi H. (2006). 
An integrated 
framework for IT governance and the development and 

validation of an assessment instrument
. Paper 
presented at the 39
th Hawaii International Conference 
on Systems Sciences, Kauai, Hawaii. 
[6]
 Dubinsky Y., Talby D., Ha
zzan O. & Kere
n A. (2005). 
Agile Metrics at the Israeli Air Force
. Agile 2005 
Conference, Denver, Colorado. 
[7]
 Dubinsky, Y., Hazzan, O., Talby D., and Keren A. 
(2007) Transition to Agile Software Development in a 
Large-Scale Project: A System Analysis and Design 

Perspective, in the Advances in Management 

Information Systems (AMIS) Monograph Series, 
AMIS Systems Analysis and Design (SA&D)  
volume 1, chapter 5. 

    [8]
 Dubinsky, Y., Yaeli, A., Feldman, Y., Zarpas, E., and 
Nechushtai, G. (2008) Governance of Software 

Development: The Transition to Agile Scenario, 
IT Governance and Service Management Frameworks 
and Adaptations
, Idea Group Publishing, Information 
Science Publishing, IRM Press. 
[9]
 Ericsson, M. (2007). 
The governance landscape: 
steering and measuring development organizations to 
align with business strategy
. Retrieved from: 
http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/rational/library/ 

feb07/ericsson/  
[10]
 Hazzan, O. and Dubinsky, Y., (2008). 
Agile Software 
Engineering
, Springer-Verlag London Ltd. 
[11]
 Highsmith, J. (2002). 
Agile software development 
ecosystems. 
Boston, Massachusetts: Addison-Wesley. 
[12]
 Talby, D., Hazzan, O., Dubinsky, Y. and Keren, A. 
(2006) Agile software testing in a large-scale project, 

IEEE Software, Special Issue on Software Testing, pp. 
30-37. 
[13]
 Van Grembergen W. & De Haes S, (2004). IT 
governance and its mechanisms. 
Information Systems 
Control Journal, 1. Retrieved from: 
http://www.isaca.org/Template.cfm?Section=Home& 

Template=/ContentManagement/ContentDisplay.cfm&
ContentID=16771 
[14]
 Webster's Revised Unabridged Dictionary (1913). 
Edited by Noah Porter. 
[15]
 Weill P. & Ross, J.W. (2004). 
IT governance
. Watertown, 
Massachusetts: Harvard Business School Press.  
       45