 Aspect
-Oriented Design in Java/AspectJ and Ruby
  Dean Wampler
 Object Mentor, Inc.
 dean@objectmentor.com
   Abstract
  This tutorial teaches professional developers design 
principles for Òproduction
-qualityÓ, aspect
-oriented 
software, written in Java/AspectJ
 and Ruby. 
 The discussion starts with a review of the rationale 
for aspect
-oriented software development (AOSD), 
how it solves some key problems in enterprise 
applications, followed by a discussion of tool options 
and techniques for both languages. 
 After
 reviewing some of the problems developers 
encountered during early attempts at aspect
-oriented 
design (AOD), recent strategies for addressing those 
problems are discussed. The majority of the tutorial 
then covers extensions to standard object
-oriented 
pri
nciples and patterns that support designing and 
implementing aspect software that is agile, robust, 
maintainable, testable, and reusable. Guidelines for 
when to use aspects 
vs.
 other techniques are covered. 
The tutorial concludes with a look forward to way
s 
that aspects could improve architectures and 
frameworks. 
  1. Level of the Tutorial
  Intermediate to advanced.
  2. Prerequisites for Participants
  Experience designing and implementing software 
written in a static language like Java or C# and/or a 
dynami
c language like Ruby or Python. Experience in 
Object
-Oriented Software Development (OOSD) 
required. A basic understanding of AOSD and AspectJ 
helpful, but not required.
  3. Required Equipment for Participants
  Students should bring a laptop (they can be sh
ared) 
with the following software installed: Java 1.5+, 
AspectJ 1.5+, an editing environment for Java (Eclipse 
+ AJDT plug
-in recommended), Ruby 1.8.4+, plus a 
Ruby editing environment (
e.g.,
 Eclipse RadRails 
plug
-in or IntelliJ IDEA with ruby plug
-in).
  4. Description
  The tutorial starts with a motivation for AOSD, 
using a simple example that demonstrates design 
problems that are not well modularized by objects, 
because of Òcross
-cutting concernsÓ (CCCs), which are 
multiple ÒdomainÓ models that intersect 
in an 
application (
e.g.,
 the primary problem domain and 
ÒinfrastructureÓ domains like persistence, security, 
etc
.). The example is presented in both Java and Ruby. 
 Aspects are defined, followed by a discussion of 
how they restore system modularity problem
s raised by 
CCCs. 
 With this motivation for AOSD, we explore the 
nature of Java, a representative static language, and 
Ruby, a representative dynamic language, as they help 
or inhibit solving the modularity problems of CCCs 
using aspects. 
 We discuss how J
avaÕs metaprogramming facilities 
are somewhat limited compared with RubyÕs. We 
examine how this limits JavaÕs ability to solve CCC 
problems ÒnativelyÓ, which motivated the emergence 
of AspectJ, in part.  We then explore how AspectJ and 
pure
-Java AOP soluti
ons, like Spring AOP and JBoss 
AOP implement aspects.
 In contrast, Ruby has more powerful 
metaprogramming support, making it easier to solve at 
least some CCC problems without AO
-specific 
extensions. 
 We examine some of these Ruby techniques and 
see how th
ey are used in 
Ruby on Rails
 in an ÒAO
-likeÓ way.
 This leads to the question of whether or not you 
really even need ÒnativeÓ AO support if you have good 
metaprogramming tools. We argue that you do. In 
particular, we draw an analogy with OOSD; there is an 
important advantage to having native support for a 
design approach, even if you can ÒfakeÓ it with 
metaprogramming.
 We then return to design by discussing early aspect
-oriented design (AOD) approaches for aspects, based 
 on the concept of obliviousness, and the problems these approaches created. These problems actually reflect forgotten lessons learned over the years in OOD, such as the importance of minimizing coupling and maximizing the use of abstractions.  Then we review more recent work that addresses these problems, primarily by extending OOD concepts of abstractions with AOD-specific ideas.  With this background, we explore several well-known, object-oriented design principles from an aspect-oriented design perspective. The design principles include 5 class and interface principles with the acronym SOLID and 6 packaging principles. The SOLID principles are the following: 4.1 Single Responsibility Principle A class should have only one reason to change. 4.2 Open-Closed Principle A class should be closed for modification, but open for extension. 4.3 Lyskov Substitution Principle A class ÒBÓ is derived from another class ÒAÓ when instances of ÒBÓ can be substituted for instances of ÒAÓ without breaking client expectations.  4.4 Interface Segregation Principle Interfaces should be as narrow as possible (the SRP for interfaces). 4.5 Dependency Inversion Principle Abstractions should not depend on details; details should depend on abstractions. These principles are examined in several ways: (i) how aspects change their interpretations, (ii) how aspects should obey the principles, both in their internal design and when extending behaviors of objects, and (iii) how aspects make it easier to support these principles. Of the 6 package principles, 3 are relevant for our discussion. They are: 4.6 The Common Closure Principle The classes in a package should be closed together against the same kinds of changes. A change that affects a closed package affects all the classes in that package and no other packages. 4.7 The Stable Dependencies Principle Depend in the direction of stability. 4.8 The Stable Abstractions Principle A package should be as abstract as it is stable.  When considering aspects, several extensions to these principles arise. 4.9 The Updated Open-Closed Principle A class or aspect should be closed for source and contract modification, but open for extension. 4.10 The Updated Liskov Substitution Principle Derived types or aspects + base types must be substitutable for base types. 4.11 Advice Substitution Principle Aspect advice must obey the contract of the join points it advises. 4.12 Introduction Substitution Principle An introduction must conform to the class contract. 4.13 Pointcut Inversion Principle Pointcuts should not depend on details; details should depend on abstractions.  4.14 Pointcut Scope Principle The larger a pointcutÕs scope, the more abstract it should be.  (The AOD terms advice, join point, and pointcut will be defined in the tutorial.) Along the way, we also consider several design patterns, both well-known OO patterns and new AO-specific patterns. To conclude the tutorial, we explore ways that aspects are likely to be more influential over time in large-scale software design.  We discuss how aspects overcome some of the limitations of OO-based frameworks, specifically the difficulty of adopting most frameworks incrementally or adopting pieces ‹ la carte. This is due to the dependencies between components in traditional OO frameworks, which aspects can help reduce. The tutorial ends with a discussion of domain-specific languages (DSLs), which are especially popular in Ruby. We discuss how DSLs can be used to encapsulate CCC intuitively and how aspects can be used internally to implement the required ÒweavingÓ of concerns. We consider Ruby on RailÕs ActiveRecord library as an example.  Throughout the tutorial, examples and exercises are used to reinforce the principles discussed.    