 On the Impact of a Collaborative Pedagogy on African American  
Millennial Students in Software Engineering 
Laurie Williams
1, Lucas Layman
1, Kelli M. Slaten
2, Sarah B. Berenson
2, Carolyn Seaman
3 1Department of Computer Science, z{lawilli3, lmlayma2}@ncsu.edu 
2Department of Mathematics Education, 
{kmslaten, berenson}@ncsu.edu    
North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA 
3Department of Information Systems, cseaman@umbc.edu 
University of Maryland, Baltimore County, Baltimore, MD, USA 
  Abstract 
Millennial students (those born after 1982), 
particularly African Americans and women, have 

demonstrated a propensity toward collaborative activities.     
We conducted a collective case study at North Carolina 
State University and North Carolina A&T to ascertain the 

role of collaboration and social interaction in attracting 

and retaining students in information technology.  

Responses from semi-structured interviews with 11 
representative African American students in these classes 

were coded and analyzed.  The responses from these 

minority students were used to evolve a social interaction 
model.  The conjectures generated from the model suggest 
that pair programming and agile software methodologies 

effectively create a collaborative environment that is 

desirable to Millennial students, male and female, and, 
with the new evidence, minority and majority.  
Additionally, the African American Millennial students 

enjoy learning from their peers and believe that a 

collaborative environment better prepares them for the 
ﬁreal world.ﬂ 
1. Introduction 
The Millennials gravitate toward group activity . . . 
gravitate toward activities that promote and reinforce 

social interaction . . . where students help each other. [27] 
Research has suggested that African American, 
Hispanic, Asian and women students prefer and benefit 
from collaborative work environments that provide for 
social interactions [23, 24, 34].  Additionally, Millennial 
students (those born after 1982
1) have demonstrated a 
propensity toward collaborative activities [27-29].  Yet, 
these students often have the perception that information 
technology (IT) careers overwhelmingly involve solitary 
                                                       
 1 Other names for the Millennial generation include: Generation Y, Net 
Generation, and Echo Boomers. 
activities.  Educators reinforce this perception when 
insisting that students work on programming assignments 

alone, particularly in comparison with the ﬁlab groupﬂ 
model common in many science courses.   
Now, IT 
educators must create a collaborative, socially-engaging 
environment that appeals to the current generation of 
students and that paints a more realistic picture of the 
collaborative nature of professional IT careers. 
Between 2003 and present, we have conducted a 
longitudinal, collective case study to ascertain the effects 
of a collaborative pedagogy on student perceptions of IT 

careers.   The study has been conducted with third and 

fourth year software engineering courses at North Carolina 

State University (NCSU); North Carolina A&T (NCAT), a 

historically black college/university; and Meredith 
College, a women™s college.  These students are at a 
critical juncture in deciding whether or not to actually 
pursue an IT career upon their impending graduation.   
In this paper we present the latest phase of our 
longitudinal study. Previous phases of our study [5, 31] 
have focused primarily on women and non-ethnic 

minority
2 students.  In this paper, we switch our focus and 
discuss the important social factors created by pair 
programming and collaboration as gathered from 
interviews with 11 African-American Millennial students 
at NCAT.  The emergent themes among the African 

American Millennials are similar to those found in our 

prior phases of our study but also provide additional 

important insight into the support structures created by a 
collaborative development environment.   
We present our findings in the context of the Social 
Interaction Model of Pair Programming (SIMPP v3), a 
conceptual framework for characterizing the driving 

forces through which pair programming and collaboration 

can help attract and retain students in IT.  Previous 

versions of the SIMPP model were developed from 
interviews with seven ethnic majority and two ethnic 
minority students.  We expand and further validate the 
                                                       
 2 In our studies, we consider ethnic minorities in computer science to be 
African American, Hispanic, and American-Indian students. 
 SIMPP model by adding and integrating the responses of 
the 11 African American Millennial students.  We then 

use the SIMPP conceptual framework to make conjectures 
about the impact of the social interaction realized when 
students pair program.       
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: 
Section 2 contains background and related work; Section 3 

describes our research methodology; Section 4 describes 

the original SIMPP conceptual framework; Section 5 
discusses emergent themes among African American 

Millennial students; Section 6 presents the evolved SIMPP 

model based on responses from the 11 African American 

Millennial students in our study; and Section 7 presents 

our conjectures.  Finally, we provide discussion and our 

conclusion in Section 8. 
2. Background 
In this section, we provide background and related 
work on the sociological preferences of the Millennial 
generation, underrepresented ethnic minorities, and 
women.  We also provide related information on agile 
methodologies and pair programming.         
2.1.
 Preferences of the Millennial generation 
Both men and women thought the [IT] industry boring and 
not very appealing . . . could be due to the geeky image of 

the industry and the direct conflict between the values and 
desired lifestyles of the Millennials and the perceptions of 
the IT industry
3 [35].   
Millennials™ learning preferences tend toward 
teamwork and experiential learning, and their strengths 

include a collaborative style of working [27, 28].  They 

are accustomed to working in teams with people with 

whom they ﬁclick,ﬂ thereby fostering the social aspects of 

work [29].  Millennials work best in office space set up 

physically to share ideas.  They learn better through 
discovery than by being told, and they prefer learning 

through participation rather than by learning by being told 

what to do [28].  Results and actions are considered more 
important than the accumulation of facts [27, 28].  
Educators are challenged to employ pedagogical 

techniques that appeal to the values and learning styles of 
Millennial students and, in the process, to create an 
educational environment that is more representative 

industry™s collaborative environment.  
2.2.
 Preferences of underrepresented minorities 
Research has shown that the success rate of 
underrepresented minorities in science courses can be 
                                                       
 3 Based upon a survey of 181 university business students (56% men, 
44% women). 
dramatically improved by shifting the learning paradigm 
from individual study to one that capitalizes on group 

processes, such as student work groups and student-
student tutoring [26].  Treisman [34] performed an 
experiment with African American and Hispanic calculus 

students.  He found that about 60% of minority students 
who had completed calculus at UC-Berkeley in the 
preceding decade received grades of D or F.  Prior social 

norms had taught these minority students that they needed 
to study alone because working with others was cheating.  

In contrast the most successful Asian students formed 

ﬁstudy-squadsﬂ to get through calculus, groups in which 

social status was increased by one's ability to help others.   
Treisman told his students they were required to do 
peer checking of each other™s work.  Students also worked 
in collaborative groups during class.  Only about 4% of 
the minority students completing Treisman's "workshop" 

calculus made a D or F, versus the 60% earlier [14].   
2.3.
 Preferences of women 
Geeks are taken to mean yo
ung men, working solo for 
long hours with just a terminal to communicate with . . . 
this image does not appeal to women [35]. 
Prior studies, including those of [1, 13, 23], indicate 
that female students are concerned about the insularity of 
working alone for long periods of time, as they perceive to 

be the case with computer science and IT careers.  

Additionally, women believe that a career in computing or 
software involves a lifestyle that is not well rounded or 
conducive to family life [13].   Margolis and Fisher cite 

instances where undergraduate women™s confidence in 

their abilities to succeed in computer science declines as 

they feel they are spending long hours on assignments that 

fellow students appeared to finish in comparatively little 
time [24].  In theory, pair programming can help 
boost 
women™s confidence in two ways:  (1) when pairing, 
women become familiar with how long their fellow 

students actually work and how much they actually know 

(or do not know); and (2) together, the pair tends to more 
easily figure out an assignment and to finish it faster [24, 
37, 38].    
2.4.
 Agile software development and pair 
programming Œ a pedagogical intervention 
Agile software development methodologies are a 
subset of iterative and evolutionary methods [17, 18] and 
are based on iterative enhancement [2] and opportunistic 
development processes [11].  Agile methods are highly 
collaborative in nature and thus may be an avenue for 

meeting the learning needs of Millenials.  The Manifesto 

for Agile Software Development and the Principles 
Behind the Agile Manifesto [4, 12] document the strong 
 emphasis on interpersonal communication and cooperation 
within agile methodologies.  For example, the Manifesto 

states that individuals and interactions are more important 
than processes and tools; and that customer collaboration 
is more important than contract negotiation.  Social 

interaction is also emphasized in agile methodologies.  
Software developers sit in close proximity to their 
teammates, collaborate on all tasks, and make agreements 

face-to-face rather than through signed-off documents [8].   
Pair programming is a practice of the Extreme 
Programming (XP) [3] methodology.  Much of the 
research on pair programming in an academic 

environment has concentrated on establishing the efficacy 

of the practice for educating students.  Studies conducted 

at NCSU [5, 6, 20, 22, 25, 31] have shown that pair 
programming creates an environment conducive to more 
advanced, active learning and social interaction, leading to 

students being less frustrated, more confident, and more 
interested in IT.  Further, a study of undergraduate 
students at Pace University found a positive correlation 

between out-of-class collaboration and student 

achievement based on student projects and examination 

grades [15].    
3. Methodology 
In this section, we discuss the details of the software 
engineering course at NCAT and the student participants. 
The research design and method of inquiry are also 
addressed. 
3.1.
 Course description 
Two sections of a junior- and senior- level software 
engineering course at NCAT contributed data to this phase 
of the study
4.  The courses took place in the Spring 2005 
and Spring 2006 semesters.  There were approximately 20 

students enrolled in the course each semester.  Students 
attended three 50-minute lectures each week.  Most 
weeks, one of the 50-minute lectures was replaced by a 

laboratory session.   The laboratory for this course was set 

up for pair programming.  The tables, arranged in a ring, 

have enough space for the computer equipment and 
accommodate the seating arrangements of the 

programming pair. 
Students completed three solo assignments (two 
programming); seven pair assignments (including an 

analysis and design assignment); and one six-week term 

project in teams of three to four.  Each solo assignment is 

completed in one week.  The duration for paired 
assignments ranged from one week to 10 days.  The 
shorter assignments involved the development of small 

projects where each assignment focusing on a different 
                                                       
 4 Information on the courses and students involved in building previous 
versions of the SIMPP model may be found in [5], [31].  
area of the software development process.  These 
assignments were completed using an object-oriented 

development model in C++.  Optionally, the XP 
methodology was utilized for the team project.   
3.2.
 Research design 
To examine multiple students™ perspectives, we used 
a collective case study approach, looking for emergent 
themes in perceptions of computer science students.  With 
collective case studies, several cases are studied within the 
same project to inquire into a particular phenomenon [32].  

Collective case studies are based on the analysis of several 

individuals within a specific domain and the dynamics that 

emerge from that domain [10].  We define our domain as 

ﬁsocial interactionﬂ and analyze the dynamics resulting 
from instructional and programming approaches used by 

the students.  These dynamics were examined from the 

point of view of the SIMPP (explained in Section 4) 

developed during our longitudinal study [5].      
3.3.
 Method of inquiry 
The primary sources of data were semi-structured 
interviews that were audio recorded and transcribed.  
Semi-structured interviews are conducted with a written 
protocol, but allow the interviewer to ask further questions 
based on the interviewees™ responses [30].  Each interview 

lasted approximately 30 minutes.  The transcriptions were 

independently coded by three researchers; the individual 

codings were then combined and compared by the third 

author.  Coding is the process that categorizes qualitative 
data into different themes via three steps: open coding, 

axial coding, and selective coding [31, 33].  Open coding 

is the process of identifying the categories in the data and 

the properties of the different categories.  Axial coding is 
used to connect the categories and find their 
interrelationships. In the last step, selective coding 
identifies one or two central categories and forms a 
conceptual framework, in our case the SIMPP, from which 

to generate conjectures.    
3.4.
 Participants 
Previously, the SIMPP had been developed and 
evolved through analysis of the input of nine Millennial 
students (seven majority/two minority) from NCSU and 
NCAT.  Table 1 shows the progression of subjects in the 
creation of the SIMPP models.  For this phase of the 

study, we wished to determine if the SIMPP model 

applied to African American students as well.  Including 
the students in this phase of the study, the SIMPP has 
integrated interview responses from 20 representative 
students, including 11 women/nine men, and 13 

minority/seven majority students.  The focus of our 

longitudinal research project is the success and retention 
 of women and minorities in IT.  Therefore, our aggregate 
sample of twenty students is approximately half female 

and half minority, which is not representative of the 
population distribution at large. 
Table 1. SIMPP models and participants 
SIMPP # men # women # majority # minority
v.1 0 3 1 2
v.2-v.3 4 2 6 0
v.3-R 5 6 0 11
Total 9 11 7 13
 In this paper, we focus on the analysis of fifteen 
interviews with 11 African American students (six 
women/five men) from NCAT who were enrolled in the 
Spring 2005 and Spring 2006 software engineering 

courses.  The students in this study were solicited 

randomly by the course instructor from all of the students 

enrolled in the courses.  The choice of interviews used in 
our analysis was based on theoretical sampling [10].  

Theoretical sampling is used in case studies where cases 
are chosen based on their likeliness to extend or reproduce 
an emergent theory.  In our study, we are evolving the 

SIMPP.  Theoretical sampling is first done with a 

homogenous group to develop a theory or model, which 

was done in the initial phase of study.  Then the sampling 
is applied to a heterogeneous group to confirm or 
disconfirm the conditions of the previously-developed 

model. 
The six female and five male participants from NCAT 
were interviewed about their experiences in the course 

concerning social interaction and group work.  Of the 
female participants, Vanessa, Kayla, and Crystal (all 
names are pseudonyms) were interviewed twice, once at 

the beginning of the semester and then again at the end of 

the semester in Spring 2005.  Teresa, Marie, and Sandra 

were interviewed once at the end of Spring 2006.  Only 

one male participant, Shelton, was interviewed twice in 

Spring 2005.  Two other participants, Nathan and Trevor, 

were both interviewed at the end of the semester in Spring 

2005.  Greg and Ryan were both interviewed at the end of 

Spring 2006. 
4. Social Interaction Model of Pair 
Programming (SIMPP) 
The conceptual framework for our study is based on 
situated cognition [5, 19], where students learn in 
collaborative apprenticeships that reflect real world 
practice; and on social constructivism discourse studies 
[36], where students™ dialogues within themselves and 
with their peers contribute to their learning experiences.  
We examine their perceptions of their learning experience 

as students move beyond these initial peripheral 
apprenticeships toward more responsibilities of an IT 
worker. 
The initial version of the SIMPP [5] was initially 
developed from a case study of three interviews with 

female students who took the software engineering course 

at NCSU in the Fall 2003 semester.  The categories 
evolved from the initial version of the SIMPP model  to 
the second version [31] as input from more students 

became available.  The current version of the model, 

SIMPP v3, is similar to the second version with only 

nomenclature differences. 
The SIMPP v3, shown in Figure 1, describes five 
interrelated components of social interaction in pair 

programming that emerged from past student interviews.  

Each component has a bi-directional relationship with 
all
 other components, that is, a change in one factor (for 

better or for worse) will perpetuate a change in the others.  

Yet, there is no ordering among the components Œ their 
relationship is circular.  For example, students believe that 
project quality and confidence are intimately tied.  As the 

quality of their project improves through collaboration, so 

does their confidence.  Yet, because of the confidence in 

their solutions, they produce better future projects.     
   Figure 1. Social Interaction Model of Pair 
Programming v3 (SIMPP v3) 
Students observed that errors in programming and 
rationale were corrected more quickly while working with 
others.  Also, partners often had a solution to an arising 

problem.  Both of these aids reduced the 
time spent
.  According to the students, the positive influence of social 

interaction on the time factor yielded a greater 
sense of 
accomplishment
 and also a 
higher quality 
product. 
Creating higher quality products in less time increased the 
students™ 
confidence
 in their abilities.  We propose that 
these four factors fostered or retained these students™ 
interest in IT
 careers.  By producing a higher quality 
product in less time, a student™s confidence should 

increase, which in turn, should foster more interest in that 

particular activity, a concept supported by [1, 24].  
In the remainder of this paper, we will examine the 
interviews of the 11 African American Millennial students 
Time Spent 
Sense of 
Accomplish.  
Interest in IT 
 Quality 
Positive 
Collaborative 
Experiences 
Confidence 
 in our study to see if their responses support or contrast 
with the components of the SIMPP model.  We will then 

expand and revise the model to incorporate this new 
information. 
5. Emergent themes among African American 
Millennials 
In this section, we explore four themes that emerged 
in interviews of the eleven African American Millennial 
students at NCAT.  These themes were consistent with the 
previously-reported interviews, further validating the 
SIMPP model itself.  Furthermore, these new interviews 

revealed additional important characteristics of the 
collaborative factors in the SIMPP.   
5.1.
 Time and quality   
Our previous findings suggest that time is an 
important factor in students™ experiences with social 
interaction.  Some students believe working together takes 
more time, but results in a better product, while others 
believe collaborating saves time over working alone by 

catching errors.  The African American Millennials in our 

current study share similar ideas about time.  On the one 

hand, collaborating with others saves time.  Shelton says 
that working with others saves time on large projects: 
– I guess it™s best to work with another person because it 
might cut down the time that you really have to work– but 
when it comes to a major project you™ll probably need 

some definite help. If I™m by myself I™ll be intent on that 

one track until I get deeper into it and then it™s wrong.  
Having someone else they™re not necessarily standing over 
your shoulder but on the same page as you™re on, you can 

share those ideas and perhaps have a better product.  
Nathan™s experience of working with his group 
together in the lab illustrates the importance of teamwork 

in solving problems quickly and efficiently: 
–we can just kind of talk to each other while we™re 
programming it, that way, eliminate some of the problems 
that we could have by each of us going out on our own 
and trying to make something up. I think that way there™s 

more teamwork– I think working together in the lab has 

allowed us to catch our mistakes before we™ve actually 

thought we were done with something– I thought that was 

efficient, catching errors before we got too far. 
For Shelton, saving time on large projects implies 
getting help which could result in a higher quality product. 
Marie would rather work with a partner on assignments 
because it saves her time: 
I like it better than working by myself–Because I might 

understand it one way, and then the way I™m looking at it 

is the longer way to get the final answer, but then they 

have a shorter way, which is the easier way–it saves 

time–a lot less time. 
On the other hand, collaboration can take more time 
than working alone.  Coordinating schedules and ideas is a 

concern for Nathan: 
I think one advantage of working individually is that since 
you have no one to disagree with, you™ll probably get it 
done a little bit quicker, but since you have to coordinate 
your schedule and coordinate ideas and make sure that 

you agree on certain topics, certain issues, that I think it is 

more time consuming. But it™s worth it in the end because 

you will have a better product from all the brain power 
going into it. 
Vanessa feels that collaborating in the workplace is a 
time-saving practice where problems are solved faster: 
I: How do you think that working in groups or with a 
partner - do you think that has a place in the IT work 

place? 
V: Of course. Two heads are better than one. I mean if 
you™re having a problem if you have more than one person 

working on it, more brains focused on this one problem 

it™s going to get solved quicker. 
As in our previous studies, we find that the 
relationships between time spent, higher efficiency, and 

higher quality are important factors to consider when 

examining students™ perceptions of social interaction. 
Whether working together takes more time or less time, 
students feel that they end up with a better product overall 

and avoid more errors. 
5.2.
 Peer learning 
Our previous studies [5, 22] reveal the multifaceted 
category of higher quality resulting from collaborative 
experiences.  Relating higher efficiency and higher 
quality, students in this and previous studies mentioned 
fewer errors, more ways of solving problems, including 

more elegant methods, and filling in gaps and missing 

pieces of ideas.  Learning is again an important theme 

contributing to students™ perceptions of higher quality.   
Eliminating and avoiding problems while 
collaborating with their peers contribute to African 
American Millennial students™ sense of accomplishment. 

Furthermore, being more efficient contributed to the 

learning experiences of these students. Vanessa prefers to 

work in a group over working solo: 
 –yes I™d rather work in a group.  You get more done and 
you get to see how other people see things.  Maybe learn 

some new things at the same time. 
Similarly, Kayla feels that she learns more efficiently 
by working with others: 
You can share each other™s knowledge like sometimes it™s 
better to learn from your peers than from the instructor 

because they might know how to relay it better.  So when 

you™re working in groups you™re also learning. 
Teresa also comments on her learning from her peers: 
Something in particular, I guess one thing I™m kind of a 

little bit having trouble on, which I know will be on the 

final, is like state chart diagrams–I™ve been using my 

peers to find out exactly how to do it and make sure I™m 
doing it the correct way.   
 Shelton connects this idea of learning from others to 
his vision of the workplace: 
Yes, I think it should be used in the workplace–Different 
ideas. One person might have one opinion and then 
somebody else will have one.  And then I guess if you put 

it together there might be something new that one person 

couldn™t have done all by themselves. 
Learning from the different ability levels of his peers 
led Shelton to comment: 
Everyone looks at something a little differently. I don™t 
know too many people that truly write programs the same 
unless they™re copying each other.  So everyone looks at 

the problem or the approach to solving a problem 

differently and that can bring in different ideas good or 

bad and you get a learning experience. 
Crystal appreciates the social aspect of learning from 
others with different ability levels: 
Well nobody wants to do their work by themselves the 
entire time so I think the company of everyone is always 

nice– You know, see what you can learn from other 

people.  That™s definitely helpful. Because you know some 

of my weaknesses can be someone else™s strength.  So 
they™ll kind of coincide and balance each other out. 
Sandra comments on the importance of having others™ 
perspectives: 
–when you have pairs programming, you might think it™s 
right, but you might have somebody else who™s saying, oh, 
this isn™t right, or maybe we need to take another 

approach.  So, you have another set of eyes and another 

brain that could either help, you, or it could probably 
affect the grade.  But, you have someone saying, well, 
maybe we should look at this differently.  So you have 

somebody else who can make you think outside the box 
than what you™re already thinking in. 
Similarly, Kayla likes the quality of learning from 
communication with her peers instead of seeking out the 
teacher for help: 
I™d say I prefer to work in a group just because you™ll 
always have help if it™s needed.  If you™re not clear on 

something, usually somebody in your group would be able 
to help you out with it without always running to the 
teacher. It™s more peer-to-peer relationships going– You 

can share each other™s knowledge like sometimes it™s 

better to learn from your peers than from the instructor 

because they might know how to relay it better.  So when 

you™re working in groups you™re also learning. 
Ryan appreciates the importance of communication in 
working with others: 
–the main thing in groups, just in general is how to 
listen–Working in groups, you listen and then you learn 

that way. Like me, personally, like I said, I™m a person 

who™s an eye, ear and see kind of guy. So, if I™m in a 

group and somebody says, well, why don™t we do it like 

this, and then they can back it up by showing us a picture 

or something, that™s my ears and my eyes already seeing it 
and then hands-on, if you can make it, that™s something I 
like to see. So, working in groups Œ the main thing, I think 

about working in groups is communication. If you all can 

communicate right, you pretty much can do any job. 
In other words, learning from others contributes to 
higher overall sense of accomplishment and confidence by 

helping these students to see more efficient ways of 

approaching a problem.   
5.3.
 Real Practice 
Students in this study felt they were learning social 
and communication skills that would help them once they 
enter the workforce.  That is, these students value the 
practical applications of social interaction. 
Crystal comments on the development of 
communication skills: 
And also like even if you knew a lot, if you were 
knowledgeable on it, it helps you as far as the 
communication to get it across. Like this is what it is.  So I 
guess it™s more of a helpful thing– I definitely think it™s 

helpful because if you™re not used to working with other 

people to get a project done then once you go off to work 

and you have to work with a lot of people that could mess 

you up in terms of how you™re used to working.  I guess 
 that™s the big plus within the course.  That it does teach 
you that you do have to work within a group to get stuff 

done. 
Kayla also comments on learning communication 
skills and their importance in real practice.  When asked 
what she had learned from collaborating in the course she 

commented: 
I guess communication skills.  They talk about it a lot like 
when you get in the corporate world, group work is also a 

necessity so that was just so you will know how to work in 
a group.  Experience in working with groups. 
Nathan took this idea further by adding that he 
learned social skills as well: 
I guess I™ve been learning a lot from the two people I™ve 
been working with. Not just from a computer 
programming aspect, but also just social skills and just 

relating with people. So I™m learning things about life as 

well. 
Students noticed that the closeness of the setting of 
their apprenticeship to workplace environments increased 

their competence, which in turn led to their increased 
interest in the IT field. 
Nathan notes that interviewers ask him about his 
collaborative abilities: 
Yeah, from the way I™ve been doing interviews and stuff, 
over the course of the semester, it seems like a lot of their 

focus has been on group work, how you feel about 

working in a group, or working in teams, have you ever 

worked in teams, what would you do if you don™t agree 
with someone, stuff like that. So it seems like the next step 
in the industry will be working in a team in some way or 

some sort. 
He continues with how his collaborative experiences 
in the software engineering course are helping him prepare 

for a career: 
So I really feel that they™ve been beneficial to me, as far as 
getting a feel of how things will be done in the industry, 
because you won™t be working by yourself on a particular 

assignment, you™ll have other people working with you to 

accomplish the goal, as far as interacting with these 

people to accomplish this goal and being able to talk to 

other people and bring in different viewpoints in order to 

accomplish the task. 
Shelton, on the other hand, explains how the course 
fits his vision of the workplace: 
More group effort. A bunch of group work. It™s not going 
to be like any individual work. I guess it gave me a chance 

to work with more people. Because I know that™s how it™s 
going to be in the real world when I go get a job.  
Vanessa also values the relationship of her course 
experiences with her vision of the workplace: 
I like the idea that we got to work in groups and we got to 
learn more about the software development life cycle.  

And we learned more things that we would actually be 

applying once we get a job.  And that™s what I liked about 
the course– Like how we get to work–like if we were to 
go out and actually get a job, most likely we™ll be working 

on a software development team.  And getting to work in 

groups and learning the life cycle and all those things I 

think it helped prepare us more for a real work 

experience. 
Likewise, Ryan appreciates the relationship between 
his idea of the workplace and the Computer Science 
major: 
I™d definitely say I like groups the most. Because most of 
the time when you get out now, in the real world, in a lot 

of organizations, you™re going to work with groups–you 

definitely have to be able to do groups. As of now, with 

this kind of major, you don™t do much by yourself.  You 

think, but you implement with others.    
These students valued their increased competence in 
social and communication skills.  They see the need to 

learn beyond basic technology skills and are confident that 

their newly learned skills are practical. 
6. Expanding the model 
The additional data provided by the 11 interviews 
reported in this study supported the categories of the 
SIMPP and did not surface inconsistencies between these 
minority students and the prior majority students.  The 
additional data, however, highlighted complexities within 

the categories of the SIMPP and allowed us to develop 

further relationships between categories.  Thus, we expand 

our model to the new SIMPP v3-R (see Figure 2) where 

the R indicates that relationships are now shown.  
Relationships are denoted as ovals.   
The issue of peer 
learning
 relates to the categories of 
higher productivity, higher quality and increased 

confidence.  Students believed they learned more efficient 
ways of approaching problems, had fewer errors, and were 
able to fill gaps in their own knowledge when they worked 
with other students.    
      
   
   
  
 
   
   Figure 2. SIMPP v3-R 
Furthermore, our new results implied that the students 
felt more confident and empowered to learn when they 
were able to ask their peers questions.  The confidence 

also increased through the closeness between classroom 

practices and workplace practices, that is, through class 

practice being close to 
real practice
.  Students valued the 
connection of these collaborative practices to the 

workplace.  This connection, as well as growth in the 

quality of their work and in the productivity, increased 

their interest in working in the IT field.  
 7. Conjectures on attracting and retaining 
African American Millennial Students in IT 
Based upon our findings, we propose three 
conjectures about how social interaction can help attract 
and retain African American Millenial students in IT.   
The type of qualitative inquiry reported in this paper does 
not produce generalizable results as can be done with 
some quantitative analyses.  However, qualitative research 

can draw implications, propose theories, or promote 

conjectures.  Larger quantitative studies can then be 

designed to evaluate the generalizability of the 
conjectures.  Initial quantitative validation of the SIMPP 

v2 model has been conducted [22, 31].   
Conjecture 1:
 Through social interaction in course 
activities, African American Millennial students change 
their perspective of IT as a solitary activity to IT as a 
collaborative activity.   
As stated in Section 2, women [1, 13, 23] and 
Millennials [35] generally perceive IT to be a discipline 
involving a great deal of solitary activity.  Often, 

instructors of early courses in a computer science 

curriculum insist that students work alone.  The first 

author conducted an informal email surve
5 of the SIGCSE
6 mailing list.  Based upon 50 responses, the majority of 
educators felt that students needed to primarily work solo 
on their programming assignments in the first two years of 
study so they can learn the fundamentals of programming 

and develop their own skills.  As such, the solo work 
requirement affirms the student view of ﬁsolitary workﬂ in 
IT, potentially contributing to the retention problems of 

the computer science discipline.  Conversely, a survey of 
359 practitioners
5 indicates that software engineers spend 
almost 40% of their day working with others; the solitary 
work perception is not accurate.  
Our interview data indicate that by the end of the 
software engineering course, the students change their 
perception.  The students consistently verbalize their view 

that the collaborative work done in the class is 

representative of what they will do in industry, indicating 
a new perspective on IT as a collaborative activity.    
                                                       
 5 Surveys conducted in preparation for keynote speech 
ﬁDebunking the Geek Stereotypeﬂ presented at CSEET 2005 
http://www.site.uottawa.ca/cseet2005/KeynotesPDF/LaurieWilli

amsKeynoteCSEET2005.pdf 
6 ACM Special Interest Group on Computer Science Education; 
http://www.sigcse.org/
 Time Spent 
 Quality 
 Confidence 
  Learning 
Productivity 
 Interest in IT 
Real 
Practice 
 Conjecture 2:
  Social interaction improves African 
American Millennial students™ interest in IT because it 
helps them to learn both technical and interpersonal skills, 
which in turn makes them feel more confident and better 
prepared for the ﬁreal world.ﬂ 
When students work in groups, they are continuously 
brainstorming and discussing alternatives.  The act of self-
explanation has been found to help organize thoughts and 

be beneficial in that it causes the speaker to better 

understand the subject at hand or to improve (and correct) 

his or her own imperfect mental model [7].  As such, 

learning occurs to both the speaker and the listener in the 

discussion.  Students prefer to learn from each other over 

learning from a teacher [27, 28].  In the process of these 
discussions, students are learning more about 
communicating in the context of a software development 

team.  From these increased technical and communication 

skills, students can be more confident that they will be 

more successful in the ﬁreal world.ﬂ  
Conjecture 3:
  Social interaction improves African 
American Millennial students™ interest in IT because it is a 
preferred work style when compared with working solo. 
Our data supports prior findings that Millennial 
students want to work together and learn together. 
Computer science students are often stereotyped as 

introverts.  However, one of the classes in this study  was 
comprised of about 70 students of which almost half were 
Myers Briggs [16, 21] extroverts and more had low 

introvert scores.  In a five-year study of 23 co-educational 
computer science departments in Virginia, face-to-face 
interviews revealed that both men and women consider 

their classmates a necessary source of help [9].  Structured 

social interaction, such as is provided by pair 

programming and agile software development, allows 

students to work as they desire.      
8. Summary 
Studies indicate that Millennial students, particularly 
women and minorities, desire a collaborative, 
interpersonal environment.  Increasingly, these students 
consider IT as boring and not appealing.  In our 
longitudinal research study, we examine if and in what 
ways pair programming and collaboration can help to 

attract and retain students in IT disciplines.  In the past 

two years, software engineering courses at NCSU and 

NCAT have incorporated a pedagogical intervention 
emphasizing collaboration, structured in the collaborative 

aspects of agile software development and its practice of 

pair programming.   
We conducted a series of semi-structured interviews 
with students in these classes.  Through analysis of these 

interviews, we have formulated a conceptual model we 
call the SIMPP.  In this paper, we specifically discuss the 

themes and relationships that emerged from the interviews 

of 11 African American students.  We use these themes to 

further develop the SIMPP into a more generalized model 

that reflects the views of men, women, ethnic minorities, 

and ethnic majorities.  We further make conjectures of 
how pair programming and agile development-style 
collaboration impacts student views of IT.  Our findings 

suggest that pair programming and agile software 

methodologies effectively create the collaborative 

environment desirable to Millennial students.  

Additionally, the students enjoy learning from their peers 

and feel a collaborative environment better prepares them 

for the ﬁreal world.ﬂ  Future research will evaluate and 

evolve these conjectures with additional students via 

additional qualitative and quantitative studies.   
Acknowledgements 
This material is based upon the work supported by the 
National Science Foundation under the Grant No, 
00305917.  Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or 
recommendations expressed in this material are those of 
the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of 

the National Science Foundation.   We would like to thank 

Sung Yoon, the instructor at NC A&T who taught the 

class and convinced his students to participate in the 
interviews.  Additionally, we thank Stephen Czenszak for 

his assistance with coding the interview.      
References 
[1] American Association of University Women Education 
Foundation, 
Educating Girls in the New Computer Age
, 2000, 
http://www.aauw.org/member_center/publications/TechSavvy/T
echSavvy.pdf
, accessed  
[2] V. R. Basili and A. J. Turner, "Iterative Enhancement:  A 
Practical Technique for Software Development," 
IEEE 
Transactions on Software Engineering
, vol. 1, no. 4, 1975, pp. 
266 - 270. 
[3] K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained:  Embrace 
Change
, Second ed. Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 2005. 
[4] K. Beck, M. Beedle, A. van Bennekum, A. Cockburn, W. 
Cunningham, M. Fowler, J. Grenning, J. Highsmith, A. Hunt, R. 
Jeffries, J. Kern, B. Marick, R. C. Martin, S. Mellor, K. 

Schwaber, J. Sutherland, and D. Thomas, "The Agile Manifesto,"  

http://www.agileAlliance.org
, 2001 2001. 
[5] S. B. Berenson, K. M. Slaten, L. Williams, and C.-w. Ho, 
"Voices of Women in a Software Engineering Course:  

Reflections on Collaboration " 
ACM Journal on Educational 
Resources in Computing
, vol. 4, no. 1, 2004, pp. 1-18. 
[6] S. B. Berenson, L. Williams, and K. M. Slaten, "Using Pair 
Programming and Agile Development Methods in a University 

Software Engineering Course to Develop a Model of Social 

Interactions," Crossing Cultures, Changing Lives Conference, 

Oxford, UK, 2005, pp. to appear. 

[7] M. T. H. Chi, "Self-Explaining:  The Dual Process of 

Generating Inference and Repairing Mental Models," in 
 Advances in Instructional Psychology
, R. Glaser, Ed. Mahwah, 
New Jersey: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 2000, pp. 161 - 238. 
[8] A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development
. Reading, 
Massachusetts: Addison Wesley Longman, 2001. 

[9] J. M. Cohoon, "Toward improving female retention in the 
computer science major," 
Communications of the ACM
, vol. 44, 
no. 5, 2001, pp. 108-114. 
[10] J. W. Creswell, 
Qualitative inquiry and research design: 
Choosing among five traditions.
 Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 
1998. 

[11] B. Curtis, "Three Problems Overcome with Behavioral 

Models of the Software Development Process (Panel)," 

International Conference on Software Engineering, Pittsburgh, 
PA, 1989, pp. 398-399. 
[12] M. Fowler and J. Highsmith, "The Agile Manifesto," in 
Software Development
, August 2001, pp. 28-32. 
[13] P. Freeman and W. Aspray, "The Supply of Information 

Technology Workers in the United States," Computing Research 

Association, Washington, DC, 1999. 

[14] R. E. Fullilove and P. U. Treisman, "Mathematics 

achievement among African American undergraduates of the 
University of California, Berkeley: An evaluation of the 
Mathematics Workshop Program," 
Journal of Negro Education
, vol. 59, no. 3, 1990, pp. 463-478. 

[15] A. Joseph and M. Payne, "Group Dynamics and 

Collaborative Group Performance," Thirty-fourth SIGCSE 

Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education, Reno, 

NV, March 2003, pp. 368-371. 

[16] D. Keirsey, 
Please Understand Me II
. Del Mar, CA: 
Prometheus Nemesis Book Company, 1998. 
[17] C. Larman, 
Agile and Iterative Development:  A Manager's 
Guide
. Boston: Addison Wesley, 2004. 
[18] C. Larman and V. Basili, "A History of Iterative and 

Incremental Development," 
IEEE Computer
, vol. 36, no. 6, June 
2003, pp. 47-56. 

[19] J. Lave and E. Wenger, 
Situated Learning:  Legitimate 
peripheral participation
. New York, NY: Cambridge University 
Press, 1991. 
[20] L. Layman, "Changing Students™ Perceptions:  An Analysis 
of the Supplementary Benefits of Collaborative Software 

Development," 19th Conference on Software Engineering 

Education and Training (CSEE&T '06), Turtle Bay, Hawaii, 

2006, pp. 156-166. 

[21] L. Layman, T. Cornwell, and L. Williams, "Personality 

Types, Learning Styles, and an Agile Approach to Software 

Engineering Education," ACM Technical Symposium on 
Computer Science Education (SIGCSE '06), Houston, TX, 2006, 
pp. 428-432. 

[22] L. Layman, L. Williams, J. Osborne, S. Berenson, K. Slaten, 

and M. Vouk, "How and Why Collaborative Software 

Development Impacts the Software Engineering Course," 

Frontiers in Education, Indianapolis, IN, 2005, pp. T4C 9-14. 

[23] J. Margolis and A. F. (1997), "Geek Mythology and 

Attracting Undergraduate Women to Computer Science," Joint 
National Conference in Engineering Program Advocates 
Network and the National Association of Minority Engineering 

Program Administrators., 1997, pp.  
[24] J. Margolis and A. Fisher, 
Unlocking the Clubhouse:  
Women in Computing
. Cambridge, Massachusetts: The MIT 
Press, 2002. 
[25] N. Nagappan, L. Williams, M. Ferzli, K. Yang, E. Wiebe, C. 
Miller, and S. Balik, "Improving the CS1 Experience with Pair 

Programming," ACM Special Interest Group Compuer Science 

Education (SIGCSE) 2003, Reno, 2003, pp. 359 - 362. 

[26] C. E. Nelson, "Student Diversity Requires Different 
Approaches to College Teaching, Even in Math and Science," 
American Behavioral Scientist
, vol. 40, no. 2, 1996, pp. 165-175. 
[27] D. Oblinger, "Boomers, Gen-Xers, and Millennials:  
Understanding the New Students," 
Educause Review
, vol. 38, no. 
4, July/August 2003, pp. 37-47. 

[28] D. Oblinger and J. Oblinger (Eds.), 
Educating the Net 
Generation
. Boulder, CO: Educause, 2005. 
[29] C. Raines, 
Managing Millennials
, 2002, 
http://www.generationsatwork.com/articles/millenials.htm
, accessed February 12, 2006. 
[30] C. B. Seaman, "Qualitative Methods in Empirical Studies of 

Software Engineering," 
IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering
, vol. 25, no. 4, 1999, pp. 557-572. 
[31] K. M. Slaten, M. Droujkova, S. Berenson, L. Williams, and 
L. Layman, "Undergraduate Student Perceptions of Pair 

Programming and Agile Software Methodologies: Verifying a 
Model of Social Interaction," Agile 2005, Denver, CO, 2005, pp. 
323-330. 

[32] R. E. Stake, 
The Art of Case Study Research
. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, Inc., 1995. 

[33] A. L. Strauss and J. M. Corbin, 
Basics of Qualitative 
Research: Techniques and Procedures of Developing Grounded 

Theory
, Second ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 
1998. 
[34] U. Treisman, "Studying students studying calculus: A look 
at the lives of minority mathematics students in college.," 
The 
College Mathematics Journal
, vol. 23, no. 5, 1992, pp. 362-372. 
[35] E. Walker and L. O'Neill, "IT courses and the IT industry:  

Does the future rely on gender or generation?," Annual 

International Conference of the Higher Education Research and 

Development Society of Australasia (HERDSA), Perth, 

Australia., 2002, pp. 695-703. 

[36] J. L. Wertsch and C. Toma, "Discourse and learning in the 
classroom: A sociocultural approach," in 
Constructivism in 
Education
, L. Steffe and J. Gale, Eds. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence 
Erlbaum, 1995, pp. 159-174. 
[37] L. Williams and R. Kessler, 
Pair Programming Illuminated
. Reading, Massachusetts: Addison Wesley, 2003. 
[38] L. A. Williams, "The Collaborative Software Process," 

University of Utah Department of Computer Science, Salt Lake 

City, UT, PhD Dissertation, 2000. 
  