 Requirements Interaction Management in an eXtreme 
Programming Environment: A Case Study* 
 D.M. Woit 
Ryerson University 
Toronto, Ontario  
Canada M5B2K3 
1-416-979-5000 
dwoit@scs.ryerson.ca 
 
   
 ABSTRACT
 This work reports experience applying the process of 
Requirements Interaction Management (RIM) within the context 

of developing a commercial, internet-based software application 

in an industrial venue, employing the eXtreme Programming 

(XP) methodology. We describe our means of managing the 

interactions Œ by extending the standard XP requirements 

process while maintaining consistency with the principles of XP 

itself. We outline our rationale for modifying the XP 

requirements process, and provide a temporal comparison 

showing that, for this project, modified process is essential to 

successful application of RIM.   
Categories and Subject Descriptors
 D.2.1 [
Software Engineering
]: Requirements/Specifications Œ 
methodologies, tools.  
General Terms
 Measurement, Management, Documentation.  
Keywords
 requirements engineering, system specification, system analysis, 
dependency analysis, interaction analysis, extreme programming, 

user stories, requirements interaction management. 
1. INTRODUCTION  
1.1 The Product 
Product development began in early 2000, using the standard 
eXtreme Programming (XP) methodology, as described in 
[3,4,7]. The project was larger than any attempted at that time 
[7], comprising twelve developers, two graphic designers, two 

individuals filling the other XP roles (tracker, tester, coach, etc.), 

and up to three test individuals. The customer was on-site, 

devoted 100 percent of his time to the project, and provided 

specific and detailed GUI. The project was built for the 

customer, in accordance with his vision; upon completion, the 

product was to be sold or leased to third parties.  
The product comprises three general utilities: a set of 
collaboration tools, a secure platform from which to build and 

deploy web services, and a system for distributed 

communication. The collaboration tools include a number of 

fundamental fac
ilities, such as multimedia streaming, data 
sharing and storage, instant messaging, email, browsing, 

scheduling, etc., integrated through a distributed contact 

management system. The web services platform comprises an 

API supporting XML RPC and provides secure, third party 

integration with the system facilities mentioned above 

(scheduler, data storage, etc.) and associated data. The 

distributed communication system is a multi-domain, distributed 

server cluster that enables automated authentication and 

interaction within and between enterprises. Information is 

controlled by its owner, and is accessed by others, subject to 

authentication and permissions, via the cluster. The product is 

SSL secure, multi-language, and allows multi-branding. It has 

complex notions of client hierarchies, and all data sharing is 

regulated by user-manageable permissions, in accordance with 

the hierarchy.  The multi-tasking and multi-dimensional GUI is 

complex (over 11,000 images) and dynamically re-configurable 

by both client and server. Although accessed via a browser, the 

product™s interface with the Linux server is dynamic so that the 

browser DOM is reconfigured on the fly without user 

intervention.  
1.2 The XP Requirements Process 
The notion of requirements in XP differs from that of traditional 

methodologies in that user stories comprise requirements 

documents. A user story is typically 1-3 sentences written on an 

index card describing some functionality the customer values, 

serving as a starting point from which customer and developer 

generate more precise details [3,4]. Estimated completion time 

and notes are added to each card as it is discussed [10]. 

Developers decompose the functions on the card into manageable 
*This work is supported by a Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research 
Council of Canada (NSERC) Discovery Grant and by Swurv Holdings Inc. 

  
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for 
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not 
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear 

this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, or 

republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific 

permission and/or a fee. 
ICSE™05
, May 15Œ21, 2005, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 
Copyright 
2005 ACM 1-58113-963-2/05/0005
...$5.00 
  tasks, maintaining a record of each task and its status on the 
card.  In the sequel, we will refer to the process of writing and 

using traditional story cards as the XP requirements process. 
Modifications to the XP requirements process are reported 
necessary for projects with numerous story dependencies 

[1,17,18,20], projects that are large [5,12,20], and projects with  

a complex GUI component [19], all of which apply to our project. 

Our modifications to the requirements process are also essential 

to support management of requirements interactions as described 

in the sequel. 
1.3 Requirements Interaction Management 
Unmanaged dependencies among requirements have been 

attributed to stakeholder dissatisfaction and numerous software 

and system failures, some with grave consequences [8,15]. 

Requirements Interaction Management (RIM) is described as 

ﬁthe analysis and management of dependencies among 

requirements,ﬂ and is more formally defined as ﬁthe set of 

activities directed toward the discovery, management, and 

disposition of critical relationships among sets of requirements,ﬂ 

which ﬁmay be applied within an ad hoc or a defined processﬂ 

[15]. We were motivated to attempt RIM incorporation because it 

is reported to be a ﬁcritical area of requirements engineering 

whose methods will lead to the development of systems with 

higher stakeholder satisfaction and fewer failures,ﬂ and because 

our project exhibits numerous dependencies (see Section 2) 

consistent with other projects reported to have benefited from 

RIM application [15]. We anticipated RIM to have a positive 

impact on the satisfaction of our XP customer, as predicted by 

[15]. We were motivated to modify the XP requirements process 

to incorporate RIM because application of RIM within the 

standard XP process proved temporally impractical, as explained 

in Section 3. 
1.4 Outline 
We begin, in Section 2, by confirming that the dependencies 

arising in our project requirements over a three-year period are 

consistent with those described in the literature.  In Section 3 we 

describe our application of RIM, using the standard XP 

requirements process. We outline problems encountered and 

present our rationale for XP requirements process modifications 

in support of RIM. In Section 4 we describe our process 

modifications, which were developed in accordance with XP 

principles. Our application of RIM is outlined in Section 5. In 

Section 6 we present data showing RIM application temporally 

impractical before process modification, but practical afterward. 

We also include results concurring with [15] that RIM 

application results in higher stakeholder satisfaction. In Section 7 

we outline alternative XP requirements process modifications 

and present our rationale for selecting our particular adaptations 

to accommodate RIM. 
2. REQUIREMENTS INTERACTIONS 
Data gathered over three years of our project show a total of 911 

dependencies among 383 extant stories, with all dependencies 

originating in story cards. Forty percent of dependencies arise 

from functional interactions among stories. Sixty percent arise 

from GUI components, and are usually related to the customer™s 

explicit GUI artifacts included in stories. 
Requirements dependencies are also referred to as requirements 
interactions [15] and are generally categorized as positive (the 

conjunction of the requirements does not imply False), negative 

(conjunction implies False), and implementation conflict (each 

requirement is satisfied individually by their implementations, 

but not when the implementations are combined.) All identified 

interactions in our project fall into the positive interaction 

category. No negative or implementation conflict interactions 

appear because they are effectively circumvented by our XP 

approach to RIM, described in Section 3, and our modifications 

to the XP requirements process, described in Section 4. 
A ﬁmore refined analysis of the literature reveals that the basis of 
most interactionsﬂ can be classified as: structure, resource, task, 

causality and time [15], as follows: 
• structure: two requirements are similar,  
• resource: two requirements depend on the same 
resource,  
• task: one requirement describes a task required for 
another,  
• causality: one requirement describes a consequence of 
another, and  
• time: temporal relations of one requirement to another, 
including coincident state.  
Classification of our requirements interactions into these 
categories is presented in Table 1, revealing that the 

requirements dependencies we experienced are consistent with 

those reported in the literature [15].   
 Table 1. Classification into Literature Categories 
Category Percent of Interactions 
Resource 
63.8% 
Causality 
17.0% 
Task 
10.4% 
Time 
 4.6% 
Structure 
 4.2% 
  3. RATIONALE FOR PROCESS 
MODIFICATIONS 
Managing requirements interactions follows the process: create 
the requirements, partition requirements to help identify 

interactions, resolve the interactions, and modify all relevant 

requirements [15]. The process may be performed in an ad hoc 

fashion, or employ specific tools, such as automated conflict 

analyzers applied to requirements recorded in a formal language. 

Requirements are analyzed for interactions typically after each 

phase in the lifecycle or after a major requirements modification. 

This appears to work well for projects developed with traditional 

methodologies. However, we chose to follow a more iterative 

approach, to be consistent with the principles of XP, including 

that of simplicity. As XP stories are developed one-by-one, 

usually extending current requirements or functionality, we chose 

to perform requirements interaction analysis, resolution, and 

modification during story creation. We found this more effective 
 in our environment because it allowed us to create stories with 
no negative interactionsŠas opposed to creating them with 

negative interactions and later analyzing the whole requirements 

set to discover them, followed by conflict resolution.  
Consistent with the principles of XP, we initially employed the 
ﬁsimplest thing that could workﬂ to identify and resolve 

requirements interactions during story creation [3]. We manually 

searched existing artifacts for dependencies, and if found, 

resolved them (or explicitly identified them if no resolution was 

necessary) and modified the appropriate artifacts immediately. 

However, identifying dependencies and modifying artifacts was 

challenging when we employed the traditional XP paper-and-pen 

method of artifact maintenance. The following activities were 

necessary, but tedious, time-consuming and error-prone: 
• Searching of artifacts for related, existing functionality 
and GUI: This required visual inspection of great 

numbers of paper artifacts. 
• Locating an artifact referenced from another: This 
required shuffling through large stacks of paper. 
• Modification management of requirements artifacts.  
This required hand-written modifications to existing 

artifacts (natural language and diagrams), resulting in 

cognition and configuration problems. 
We note that these activities may not be as challenging for every 
XP project. In our project, they are significant because of the 

extraordinary number of story artifacts and dependencies. 

Several underlying project properties contribute to the large 

number of artifacts and dependencies, as follows: 
• Our customer has copious and exacting GUI 
requirements, down to the pixel, which he generates 

precisely using imaging software. 
• Our product scope is much greater than the typical XP 
project [7,16]. 
• Our GUI is complex. It is dynamically generated based 
on system state and multiple user i
nput simultaneously, 
resulting in a theoretically infinite number of 

configurations, which often require description in 

artifacts. 
We expect any XP project with comparable properties will also 
encounter similar challenges incorporating RIM when employing 

the traditional XP requirements process. Other reports confirm 

that effective management of interactions requires process 

adaptations [1,17,19,20] for projects with extensive scope and 

GUI. 
4. PROCESS MODIFICATIONS 
We followed the basic tenants of XP in modifying our 

requirements process to facilitate RIM: We modified 

incrementally, incorporating user feedback; we modified process 

only as necessary to solve the problem at hand; we performed the 

simplest modifications that worked [3]. It is important to note 

that, in our case, the notion of ﬁsimpleﬂ is influenced by our 

collective experience with the Unix operating system (OS). The 

most important modifications were to make our artifacts 

electronically searchable and retrievable to facilitate interaction 

identification and requirements partitioning. We maintained 
stories in text files that could be subject to the full arsenal of 
Unix searching utilities. The format chosen for text files was 

html because (a) hyperlinking allowed simple referencing of one 

artifact from another, useful for explicit dependency pointers, 

and (b) it is an OS-independent format, important because 

individuals in our project accessed requirements from Linux-, 

Windows- and Macintosh-based platforms. The customer created 

and modified stories with WYSIWYG software, while other 

individuals usually edited the html directly. The artifact revision 

process was also greatly simplified, being electronically based. 

Location of a named artifact now became trivial: artifacts were 

accessed through a browser by name, or through simple directory 

indexing; referenced artifacts were accessed via hyperlinks. Why 

we considered our strategy simpler than incorporating COTS 

tools is covered in Section 7. 
As the requirements-base grew, feedback suggested adjustments 
as follows: It was desirable to replace flat indexing by a 

hierarchical organizational structure. A short CGI displays 

artifacts in a hierarchical fashion, sorted by component. As it was 

deemed undesirable to follow a number of links to retrieve an 

artifact, artifact links were listed sorted by sub-component, but 

presented flat. Our Macintosh-based customer usually located 

dependencies with the help of Unix-experienced members of the 

team; however, when he searched without such assistance, he 

was restricted to the searching capabilities of the browser. To 

facilitate this searching, we created a requirements view that 

concatenated artifact contents, so that all artifacts could be 

searched at once within the browser. An iteration view was 

added. This listed all of the XP iterations up to and including the 

current iteration, and within each, listed links of artifacts 

involved.  Our simple solutions also applied to GUI artifacts. The 

GUI artifact creator, the customer, produced abundant 

requirements images by means of imaging software, which were 

easily referenced from other artifacts via linking. Finally, as the 

traditional XP requirements process requires space for notes on 

each story card, we accommodated this in our electronic version 

by adding a link to a notes file for each story. 
4.1 Summary of Process Modifications 
Our modifications to traditional XP process to accommodate RIM 

are summarized as follows: 
• Replace paper-and-pen stories with electronic text 
documents in html format. 
• Replace on-paper GUI drawings (hand-written, or 
created and printed with an imaging tool) with 

electronic copies, in any simple browser-compatible 

format, such as gif or jpg. 
• Replace artifact searching via visual inspection with 
electronic searching. 
• Replace artifact organization via paper files, stacks of 
paper, and hand-written lists, with an electronically 

based, hierarchical display.  
• Replace artifact location via manual searching with 
electronic searching and retrieval through a 

hierarchical organizational structure. 
 5. APPLYING RIM 
As each new story is created, it is subject to the standard RIM 
activities of requirements partitioning, interaction identification, 

interaction resolution, and requirements modification, as follows. 
• Requirements partitioning: This is given at the most 
basic level by the requirements hierarchical structure. 

For example, email stories are isolated using glob 

constructs to identify them in the requirements 

hierarchy. Further partitioning is obtained via an ad 

hoc combination of Unix utilities. For example, to 

further partition to obtain a reverse-time ordered list of 

email stories created within the last week, but accessed 

yesterday, we would pipe find and sort utilities over 

files identified with glob constructs.  
• Interaction identification: Dependencies are identified 
via efficient electronic searching at story creation time, 

using an ad hoc combination of Unix utilities, with 

grep being most commonly employed. Final 

identification involves reading targeted story 

fragments, lists or other information produced by grep 

partitioning.  
• Interaction resolution: Once an interaction is identified, 
it is resolved by the customer. No conflict resolution 

methods as described in [15] are necessary, because 

only one customer contributes to requirements. Note 

that some interactions are identified for the purpose of 

adding an explicit dependency pointer to a story, and 

thus require no resolution. For example, when one 

story extends a permissions scheme developed in 

another story, the interaction is identified and a pointer 

to the original permissions scheme is included in the 

new story. 
• Requirements modification: any required modifications 
are explicitly included in artifacts, by appropriate file 

editing. 
The RIM activities normally result in additions/revisions to 
newly created stories. However, they can require revisions to 

existing stories, in the case when such stories are not yet 

implemented in the product. This typically occurs during the 

release-planning phase of XP, in which a group of stories is 

created at once for the next release. 
6. EFFECTIVENESS OF PROCESS 
MODIFICATIONS 
We assert that had we not modified our XP requirements 
process, we could not have successfully incorporated RIM, 

because of temporal drawbacks. Sampling the requirements 

artifact creation process showed that for each story created, an 

average of 3 complex interaction searches were required. 

Complex interaction searches are those that involve strategies 

beyond those of simple boolean textual location for the purpose 

of locating some functionality or image. They involved, for 

example, use of extended regular expressions; facilities to search 

by artifact properties, such as creation time, modification time, 

last access time, sub-component membership; summaries of 

number of times items were located within specific artifacts; 

sorting by various properties, etc. Data from pre-process 
modification time shows that one such complex search averaged 
approximately 0.5 hours when performed manually, on 

approximately 25 stories. Extrapolating to a time in the project 

when approximately half the stories existed (about 150) suggests 

that had we been relegated to traditional XP requirements 

process for RIM, each new story would require 

3x(0.5x150/25))=18 hours in the worst case for complex 

searching. At best, the searches could be conducted in parallel, 

requiring only (0.5x150/25)=6 hours per new story.  Sampling 

the modified requirements artifact creation process shows that 

each complex search requires an average of 5 minutes, attributed 

to search formulation and modification, and human cognition of 

the final computed results. Thus, for each new story the average 

complex search time is 3x5=15 minutes. We did not perform 

these in parallel because of hardware limitations. 
Sampling the requirements artifact creation process showed that 
for each story created, an average of .5 artifact searches were 

required. An artifact search refers to simple manual locating of a 

given story card or image in the stack. Before process 

modification, this required a quick visual inspection of each 

artifact™s name and/or classification, usually performed 

sequentially, as it was difficult to keep cards ordered. Data from 

pre-process modification time shows that one such artifact search 

averaged approximately 45 seconds when performed manually, 

on approximately 25 stories. Extrapolating to a time in the 

project when approximately half the stories existed (about 150) 

suggests that had we been relegated to traditional XP 

requirements process for RIM, each new story would require 

0.5x(45x150/25)/60=2.25 minutes for artifact searching. 

Sampling the modified requirements artifact creation process 

shows that each artifact search requires an average of 3 seconds, 

attributed to scrolling in a list to the correct area in the displayed 

hierarchy, visually locating the link and clicking it. Thus, for 

each new story the average artifact search time is 0.5x3=1.5 

seconds. 
Summing complex interaction search times and artifact search 
times before process modification gives 6 to 18 hours, plus 2.25 

minutes per story. Summing these after modification gives 15 

minutes plus 1.5 seconds. Therefore, incorporating RIM within 

the modified XP requirements process caused an additional 15 

minutes (and 1.5 seconds) per new storyŠsignificant, but 

achievable. Had we not modified process, the project could not 

have succeeded, because 6-18 hours (plus 2.25 minutes) per new 

story is time prohibitive. The acute difference in time required 

for searches supports our assertion that RIM would be impossible 

to incorporate into our XP project without modifying the XP 

requirements process. 
It is worth noting that our RIM application is consistent with 
higher customer satisfaction in the overall product, concurring 

with [15]. On a seven point Likert scale, the customer™s 

satisfaction increased from point 2 (very dissatisfied) to point 6 

(very satisfied) when measured pre-RIM and post-RIM 

incorporation, respectively. The modifications to the XP 

requirements process to accommodate RIM resulted in higher 

customer satisfaction with the XP requirements process itself. On 

a seven point Likert scale, the customer™s satisfaction increased 

from point 1 (completely dissatisfied) to point 6 (very satisfied) 

when measured pre- and post-requirements modification.  
 We have presented data showing that for our project RIM 
incorporation is time-prohibitive unless the XP requirements 

process is modified, and that customer satisfaction increases with 

said process modifications. However, it is important to note that 

these are subject to this particular product, described in Section 

1.1.  Finally, based on the fact that our project was much larger 

than those suggested for the XP methodology [7], its size being 

in the top 4 percent of all XP projects [16], we believe that our 

successful application of RIM implies that our process 

modifications are appropriately scalable to any standard XP 

project. 
7. COMPARISONS WITH OTHER 
PROCESS MODIFICATIONS 
In [12] the authors provide suggestions for incorporating 
requirements engineering practices into XP, such as: electronic, 

web-based stories, customer GUI in gif or jpg format, 

hierarchical story organization, and searchable stories. The 

authors assert these practices improve the XP requirements 

process because they increase its Sommerville-Sawyer rating 

[12]. Our modifications to the XP requirements process are 

consistent with those of [12] and, in addition, are fo
und to 
facilitate incorporation of RIM.  
The need to alter the XP requirements process to effectively 
manage dependencies in large projects is noted in other reports 

[1,17,18,20], and our modifications provide specific solutions to 

the problems they identify. For another large project, [5], the 

standard XP requirements process is abandoned in favor of 

traditional up-front design. The solution for our large project was 

less extreme, requiring alteration of the standard XP 

requirements process only. 
The traditional XP requirements process was modified to 
accommodate web-based projects [19]. However, those 

modifications are inadequate to aid in incorporating RIM, as they 

focus on assisting the customer in GUI production, which is 

unnecessary in our project, and do not make artifacts amenable to 

electronic searching and retrieval. 
Others report modifying XP process to incorporate electronically 
based requirements artifacts, e.g., [2,3,9,11,21,22]. However, 

these reports focus on the tool support they supply, rather than on 

the process they modify. These tools are insufficient to effect the 

process modification required to meet the challenge of RIM in 

our project. None of the tools incorporate the complex searching 

facilities we required. None store artifacts in a format directly 

and independently accessible by more complex searching and 

retrieval utilities.  
Tools for general requirements management (not XP specific) 
such as [6,8,14] allow some degree of complex searching, but not 

to the level we achieved with our simple Unix solution. These 

tools also impose a language structure on the requirements, 

which was unnecessary in our XP project and incompatible with 

the XP simplicity rule in our case.  
Although the tools mentioned above are inadequate for our 
project because of their limited or non-existent searching and 

retrieval facilities, or their incompatibility with XP, they are also 

of limited applicability because of the following issues. These 

tools impose a fixed organizational structure on the 
requirements. Tool users may not be able to easily adapt the 
structure to their own project. If tool modifications are possible, 

they may be challenging. In our project, incorporating user 

feedback about our requirements management ﬁtoolﬂ was a 

simple task, involving modification of a small program that we 

created and maintained; however, adapting existing tools to 

incorporate our feedback, an obligation in an XP project, would 

have been an additional challenge if an open source tool had 

been used, and impossible with commercial tools. Flexibility, 

and ability to respond to user feedback, is thus limited. 
It is also not clear how to incorporate the given tools into the 
existing revision control and backup fac
ilities of our project. 
With our simple text files, revisions are easily maintained with 

cvs, consistent with the overall project. Backups require no 

special implementation, as they occur as part of the project 

backup process. With the tools above, artifacts are not 

necessarily stored in a form compatible with the revision and 

backup processes in place in our project. Enabling these fac
ilities 
would require additional analysis and implementation, 

inconsistent with the simplicity rule. 
Finally, many of the tools supporting electronic requirements are 
included in an overall XP CASE tool. Adoption of such a CASE 

tool necessitates the modification of more than simply the 

requirements process. In some projects, such as ours, this 

additional complexity and functionality is not required, as no 

feedback suggests that any non-requirements process 

modification would be beneficial. The basic principles of XP, 

directing us to modify only what is necessary now, and to do the 

simplest thing possible, suggest that adoption of a whole CASE 

tool, and its associated complexities, when most of its 

functionality is superfluous, is ill-advised. 
8. CONCLUSIONS 
We present our experiences applying Requirements Integration 

Management to our ongoing, in-production, commercial, 

eXtreme Programming project. We present our rational for 

augmenting the standard XP requirements process to support 

RIM, and outline our adaptations. We use data gathered over 

three years to support our conclusion that these modifications are 

essential to successful RIM incorporation in our XP environment.  
As discussed in the previous sections, we learned the following 
in relation to our large XP project with extensive, complex GUI 

requirements: RIM can be successfully incorporated using the 

principles of XP itself; incorporating RIM is not viable unless the 

standard XP requirements process is modified; complex, 

electronic requirements searching and retrieval are the most 

important accommodations to facilitate RIM; tool use is essential 

in modifying the XP requirements process to accommodate RIM, 

but use of COTS tools may not always be appropriate, and may 

be inconsistent with the principles of XP itself; our simple 

approach to XP requirements process modification is sufficiently 

scalable for standard XP projects; modifying the standard XP 

requirements process to accommodate RIM can result in 

increased customer satisfaction with the requirements process 

itself, and incorporating RIM can increase overall customer 

satisfaction with the product. 
We hope that our experiences can help others in determining if 
their XP project is a candidate for RIM, and in determining if 
 process modifications are appropriate. Although each project and 
team must employ their own modifications in keeping with the 

principles of XP and in accordance with their own environment 

and experience, we believe our adaptations and lessons learned 

may be beneficial, and may serve as a guide, in their endeavors 

to successfully incorporate RIM into XP environments. 
9. REFERENCES 
[1] Amr Elssamadisy, Gregory Schalliol. Recognizing and 
responding to "bad smells" in extreme programming. In 
Proceedings of the 24th International Conference on 

Software Engineering
 (Orlando FL, May 2002), 617-622. 
[2] Auer, K. Autotracker. In 
Refining the practices of XP, 
workshop in ACM SIGPLAN Conference on object-oriented 

programming systems, languages and applications 

(OOPSLA 2002)
 ( Seattle, WA, Nov. 4-8, 
2002). 
[3] Beck, K. 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change
. Addison-Wesley, Boston MA, 2000. 
[4] Beck, K., and M. Fowler 
Planning Extreme Programming
. Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2001. 
[5] Cao, Lan, Mohan, K., Peng Xu, Ramesh, B. How extreme 
does extreme programming have to be? adapting XP 
practices to large-scale projects. In 
Proceedings of the 37th 
Annual Hawaii International Conference on Software 

Engineering
 (January 2004), 83-92. 
[6] DOORS Requirements Management System. 
http://www.telelogic.com/ 
[7] eXtreme Programming Immersion Training. Feb 28 Œ March 
3, 2000. Scotts Valley CA. Object Mentor. 
[8] Feather, M.S., Cornford, S.L, Gibbel, M. Scalable 
mechanisms for requirements interaction management. In 
Proc. 4th Intl. Conference on Requirements Engineering
 (Schaumburg, Illinois June 
2000), 119-129. 
[9] Iterate. http://www.diamond-sky.com/products
/iterate/  
[10] Jeffries, R., A. Anderson, and C. Hendrickson. 
Extreme 
Programming Installed
. Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 
2001. 
[11] Maurer, F., Supporting Distributed Extreme Programming. 
In 
Lecture Notes in Computer Science
, Volume 2418/2002, 
Springer-Verlag Heidelberg, 2003, 13-22. 
[12] Nawrocki, J., Jasinski, M., Walter, B., Wojciechowski, A. 
Extreme programming modified: embrace requirements 
engineering practices. In 
Proceedings IEEE Joint 
International Conference on Requirements Engineering
 (Sept. 2002), 303-310. 
[13] Pinna, S, Mauri, S., Lorrai, P, and Corriga, C. XPSwiki: An 
agile tool supporting the planning game. In 
Lecture Notes in 
Computer Science
, Volume 2675/2003
, Springer-Verlag 
Heidelberg, 2003, 104-113. 
[14] Rational RequisitePro http://www-
306.ibm.com/software/awdtools/reqpro 
[15] Robinson, W.N., Pawlowski, S.D., and Volkov, V.  
Requirements interaction management.  
ACM Computing 
Surveys 35,2
 (June 2003), 132-190.  
[16] Rumpe, B., Astrid Schroeder. Quantitative Survey on 
Extreme Programming Projects. In 
Proceedings of 
International Conference on Extreme Programming and 

Flexible Processes in Software Engineerin,( XP2002)
 (Alghero, Italy, May 2002)  95-100. 
[17] Schalliol, G. Challenges for Analysts on a Large XP Project. 
In 
Extreme Programming Perspectives
. Ed. M. Marchesi, G. 
Succi, D. Wells, L. Williams. Addison-Wesley, Boston, 

MA, 2002. 
[18] Taber, C. and Fowler, M. An iteration in the life of an XP 
project.  
Cutter IT Journal, 13,11
 (2000). 
[19] Wallace, D., I. Raggett, and F. Aufgang. 
Extreme 
Programming for Web Projects
. Addison-Wesley, Boston, 
MA, 2003. 
[20] Watt, R.J., Leigh-Fellows, D. Acceptance test driven 
planning. In 
Proceedings of the 4th Conference on Extreme 
Programming and Agile Methods
 (Calgary, Canada, August 
2004), 43-49. 
[21] Xpcgi. http://xpcgi.sourceforge.net/  

[22] Xplanner. www.xplanner.org/ 

 
   