 contributed articles
SEPTEMBER 2009  
|  VOL. 52  
|  NO. 9  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    143DOI: 10.1145/1562164.1562200BY 
DINESH 
BATRA
FRUSTRATION WITH THE BUREAUCRATIC NATURE O
F the disciplined approach has led to the call for agile development.3 The new approach is de˜ned by the Agile Manifesto (http://agilemanifesto.org/), which 
values individuals and interactions over processes 
and tools, working software over comprehensive 
documentation, customer collaboration over contract 
negotiation, and agility in responding to change 
over following a prescribed plan. Agile development 
does not focus on process improvement; instead 
it focuses on customer satisfaction and employee 
empowerment. This is evident from reading the stated 
values and principles of the Agile Manifesto, which 
include fairly extreme positions such as ﬁwelcome 
changing requirements, even late in developmentﬂ 
and ﬁthe best architectures, requirements, and 
designs emerge from self-organizing teams.ﬂAn interesting issue arising from the call for agile development is its role in distributed development, 
which usually translates to offshore development. A recent study
7 indicates that agile 
practices can reduce temporal, geo-
graphical, and socio-cultural distances 

in distributed development projects. 

The study researched agile develop-

ment between teams located in the U.S. 

and Ireland, and while it reported that 

overall communication was improved, 

it also noted problems related to geo-

graphical, temporal, and even lan-

guage distances. Although there are 

other reported successes of distributed 

agile development,
9 the projects are 
generally small, the team members are 
likely familiar with each other, and the 

participants are largely experts or high 

caliber developers. This raises a research, as well as a 
practical, question: can we extend the 

use of agile practices from small proj
-
ects to medium and large projects that 

involve a signi˜cant outsourcing com
-
ponent? To address this question, we 

must drop constraints such as small size 

projects, and expert developers belong
-
ing to the same company, and examine 

problems arising from geographical, 

temporal, and cultural distances. Ac
-
cordingly, agile practices may need to 

be modi˜ed. 
In this article, the key issues of soft-
ware projects with an outsourced com-

ponent are ˜rst identi˜ed. These issues 

are then used as a background to evalu-

ate how standard agile practices stand 

up when applied to larger projects. This 

evaluation is followed by recommen-

dations for modi˜ed agile practices for 
outsourced software projects.Key 
Issues of Outsourced  Software Projects 
Although outsourcing is not equivalent 

to offshoring a software development 

project, the high availability of skilled 

labor and the economic advantages of 

considerably lower wages have made 

the two equivalent for all practical pur-

poses. Outsourcing seems to have a sta-

ble future;
4,5 several studies (www.acm.
org/globalizationreport/) have shown 

that it improves productivity and does 

not necessarily lead to loss of jobs for 

the local region of the outsourcing cli-
Modi˜ed 
Agile 
Practices for 
Outsourced 
Software 
Projects 144    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  SEPTEMBER 2009  
|  VOL. 52  
|  NO. 9
contributed articles
namic, global, customer-focused, and 
competitive environment. Pure struc-

ture approaches are not suitable for 

dynamic environments.
3 The nature of 
contemporary software development 

requires ˚exible and organic instead of 

overly hierarchical, mechanistic struc-

tures. The Agile Manifesto and its prin-

ciples, therefore, are certainly relevant 

in this environment; however, to date 

agile development has been reported 

only for limited size projects and small 

teams.3 Beck
2 states: ﬁSize clearly mat-
ters. You probably couldn™t run an XP 

project with a hundred programmers. 

Not ˜fty. Nor twenty, probably. Ten is 

de˜nitely doable.ﬂ Agile development 

needs to be examined in the context of 

larger projects. Just as organizations 

cannot keep growing in an entrepre-

neurial mode and need formal coordi-

nation and control, agile development 

may need some degree of formality im-

posed for larger projects.Cultural distance
. Compared to dis-
cipline-based development, agile de-

velopment denotes a signi˜cant shift 

in culture. There are no prescribed 

processes or tools; instead, values and 

principles govern agile development. 

Perhaps, its most important charac-

teristic is the organizational and team 

culture as guided by a manifesto. Orga-

nizational culture is embedded in, and 

affected by, the larger national culture.
8 Agile values, for instance, can ˜t in the 

less bureaucratic, more ˚exible Ameri-

can culture, but not necessarily in the 

more hierarchical and structured cul-

tures found in Asia, Latin America, 

and certain parts of Europe. Work that 
ent. A severe recession has, indeed, re-

cently led to massive layoffs; however, 

these layoffs have primarily resulted 

from a weak economy, not because of 

outsourcing. The primary motive for 

offshoring is to keep costs down, but 

there are several other noteworthy ben-

e˜ts, such as the ability to undertake 

larger projects, to expand markets,
11 and to achieve agility in development 

and operation.
5 However, offshoring 
does not always lead to cost savings or 

more successful projects.When a software development proj
-ect is outsourced, generally three par
-
ties are involved (Figure 1): the cus
-
tomer, the outsourcing client, and the 

outsourcing vendor. Consider a typical 

scenario: a customer in the US needs 

an information system, and a software 

division in the customer™s same com
-
pany or another software development 

company in the U.S. is asked to develop 

the system. The outsourcing client is 

the primary software development unit 

and may outsource a portion of the proj
-
ect to a vendor in another country, for 

example, India. For competitive advan
-
tage, the outsourcing client may want 

to retain core activities such as analysis 

and testing while outsourcing commod
-
ity activities like programming. This 

arrangement provides for growth and 

agility while controlling costs for the 

outsourcing client. Several outsourcing 

vendors may be involved, although an 

analysis involving multiple vendors is 

beyond the scope of the paper. 
The relationship between the out-
sourcing client and the outsourcing 

vendor is likely to be based on a con-

tract.4, 5
 Thus, the outsourcing client 
may not have a strong in˚uence on the 

internal practices of the vendor. Per-

suading the vendor to follow certain 

development practices may be dif˜cult. 

On the other hand, if the outsourcing 

vendor is a partner or collaborator in 

some respect, the client may have suf-

˜cient in˚uence to initiate practices 

considered novel at the vendor site.In adopting agile practices for out
-sourced projects, we need to consider 

factors such as the size and nature of 

the project, the cultural distance be
-
tween the outsourcing client and the 

outsourcing vendor, along with the tem
-
poral, and the geographical distances.Size and nature of the project
. Today™s 
software projects are developed in a dy-
takes place over long distances will of-

ten involve communication engaging 

different national cultures.
10 Business 
alliances and collaborations have been 
found to fail because of such differenc-

es.8 Organization literature has report-
ed interesting ﬁCatch-22ﬂ scenarios 

arising as a result of cultural clashes.Temporal distance
. It is obvious that 
temporal distance is also likely to miti
-
gate communication, which is a critical 

ingredient of agile practice. When it is 9 

am, or time to start work in New York, it 

is around 6:30 pm, or time to leave the 

of˜ce, in New Delhi. Even when collabo
-
rating parties are in similar time zones 

(such as those of the U.S. and Mexico), 

studies have shown that different ori
-
entations to time and schedules may 

lead to misunderstandings.Geographical distance
: This factor 
can greatly affect communication. 

Surely, the widespread use of email and 

other communication means have en-

hanced virtual communication. How-

ever, these mechanisms still largely 

facilitate ﬁbusinessﬂ communication, 

not ﬁorganizationalﬂ communication. 

Business communication includes for-

malized and planned messages, codi-

˜ed in letters, memos, reports, Web 

sites, and advertising campaigns. Or-

ganizational communication includes 

business communication as well as in-

formal, day-to-day interactions among 

organizational members.
8 Agile prac-
tices, as currently prescribed, rely on 

organizational, not business commu-

nication. Although technologies such 

as videoconferencing and online chat 

address the geographical distance 
Figure 1: Parties and 
Dynamics in Outsourced Software 
Development
Contracts 
project and meets  requirementsProvides  
software product
Outsources routine  activities (e.g.  programming)
Delivers  
working codeCustomer(Ex: US)Outsourcing Client(Ex: US)May retain core project activities such as  requirements, analysis, design, 
testing, and integration
Outsourcing Vendor
(Ex: India) contributed articles
SEPTEMBER 2009  
|  VOL. 52  
|  NO. 9  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    145problem, it is questionable if the re-
sulting engagement satis˜es the level 

expected in agile development.Here, we explained the context for 
the various factors involved in evaluat-

ing agile practices in distributed set-

tings. This contextual knowledge can 

be employed to scrutinize the agile 

values and principles in order to assess 

which ones hold up for larger projects 

in a distributed environment.Interaction of 
Agile Values with 
Outsourced Development

The Agile Manifesto lists four fun-

damental values that should govern 

software development. Table 1 evalu-

ates these values as applied in an out-

sourced project. Each value is quali-

˜ed by the advantages it provides to 

outsourced development, and how the 

value may be mitigated in outsourced 

development.Individuals and interactions vs. pro-
cesses and tools
. In co-located settings, 

agile practices improve organizational 

communication by facilitating infor-

mal interactions. In distributed devel-

opment, the informal communication 

process is considerably broken down. 

For example, the assumption of tacit 

knowledge is challenged, and the pair 

programming practice is likely to be 

drastically affected. This value may not 

be welcome however, in regions where 

the national culture is characterized by 

high power distance, where the values 

tend toward hierarchy and structure.Working software vs. comprehensive 
documentation. The basic premise of 

outsourcing is that it allows a project 
to be done faster and cheaper. Thus, 

the goal of providing working software 

is likely to be achieved more quickly. 

However, documentation, too, is im-

portant in an outsourced project, giv-

en the realities and constraints of any 

agency agreement. As the project be-

comes bigger, one cannot rely on tacit 

knowledge alone. Customer collaboration vs. contract 
negotiation. Transactional cost theory 

favors contractual agreements for out
-
sourcing non-core activities of software 

development, especially given the low 

monitoring costs in today™s global en
-
vironment. Although some companies 

open their own of˜ces at offshore sites 

and do not need a contract, the remote 

unit may not be large enough to pro
-
vide the level of support needed given 

that the software activities that are typi-
cally outsourced (such as coding) need 

a large amount of personnel resources. 
Responding to change vs. following a 
plan. The client-vendor contract can-

not be renegotiated on an ad-hoc basis. 

If the customer proposes changes, es-

pecially at the later stages of a project, 

these changes will have to be passed on 

to the vendor. The vendor™s response 

will depend on various factors such 

as the relationship with the outsourc-

ing client, to what extent the agile cul-

ture is prevalent, the costs involved in 

responding to the changes and how 

these are recovered, and how much fu-

ture business is expected. Whether one 

applies the agency theory, or just plain 

common sense here, it seems unlikely 

the vendor will absorb the costs arising 

from signi˜cant changes. Interaction of 
Agile Principles  
with Outsourced Development

The Agile Manifesto lists 12 principles 

that should govern software develop-

ment. The advantages, and the prob-

lems, found in subscribing to each 

principle in an outsourcing environ-

ment are listed in Table 2.
Outsourced development is general-
ly governed by client-vendor contracts. 

Since organizational culture cannot be 

captured in a contract, a fundamental 

problem arises when employing some 

agile principles. For example, a con-

tract cannot ﬁwelcome changing re-

quirementsﬂ however, it can spell out 

the ˜nancial implications of the change 

requirements. Face-to-face commu-

nication is ruled out with outsourced 

development because of geographical 

distances; if high quality virtual meet-

ings are a requirement, then someone 

needs to pay for installing additional 

equipment and providing the band 

width. The practice of pair program-

ming may be dif˜cult to include in a 

contract. Pair programming is practi-

cally impossible between program-

mers at the client and the vendor end. 

The 40-hour week is a mirage in vendor 

companies; anecdotal evidence sug-

gests that most developers in countries 

like India end up working 50-60 hours 

per week, which can lead to fatigue and 

burnout. Further, high turnover is a 

given, as developers continually scout 

for better pay and opportunities in a 

growing sector of the economy. 
Modi˜ed Agile Practices  
for Outsourced Projects
The previous analysis indicates the use 

of agile practices in outsourced soft-

ware projects is not a simple, straight-

forward issue. Nevertheless, agility is 

paramount in today™s fast-paced, dy-

namic, and global environment, and 

the Agile Manifesto is a good starting 

point to analyze software practices. 

Successful organizations today are cus-

tomer- and employee-focused, less hi-

erarchical and more horizontal, more 

integrated with vendors,
1 responsive to 
change, and willing to adapt. Yet, agile values and principles can 
be extreme and incongruous. In 1946, 

Herbert Simon
12 challenged the tenets 
of classical organizational theory pro
-
posed by Fayol, Gulick, and others by 

pointing out the inherent contradic
-Table 1. Support for 
Current Agile Values in 
Outsourcing EnvironmentAgile Manifesto  Values
Advantages in an 
Outsourcing EnvironmentProblems in an  
Outsourcing EnvironmentIndividuals and interactions 

vs. processes and tools. There is some evidence 
that organizational 
communication may 
improve.
Various distances may impede communication and interactions.
Both outsourcing and outsourced parties are 
likely to employ business (formal), instead 

of organizational (formal and informal), 
communication.Likely to con˜ict with the cultural values of 
the vendor party.
Working software 

vs. comprehensive 

documentation.Software can be developed 

more quickly.
Documentation is essential for avoiding 

ambiguities arising because of lack of tacit 
knowledge.Customer collaboration vs. 

contract negotiation.
The normal outsourcing practice is through 

contract negotiation.
Responding to change vs. 
following a plan.More resources may be 
available to handle changes.Vendor may not welcome changes unless there is additional compensation.Contract between client and vendor parties 
may not be easily renegotiated.
 146    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  SEPTEMBER 2009  
|  VOL. 52  
|  NO. 9
contributed articles
Certainly, ﬁdisruptive technologiesﬂ 
may eventually overcome such bar-

riers,6 but, as an example, high qual-
ity videoconferencing on workstations 

has not yet fully matured.Modi˜ed Agile Practices
. The principle, 
ﬁwelcome changing requirements, even 

late in developmentﬂ is acceptable if the 

outsourcing client is ready to absorb the 

increased costs, and not try to pass it on 

to the vendor. Even then, the stipulation, 

ﬁeven late in development,ﬂ needs to be 

eliminated. Late stage changes are not 

feasible in large projects, which need a 

higher degree of accountability. The prin
-
ciple gives the customer 
carte blanche
 without the ˜nancial obligations.The principle, ﬁbusiness people and 
developers must work together daily 

throughout the project,ﬂ is generally in
-
terpreted as the customer being located 
tions. The recently proposed Agile Man
-
ifesto has not been challenged so far, 

although some inconsistencies are evi
-
dent. For example, if a software division 

decides to accept changes proposed 

late in the project, then it will have to 

ask the employees to work harder than 

the espoused 40-hour week. If the em
-
ployees continue to work at the routine 

pace, then the project will get delayed, 

and this may not be acceptable to the 

customer. Similarly, if the division de
-
mands excellence from its employees, 

it will have to decide what to do with its 

below average employees, which goes 

against the agile principle that individ
-
uals are valued more than processes.When the agile practices are sub
-jected to the realities of outsourced de
-
velopment, the contradictions are es
-
pecially evident, as suggested in Tables 

1 and 2 in the previous section. Some 

of the values and principles are highly 

feasible, a few are infeasible, and the 

remainder need to be adjusted. Here, 

we consider each of these three catego
-
ries and makes recommendations in 

the outsourcing context. Since the prin
-
ciples capture the essence of the values, 

Table 2 is used to guide this discussion.
Feasible Agile Practices
. The four 
principles termed as feasible in Table 

2 are clearly viable. Infeasible Agile Practices
. The princi-
ples, ﬁcontinuous attention to technical 

excellence and good design enhances 

agilityﬂ and ﬁbuild projects around mo-

tivated individualsﬂ are somewhat con-

fusing at the outset. Software projects 

certainly need excellent design and 

technology skills, but they also need ex-

cellent requirements gathering, analy-

sis, communication, team work, and 

other skills. Ideally, one would build 

projects around motivated individuals, 

but the ﬁmotivatedﬂ and ﬁexcellentﬂ 

de˜nitions are subjective and can be 

misinterpreted in organizations. For 

example, these de˜nitions can be used 

to ˜re the bottom 10% of the personnel 

each year. A better practice would be to 

build motivated and capable individu-

als by providing training and develop-

ment programs.In an outsourced project, the client 
cannot control personnel excellence at 

the vendor end, unless the vendor has 

been acquired by the client. The client 

would obviously examine the capabili-

ties and references of the vendor. If the 
project is awarded to a vendor with an 

established record of technical excel-

lence, then the client need not micro-

manage the vendor. Eventually, the 

collaboration may lead to permeable 

structures and trusting relationships
1 and the vendor may be more open to 

instituting agile practices. If the client is developing its own 
facility in an offshored area, there is 

some leeway in the selection of the top 

tier personnel. However, large scale 

hiring will be dif˜cult with such an ex-

acting constraint.The principle, ﬁthe most ef˜cient 
and effective method of conveying in-

formation to and within a development 

team is face-to-face conversationﬂ when 

referring to communication between 

the client and the vendor in outsourced 

development is practically impossible. 
Table 2. Evaluation of Current Agile Principles in Outsourcing EnvironmentAgile Manifesto  PrincipleAdvantages in an 
Outsourcing EnvironmentProblems in an  
Outsourcing EnvironmentOur highest priority is to satisfy the 

customer through early and continuous 

delivery of valuable software.
Feasible because more 

resources are available.Welcome changing requirements, even 

late in development. Agile processes 

harness change for the customer™s 

competitive advantage.
The lowering of costs 
because of outsourcing may 
provide some ˜exibility in 

managing changes.Vendor may not accept late changes.  Vendor may not agree to ˚xed price contract.
Deliver working software frequently, 

from a couple of weeks to a couple of 
months, with a preference to the shorter 

timescale.Feasible because more 

resources are available.Business people and developers must 

work together daily throughout the 

project.Temporal and geographic 
distances may make it more 
dif˚cult to work with the 
vendor.
Build projects around motivated 
individuals. Give them the environment 

and support they need, and trust them to 

get the job done.Dif˚cult to control motivation 
at the vendor™s site.
Approximately 49.99% of 
designers are below average.
The most ef˚cient and effective method 

of conveying information to, and within, 

a development team is face-to-face 

conversation.
Practically impossible 

between the outsourcing 

client and vendor.
Working software is the primary measure 

of progress. Feasible.
Agile processes promote sustainable 
development. 
The sponsors, developers, 

and users should be able to maintain a 
constant pace inde˚nitely.
Somewhat feasible.Because of temporal 

distance, fatigue is inevitable 
if practices like pair 

programming are instituted.
Continuous attention to technical 
excellence and good design enhances 
agility.
Approximately 49.99% of 

designers are below average.
Simplicity Œ the art of maximizing the 

amount of work not done Œ is essential.Feasible.
The best architectures, requirements, 
and designs emerge from self-organizing 
teams.Cultural disparities between 

the outsourcing client and 
vendor may inhibit self-

organization.At regular intervals, the team re˜ects on 

how to become more effective, then tunes 

and adjusts its behavior accordingly.
Organizational culture may 
hamper this practice.
 contributed articles
SEPTEMBER 2009  
|  VOL. 52  
|  NO. 9  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    147at the developer™s premises. This takes 
a broader meaning when three parties Œ 

customer, outsourcing client, and out
-
sourcing vendor - are involved. If agile 

practices are applied literally, one may 

come up with a communication con
-
˜guration as shown in Figure 2. 
The recommended structure shown 
in Figure 3 is an altered con˜guration 

that maintains reasonable communi-

cation and feedback, but reduces the 

communication links required. The 

full lines indicate regular and de˜ned 

communication links, while the dotted 

lines indicate informal and as-needed 

links. The customer representative is 

physically located at the outsourcing 

client in both con˜gurations. The vendor™s team would likely re-
semble a programming team under a 

group leader, although there may also 

be design and other personnel. To fa-

cilitate communication while main-

taining control, the outsourcing client 

needs to send an ambassador to the 

vendor™s site. Typically, the ambassa-

dor would be someone who has spent 

a reasonable period of his or her life 

in the vendor country. The ambassa-

dor should be in daily communication 

with the programming leader, pro-
grammers, and designers at the vendor 

end. Similarly, there must be a primary 

contact on the outsourcing client side. 

This role is ˜lled by the team coordi-

nator or project leader, who forms the 

bridge between the customer and the 

outsourcing vendor.
The Agile Manifesto also puts stress 
on working software, so there is the 

need for an integration group. This 

group, consisting mainly of program-

mers, continually test, evaluate, and 

integrate software so that the program-

ming group at the vendor™s end gets 

daily feedback. The customer, the ambassador, the 
coordinator, the programming group 

leader, and some members from the 

client™s design team, and integration 

team should form an 
agile team
. The ag
-ile team™s purpose is to communicate 

on a daily basis through state-of-the-art 

videoconferencing in order to continu
-
ally evaluate and monitor the project. 

This group can be the hub for daily 

planning, coordinating, communicat
-
ing, monitoring, and control. However, 

this should not be the only network of 

communication, and informal commu
-
nication should be encouraged among 

individuals, and between teams.In light of the above discussion, the 
principle, ﬁthe best architectures, re-
quirements, and designs emerge from 

self-organizing teams,ﬂ may need to be 

modi˜ed. Although the notion of a self-

organizing team is sound, there is the 

need to incorporate accountability into 

agile development, especially if the size 

of the project is medium or large. This 

is done through the roles like the ones 

described in Figure 3. Large projects 

will need some degree of hierarchical 

structure to ensure accountability. 
The principle, ﬁat regular intervals, 
the team re˚ects on how to become 

more effective, then tunes and adjusts 

its behavior accordingly,ﬂ requires an 

adaptive mindset, and given the cultur
-
al distances, may not be possible at the 

vendor end. The notion of self-organiz
-
ing teams and adjusting behavior may 

be too much for organizational cultures 

built on high power distance (such as 

accepting power inequality) and high 

uncertainty avoidance. Organizational 

learning and change can take time.Finally, the principle, ﬁagile process-
es promote sustainable development; 

the sponsors, developers, and users 

should be able to maintain a constant 

pace inde˜nitely,ﬂ can be controlled at 

the client™s end only. Unless the vendor 

company is owned by the client, the is-

sue of constant pace should be left to 

the former. Given the agile practice of 

ﬁwelcoming changing requirements, 

even late in development,ﬂ this prac-

tice is easier said than done.ConclusionIt is evident that agile practices will 

need to be modi˜ed for outsourced 

software projects that tend to be typi-

cally of medium or large size. To eval-

uate the claims made in the paper, 

researchers need to conduct empiri-

cal research based on case studies, 

surveys, and action research. Such re-

search could lead to a hybrid approach 

that harmonizes agility and discipline, 

and adapts it based on the context and 

the environment. References 1. Ashkenas, R. N. The boundaryless organization: 

Breaking the chains of organizational structure (2nd Ed.). Jossey-Bass, 2002. San Francisco, CA.
 2. Beck, K. Extreme programming explained: 
Embrace 

change (2nd Ed.). Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 2004.
 3. Boehm, B. W., and Turner, R. 
Balancing agility and 

discipline: A guide for the perplexed. Addison-Wesley, 

Boston, 2003.Figure 2.Figure 3. 148    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  SEPTEMBER 2009  
|  VOL. 52  
|  NO. 9
contributed articles
 4. Brown, D., and Wilson, S. 
The black book of outsourcing: How to manage the changes, challenges, 
and opportunities
. John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, N.J., 

2005. 5. Cohen, L. and Young, A. 
Multisourcing: Moving beyond 

outsourcing to achieve growth and agility
. Harvard 

Business School Press, Boston, 2006. 6. Hammer, M. and Champy, J. 
Reengineering the 
Corporation: A manifesto for Business Revolution
. 
Harper Business, New York, 1993.
 7.
 Holmstrom, H., Fitzgerald, B., Ågerfalk, P. J., and 

Conchúir, E. O. Agile practices reduce distance in 

global software development. 
Information Systems 

Management, 23, 3, (2006), 7-18.
 8. Keyton, J. 
Communication & organizational culture: 
A key to understanding work experiences. Sage 
Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, 2005. 9. Kircher, M., Jain, P., Corsaro, A., and Levine, D. 

Distributed extreme programming. 
XP2001 
Conference, Sardinia, Italy, 2001.
 10. Olson, J. S., and Olson, G. M. Culture surprises in 

remote software development teams. 
ACM Queue 1
, 
9, (2003), 52-59.
 11. Sahay, S. Global software alliances: The challenge of 

standardization. Scandinavian Journal of Information 
Systems
, 15, (2003), 3-21.
 12. Simon, H.A. The proverbs of administration 
Public 
Administration Review 6
, 1, Winter 1946, 53-67.
Dinesh Batra
 (Dinesh.Batra@business.˜u.edu) is a Knight-

Ridder Research Professor in the College of Business 
Administration at the Florida International University. He 

is a co-author of the textbook Object-Oriented Systems 

Analysis and Design
, Pearson Prentice-Hall.
© 2009 ACM
 0001-0782/09/0900 $10.00
