 Communications of the Association for Information Systems˛,.0ˇˇˆ˙ˇ˘˜˛ˇˇ˙ˆ˘ˇ//1,)),!!&0&,+,.(0%8/")˚&/+",./6&˚0".&,1$%,1.+˚) 0.&˜.˚."ˇ"  "-0",**1+& ˚0&,+//, &˚0+#,.*˚04/0"*10%,.&5"!*&+&/0.˚0 0.&˜.˚."ˇ*˚0)"˚/,+0˚ 0")&˜.˚./+",.$˙" ,**"+!"&0˚0&,+"+!.˚+&ˇ"//,+"˚.+"./0.&˜10"$&,73˚..,'"˚/˚/"+˚)4/&˘,).02˚&)˚˜0%8/")˚&/+",.,/   Volume 23 
Article 15 
Lessons Learned from Distributed Ag
ile Software Projects: A Case-Based 
Analysis 
Indranil Bose 
 School of Business 
The University of Hong Kong 
Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong 
bose@business.hku.hk 
 Agile software development in a distributed setting is chall
enging. The teams involved in t
he process face difficulties 
in communication, personnel selection, work culture,
 and knowledge management. The shortcomings associated 
with working in different time zones and the inabilities to
 develop trusting relationshi
ps between developers are well 
known. Companies often take recourse to agile softw
are development methods in a distributed environment in 
search of reduced cost, higher efficienc
y, increased flexibility, and good customization. However, it is not clear 
whether agile methods can be successfully followed and thei
r benefits realized in a distributed setting. This paper 
revisits and synthesizes the lessons learnt from twel
ve case studies detailing successful implementation of 
distributed agile software projects. The cases are analyzed fr
om the perspective of the agile manifesto to determine 
how closely they follow its values and principles and to what extent they realize the benefits of the agile 
methodology. The cases lead to the discovery of disparate 
and innovative solutions adopted by different companies 
for overcoming the challenges of distributed agile so
ftware development. Some so
lutions are 
commonplace and others are unique and their combination in the context of 
the challenges is enlightening. The list of solutions can 
suitably guide companies that plan to adopt the agile
 methodology in distributed software development 
environments in future.  

 Keywords: 
agile methods, case analysis, case studies,
 distributed development software development 
 Volume 23, Article 
34, pp.
 619-632, December
 2008    Lessons Learned from Distributed Agile
 Software Projects: A Case-Based 
Analysis 
620 Volume 23
 Article 15 
I. INTRODUCTION Distributed software development has been around for some
 decades. Many large organizations have taken 
advantage of it for projects that invo
lve cooperation and collaboration between t
eams located at different locations. 
In distributed software development the bulk of the work is
 often offshored to developing countries with a small team 
of consultants working onshore with the clients.
 Other than low cost, the main drivers for distributed software 
development are flexibility and increased pr
oductivity. The lure of distributed 
software development arose from the 
availability of talented knowledge workers in multiple loca
tions around the globe, who could develop software of high 
quality at lower cost. Distributing the work also mean
t that developmental work 
could be done around the clock 
taking advantage of the difference in the time zones. 
But managing a distributed software development team is a 
great challenge. This is due to complexities resulting from
 asynchrony of communication, differences in work culture, 
and differences in organizational practices. Companie
s that look for economic methods for developing quality 
software sometimes combine distributed development with agile methods for software development. The hope is 

that such a combination will allow companies to leverage 
the advantages of agile methods and increase the gains 
achieved in distributed software development. However, in
corporating agile methodologies in a distributed setting 
makes the software development process 
even more challenging. In this paper, we analyze and synthesize twelve 
case studies on successful im
plementation of distributed agile software pr
ojects that address the key challenges 
encountered in such projects. The solution strategies prop
osed are listed in the context of six commonly occurring 
problems in such projects and studied from the perspective 
of the values and principles of the agile manifesto. 
II. AGILE METHODS OF SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 
The agile method of software development aims to develop so
ftware quickly, economically, and efficiently. From the 
late ‚90s, the agile methods have become popular because 
they can take care of volatile customer requirements, 
establish close interaction between customers and developers, and deliver software within shorter time periods and 
stringent budget constraints. Various agile software 
development methods such as extreme programming (XP), 
feature-driven development, crystal clear method, and 
SCRUM, etc., have become popular in recent times 
[Abrahamsson et al. 2003]. In a traditional plan driven model software is developed in a sequential mannerŠ
requirements are gathered from clients, different roles are as
signed to developers for coding and control, and finally 
software is tested and integrated with existing system
s [Huo et al. 2004]. In doing so, a large amount of 
documentation is produced that contai
ns knowledge about developmental processes.  Interactions between clients 
and members of the development team ar
e very little, and the focus is on achieving efficiency by improving the 
repeatable processes.  

 Agile methods aim to overcome the limitations of the plan
 driven approaches by consi
dering that requirements for 
building software are not static but dynamic. Hence, inst
ead of development taking place in the form of highly 
defined processes, it takes the form 
of ﬁminimally defined and adaptiveﬂ pr
ocesses in agile methods [Bowen and 
Maurer 2002]. They also aim to involve customers in t
he software design from the very beginning for providing 
feedback about the product and the process. Since the customers know how the software is shaping up from the 

beginning, they have the opportunity to delay decisions on ce
rtain items till they become absolutely necessary. This 
helps reduce costly overruns at the end and helps the c
ode remain up to date with the requirements. Also, as the 
requirements keep changing, there is less importance attach
ed to keeping proper and lengthy documentation. Agile 
methods use the repetitive proc
ess of short iterations consisting of build, then consult with customers on site, and 
then build some more to avoid mismatch between the de
liverable and the customers™ expectations. Some experts 
have compared this style of software development to ﬁartful 
makingﬂ because of the lack of structure in the entire 
process [Austin and Lee 2003].  
 
Agile methods also tend to build software with teams of sm
aller size, and there is frequent face-to-face interaction 
between team members. A commonly used term in agile development is 
pair programming
, where two expert 
programmers work on the same piece of code to improv
e its quality. While the benefit of pair programming is 
constant inspection of code quality, 
it can only succeed when there is understanding between programmers in terms 
of accepting criticisms, sugge
stions, and ability to follow each other™s in
structions. That is why some authors have 
called the agile methods more people driven and less process 
driven [Nerur et al. 2005]. Another important feature 
of the agile methods is refactoring where the programmer
s improve the internal stru
cture of the code without 
changing its outward appearance. The impact of these chan
ges is usually small but they go a long way in improving 
software quality. Figure 1 shows the different steps fo
llowed in the agile method of software development.  
   Volume 23
Article 15 
621 
     
   
 
   
    Figure 1. Different Steps in the Agile Method of Software Development 
In terms of testing and integration, the agile approach is ve
ry different from the plan driven approach [Talby et al. 
2006]. The agile method often follows a test-driven approach. Once
 a portion of the code is written, it is released as 
an early version to the customer, integrated with the custom
er™s existing system, and tested to identify the avenues 
for improvement. This is known as 
continuous integration,
 and it makes the process of searching for bugs cheap and 
efficient. Testing in agile methods usually occurs much 
earlier in the developmental life cycle. Early customer 
feedback is a key feature that enables modification of re
quirements from time to time and provides a form of 
acceptance testing. The key features
 of the agile methods of software 
development and the benefits of these 
features are listed in Table 1. 
Table 1. Key Features of Agile Methods and Their Benefits 
Features Benefits 
Continuous requirements gathering Customers delay decisions
 about crucial items; software remains flexible 
Frequent face-to-face interaction Overcomes misunderstandings; builds trust among team members 
Pair programming Easier teamwork; better ownership of code 
Refactoring Gradual improvement of 
code without creating a shock wave 
Continuous release and integration Detection and fixi
ng of bugs earlier on in the project; higher software 
quality  Early expert customer feedback Avoidance of costly 
overhauls in the end; lower cost of development 
Minimum documentation Smaller development
 time; lower cost of documentation 
III. AGILE METHODS OF DISTRIBUTED SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 
Agile methods are well suited when customers and develo
pers are collocated and there is frequent interaction 
between the two groups [Boehm and Turner 2005]. However,
 there is increasing evidence from practice that 
indicates that agile methods are being adopted by small as 
well as large organizations. For example, organizations 
like ABB, Daimler Chrysler, Motorola, and Nokia have all 
adopted and recorded t
heir positive expe
riences in using 
agile methods [Lindvall et al. 2004]. Among offshore or
ganizations embracing the agile methods Cognizant 
Technology Solutions and ITC Infotech India are the most prominent. Vendors like ThoughtWorks and Valtech have 

even paved the way for successful distributed agile devel
opment [Moore and Barnett 2004]. However, there is no 
denying that incorporating agile methods in distributed 
software development requires considerable effort. This 
section describes the various challenges involved in this adoption and some generic considerations and possible 

strategies for addressing these challenges. The solution st
rategies suggested are not exhaustive by any means. In 
Dynamic requirements specification 
Iteration planning Iteration planning 
Unit testing Continuous 
integration 
Pair programming 
Pair programming 
Small release Small release Continuous 
integration 
Final release 
Iteration 1 Iteration 2 Iteration 
n – Unit testing    622 Volume 23
 Article 15 
the following section, 12 case studies are explored in more 
details to find out what specific solution strategies are 
actually adopted by those companies to overcome the challenges.  
Communication Developers need to communicate frequently and teams located 
across time zones make this difficult. There is also 
the need to have effective communication with active cust
omers to get their feedback about the quality of the 
product in progress and the changing requirements of
 the project. Onshore and offshore teams often use 
unstructured wikis to communicate asynchronously about t
he status of the project [Fowler 2004; Sepulveda 2003].
 Personnel Selection  Programmers who are used to the planned approach and adept
 at following orders of the project managers are not a 
good choice for the agile team. Since some agile methods pr
efer pair programming it is essential to find coding 
partners who have similar mindset. Also, as requirements k
eep changing in an agile project it becomes necessary to 
have a cross-functional team consisting of analysts, deve
lopers, testers, and project managers. The members also 
need to be able to communicate with customers and understand their needs. 
 Work Culture  
Offshore teams often use plan driven development. It takes 
time and patience to change this culture. There is a 
need to educate developers in offshore teams about agile
 methods through cross-team workshops and informal 
meetings [Fowler 2004; Sepulveda 2003]. Also, in order to
 inculcate independent thinking and action, the traditional 
incentive and rewarding schemes need to be modified. On
shore team members must be aware of prevalent work 
practices and customs of offshore locations (e.g., absences
 during religious festivals) [Nisar and Hameed 2004].
 Different Time Zones 
Agile methods emphasize frequent face-to-face meetings 
that are often arranged at a short notice. This is 
impossible for distributed teams as the hour
s of work are different. To overcome this it is important to instill a good 
build discipline among developers so that the finished build of the software at the end of the day can be downloaded 

and tested by the onshore team and even by participat
ing customers [Fowler 2004; Nisar and Hameed 2004]. When 
meetings are arranged it is imperat
ive that both teams are allowed to 
set their preferred meeting times. 
 Trust Trust is extremely difficult to achieve in a distribut
ed setting [Sepulveda 2003]. Frequent meetings have to be 
substituted by seeding (when initial requirements are convey
ed) and maintenance visits (status checks) by members 
of the onshore team and even by customers,
 if possible. These visits must be sh
ort and informal so that they are not 
looked upon as policing visits. Also, project managers need to
 act more like facilitators than commanders-in-chief to 
encourage independent thinking amon
g offshore team members.  
Knowledge Management  
Agile methods™ emphasis on ﬁjust enoughﬂ document
ation may not work for distributed environments where 
developer turnover is high [Bowen an
d Maurer 2002]. If tacit knowledge of programmers is not documented, it won™t 
be reused. Wikis, issue tracking tools, and remote sc
reen capture methods may be used for documentation and 
documentation templates must be reviewed from time to 
time to make sure they are working appropriately. Code 
repositories are also an essential part of the knowledge management effort [Rees 2004].
 IV. CASE ANALYSIS 
Due to challenges facing the deployment of distributed agile
 software development, it is not surprising that only few 
case studies exist that discuss the expe
riences faced by the onshore and the offshore teams. In order to learn from 
the experience of others, a s
earch was conducted for case studies that 
followed the definition proposed by Yin: ﬁA 
case study is an empirical i
nquiry that investigates a contemporary phenom
enon within its real-life contextﬂ [Yin 
2002]. This resulted in 12 case studies that claimed to be 
successful in agile software development in a distributed 
setting. These cases are published as either journal or 
conference papers. They st
udy the challenges faced in 
implementation of software projects in the context of di
stributed agile development. Ot
her case studies documented 
in this area are not included because they either lack deta
ils or do not dwell on innovative solution strategies. Table 
2 provides a list of the software companies that undertook 
distributed agile software projects with offshore teams 
located in other countries. It is seen that among the 12 ca
ses, 10 onshore companies were located in the U.S. and 
seven offshore companies were located in India. A variet
y of software projects became candidates for distributed 
agile development and no patterns were seen. XP and SCRUM were the agile methodology of choice for most 
cases.  
   Volume 23
Article 15 
623 
Table 2: List of Examples of Su
ccessful Distributed Agile Projects 
No. Onshore 
Location 
OffshoreLocation 
Client Location 
Software 
Project 
Team Size 
Agile 
Method Reference 
1 Extol International, 
USA Elegance 
Technologies, 
India 
UCCnet, 
USA Domain-
specific front-end for Extol 
Business Integrator 
2-3 onshore 
and 5-10 
offshore 
SCRUM and FDD 
[Kussmaul et al. 
2004] 
2 Iona Technologies, 
USA Iona Technologies, 
Dublin, Ireland 
Not specified Application 
Server Platform and Web Services 
Integration 
Platform 130 engineers 
XP [Poole 2004] 
3 Valtech, USA Valtech, India Not spec
ified Not specified Not specified SCRUM 
and XP 
[Danait 2005] 
4 Telco, USA India USA Unspecified 
pilot projects 
16 Not 
specified 
[Balasubramaniam et 
al. 2006] 
5 Manco, USA India USA Extend 
functionality of 
complex 
supply chain 
system 
14 Not 
specified 
[Balasubramaniam et 
al. 2006] 
6 Consult, USA India USA CRM system 15 SCRUM 
like process 
[Balasubramaniam et 
al. 2006] 
7 Aginity LLC, 
USA Ukraine Not specified Business 
intelligence 
application 
3 groups Not 
specified 
[Armour 2007] 
8 BNP Paribas, 
France 
India Not specified Security 
services 
100 with 50 
onshore and 
50 offshore members 
Not specified 
[Massol 2004] 
9 Finnish 
company, 
Finland 
Not specified Several 
customers 
Not specified Teams of 6 
developers 
each 
SCRUM [Paasivaara and 
Lassenius 2006] 
10 WDSGlobal, UK USA and 
Singapore 
Not specified Refinement of 
mobile 
configuration 
platform 
Not specified XP [Yap 2005] 
11 CEInformant, 
USA India USA J2EE 
compliant 
solution 
software for 
insurance 
business 
2 offshore teams of 6-8 members each 
SCRUM [Computer 
Enterprises 2005] 
12 SirsiDynix, USA Starsoft, Uk
raine Not specified Integrated 
library system 
36 onshore 
and 20 
offshore members 
SCRUM [Sutherland et al. 
2007] 
 The cases were analyzed to discover what steps were 
taken by the respective companies to overcome the six 
challenges detailed in the earlier section. Although most 
cases were sufficiently detailed, they did not provide 
information about innovative solutions for overcoming each of
 the challenges. Table 3 lists the various solutions that 
served these companies well and contribut
ed to the success of the projects. 
Table 3: Solutions Adopted by Companies for Facing Challenges in Distributed Agile Development 
 No. Company Communication 
Personnel  Selection 
Work  
Culture 
Different  
Time Zones 
Trust 
Knowledge 
Management 
1 Extol International 
Status e-mail to mailing list 
 Synchronous 

(Web conferencing)  and asynchronous 
2-3 onshore 
staff and 5-10 offshore staff 
 
One consultant spent several days onsite 
Avoid direct questions that are 
looked upon as challenge to 
authority 
 Tolerant to 15-30 minute meetings via IM  Web 
conferencing and phone meeting times Exchange of staff 
members between 
two locations 
 
Onshore team 
more involved in 
design and CVS repository to 
store all requirements, 
designs, source code, and related    624 Volume 23
 Article 15 
(email) 
communication offshore team accustomed to the SW-CMM model 
 rotated for 
convenience  
Round the clock cycles by 
sending 
requirements to offshore team at end of day 
offshore team in implementation  
Frequent delivery 
of software 
documents  Small number 
of documents 2 IONA Technologies Unstructured Wiki 
pages used to 
present distributed story 
board 

 
Twice weekly 
meetings replaced daily standups 

 Conference call during product 

delivery  
Disparate group of 
engineers located across the globe 
Rotate one or two 
developers across 
sites 
 Attention paid to 
differences in 
perception of authority and 
body language 
Daily 
conference 
calls to identify 
who needs to 
pair with whom 

 
Automated nightly build, 
integration, and 
testing Access to common 
build environment 
 Rotation of engineers 

 
Dissenting members allowed 
to compete or 
asked to leave or compromise sought Common source base 
and multi-site control system 
used 3 Valtech India Twikis used 
 IM used between 
developers in 
overlapping time zones New team 
member introduced by 
Web 
conference 
Cross-functional kickoff meetings  Flat organizational 

structure 
 Role swapping 

allowed 
 Coffee and ice-
cream socials to 
celebrate milestones Web conferencing frequently used 
 
Web kickoff meetings recorded and 

played back 
 Pair 
programming 
conducted through Web 
conferencing  Programmers 

did not leave 
office till last 
code checked did not break 
build Pair programming 
used for initiation of new members with 
experienced 

members acting as 
mentors 
 
Chocolates distributed when someone broke 
build  Cross-location 

visits implemented 
Web conferencing used for virtual white 

boarding 
 Burn-down 

charts used  Bugzilla bug 
repository 
used  
Twiki used as 
a central repository 
4 Telco Informal 
communication took place through formal 

channels  Short morning 
meetings held for 
status tracking, ideas and 
comments generation 
 
SMS and online chats used for communication 
 Videoconferencing used by senior 

managers every 
week for handling 
critical issues 
Project leads played a major 
role in co-
ordination 

 A cohesive team was built 

using members who had prior 
experience of 

working with 
each other 
No particular steps taken Meetings took place at early 
mornings for 
onshore team 
and late evenings for offshore team 
Customer delegates spent significant amount 
of time with 

developers  Senior members of 

management visited developer sites to evaluate 
progress of project  
Short use cases and user stories took the place 
of detailed use cases 
 
A database tracked project status, 
notified issues, and handled 
priorities 5 Manco Project lead 
responsible for facilitating 
communication and reducing miscommunicatio

n   Videoconferencin
g used by senior 
managers every 
Project leads played a major 
role in co-

ordination 
No particular steps taken Meetings took place early 
mornings for 

onshore team and late evenings for 
offshore team 
Frequent and long 
visits to customer 
sites by one or 

more developers 
 Senior members of 

management visited developer sites to evaluate 
progress of project 
Short use cases and user stories 
took the place of detailed use cases 

 A database tracked 
project status, notified    Volume 23
Article 15 
625 
week for handling 
critical issues 
issues, and handled priorities 6 Consult Project leads on 
call via Blackberry Project leads played a major 

role in co-
ordination 
 
A high performance 
team was built 

using members who had prior 
experience of 

working with 

each other 
No particular steps taken Meetings took place early 

mornings for 
onshore team and late 
evenings for offshore team 
A group of analysts 
and developers 
always present at 
the customer site  
Senior managers 
visited developers at the beginning of 

the project to finalize terms of contract and set up 

ground rules to be 

followed  
No particular steps taken 7 Aginity LLC IM frequently 
used  Open source 

groupware used 
to manage development 
space Choice of offshore location restricted to a 
country with 
similar culture  
 
Chosen team members are creative and 
intelligent 
No particular steps taken Builds, tests, and test results made visible due to lack of 
social communication between teams 
Presence of a friendly contact 
who acted as an 
agent between the 

offshore and onshore team 
 
Offshore team 
given plenty of 
freedom to develop 

solution  Iterative 
development using common development 
language and common vocabulary 
Use of compelling user stories rather than dry 

specifications 
of requirements 

 Project Web pages created 
to give an idea of project progress and 
status  A variety of 

tools used for task and time tracking, 
issues control, and code management 
8 BNP Paribas Weekly technical 
and management 

conference calls 
with all teams 
 Establish 
communication channel at all levels 

 E-mails, chats, 
and Wikis 
frequently used 
 Phone calls and 
videoconferencing moderately used 
Mostly senior 
members made 
up the offshore 

team  Project leads 
played a major 
role in business 
conception and 
detailed design  Good mediators 
helped in solving 

language and  
cultural problems A lot of visits 
organized in 
both directions  Same roles used at both locations Œ 
managers, project 

leads, lead developers, developers 
 Dedicated offshore 
support persons in 

each team 
 No micro manage-

ment of teams 
 Sharing of activities 
like business conception, detailed design, 
and testing  Sharing of use cases through 
a repository 

 Use of a shared quality 

dashboard showing 
results of tests 

 Knowledge 
sharing (both 
software and 
culture related) at all 
levels  
9 Finnish company 
Electronic communication using mailing lists, 
Wiki, IRC, IM, 
Skype, 
teleconferencing.  
Sprint demos 
through videoconferencing and desktop 
sharing System 
architect played 
the role of proxy customer 
to offshore team since the actual customer 
was not 

available 
No particular steps taken Communication is made using tools so that they remain 

visible 
Members of offshore team invited to work at 
onshore location 
 Frequent 
communication 
between teams  
Project documents stored in Wikis 10 WDSGlobal Video 
conferencing used during daily 
handover and 

during customer requirements gathering 
An XP coach hired at each location to train people on XP 
and object oriented programming 
Cultural differences created misunderstanding
s and solved using round-the-
world program 
Daily 
handovers took place between teams when 
status updates as well as 
lessons learnt Office space reconfigured and 
made cube-less in order to put pairing 

stations in place 
 Offshore workers 
A new source 
control system 
put into place  
A monthly 
product backlog called    626 Volume 23
 Article 15 
 Coaches communicated 
with each other 
after daily 
handovers, once 
per week via 
teleconferencing and also visited  
each other for two 
weeks every 
quarter 
with Java and 
work closely 
with business 

managers   A rotating guru 

from the onshore team helped in 
setting up the infrastructure and initial 
training 
 where members 
visited each location for 4-6 
weeks 
 Some controlled 
flexibility to adapt 
processes according to local 

culture  were shared 
 Configuration 
changes of the shared control system 

synchronized 
automatically 
between 

locations spent several weeks with 
onshore team in a 

programming boot 
camp  
Frequent pairing 
used for solving complex design 
problems in a collaborative manner 

 
If fixes could not be completed on time work passed to the 

next region to ﬁput 
out fires togetherﬂ 
Company 
Program Plan created  for 
better coordination between 

teams and prioritization of projects 11 CEInformant Daily focused 
SCRUM meeting 
lasting for at most 
30 minutes  Weekly status 

meetings to understand risks faced by offshore 

teams  Wrap-up meetings 

for demonstration 
of sprints People with a 
diversity of 
skills in various 

activities 
included in the project 
 Product manager 
responsible for keeping track of and updating 
project backlog   Team leads 
responsible for keeping track of sprint backlog No particular steps taken No particular steps taken Offshore team had 
full authority to do 
things that were 

necessary for the 
success of the project 
 Onshore team 
trained offshore 

team in the use of 
various tools and in orientation of newly 

recruited developers Offshore and onshore teams used 
the same StarTeam repository for 

issue tracking 
 Errors in 

coding recorded using Bugzilla 

 Requirements recorded in 
terms of use cases, user 
interface 
prototypes, 
and standards documents 
 
Discussion 
threads documented 
12 SirsiDynix Daily SCRUM 
meeting by 

teleconference preceded by email 
communication 
 Daily standup 
meeting at 
offshore locations prior to SCRUM 
meeting Teams built according to 
functional areas of systems 
 
Product owner 
responsible for co-ordination of 
requirements and team management 
No particular steps taken Daily SCRUM 
meetings held 
at 7:45 a.m. for 
onshore team and 17:45 p.m. 

for offshore team for mutual 
convenience  No particular steps 
taken Global build repository 

used   Issues 
tracking and project management 
software used 
to generate 
real-time view 

of project including bugs report 
 V. AGILE MANIFESTO AND THE CASE STUDIES 
One of the popular benchmarks for judgment of agile projects
 is the agile manifesto which aims to ﬁuncover better 
ways of developing software by doing it and helping others do 
itﬂ [Fowler and Highsmith, 2001]. This manifesto was 
put forward by a team of software dev
elopment experts and laid down the values of the agile methodologies and the 
principles to be followed to attain those values. It was 
important to analyze the twelve agile software development 
cases in the light of the agile manifesto since this is a we
ll accepted benchmark to judge agile projects. The following 
paragraphs describe how the twelve case studies either conf
ormed or deviated from the values and principles of the 
agile manifesto. 

 The agile manifesto consists of four values that appear 
in the form of two part comparative phrases outlining in the 
first segment what is emphasized in an agile development 
project and in the second segment what is important but 
is of lesser priority. The values and principles of the agile
 manifesto are listed in Table 4 together with a check mark 
() to indicate which of the case studies actually showed an ev
idence of the value or a principle. An x indicated that 
   Volume 23
Article 15 
627 
the case study did not support the value or the principle. It 
is easy to imagine that since the case studies are not 
detailed enough, some of them did not provide enough or no
 information about whether the values or principles were 
maintained or not. This is indicated by a -- in the corr
esponding column. All case studies emphasized that the 
projects revolved around people rather than processes. 
The team selection was done carefully and leaders were 
chosen who could coordinate the development activity. 
Various modes of electronic communication were adopted 
for frequent interaction and exchange of ideas. In the sa
me fashion, the focus on working software also could be 
seen in most case studies. The agile manifesto prefers 
working software over detailed documentation but does not 
negate documentation completely. In the case of Extol In
ternational, the developers stated the importance of 
documentation and remarked that ﬁkey documents help to 
bootstrap the project by establishing a common 
framework for stakeholdersﬂ [Kussmaul et al. 2004]. Four
 case studies emphasized the importance of customer 
collaboration. A particularly interesting case in this regar
d is that of the Finnish company that was developing the 
software for several customers and used t
he system architect from one of its cu
stomers to act as a proxy customer 
who could talk about likely technical and business issues
. The fourth value of the agile manifesto had the least 
support from the case studies. Most case studies did 
not discuss in details whether the software development 
process involved responding to changes requested by the cu
stomer even at the last moment. However, the case 
studies on Extol, Manco, and Consult cl
early stated that they devia
ted from the agile practice of not following a plan 
in the early stages of the project and used a few iterations
 in the project to confirm the key requirements for the 
project as well as an architecture for t
he project. In fact, it was stated that ﬁi
nstead of strictly following the agile 
development practices as commonly defined, the companies co
ntinuously tweak them to fit the evolving needs of 
their projectsﬂ [Balasubramaniam et al. 2006]. 
Table 4: Adherence to the Values and Principles of the Agile Manifesto 
 Case studies 
Characteristics promoted by the agile manifesto 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 
Values Individuals and interactions over processes and 
tools              Working software over comprehensive 
documentation 
     --  -- 
     Customer collaboration over contra
ct negotiation  --  -- -- 
    -- -- 
 -- -- -- 
Responding to change over following a pl
an x -- -- -- x x -- -- --  -- 
  -- 
Principles Early and continuous delivery of valuable software 
   x x x  -- 
  --  -- 
  -- 
Welcome changing requirements even late in 
development 
-- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- --  -- 
Deliver working software frequently 
   -- -- -- 
       Business people and developers work together 
throughout project 
  -- -- 
    -- -- 
 -- -- -- 
Build projects around motivated individuals and 
support and trust them 
-- -- -- 
    -- 
 --  --  --  -- 
Face-to-face conversation within the development 
team             Working software is the primary measure of 
progress 
         -- 
    -- 
 Promote sustainable development to maintain 
constant pace indefinitely 
-- 
  -- -- -- -- --  -- 
   Continuous attention to technical excellence and 
good design 
--  -- 
   --  -- 
  -- 
  --  -- 
Simplicity is essential  --  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
 -- 
Self-organizing teams -- -- 
 -- -- -- 
  -- -- 
  -- 
Team regularly adjusts behavior to enhance 
effectiveness 
-- --  -- -- -- -- -- -- -- 
  -- 
 The 12 principles laid down in the agile manifesto were ob
served to some extent in the case studies. All companies 
enabled multiple forms of electronic communication between 
the offshore and onshore teams to simulate face-to-
face conversations. Although these were face-to-interface conversations using various electronic technologies but 
they were found to be quite effective and were used 
on an as needed basis. M
any case studies emphasized 
availability of working software that wa
s usually put in a shared r
epository. This working so
ftware also served as a 
measure of progress made in the project. However, not 
all companies that valued working software went on to 
deliver such software to their customers from time to time. Only five companies mentioned doing this. Another 

common characteristic seen in five case studies was th
e strong emphasis on achieving good software quality with 
   628 Volume 23
 Article 15 
bug fixing taking place continuously and serious efforts be
ing spent on not breaking the builds. A constant and 
sustained pace for development with pre-specified times for 
deliveries of builds were seen in five case studies as 
well. The collaboration between business 
people and developers took place in fi
ve case studies and only four case 
studies identified key business people who played a crucial ro
le in coordinating and directing the project. One of the 
important principles of the agile manife
sto is the availability of carefully sele
cted teams that were 
mostly trusted to 
follow their own procedures to develop the software in a way t
hat they felt was most suitabl
e. Existence of such self-
organizing teams was reported in only five case studies. Only
 two case studies indicated that efforts were spent on 
regularly adjusting the working mode according to need and 
one case study discussed the importance of simplicity 
of design. Finally, there were no case
 studies that provided details on the 
responsiveness of the development team 
to the changing requirements of the custom
ers. Although it is likely that given 
the small scope of description of the 
case studies, they did not delve into the details of the valu
es and principles of the agile
 manifesto, but still it can be 
said that not all values and principles listed in the agile
 manifesto were considered to be important in the case 
studies under consideration.  
VI. LESSONS LEARNED Some interesting lessons can be learnt from the commona
lity analysis of the 12 case studies. As suggested by the 
literature, a variety of means of 
communication was used by the team
s ranging from e-mail to chat to 
teleconferencing. Videoconferencing seemed to be the 
most commonly used means of electronic communication 
with five cases reporting the use of it. Since video conferenci
ng is expensive it was mostly used for the most critical 
parts of the project. An example is the use of videoconf
erencing for sprint demonstrations by the Finnish company. 
In addition to videoconferencing, Wikis and IM were us
ed in four cases. Another 
interesting feature was the 
prevalence of daily focused Scrum meetings for m
any companies. All case studies emphasized frequent 
communication between the developers using a variety of te
chnologies. However, the lack of co-location often made 
this communication face-to-interface rather than face-to-fa
ce. Also, the communication was not always continual in 
order to save costs and was done on an as needed basis. 
 
In terms of personnel selection for the project, it is obse
rved that different companies adopted different policies with 
success. Many cases acknowledge
d, either directly or indirectly, the impo
rtance of the presenc
e of a strong project 
lead who could coordinate the various activities of the 
project. When selecting team members, the stress was on 
selecting programmers that were seni
or, creative, and had prior experience of 
working with each other. SirsiDynix 
was quite unique because it formed teams according to th
e functionalities of the system that was being built. No 
other company seemed to follow this practice. Also, it
 was observed that five companies chose to have self-
organizing teams that worked well with little supervi
sion and enjoyed responsibilities of managing their own 
business. 

 Although cultural issues are considered to be quite import
ant a challenge, seven out of
 the 12 companies chose not 
to address this challenge. For those cases where cultural 
differences turned out to be 
problematic, the presence of a 
mediator was sought and more flexibility in the development
 was allowed. At least in two cases developers were 
rotated across sites so that they could learn the social
 and work culture of all sites involved in the software 
development. 

 Working across different time zones was acknowledged to be a major challenge by most companies. In order to take 
advantage of the ﬁfollow-the-sunﬂ philosophy, certain compro
mise had to be sought. In five cases, the meeting time 
between the onshore and offshore teams was selected accordin
g to mutual convenience. The meetings were also 
conducted using Web conferencing so that a record of 
the discussion could be kept 
and referred to by developers 
who could not attend the meeting on time. The offshore team
 was also given flexibility in adopting the processes and 
tools that they felt comfortable with. However, some contro
l was still exercised by forcing them to abide by the global 
standards.  
 
On-site development ensures plenty of social interactions t
hat ultimately lead to building of trust among developers. 
Special efforts towards developing trust in offshore agile development included rotation of staff members between 
onshore and offshore locations (used in five cases) and 
abundant flexibility allowed for the offshore development 
team (used in three cases). Valtech India was unique in 
building trust by allowing new members to learn about the 
project through pair programming with more experienced members in other locations.  

 There were several companies that used a global build re
pository that could be shared between locations. This 
eased the development task to a great extent. At the same
 time project use cases were shared between developers 
in some case studies and error tracking tools like Bugzilla was used in two cases. These leads us to believe that 
although the emphasis was on minimum documentation fo
r agile software development the teams resorted to 
sharing the knowledge by electronic means as 
and when there was a necessity for doing so.  
    Volume 23
Article 15 
629 
The case analysis identified several common characteristic
s in distributed agile projects that would have been seen 
in any distributed plan driven projects as well. For exam
ple, the need for communication via a variety of electronic 
means is essential for all distributed projects. The same al
so holds for adjustment of meeting times according to the 
mutual convenience of the development teams. Both thes
e actions are essential for success of any distributed 
software development project and it was not surprising that 
they made their appearance for distributed agile case 
studies as well. So the agile case studies did not show 
any unique characteristics in terms of ﬁcommunicationsﬂ and 
ﬁdifferent time zonesﬂ factors.  

 However, some unique characteristics we
re seen from these case studies in te
rms of ﬁpersonnel selection,ﬂ ﬁtrust,ﬂ 
and ﬁknowledge managementﬂ that could be attributed to the ag
ile nature of these projects. The strong focus of agile 
projects on individuals and interactions, as discussed in 
the agile manifesto, could be evidenced in these case 
studies as well. The offshore team was carefully chosen a
nd preferences were given to the selection of developers 
who had worked with each other on prior projects. The 
implicit understanding was that if they had worked 
successfully on a prior project they und
erstood each other™s working styles, tr
usted each other, and could again work 
together to make the project successful. In some sens
e, it was assumed that prior co-workers will have good 
interactions with each other. Also, some case studies al
so emphasized the need for a project leader who acted as a 
pivot and coordinator for the project. (S)he traveled freque
ntly between offshore and onshore locations and often 
spent a significant amount of time at 
the customer premise. This was necessary to maintain the interaction between 
the various teams and also to convey on a firsthand basis 
the clients™ changing needs to the development teams. 
The project rotated around such a senior team lead that 
was also responsible for ensuring that there was no project 
backlog. Another characteristic that was 
seen in five cases was the flexibility t
hat was offered to the offshore teams. 
This was probably done to make the teams self-organizi
ng. There was little micro-management and teams were 
trusted and allowed to work on their own. They were not told
 what processes were to be followed or what particular 
tools were to be used. Also, the emphasis on working software was maintained in several cases. Usually global build 

repositories were constructed where the latest form 
of the working software was always available to the 
development teams. It should also be mentioned that so
me companies did not focus on early delivery of software 
but delivered software only after a few rounds of development 
when they felt comfortable 
with the current version. 
However, contrary to the popular belief 
that agile projects did not need any det
ailed documentation, most of these 
case studies showed that developers opted for moderate do
cumentation that kept tra
ck of progress status and 
priorities for the projects. The focus was on working 
software for sure but documentation was not neglected 
completely.  
 Some important lessons can be learned from the analysis of
 the case studies from the perspective of the values and 
principles of the agile manifesto. It is observed that so
me values such as the importance of people and their 
interactions and the availability of working software were
 clearly followed in most case studies. Agile software 
development thrives on formal and informal interactions bet
ween people. This is necessary for building trust and for 
understanding developers™ coding habits. Multiple forms of 
interactions through IMs to Wikis to videoconferencing 
were used in these case studies. There were two com
ponents to these interactionsŠsome were preplanned as 
seen in the focused SCRUM meetings organized by CEInformant or SirsiDynix through teleconferencing and some 
were instantaneous on an as needed basis as seen in the 
use of IM and chat by Aginity LLC and BNP Paribas. 
Some companies like Valtech encouraged onshore and offshore 
developers when they came together to take part in 
informal social gatherings like coffee and ice cream socials 
to build trust and friendship, while celebrating completion 
of milestones. This practice was unique but in conformance 
with literature that stressed the importance of ﬁrenewing 
social ties through bonding activities – both in the early 
stages of the team development 
and the later stages, when 
social ties may fade and affect collaborative workﬂ [Osh
ri 2008]. Further, some developers moved between onshore 
and offshore locations to get to know their partners better and to know more about their software development 
practices. This was seen in the case of Extol Inter
national, IONA Technologies, Telco, Manco, Consult, and BNP 
Paribas. Also, project leads played a very important ro
le in co-ordinating development efforts and this was 
evidenced in three case studies. All these efforts were ta
rgeted to improving the interaction between the teams and 
could be seen to conform to the first value of the ag
ile manifesto. Although several tools were used by the 
companies, it was clear that the importance given to people 
in the development effort was more than that given to 
tools and processes. The second value of the agile manife
sto that stressed the importance of working software over 
documentation was also upheld in the case studies. Seve
ral companies instituted comm
on build environments that 
were easily accessible to onshore and offshore teams. Th
is indicated the current progress with the software and 
assigned responsibilities about the status of the software to
 certain developers or teams.
 Valtech India went to the 
extent of stating that 
ﬁthe golden rule of thumb was not to leave the 
office premises until the last code that was 
checked did not break the buildﬂ [Danait 2005]. As suggested 
by this value of the agile manifesto, documentation 
was kept at a minimum and the focus was on the work
ing software. Documentation mostly included use cases, 
requirements, and burn-down charts. In case of Cons
ult, it was reported that ﬁoften many documents were 
developed after the actual work was completedﬂ [Balasubra
maniam et al. 2006]. Among the principles of the agile 
manifesto, three received good support. 
Firstly, there was a str
ong emphasis in all case studies on communication. 
   630 Volume 23
 Article 15 
Due to the distributed environment, the conversations beca
me face-to-interface rather than face-to-face but it 
definitely took place on an as needed basis using a variety of
 electronic means. No exceptions were reported. Some 
companies like Valtech recorded kickoff meetings that t
ook place via Web conferencing 
for the benefit of those who 
missed them and CEInformant even recor
ded discussion threads for subsequent reference if needed. Secondly, the 
need to deliver working software frequently was evidenced in 
nine case studies. The delivery period varied from two 
weeks (in case of SirsiDynix) to one month (in case of 
CEInformant). In the case of the Finnish company, the 
working software was shared between participants using a sprint demo and desktop sharing. This was a unique 

practice. Thirdly, the companies not only focused on deliv
ering working software but they also measured progress in 
terms of the working software. SirsiDynix and BN
P Paribas used the Jira software for doing so.  
 
While two of the values and three of the principles of t
he agile manifesto were evidenced in the 12 case studies, 
some were prominently absent or at least there was no me
ntion of any specific efforts made by the companies to 
uphold such values and principles. For example, the agi
le methods are widely touted to be customer focused 
because they take into account customers™ late breaki
ng requirements into the process of development and do not 
follow a plan. However, only one case study supported this
 value, eight did not say anything specific about it, and 
three were even against it. Two of the companies Manco 
and Consult went against this value from the very 
beginning and ﬁdevoted the first two or three iterations 
of a project to finalize critical requirements and develop a 
high-level architectureﬂ [Balasubramaniam et al. 2006]. Some companies involved customers in the development 

process as suggested by the third value of the agile mani
festo and the Finnish company followed a unique practice 
of involving a particular customer company™s system archit
ect as a proxy customer because they were planning to 
sell the software to multiple customers. However, most
 companies did not do anything specific to involve the 
customers in the development process and thus compro
mised the agile methodology to an extent. In terms of 
principles of the agile manifesto, some were poorly suppo
rted by the case studies. Since 
the case studies said very 
little about the involvement of the custom
ers, it was not surprising
 that they did not say 
anything about whether any 
changes in the requirements coming from the customer at
 the later stages of the development were supported or 
not. Similarly, achieving simplicity in the design of the 
code was mentioned as a goal in only one case study and 
only two case studies mentioned that changes in team 
behavior took place to accommodate the needs of the 
process. Clearly, these principles were not given a lot of
 importance in the case studies. Project leads played an 
important role in coordinating development efforts and often acted as rotating gurus and visited offshore locations to 
liaise with the developers. Usually senior consultants were chosen for a responsible job like this. However, such a 

practice of building projects around qua
lified and motivated leaders was only illu
strated in four ca
se studies. Even 
more surprising was the finding that only five companies re
marked that the offshore teams were self-organizing and 
enjoyed plenty of independence in developing 
the software. This basically showed
 that due to the distributed nature 
of the projects, it was important to bring in discipline to the process and so it was not always possible to give the 
offshore teams a lot of flexibility to do things in the wa
ys they thought were the best. This finding was supported by 
literature on distributed agile development
 which reported that ﬁfor globally 
distributed projects, the conventional 
agile methods must be adjusted and modified by embracing 
more rigor and discipline in software developmentﬂ [Lee 
et al. 2006]. Also, only five case studies showed support 
for the value of sustainable 
development and maintenance 
of constant pace of work. Often the developer had to put in
 long hours of work to deliver the working software and 
ensure customer satisfaction. It is interesting to not
e that, although the case studies showed strong emphasis on 
individuals and interactions, no specific steps seemed to have been taken by the companies to protect the 

developers from overwo
rk and mental stress. 
V. CONCLUSION 
Increasingly companies are moving toward adoption of agile methods for distributed software development. Several 
challenges need to be overcome if the full benefits of agile me
thods are to be realized in a distributed setting. It must 
be remembered that not all projects can be handled using di
stributed agile methods. It is believed that for very 
complex and strategic projects distributed agile methods may not be a good choice [Moore and Barnett 2004]. In 
fact, most of the case studies that were studied in this p
aper were small in their scope. Also, it can be seen from the 
knowledge gathered from the 12 case studies that different
 solution strategies work for different companies based 
on available resources, intended outcome, and work culture.
 Several lessons were learnt from the case studies. 
Some of them were similar to lessons learned from any
 distributed software development projects whereas some 
were specific to the agile development. It was found that
 team selection, trust, and knowledge management were 
quite important for the agile case studies. The case studies were analyzed from the point of view of the agile 

manifesto and it was observed that some values and principles were adhered to in these case studies and some 
were either not followed or were compromised to an extent. Most case studies emphasized values like the important 
role played by the developers and the project leaders and t
heir interactions and the need for regular delivery of 
working software often with minimal documentation. The 
principle of face-to-interface communication was also 
greatly championed by all case studies. A common build env
ironment was commonly seen in the case studies that 
helped to measure progress of the project in terms of
 the working software and was shared between developers. 
The emphasis of agile methods on customer collabor
ation, responsiveness toward customers™ changing 
   Volume 23
Article 15 
631 
requirements at any point of the devel
opment cycle, building projects around motivated individuals, emphasizing 
simplicity of design, creating self-organizing teams,
 and allowing flexibility and adjustment of team behavior 
according to need are some of the values and principles of 
the agile manifesto that were least discussed in the case 
studies. This indicated that some departure from the valu
es and principles of the agile manifesto were needed. 
However, such a non-conformance is not 
surprising. There is evidence in past li
terature that the agile methods need 
to be carefully adjusted when applied to a distributed se
tting by embracing more rigor and discipline [Lee et al. 
2006]. The same phenomenon was observed in the case studies 
that were studied in this paper. It must be noted at 
this point that the entries in Table 4 were based on author™s interpretation of the 12 case studies and they made use 
of author™s judgment. In future, a study can be done with 
more than one person filling out a similar table based on 
the case studies. The resulting tables can then be reconcil
ed to find a more objective evaluation of the case studies 
and to determine to what extent the case studies follo
wed the agile manifesto. The lessons learnt and the 
summarized knowledge from the case studies in this paper 
should be useful for practitioners and companies that are 
planning to venture in the world of distributed agile deve
lopment and they will adopt these solutions and customize 
them according to their needs, strengths, and limitations. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT 
Thanks are due to the anonymous associate editor and the edito
r in chief for their useful suggestions on the earlier 
versions of the manuscript which ha
s greatly improved the cl
arity, readability, and c
ontribution of the paper.  
REFERENCES 
Editor™s Note
: The following reference list contains hyperlinks
 to World Wide Web pages. Readers who have the 
ability to access the Web directly from their word proces
sor or are reading the paper on the Web, can gain direct 
access to these linked references. Re
aders are warned, however, that:  
1. These links existed as of the date of publicat
ion but are not guaranteed to be working thereafter. 
2. The contents of Web pages may change over time. Wher
e version information is provided in the References, 
different versions may not contain the information or the conclusions referenced. 
3. The author(s) of the Web pages, not AIS, is (a
re) responsible for the accuracy of their content. 
4. The author(s) of this article, not AIS, is (are) respon
sible for the accuracy of the 
URL and version information. 
 Abrahamsson, P. et al. (2003). ﬁNew Directions
 on Agile Methods: A Comparative Analysis,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 
25th International Conference on Software Engineering
, ACM Press, pp. 244-254. 
Armour, P. G. (January 2007). ﬁAgile – and Offshore,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM 
(50)1, pp. 13-16. 
Austin, R. and D. Lee. (2003). ﬁBeyond 
Requirements: Software Making as Art,ﬂ 
IEEE Software (20)1, pp. 93-95.  
Balasubramaniam, R. et al. (October 2006). 
ﬁCan Distributed Software Development be Agile?ﬂ 
Communications of 
the ACM (49)10, pp. 41-46. 
Boehm, B. and R. Turner. (September-October 2005). ﬁMana
gement Challenges to Implement Agile Processes in 
Traditional Development Organizations,ﬂ 
IEEE Software 
(22)5
, pp. 30-39. 
Bowen, S. and F. Maurer. (2002). ﬁProcess Support 
and Knowledge Management for Virtual Teams Doing Agile 
Software Developmentﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 26
th Annual International Computer Software and Applications 
Conference, 
IEEE Computer Society 
Press, pp. 1118-1120. Computer Enterprises. (2005). ﬁGlobal Agile Developm
entŠCEI™s Approach to Successful IT Outsourcing,ﬂ 
http://www.ceiamerica.com/cei/company/resources/ceinformant_09132004.pdf
 (current July 30, 2007). 
Danait, A. (2005). ﬁAgile Offshore TechniquesŠA Case Studyﬂ in 
Proceedings of the Agile Development 
Conference
, IEEE Press, pp. 214-217. 
Fowler, M. (April 2004). ﬁUsing an Agile Software Process with Offshore Development,ﬂ 
http://www.martinfowler.com/articles/agileOffshore.html
 (current March 26, 2008). 
Fowler, M. and J. Highsmith. (August 2001). ﬁThe Ag
ile Manifesto,ﬂ http://www.
ddj.com/architect/184414755
 (current 
March 26, 2008). 
Huo, M. et al. (2004). ﬁSoftware Quality and Agile Methodsﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 28
th Annual International 
Computer Software and Applications Conference Vol. 1, 
IEEE Computer Society Press, pp. 520-525. 
Kussmaul, C., R. Jack, and B. Sponsler. (August 2004). ﬁO
utsourcing and Offshoring with Agility: A Case Studyﬂ in 
Zannier, C., H. Ergogmus, and L. Lindstrom (eds.)
 Proceedings of the 4
th Conference on Extreme 
Programming and Agile Methods
, Berlin, Germany: Springer, pp.147-154. 
   632 Volume 23
 Article 15 
Lee, G., W. Delone, and J. A. Espinosa. (October 2006). 
ﬁAmbidextrous Coping Strategi
es in Globally Distributed 
Software Development Projects,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
 (49)10, pp. 35-40. 
Lindvall, M. et al. (December 2004). ﬁAgile Software Development in Large Organizations,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer 
(37)12, 
pp. 26-34. 
Massol, V. (2004). ﬁCase Study: Distributed Agile Development,ﬂ 
http://www.pivolis.com/pdf/Distributed_Agile_V1.0.pdf
 (current November 30, 2007). 
Moore, S. and L. Barnett. (September 2004). ﬁOffshore Outsourcing and Agile Development,ﬂ 
Forrester Research
.  Nerur, S., R. Mahapatra, and G. Mangalaraj. (May 2005).
 ﬁChallenges of Migrating to Agile Methodologies,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM 
(48)5, pp. 73-78. 
Nisar, M. F. and T. Hameed. (2004). ﬁAgile
 Methods Handling Offshore Softwareﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 8
th International Multitopic Conference
, IEEE Press, pp. 417-422. 
Oshri, I., J. Kotlarsky, and L. Willcoc
ks. (April 2008). ﬁBuilding 
Critical Social Ties for Global Collaborative 
Teamwork,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
 (51)4, pp. 76-81. 
Paasivaara, M. and C. Lassenius. (O
ctober 2006). ﬁCould Global Software Development Benefit from Agile 
Methods?ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the IEEE International Conf
erence on Global 
Software Engineering
, IEEE 
Computer Society Press, pp. 109-113. 
Poole, C. J. (June 2004). ﬁDistributed Product Devel
opment Using Extreme Programmingﬂ in Eckstein J. and H. 
Baumeister (eds.)
 Proceedings of the 5
th International Conference on Extreme Programming and Agile 
Processes in Software Engineering
, Berlin Germany: Springer, pp. 60-67. 
Rees, D. (April 2004). ﬁDistributed Agile Deve
lopment,ﬂ http
://www.itwales.com/998851.htm
 (current March 26, 
2008). 
Sepulveda, C. (2003). ﬁAgile Development and Remote Teams: Learning to Love the Phoneﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 
Agile Development Conference
, IEEE Computer Society Press, pp. 140-145. 
Sutherland, J. et al. (January 2007). ﬁDistributed SCRUM
: Agile Project Management with Outsourced Development 
Teamsﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 40
th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
, IEEE Computer Society Press, pp. 274-284.  
Talby, D. et al. (July-August 2006). ﬁAgile 
Software Testing in a Large-scale Project,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, pp. 30-37. 
Yap, M. (July 2005). ﬁFollow the Sun: Dist
ributed Extreme Programming Developmentﬂ in 
Proceedings of the Agile 
Development Conference
, IEEE Press, pp. 218-224. 
Yin, R. K. (2002). Case Study Research Design and Methods
, 3rd Edition, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Indranil Bose is associate professor of Information Systems at
 the School of Business, The University of Hong 
Kong. His research interests are in 
the areas of telecommunication, data mining, software development, and supply 
chain management. He holds a BTech from the Indian Instit
ute of Technology, MS from 
the University of Iowa, MS 
and PhD from Purdue University. His publications have appeared in 
Communications of AIS, Communications of the 
ACM, Computers & Operations Research, Decision Support
 Systems, European Journal of Operational Research, 
Expert Systems with Applications, Information & Manag
ement, Journal of the American Society for Information 
Science and Technology, Journal of Organizational Co
mputing and Electronic Commerce, Operations Research 
Letters etc. His research has been supported by several grants
 from academia as well as industry. He is listed in 
Marquis Who™s Who in the World,
 Marquis Who™s Who in Science and Engineering, Marquis Who™s Who in Asia, 
and 
Marquis Who™s Who of Emerging Leaders
. He acts as an associate editor of 
Communications of AIS 
and associate 
editor and editorial review board member for several ot
her journals in the area of information systems  
 Copyright © 2008 by the Association for In
formation Systems. Permission to make 
digital or hard copies of all or part 
of this work for personal or classroom use is granted wit
hout fee provided that copies 
are not made or distributed for 
profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear th
is notice and full citation on the first page. Copyright for 
components of this work owned by 
others than the Association for Info
rmation Systems must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To 
copy otherwise, to republish, to post 
on servers, or to redistribute to lists 
requires prior specific permission and/or fee. Request perm
ission to publish from: AIS Administrative Office, P.O. 
Box 2712 Atlanta, GA, 30301-2712 Attn: Reprints or via e-mail from  
ais@aisnet.org
     Volume 23
Article 15 
  .                                                                                                                                 
                      
ISSN: 1529-3181
 EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 
Joey F. George 
Florida State University 
AIS SENIOR EDITORIAL BOARD 
Guy Fitzgerald 
Vice President Publications  
Brunel University 
Joey F. George 
Editor, CAIS                                
Florida State University 
Kalle Lyytinen 
Editor, JAIS Case Western Reserve University 
Edward A. Stohr 
Editor-at-Large Stevens Inst. of Technology 
Blake Ives                                
Editor, Electronic Publications  
University of Houston 
Paul Gray 
Founding Editor, CAIS 
Claremont Graduate University 
CAIS ADVISORY BOARD   
Gordon Davis 
University of Minnesota 
 Ken Kraemer 
Univ. of Calif. at Irvine M. Lynne Markus  
Bentley College 
Richard Mason 
Southern Methodist Univ.   
Jay Nunamaker                    
University of Arizona 
Henk Sol 
University of Groningen 
Ralph Sprague 
University of Hawaii 
Hugh J. Watson University of Georgia  
CAIS SENIOR EDITORS  
Steve Alter 

U. of San Francisco 
Jane Fedorowicz 
Bentley College 
Jerry Luftman 
Stevens Inst. of Tech. 
CAIS EDITORIAL BOARD   
Michel Avital 
Univ of Amsterdam 
Dinesh Batra 
Florida International U. 
Indranil Bose 
University of Hong Kong 
Ashley Bush 
Florida State Univ. 
Erran Carmel 
American University 
Fred Davis 
U of Arkansas, Fayetteville 
Gurpreet Dhillon 
Virginia Commonwealth U 
Evan Duggan 
Univ of the West Indies 
Ali Farhoomand University of Hong Kong 
Robert L.  Glass Computing Trends 
Sy Goodman  
Ga. Inst.  of Technology 
Mary Granger 
George Washington U. 
Ake Gronlund 
University of Umea 
Ruth Guthrie California State Univ. 
Juhani Iivari 
Univ. of Oulu 
K.D. Joshi Washington St Univ. 
Chuck Kacmar 
University of Alabama 
Michel Kalika 
U. of Paris Dauphine 
Claudia Loebbecke 
University of Cologne 
Paul Benjamin Lowry 
Brigham Young Univ. 
Sal March Vanderbilt University 
Don McCubbrey  
University of Denver 
Fred Niederman 
St. Louis University 
Shan Ling Pan 
Natl. U. of Singapore 
Kelly Rainer 
Auburn University 
Paul Tallon 
Loyola College, Maryland 
Thompson Teo 
Natl. U. of Singapore 
Craig Tyran 
W Washington Univ. 
Chelley Vician 
Michigan Tech Univ. 
Rolf Wigand  
U. Arkansas, Little Rock 
Vance Wilson 
University of Toledo 
Peter Wolcott U. of Nebraska-Omaha 
DEPARTMENTS 
Global Diffusion of the Internet.  
Editors: Peter Wolcott and Sy Goodman 
Information Technology and Systems.  
Editors: Sal March and Dinesh Batra 
Papers in French 
Editor: Michel Kalika 
Information Systems and Healthcare 
Editor: Vance Wilson  
ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL                                                                              
James P. Tinsley 
AIS Executive Director 
 Robert Hooker 
CAIS Managing Editor 
Florida State Univ. 
Copyediting by Carlisle 
Publishing Services 
   