 contributed articles
JUNE 2010  |  VOL. 53  
|  NO. 6  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    126DOI: 10.1145/1743546.1743580BY 
SERGIO DE CESARE, 
MARK LYCETT, 
ROBERT 
D. MACREDIE, 
CHAITA
LI PATE
L, AND RAY PAU
LORGANIZATI
ONS UNDERTAKING S
OFTWARE DEVEL
OPMENT are often reminded that successful practice depends on a number of non-technical issues that are 
managerial, cultural and organizational in nature.4,8 These issues cover aspects from appropriate corporate 
structure, through software process development and 
standardization to effective collaborative practice. 
Since the articulation of the ‚software crisis™ in 
the late-1960s, signi˜cant effort has been put into 
addressing problems related to the cost, time and 
quality of software development via the application 
of systematic processes and management practices 
for software engineering. Early efforts resulted in 
prescriptive structured methods, which have evolved 
and expanded over time to embrace consortia/
company-led initiatives such as the Uni˜ed Modeling Language and the Uni˜ed Process 
alongside formal process improve-

ment frameworks such as the Interna-

tional Standards Organization™s 9000 

series, the Capability Maturity Model 

and SPICE. More recently, the philosophy be-
hind traditional plan-based initiatives 

has been questioned by the agile move-

ment, which seeks to emphasize the 

human and craft aspects of software 

development over and above the en-

gineering aspects.
1,2 Agile practice is 
strongly collaborative in its outlook, 

favoring individuals and interactions 

over processes and tools, working soft-

ware over comprehensive documenta-

tion, customer collaboration over con-

tract negotiation, and responding to 

change over following a plan (see Side-

bar 1). Early experience reports on the 

use of agile practice suggest some suc-

cess in dealing with the problems of 

the software crisis,
12 and suggest that 
plan-based and agile practice are not 

mutually exclusive.
10 Indeed, ˚exibility 
may arise from this unlikely marriage 

in an aim to strike a balance between 

the rigor of traditional plan-based ap-

proaches and the need for adaptation 

of those to suit particular development 
situations. With this in mind, this arti-

cle surveys the current practice in soft-

ware engineering alongside percep-

tions of senior development managers 

in relation to agile practice in order 

to understand the principles of agility 

that may be practiced implicitly and 

their effects on plan-based approach.Details of the Survey
To elicit an understanding of current 

practice and perceptions related to 

agility, an online questionnaire was de-

signed11 with the following objectives 
in mind:To review current software develop-
 ˜ment practice.To assess perceptions related to agile 
 ˜principles and values.To examine the implicit/explicit inte-
 ˜gration of agile principles with main-

stream development/organizational 

practice.Examining 
Perceptions 
of 
Agility in 
Software 
Development 
Practice
 127    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  JUNE 2010  |  VOL. 53  
|  NO. 6
contributed articles
with the concepts of agile practice. The 
use of software development processes 

provided the framework for enquiry 

and a number of questions were asked 

to provide correlation points for agile 

practice (discussed later). The major 

outcomes of interest are that:Most organizations employ a software 
 ˜development process but implement it 

in a ˚exible/con˜gured manner.
The use of framework-based process
- ˜es (for example, RUP like approaches 

that allow contextualization of process
-
es) appears to be growing in popularity.
Development processes are support-
 ˜ed by the strong use of iterative life-

cycles, but change is implemented in 

a manner that does not necessarily ˜t 

with such iterative cycles.In detailed terms, more than half 
the sample claim to use a formal soft-
E-mail was used to contact senior 
development managers at 970 organiza
-
tions in the United Kingdom, requesting 

that they participate in the research. The 

selection of participants was based on 

the contact list available and research 

noting that senior management in˚u
-
ence productivity.
3 The survey itself 
comprised of 32 questions that were 

organized into three sections address
-
ing background/demographics, current 

software development practice, and per
-
ceptions related to agility. Online pre
-
sentation of the questionnaire ensured 

that the section on current practice had 

to be completed before the section on 

perceptions of agility could be viewed 

and completed in order to reduce bias. 
Table 1 summarizes the demograph
-ics of the 62 organizations that respond
-
ed to the online survey (equating to a 

response rate of 6%). Overall, the respon
-
dents had on average more than 10 years 

development experience, had variation 

in their development experience (having 

worked in more than 4 software devel
-
opment roles), and worked in organiza
-
tions that had more than 500 employees. 

The majority of responses received were 

from IT directors, senior architects and 

IT managers. In addition, responses 

from the larger organizations covered in-

house development departments of a va
-
riety of sizes from fewer than 10 employ
-
ees to more than 500 employees. Last, 

and importantly, only about a quarter of 

the respondents used an explicitly recog
-
nized agile method as detailed below.
General View of 
Software  
Development

The objective of understanding the 

state-of-practice was to provide a 

benchmark in order to assess the gap 
ware development process within their 

organization, either developed in-

house (56%) or commercially branded 

(18%). Of the respondents that use for-

mal software development processes 

(74%), the majority indicated that they 

based their processes on framework-

based approaches which cater for ˚ex-

ibility. These approaches included the 

Rational Uni˜ed Process (RUP) 30%, 

Dynamic Systems Development Meth-

odology (DSDM) 18% and eXtreme 

Programming (XP) 8%. Interestingly, 

organizations using a formal software 

development process tailor/con˜gure 

them strongly (82%), lending weight 

to the adage that ‚people don™t adopt a 

methodology, they adapt it™ (attributed 

to Tom DeMarco); and use different 

processes for different types of project 

(79%). Tailoring of software develop-

ment processes, once seen as a nega-
Table 1: Demographics of 
RespondentsBusiness Category
% of RespondentsAverage Development 
ExperienceAverage Number of 
Development Jobs 
ExperiencedCurrent Job Title of Majority of 
RespondentsAverage Organisation 
Size (employees)Consultancy/Software house
35%More than 10 yearsGreater than 4Senior ArchitectGreater than 500
Construction/Manufacturing/Distribution12%More than 10 yearsGreater than 4
IT Manager250 Œ 500Finance/ Insurance/ Real Estate
12%More than 10 yearsGreater than 4
IT DirectorGreater than 500Government/Public Sector/Education
12%More than 10 yearsGreater than 4
IT Director50 Œ 249Media Services/Communication
14%6 Œ 10 yearsGreater than 4Project Manager
0 Œ 9Whole Sale/Retail Trade
7%More than 10 yearsGreater than 4
Head of ITGreater than 500Charity
4%6 Œ 10 yearsGreater than 4Head of ITGreater than 500Legal
4%More than 10 yearsGreater than 4
IT DirectorGreater than 500Overall Majority
More than 10 years (60%)Greater than 4 (90%)Senior Architect (28%)Greater than 500 (64%)
Aim: 
Values:

 
 

 

Principles:























Adapted from (http://www.agilealliance.org)
Sidebar 1. contributed articles
JUNE 2010  |  VOL. 53  
|  NO. 6  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    128tive activity that violates the ‚rigor and 
consistency™ of software development 

processes,6,9 now appears to be seen 
in a positive light as necessary and 

is embraced. The following opinion 

highlights a practitioner™s view on ˚ex-

ibility: ﬁAlthough a method provides 

a useful framework, it has to be ˚ex-

ible in order to re˚ect real-world con-

straints and priorities.ﬂThe levels of effort put into tailoring/
con˜guring process varied: 16% stated 

they spent 1% percent of overall project 

time on tailoring the software develop-

ment process; 67% of respondents stat-

ed the time to tailor processes ranged 

from 1% to 5% of overall project time; 

19% stated they spent 10% Œ 20% of the 

project time and 2% stated that they 

use 40% of the project time. The type 

of people involved in process tailoring 

were senior management, project man-

agers, architects and the development 

team Œ where there appeared to be a 

decision maker, the development team 

was always involved in the decision. 

Lastly, ‚project characteristics™ were 

the predominant criteria on which tai-

loring decisions were made (44%). Of the respondents that do follow 
some form of software development 

process, the majority stated that their 

processes are based on an iterative 
and/or incremental software develop-

ment lifecycle (68%), the remainder be-

ing based on the more sequential wa-

terfall model. Nearly all respondents 

stated that they cater for changing 

requirements, even late in the project 

(98%). Of that proportion, only some 

follow the dynamic prioritization path 

proposed by iterative/incremental de-

velopment (39%) - the majority of re-

spondents continue to use traditional 

change control request (61%).Perceptions of 
Agile PrinciplesThe objectives of questioning around 

agile principles were to ascertain per-

ceptions related to the value and im-

portance of agility and to relate that 

information back to the context of cur-

rent practice in order to understand 

the match between principle and prac-

tice Œ do organizations practice what 

they state as important. In summary, 

respondents were presented with 

background information related to ag-

ile values and principles and asked to 

rank the principles in terms of impor-

tance from an organizational perspec-

tive and then rate its importance from 

a personal perspective. Summary re-

sults are shown in Table 2; these ˜nd-

ings were then linked back to earlier 

questions to match perceptions with 
practice. The major points of interest 

are that:The most widely valued agile prin-
 ˜ciples relate to the frequent delivery 

of working software, daily interaction 

between business people and develop-

ers and the importance of face-to-face 

communication. The highest levels of equivocation ex-
 ˜ist around principles related to chang-

ing requirements late in the develop-

ment cycle and working software being 

the primary measure of progress.The lowest areas of organizational 
 ˜importance were that the needs of the 

development team must be prioritized 

in line with cost, quality and time and 

that architecture and design should 

emerge and not be imposed.In detailed terms, the results 
showed Principles 1, 5 and 7 (see Table 

2) as unequivocal in their perceived 

importance (60, 84 and 60% respec-

tively). When examining the frequent 

delivery of working software the results 

from current practice showed that the 

majority of respondents delivered on 

three monthly cycles (31%). Signi˜cant-

ly, however, a number of respondents 

delivered on monthly cycles (24%) and 

two-week cycles (24%) Œ smaller per-

centages delivered on weekly cycles 

(5%) or produced only a ˜nal release 

(17%). In communication terms, the 

frequency of communication between 

Business and IT ranged from approxi-

mately once a month (13%), through 

once or twice a week (56%), to commu-

nication on a daily basis (29%). The pri-

mary means of communication within 

software development practice is face-

to-face within development team (79%) 

- few respondents use e-mail (17%) or 

telephone (4%) as a primary communi-

cation tool. While the delivery of working soft-
ware was seen as important, the results 

related to software being the primary 

measure of progress were much more 

ambiguous. Here, ˜ndings from the 

data collected in practice showed a 

strong reliance on traditional project 

metrics. While a number of project re-

spondents do use working software as 

the primary measure of progress (26%), 

a signi˜cant number use other project 

milestones and deliverables (54%) or 

completion of process/lifecycle stages 

(20%). Similarly, while the majority of 
Table 2: Agile Perception 
ResultsImportance for 
Org (%)PrincipleHighMedium
Low
1

602416
2


403426
3



254233
4
373429
5

84133
6


53398
7


602614
8


351847
9
442828
10


234829
11262153
12


234433
 129    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  JUNE 2010  |  VOL. 53  
|  NO. 6
contributed articles
used implicitly across development,
7 where formal process is considered too 
heavy. Indeed, a signi˜cant number 

of respondents in this respect work in 

small development environments (63% 

have fewer than nine employees) even 

within large organizations.The trend of adapting/tailoring soft-
 ˜ware development processes to context 

is on the increase. In relation to an ear-

lier study,
5 the ˜ndings suggest an in-
crease in the number of organizations 

that tailor/adapt their development 

process and a decrease in the number 

of organizations that follow a commer-

cial process in a prescriptive fashion.A large number of the organizations 
 ˜surveyed now base their software de-

velopment on iterative and/or incre-

mental lifecycles (68%). The frequency 

of software delivery ranges from every 

two weeks to every three months (the 

majority) and by far outweighs delivery 

only on ˜nal release. Change control, 

however, is still ˜rmly locked in a tradi-

tional project management loop.Table 3 provides a summary of ag-
ile themes that are relevant in terms 

of their adoption in practice. The ˜nd-

ings suggest that there is an uptake of 

the principles of agile development, 

though in larger organisations this 

uptake is countered by the perceived 

need to maintain rigor and control of 

the process. In practice, the adoption 

of agile principles is implicitly tied up 

with process tailoring, con˜guration 

and iterative lifecycles - the correlation 

between these factors and the agile 

principles noted as important is strong. 

Process ˚exibility therefore emerges 
respondents state that they cater for 

change late in the development cycle, 

change does not appear to be a par-

ticularly welcome factor. Interestingly, 

however, there is a strong correlation 

between the respondents who embrace 

change (40%) and their use of dynamic 

change control techniques (38%).Low areas of organizational impor-
tance indicate that a signi˜cant num-

ber of respondents (47%) value human 

facets of development over and above 

typical facets of cost, quality and time. 

This view is borne out to a given de-

gree when the data is correlated with 

the view that projects should be built 

around motivated individuals (53%) 

and practice indicating that (a) the de-

velopment team is involved with deci-

sion making (64% on average) and (b) 

individuals are empowered to make 

decisions on work directly related to 

them (89%). In contrast, however, the 

results note that, while the develop-

ment team is involved in tailoring the 

software development process (64%), 

team skills are the least used tailoring 

criteria (22%). The results also indicate that archi-
tecture and design were viewed from a 

top-down perspective and not as arti-

facts that should emerge from practice 

and dialogue. While this is interesting, 

the respondents™ comments indicate 

a poor understanding of the question 

and we have thus discounted data in 

this regard. Lastly, other interesting 

but less obvious results are:Project/process re˚ection has some 
 ˜organizational ‚presence™. Here prac-

tice results show that the primary 

techniques are ‚lessons learnt™ analy-
sis (50%), self-re˚ection (24%) and as 

an outcome of formal monitoring and 

measuring (13%). Those respondents 

who stated that no explicit re˚ection 

was carried out cited time limitation as 

the cause.Documentation is still seen as im-
 ˜portant. Here, however, the major-

ity of respondents viewed their current 

levels of documentation as necessary 

and suf˜cient for their needs (50%) 

though a signi˜cant number saw their 

documentation as necessary but not 

suf˜cient for their needs (38%). In cor-

relation terms, the majority of respon-

dents who note documentation as both 

necessary and suf˜cient use formal but 

tailored development processes.ImplicationsAll surveys carry health warnings and 

this example is not immune. Overall, 

the sample size of the data can be con-

sidered limited in that it addresses a 

UK audience and the response rate is 

small at 6%. With such limitations in 

mind we have sought to present the re-

sults without bias in order to allow the 

reader to draw their own inferences. 

Overall, however, a number of interest-

ing conclusions may be drawn in rela-

tion to the state of practice and the im-

plicit use of agile principles:A number of respondents state that 
 ˜they develop software in an ad-hoc 

manner (26%). From one perspective, 

this ˜nding may be considered worry-

ing in light of the ongoing issues of the 

software crisis. From another perspec-

tive, however, ad hoc does not neces-

sarily equate to disorganized and may 

be related to the use of ‚rules of thumb™ 
Table 3: Agile Themes in Relation to their Adoption in Practice.
Agile ThemesRelated PrinciplesRating the take up of principles in Practice
Justi˜cation of RatingCommunication and Collaboration
High
Team involvement
High


Re˜ection12
Frequent delivery 

of working software


 



Managing Changing 

Requirements2

DesignVoid contributed articles
JUNE 2010  |  VOL. 53  
|  NO. 6  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    130as the ‚marriage™ between agility and 
plan-based approaches, increasingly 

supported by framework-based pro-

cess approaches such as RUP.
 References: 1. Beck, K., et al, Manifesto for Agile Software 

Development
. 2001. 2. Cockburn, A. Agile Software Development. 
The Agile 
Software Development Series
, ed. A. Cockburn and J. 

Highsmith. Addison Wesley, 2002.
 3. Dutta, S., Lee, M., and Wassenhove, L.V. 
Software 

Engineering in Europe: A Study of Best Practices 16
, 3, 
(1999), 82-90. 
 4. Fafchamps, D. Organisational factors and reuse. 
IEEE 
Software 11
, 5, (1994), 31-41.
 5. Fitzgerald, B. The use of software development 

methodologies in practice: A ˜eld study. 
Information 
Systems Journal, 7
, 3, (1997), 201-212.
 6. Glass, R. Through a glass, darkly. Methodologies: Bend 

to ˜t? The Software Practitioner, Data Base Advances 

27, 1, (1996), 14 - 16.
 7.
 Glass, R.L. In search of meaning (A tale of two words). 

IEEE Software 19
, 4, (2002), 134 -136.
 8. Griss, M.L. and Wosser, M. Making reuse work at 

Hewlett-Packard. 
IEEE Software 12
, 1, (1995), 105-

107.
 9. Hardy, C.J., Thompson, J.B., and Edwards, H.M. The 

use, limitations and customization of structured 
systems developement methods in the United 

Kingdom. Information and Software Technology 37
, 3, 
(1995), 467-477.
 10. Lycett, M., et al. Resolving the tensions of agility in 

standardized practice. 
IEEE Computer 36,6, (June 
2003), 79-85.
 11. Patel, C., Lycett, M., Macredie, R.D., and de Cesare, S. 

Perceptions of agility and collaboration in software 

development practice. In 
Proceedings of the 39th 
Annual Hawaii International Conference on System 

Sciences (Kauai, Hawaii, January 4-7). IEEE Computer 

Society Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 2006.
 12. Reifer, D.J., How good are agile methods? IEEE 

Software 19, 4, (2002), 16 - 18.
Sergio de Cesare (sergio.decesare@brunel.ac.uk) is a 
Lecturer in Information Systems and Computing at Brunel 

University, London, U.K.
Mark Lycett
 (mark.lycett@brunel.ac.uk) is a professor of 
Information Systems Development at Brunel University, 

London, U.K.
Robert Macredie
 (robert.macredie@brunel.ac.uk) is a 
professor of Interactive Systems at Brunel University, 

London, U.K.
Chaitali Patel
 (chaitali.patel@agilisys.co.uk) is a project manager and process improvement consultant at Agilisys 

Ltd. in London, U.K. 
Ray Paul
 (ray.paul@brunel.ac.uk) is Emeritus Professor 
at Brunel University and Visiting Professor at the London 

School of Economics and Political Science, London, U.K.
© 2010 ACM
 0001-0782/10/0600 $10.00
