 SEPTEMBER 2017  
|  VOL. 60  
|  NO. 9  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    35DILBERT © 2012 SCOTT ADAMS. USED BY PERMISSION OF ANDREWS MCMEEL SYNDICATION. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.
interactions supported by the app to ac
-complish a goal).9  ˜With growing emphasis on good 
UX design, UX professionals, both de-signers and researchers, are gradually 
being incorporated as required roles 

in software development, alongside 
product managers and software de-velopers. A 2014 Forrester survey of 
112 companies found that organiza-tions in which there was systematic 

investment in UX design process and 
user research self-evaluated as having 
greater impact than those with more 

limited scope of investment. 
These trends describe a new con-text that often finds agile teams un-prepared for two main reasons. First, 

while the agile process formally val-ues the principle of collaboration 

with customers to define the product 
vision, we and our colleagues in in-dustry too often observe this princi-LESSONS LEARNED BY two user 
researchers in the software 

industry point to recurrent 
failures to incorporate user 

experience (UX) research 
or design research. This leads agile 

teams to miss the mark with their 
products because they neglect or mis-characterize the target users™ needs 

and environment. While the reported 
examples focus on software, the les-sons apply equally well to the develop-
ment of services or tangible products. 
Why It Matters to 
 the ACM Community
Over the past 15 years, agile and lean 
product development practices have 
increasingly become the norm in the 
IT industry.
3 At the same time, two 
synergistic trends have also emerged. 
 ˜ End users™ demand for good user 
experience has increased signi˜cantly, 
with wide adoption of mobile devices. 
Any new application needs to do some-thing useful or fun, plus it needs to do 
it well and fast enough. In 2013, tech-nology analysts found that only 16% of 

people tried a new mobile app more 
than twice, suggesting that users have 
low tolerance for poor user experience 

(UX) (where UX is the totality of user™s 
Viewpoint Why Agile Teams Fail 
Without UX Research 
Failures to involve end users or to collect comprehensive data representing 
user needs are described and solutions to avoid such failures are proposed.DOI:10.1145/3126156 Gregorio Convertino and Nancy Frishberg 
Even when customers 
are involved, 
sometimes the teams 
may still fail to involve 
the actual end users. 36    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  SEPTEMBER 2017  
|  VOL. 60  
|  NO. 9
viewpointsinternal tools unavailable to external 
customers; and do not need to use the 
product within the target users™ time 
constraints or digital environment. 
Second, the evidence internal prox-ies bring to the team is also biased. 

Professional sales and support staff 
are more likely to channel the needs 
of the largest or most strategic existing 

customers in the marketplace. They 
are more likely to focus on pain points 
of existing customers and less on 

what works well. Also, they may ignore 
new requirements that are not yet ad-dressed by the current tool or market. 
Therefore internal staff cannot be 
the sole representative of ﬁusersﬂŠ
as shown in the ﬁDilbertﬂ comic strip 
at the beginning of this column. 
User research welcomes their com-
ments about competitive analysis, 
current insights about information 
architecture or other issues, which 

complement customer support data, 
UX research, and other sources of 
user feedback.Executives liking sales demos ˚ 
target users adopting product. En-
terprise software companies, during 
their annual customer conferences, 
use a sales demo to portray features 

and functions intended to excite the 
audience of buyers, investors, and the 
market analysts about the company 
strategy. However, positive responses 
to the sales demos should not be tak-
en as equivalent to assertions about a product™s user requirements. Instead, these requirements need con˜rmation 
via a careful validation cycle. Let sales demos open a door toward users with the help of choosers and in˚uencers.Similarly, Customer Advisory 
Boards (which draw from customers 

who have large installations, or who 
represent a speci˜c or important seg-ment of the market) stand in for all 

customers and offer additional op-portunities to showcase future fea-tures or strategy. However, a basic law 

for success in the software industry is 
ﬁBuild Once, Sell Many.ﬂ
7 This prin-ciple creates an inherent tension be
-
tween satisfying current customers 
and attracting new ones. Therefore, a 

software company needs to constant-ly rethink their tiered offerings to in-clude new market segments or cus-tomer classes as these emerge, and 
avoid one-off development efforts.ple not being put into practice: teams 

do not validate requirements system-atically in the settings of use. Second, 

even when customers are involved, 
sometimes the teams may still fail to 
involve actual end users. As Rosen
-berg puts it, when user requirements 

are not validated but are still called 
ﬁuser stories,ﬂ it creates ﬁthe illusion 
of user requirementsﬂ that fools the 

team and the executives, who are then 
mystified when the product fails in 
the marketplace.10In this Viewpoint, we illustrate ˜ve classic examples of failures to involve  
actual end users or to gather suf˜-ciently comprehensive data to repre-
sent their needs. Then we propose how these failures can be avoided.Five Cases of Neglect or 
Mischaracterizations of the User 

We identi˜ed ˜ve classic cases of fail
-ures to involve actual end users.The Wild West case. 
The ˜rst and 
most obvious case occurs when the 

team does not do regular testing 
with the users along the develop-ment process. Thus the team fails to 
evaluate how well the software built 

˜ts target users, their tasks, and their 
environments. A real-life example of 
this failure is the development and 

deployment of Healthcare.org, where 
the team, admittedly, did not fully test 
the online health insurance market-
place until two weeks before it opened 
to the public on October 1, 2013. Then 
the site ran into major failures.8 Chooser ˚ target user.
 The second 
case is neither new nor unique to ag-
ile. The term ﬁcustomerﬂ con˚ates the 
chooser with the user. Let™s unpack 
these words:  ˜A customer is often an organiza-tion (the target buyer of enterprise 
software, that is, product chooser) as represented by the purchasing of˜cer, 
an executive or committee that makes a buying decision. ˜A customer is the target user only 
for consumer-facing products. For 

enterprise software, target users may be far from the process of choosing a 
product, and have no input about prod-ucts the organization selects.Agile terminology adds to the confu
-sion: product teams write 
user stories from the perspective of the person 
who uses the software, not the one who chooses it. Then a customer demo 
(or stakeholder review) at the end of 
an iteration confirms that each user 
story is satisfied. Here is when the 
terms customer and user are conflat
-ed. For enterprise software and large 
systems, practice teaches us that of
-
ten the ﬁend-of-iteration customerﬂ 
is someone representing the product 
chooser rather than the end user. 
So the end-of-iteration demo cannot be the sole form of feedback to predict 
user adoption and satisfaction. In ad-dition, the software development team should also leverage user research to 
answer questions such as: ˜What are the classes of users 
(personas)? ˜Have we validated that the intended 
users have the needs speci˜ed in the user stories? ˜What are the current user practices before the introduction of the product 
and the impact afterward?  ˜How would we extend the tool to 
support new personas or future use 

cases?Internal proxies ˚ target user.
 The 
third case is about bias. Some teams 

work with their in-house profes-sional services or sales support staff 
(that is, experts thought to represent 
large groups of customers) as proxies 

for end users. While we appreciate 
the expertise and knowledge these 
resources bring, we are wary of two 

common types of misrepresentation 
in these situations. 
First, internal proxies are unrepre-sentative as end users because they 
have multiple unfair advantages: they 

know the software inside out, includ-ing the work-arounds; have access to 
Agile teams 
 without 
 user research 
 are prone 
 to building 
 the wrong 
 product. SEPTEMBER 2017  
|  VOL. 60  
|  NO. 9  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    37viewpointsegories, or brands, and tries to predict the likelihood of purchase, engagement, or subscription. ˜User research aims at improving the user experience by understand-ing the relation between actual usage behaviors and the properties of the 
design. To this end, it measures the 
behavior and attitudes of users thereby learning whether the product (or ser-vice) is usable, useful and delightful, including after decision to purchase. We urge organizations to act strate
-gically and connect market research, 
user research, and customer success 
functions. This requires aligning goals and sharing data among Marketing, Sales, Customer Success, and the UX Team (typically in Product or R&D).
1,4The Way Forward: 
 Educate Managers and Agile 
Development Teams
We have shown five different ways that 
agile teams without user research are 
prone to building the wrong product. 
To avoid such failures, we invite soft
-ware managers and product teams 

to assess and fill the current gap in a 
team™s competencies. The closing ta-ble gives short-term and longer-term 
action items to address the gaps.  References1. Buley, L. The modern UX organization. 
Forrester 
Report.
 (2016); https://vimeo.com/121037431 
2. Grudin J. 
From Tool to Partner: The Evolution of Human-
Computer Interaction. 
Morgan & Claypool, 2017.
3. HP report. 
Agile Is the New Normal: Adopting Agile 
Project Management. 4AA5-7619ENW, May 2015.
4. Kell, E. Interview by Steve Portigal. 
Portigal 
blog. 
Podcast and transcript. (Mar. 1, 2016); http://www.
portigal.com/podcast/10-elizabeth-kell-of-comcast/ 
5. Klein, L. UX for Lean Startups: Faster, Smarter User 
Experience Research and Design. O™Reilly, 2013. 
6. Loranger, H. UX Without User Research Is Not UX. 

(Aug. 10, 2014) 
Nielsen Norman Group blog. http://

www.nngroup.com/articles/ux-without-user-research/ 
7. Mironov, R. 
Four Laws Of Software Economics.
 Part 2: 

Law of Build Once, Sell Many. (Sept. 14, 2015); http://
www.mironov.com/4law2/ 
8. Pear, R. Contractors Describe Limited Testing of 
Insurance Web Site. 
New York Times 
(Oct. 24, 2013); http://nyti.ms/292NryG 
9. Perez, S. Users have low tolerance for buggy apps. 

Techcrunch.
 (Mar 12, 2013);[ http://tcrn.ch/Y80ctA 
10. Rosenberg, D. Introducing the business of UX. 
Interactions.
 Forums. XXI.1 Jan.ŒFeb. 2014.
11. Spool, J.M. Assessing your team™s UX skills. 
UIE. (Dec. 
10, 2007); https://www.uie.com/articles/assessing_

ux_teams/Gregorio Convertino
 (gconvertino@informatica.com) 
 
is a UX manager and principal user researcher at Informatica LLC.
Nancy Frishberg 
(nancyf@acm.org) is a UX researcher and strategist, in private practice, and a 25+-year member 
of the local SIGCHI Chapter BayCHI.org.Copyright held by authors.Confusing business leaders with us-ers or the sales demo with the product 
prototype leads companies to build products based on what sales and 
product managers believe is awesome (for example, see Loranger6). Instead, we advocate validating the designs 
with actual end users during the prod-uct development.Big data (What? When?) < The 
full picture (... How? Why?). Collect-
ing and analyzing big data about 
digital product use is popular among 
product managers and even soft-
ware developers, who can now learn 
what features get traction with us-ers. We support the use of big data 

techniques as part of user research 
and user-centered design, but not as 

a substitute for qualitative user re-search. Let™s review two familiar ways 
to use big data on usage: user data 

analytics and A/B testing.User data analytics can quickly an
-swer questions about current usage: 

quantity and most frequent patterns, 
such as How many? How often? 
When? Where? Once a product team 

has worked out most of the design 
(interaction patterns, page layouts, 
and more), A/B testing compares de-sign alternatives, such as ﬁwhich im
-age on a page produces more click-
throughsﬂ? In vivo experiments with 
sufficient traffic can generate large 
amount of useful data. Thus, A/B 

testing is very helpful for small in-cremental adjustments.Every software company is in the 
business of ˜nding and keeping new 
customers. Suppose the logs show the 

subscribers of an online dating applica-tion are not renewing. Should the com-pany rejoice or despair? If people are 

getting good matches, and thus are sat-is˜ed, non-renewal implies success. If 
they are hopelessly disappointed by not 

getting dates, non-renewal implies fail-ure. Big data won™t tell you which, but 
observing and listening to even a hand-ful of non-renewing individuals will.In brief, quantitative data is use
-ful but has two limitations: First, it 

will not tell the team why the current 
features are or are not used.
5 Different 
classes of users can have different rea
-sons. Second, it will not identify what 
additional or alternative features ap
-peal to a new class of users unfamil-iar with the product. To answer these 
questions the team needs to rely on 
qualitative research with existing and 
proposed classes of users.Market Research ˛ User ResearchFinally, we point to the growing and 
worrisome tendency in industry to mix 
up user research with market research. Market research groups make great partners for user research. While user 
research and market research have a few techniques in common (for example, 
surveys and focus groups), the goals and 
variables they focus on are different. ˜Market research seeks to under
-stand attitudes toward products, cat-Actions to address gaps in UX competencies.Short term 
1.  
Analyze the current skills of the team and 
˚ag the gap. A functional product team needs several key skill sets or UX competencies: 
 UX research, UX design, UI software 
development and prototyping.
11 These might be ˜lled by training the current team members or 

hiring UX professionals full-time or part-time.
2.  Support product managers (or product 

owners) with investment in UX. 
 Too often, product managers ˜nd their role 
 
is a sort of ﬁkitchen sinkﬂ for any task 
 that is not software development. 
 We encourage product managers to ˜nd 
additional resources in the UX competencies, to bene˜t both product and their workload. Longer term
3. Integrate UX competencies
 a.  
Teams need UX research competencies as well as UX design skills (interaction, visual). 
 Other related skill sets include content development and documentation; accessibility; 
globalization and localization. 4. Collect and prioritize ˜ndings from user research a. Seek user feedback early and often.
 b. Create channels to learn from end users and appropriate surrogates. c. Prioritize UX issues during backlog grooming; remove friction and measure delight.
 d. Build new features only after steps 4.a.Œc. are done for each key version of the product.
