 One of the mosttalked-about
methodologiesamong the softwareengi-neering community over the

past decade has been a set of
principles and practices
called ÒExtreme Program-
ming,Ó or ÒXP.Ó
1Kent Beck
led in founding this move-

ment around 1996. As I

learned more about XP, it

occurred to me that many of

the practices were similar to

iterative software engineer-

ing and prototype-driven

product development in
general. I am particularlyfamiliar with the ÒSynchro-

nize-and-StabilizeÓ tech-

niques used at Microsoft in past

yearsÑat least before Windows

became the mammoth project it

is todayÑas well as at Netscape

and other PC and Internet soft-

warecompanies.2Inthis column,Ipresent a brief overview of a
dozen key XP practices and how
they compareto a Microsoft-
style iterative development

process.
3Planning Around User Sto-
ries. 
The goal in XP projects is
to plan the project work based
on three techniques: CreateÒuser storiesÓ that capture the

functionality or features the

customer wants; generate esti-mates fromthe developers of
how long it will take to create

each of these features (based on

their prior experience); and
then ask the customer to priori-
tize which features they want in

which order, as well as how

often they would like to see a
working version of the product.

The Microsoft-style analogy forthis practice is to structureproduct requirements around

ÒfeaturesÓ that represent small
chunks of functionality under-standable to users as well as to rely

heavily on observations of how

users actually use its products. 
Small Releases of Functional-
ity.XP projects havethe goal ofTechnology Strategy and Management
Extreme Programming 
Compared with Microsoft-Style

Iterative Development 
Highlighting the similaritiesÑalthough they might be superficial in
some casesÑin softwaredevelopment practices.
Michael A. Cusumano1For the basic text on XP, see Kent Beck with CynthiaAndres, Extreme Programming Explained, Second Edi-tion,Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2005.2My discussion of MicrosoftÕs and other iterative prac-tices such as at Netscape can be found in chapter 4 ofThe Business of Software,Free Press/Simon and Schus-ter, New York, 2004. See also Michael A. Cusumano
and Richard W. Selby, Microsoft Secrets,FreePress/Simon and Schuster, New York, 1995 and
Michael A. Cusumano and David B. Yoffie,Competingon Internet Time: Lessons from Netscape and Its Battle
with Microsoft,Free Press/Simon and Schuster, NewYork, 1998.3My thanks to Kent Beck for reviewing a draft of thiscolumn as well as for the many discussions we have had
over the past several years about XP practices, how they
compare to Microsoft development practices, and to
what extent they could be useful for people interested in
product development more generally.COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM
October  2007/Vol. 50, No. 1015  16October  2007/Vol. 50, No. 10COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM
building the product around these
user stories in small increments of

functionality and then showing or

ÒreleasingÓ the evolving product to
the customer or representative

users as often as possible. The
Microsoft-style analogy would beto evolve features in increments

through Òdaily builds,Ó use these

builds internally, and show the

evolving product to users in
usability labs, beforemoving to abeta release process. 
System or Project Metaphor.
XP teams tryto assign an organiz-ing metaphor to each project to

give everyone a common focus
and to help the team and the cus-
tomer understand what the proj-ect is about and what is most
important. The Microsoft-style

analogy is to create a short Òvision

statementÓ for each project defin-

ing the key features that will be

(and not be) in the product.Simple Design.XP team mem-bers focus on building only what
user stories suggest the customer
needs Òtoday
Ó in the simplest wayto get the job done. The assump-
tion is that future requirements
will change unpredictably and

therefore doing too much Òdesign
for the futureÓwill inevitablyinvolv
etoo much waste of timeand manpower. This is somewhat

of a controversial point for large,

complex software systems, but this

is the idea. There is no specific
Microsoft-style analogy for this

point. Early Microsoft projects

(like the first version of Basic for

the Altair PC) had very simple

designs. But ad hoc coding and

incremental feature creep, as with
Windows Longhorn/Vista, has led
to spaghetti-style architectures and

products that are unnecessarily

large and cumbersome. (See my

July 2006 column ÒWhat Road
Ahead for Microsoft and Win-dows?Ó, and my February 2007

column ÒWhat Road Ahead for

Microsoft the Company?Ó.)MicrosoftÕs large development
teams also tend to build too many
features that customers never or

rarely use.Continuous Testing (or Test-
Driven Design).
XP project mem-
bers are supposed to cr
eate twotypes of tests before or as they

write code in order to find and fix

defects as they occur as well as feel

an immediate sense of progress.
First, they write automated unit

tests that cover small chunks of

incrementally added functionality.
Second, they create customer

acceptance tests that check the
broader functionality of features as

defined in the user stories.
Microsoft projects also generally
requireprogrammers and theirtester ÒbuddiesÓ to run Òsmoke

testsÓ once or more a day on

newly written code before and

after attempts to integrate the new
code with the project build. In the

early days of the Internet, when

Microsoft very rapidly introduced

products such as Internet Explorer
and NetMeeting, Microsoft teams

also followed more of an XP style

in that they sometimes had pro-
gram managers skip the stage of
writing functional specifications
and instead focus on writing test
cases while developers wrote code.
4Refactoring. 
XP programmerscontinue to revise their pr
oductdesigns and the underlying Òarchi-

tectureÓ(what subsystems existand what interfaces they hav
etoother subsystems or systems) to
accommodate new functionality

as well as to eliminate redundant

code. This ÒrefactoringÓ occurs in

Microsoft-style projects as well.

For example, the Office and Win-

dows teams incrementally re-

architected during the 1990s and

2000s to take on major newfunc-tionality as needs became appar-ent, ranging from sharing objects

across applications to linking

directly with the Internet or
accommodating Web services. In

general, Microsoft projects, like

XP projects, can re-architect

within limits to accommodate
newfunctionality.
However, it
also appears that Microsoft teamsTechnology Strategy and Management
INGENERAL
,M
ICROSOFTPROJECTS
,LIKEXP PROJECTS,CANRE
-ARCHITECTWITHINLIMITSTOACCOMMODATENEWFUNCTIONALITY
.4Michael A. Cusumano and David B. Yoffie, Compet-
ing on Internet Time: Lessons from Netscape and Its Bat-
tle with Microsoft,Free Press/Simon and Schuster, NewYork, 1998, p. 250. have learned to plan more than
they did in the early days and,
unlike XP projects, generally have

product release plans that stretch

one or two versions into the

future. 
Pair Programming.
Perhaps
the most unusual technique used
in XP projects is for team mem-bers to write code in pairsÑthat
is, with two people sitting at one
computer. The idea is that oneperson is always reviewing what

the other person is writing to
catch potential errors as well as to

spread knowledge of how the

product works at a detailed level.

This practice may seem to cut
engineering productivity in half
,but some research suggests that,

because team members more

quickly catch errors b
yworking inpairs, and errors can become

extremely time-consuming and

costly to fix later in a project, pro-

gramming productivity may actu-

ally increase.
5There is no rule at
Microsoft for pair programming,

though occasionally some people
have experimented with this tech-

nique. However, there are analo-

gies. One is the M
icrosoft practiceofpairing each programmer with
aÒtester buddyÓ who continually
writes test cases for the program-

merÕs code. Another less formal
practice is for programmers to

have ÒbuddiesÓ that read their

code, instead of more intensive

code inspections bylarger groups
in formal meetings.CollectiveP
roduct (Code)Ownership.To reduce bottle-
necks in making changes to a
product, the general rule is thatany XP team member can change
any part in the system in any

module. Team members take indi-

vidual responsibility for tasks and

delivery dates, but they share

ownership of the actual codeÑthe

computer instructions that make

softwarework. Microsoft and
most other software companies I

knowassign individual ownership
to code modules to make suresomeone is responsible for each

part of the product. However, in

companies like Microsoft where

code lives on for many years, code

does become collectively o
wnedover time, by default.
Continuous Integration.
XPteam members synchronizetheirchanges and merge or ÒintegrateÓthem into the evolving code baseat least daily as well as run their
tests beforeand after the integra-tion exercise. If any problems

occur, they must fix the code

immediately. In this way, the

evolving product is always sup-

posed to work. This idea of daily

builds and integration testing is
also fundamental to Microsoft-
style development, used regularly

at the company since approxi-

mately 1989 along with the prac-tice of breaking projects into

shorter ÒmilestoneÓ subprojects of

afew weeks or months duration.
Daily builds became more diffi-
cult to do with massive
systemslike Windows, and Microsoft hasfound ways to rely more on

branch or subsystem builds. It is

also true that, for large projects at

Microsoft, the major responsibili-
ties for integration have shifted to

dedicated build teams, though
individual programmers still run

quick tests themselves before

checking into the project build.

MicrosoftÕs build tests may not

have the same intensity or effec-

tiveness as XP-style continuous

integration, but the basic goal of
continuous integration remains an

important similarity between XP
and Microsoft-style iterative devel-

opment.Minimal Overtime.
Thereis asocial or psychological element toXP practices in that Beck andother advocates strongly discour-

age programmers from working

ov
ertime. Overtime may beinevitable in critical phases of a
project, such as just before the

final ship date. But the basic phi
-losophy is that projects r
equiringlarge amounts of overtime gener-

ally reflect poor scheduling and

bad management, and place
unnecessary stress on the whole

team. The XP ideal, as Beck says,

is mutual respect and collabora-

tion among programmers. In con-

trast, at Microsoft and most other

softwarecompanies, weoften seemarketing goals take priority overprofessional goals in a project,

forcing companies to use overtime

to compensate for unrealisticschedules or poor project manage-

ment and teamwork. Another

approach common in Windows

and other Microsoft groups,

rather than simply relying on

ov
ertime, is to delay products,sometimes for years.
On-site Customer Representa-
tive. XP projects do not want todesign a project for some abstract
COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM
October  2007/Vol. 50, No. 10175See Alistair Cockburn and Laurie Williams, ÒTheCosts and Benefits of Pair Programming,Ó unpublishedconference paper, available at http://collaboration.csc.
ncsu.edu/laurie/Papers/XPSardinia.PDF. set of users or a distant customeras envisioned by an engineer or

marketing manager. Again, the

goal is to avoid mistakes and

wasted time. XP teams try to

workalongside the customer for acustom project or with r
epresen
-tatives of the customer, such as

product managers, for more pack-

aged or standardized products.

Though developers and program

managers drivedesigns inMicrosoft, it is standard practice

to have product managers and

program managers represent thecustomer in the design process,and to use usability labs and beta
releases to get feedback on

designs.Design (Coding) Standards.
XP team members are supposed

to use the same design notations
or standards. The goal here is tofacilitate communication and col-
lectivecode ownership,that is, tomake it possible for any team
member to understand and
change any part of the product or

system, during a particular project

or in the future. It has been com-

mon in MicrosoftÕs application

projects to use a standard coding

nomenclatureand is frequently
used in operating system develop-ment as well.In conclusion, every XP prac-
tice except simple design and per-

haps collective code ownership

has some analogues in aMicrosoft-style development

process. This suggests about an

80% overlap. Beck argues that

many of these similarities aresuperficial, and that is no doubt

true. But there is also a reason for
the similarities, superficial or

notÑgood programmers gener-

ally gravitate toward similar good

engineering practices that make
sense for their contexts. I think
Microsoft moreclosely resembledXP in its earlier years. Today, it

would benefit from internalizing

some XP concepts moredeeply,such as the importance of simple

design and more direct involve-

ment of customer representatives.
But why choose an iterative
development style to begin with?

Usually, the reason is the need to

evolve or change designs more

easily during a project without

paying too much of a penalty
such as through increased bugs.

Infact, research bymyself andcolleagues on Hewlett-PackardÕs

software development practices

indicated the benefits of a morecontrolled waterfall-style process

disappeared in comparison to iter-

ative projects when (and only

when) projects used a combina-

tion of iterativetechniques andgood basic practices. These prac-tices were: early prototypes shown

to customers (to reduce the need

for late changes), continuous inte-
gration and regression testing (to

make sure working functions did

not break when engineers added

newfunctionality), and designreviews (again, to ensure the 

project was doing the right thing

before building too much of the

product).
Ofcourse, XP also has inspiredcritics. I hear most often that
these techniques seem appropriate

only for small-scale projects with

top-notch programmers who can

adapt to working in pairs. XP also

presents problems for contract

workthat requires early detailed
proposals and cost estimates, and

detailed documentation. These
criticisms are valid, though I

believe iterative development

practices are useful for any soft-

wareproject wherethe upfront
specifications areincompleteÑwhich is nearly always the case.
We can also break large projects

into smaller projectsÑif the sys-

tem architecture is sufficiently

modular and the integration
builds actually work.
Michael Cusumano(cusumano@mit.edu) is a professor at the MIT SloanSchool of Management and author of TheBusiness of Software,Free Press/Simon andSchuster, 2004. ©2007 ACM 0001-0782/07/1000 $5.00c18October  2007/Vol. 50, No. 10COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM
Technology Strategy and Management
6See Alan MacCormack et al., ÒTrade-offs between Pro-ductivity and Quality in Selecting Software Develop-ment Practices.Ó IEEE Software 20,5(Sept./Oct.2003), 78Ð85.GOODPROGRAMMERSGENERALLYGRAVITATETOWARDSIMILARGOODENGINEERING
PRACTICESTHATMAKESENSEFORTHEIRCONTEXTS
.