 Technology Strategyand ManagementMichael CusumanoFinding Your Balance in theProducts and Services DebateSoftware companies must balance product and service revenues tosurvive bad times and grow rapidly in good times.Acommon debate I hearamong software entre-preneurs and managersis whether it is better inthe software business to bemainly a products company or aservices companyŠtheunderlying assumptionbeing that a companycannot be equally goodat both. During theboon years for technol-ogy companies before2001, I believedŠand 1think most venture cap-italists, managers, andentrepreneursbelievedŠit is muchbetter to be mainly aproducts company. I nolonger think this is ttue.A products companygets most of its revenuesthrough new sales of shrink-wrapped software packages. Thereare potentially large support andmaintenance costs associated witha large user base. But, in general,if it costs you roughly the same tomake one or one million copies ofa product, you would be a foolnot to want to sell a million asisŠthat is, without adding one-of-a-kind features for individualcustomers. The more a softwarecompany gets into customizing itsproducts for each customer, aswell as selling large amounts ofmaintenance (special productenhancements as well as regularproduct upgrades) and supportservices, the more employees itneeds, the more unique projectsor labor-intensive work it under-takes, and the more it leanstoward becoming a servicescompany.Of course, what I now realizeall too painfully is that in badtimes customers (individuals orenterprises) may decide not tobuy new software versions. Thispotential failure to buy puts therevenues of software productscompanies at much more riskthan service-oriented companieswith lots of long-term con-tracts. The discretionarynature of software productsales was not so obvious tome or pronounced before thectash ofthe post-2000 Inter-net economy.Because software productsales are subject to buyers"just saying no," it is nowapparent that most healthysoftware companies need tobalance product and servicerevenues to grow rapidly ingood times and to survivethe lean years. In bad times,often the only revenues asoftware company can really bankon are ftom maintenance and ser-vices (customization of code, sys-tem implementation, training,and technical consulting) deliv-ered under long-term contracts. Ilike to refer to the services-ori-ented business model as beingsomewhat like that of a bank.The software company's long-term contracts for maintenanceCOMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM March 1003/Vol. 46, No 315 Technology Strategyand Managementand services are akin to assets ondeposit. In contrast, the businessmodel of software prodticts com-panies, which strive to replicatecopy after copy of a standardi7.edgood, is tnore like rhat of a print-ing press.A Healthy TensionSoftware compatiics, especiallyyoung ones, often struggle withthe products versus servicesdebate. The reason is obvious. Ahit software package, like a best-selling book, can generate enor-mous profits. In practice though,it is jtist as hard to write a hitsofrware package as a New Yorkget those revenues from servicecontracts to support their newproduct sales. A general rule ofthumb is that, over the lifetime otusing a software product, enter-prise customers pay between oneand two dollars in service andmaintetiance tees per dollar ofsoftware license fees (the up-frontproduct cost). As a result, thepipeline of potential service rev-enues will rise or fall just assteeply as the rise or fall in newproduct sales, albeit with a lag ofa couple of years. Therefore, soft-ware companies witb a strong ser-vices business must think moresoftware companies sell packagedsofhvare to corporations, but aspart ofthe contracts, the enter-prise customers agree to pay a cer-tain amount periodically forproduct upgrades, new training,technical support, expanded prod-uct use, and some special bugfixes, usually included tmdermaintenance and service fees. So,as packaged sales or softwarelicense fees increase, so do mainte-nance and service revenues.Know Your BusinessRegardless of the balance ofproducts and services theychoose, managers of softwareabout seiiing products, despiteRegardless ofthe balance of products and services they choose, managersof software companies must understand what their primary business is,and recognize how the two differŠfor selling products requires verydifferent organizational capabilities than selling services.Times best-seller. It is even harderto follow that hit with a continu-ous stream of new proditcts (thesequel or upgrade business) thatsell in good and bad economies.Every successful software com-pany I know of has dealt withthe challenge of saturated mar-kets. Hence the tension thatinevitably arises among enterprisesoftware companies with a strongproducts business: they realizethey must move eventuallytoward selling more labor-inten-sive services.And the struggle is more com-plicated than this. Software prod-ucts companies that want morerevenues from services generallytbeir more sporadic and non-recurring levels.It is also possible for softwareproducts companies to gravitatetoo much toward services andruin the potential of their prod-ucts business, especially when firststarting out, or in bad economictimes. Say a software companyselling a standardized product sat-urates this market, and startsofitering customers anything theywant. This leads to selling cus-tomized versions ofthe products,one at a time. The service portionof a company's revenues, and thecost of these revenues, start to risedramatically.In a more profitable scenario.companies must understand whattheir pritnary business is, andrecognize how the two differŠfor selling products requires verydifferent organizational capabili-ties than selling services.The software products businessis mainly about volume-selling orlicensing the most copies you canof a standardized product. Thebasic growth strategies here arescaling or duplicating what youhave done in similar markets.Microsoft has set the model forsuch firms, which ensure volumesales by setting de facto technicalstandards that "lock in" cus-tomers, whose software applica-tions and databases only work on16March 2003/Vol. 46. No. 3 COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM a particular operating system orhardware plarform. The develop-ment organization needs to focuson creating a stream of new prod-ucts and upgrades at regular inter-vals (a la Windows 95, 98, and2000) with standardized featuresgood enough tor the largest possi-ble set of users. Mass marketingand distribution skills are critical.Part of the strategy for a productscompany might also include try-ing to become a platform leader,although most software compa-nies create complementsŠprod-ucts that work with and add valueto a platform, such as a WindowsPC or Unix workstation, or ahandheld device powered by thePalm operating system.The software services businessis mainly about people. You needto build specific rather than gen-eral customer relationships^Š-andget enough profitable accounts tokeep your consultants and devel-opers busy close to 100% of thetime. Companies such as IBM,PriceWaterhouseCoopers, Accen-ture (formerly Andersen Consult-ing}, and Cap Gemini Ernst &Young have set the standards here.A number of Indian companies,including Tata, Wipro, Infosys,and Satym have also come onstrong as global competitors bid-ding fx>r custom IT jobs. Hitachi,Fujitsu, and IBM Japan are lead-ers in the Japanese market. Thesetypes of services are not scale busi-nesses, not sofrware licensing a laMicrosoft. But services companiescan be strategic as well as efficient.It is usually important to mixsenior with junior people to maxi-mize profits for any given clientproject, with the challenge beingto do this without damaging therelationship by having inade-quately skilled people on the job.While software products com-panies are lured by potentiallyenormous scale economies, theHoly Crail for service companiesare the more elusive scopeeconomies. These can arise fromstructuring how-to knowledge onrequirements, project manage-ment, customization, user accep-tance testing, or design reuseacross different projects. Scopeeconomies can also arise fromclever account managementŠforming relationships with partic-ular customers who keep comingback for more of your softwareand services over time.So in a nutshell, my take onthe products and services debate isthat neither designation is supe-rior. Companies should knowwhere they stand as far as theirprimary focus, but shouldnt be sorigid that they neglect to reapbenefits from both incomestreams. BCUSUMANO (cusumano@niit.edu) is [he -Slo.in Management ReviewDistinguished Professor at the MIT SloanSchool of Management.Permission [i> make diginil or liard topics lit all or part ofiliis wiirk tor personal or cUssruom ust is granred withoutfk- provided tliui copies are not made or distributed torprofit or tummenial mlvantane and that copies bear ttiisnotice and the full i itation on the tirst |Klne. To copy oih-erwisc. ti) tepublish. ro piisr on servers or lo redistributeto lists, requires prior speiifii: ptrmissioti and/ur J tee,0 2003 ACM 0002-()782/O.V030() (5.00Trees in our cities provide weicome reiiet fromthe pressures Q\ modern iifeBe Part OfHistoryow, for the first time, the ArborDay Foundation is making it possiblefor everyone to vote for a nationalsymbolŠAmerica's National Tree. Goonline now at arborday.org and castyour vote. The voting ends midnight,the day before National Arbor Day, thelast Friday in April.If you don't have Internet accessyou can write your selection on a threeby five card and send it to: NationalTree, The National Arbor DayFoundation, Nebraska City, NE 68410.^gVThe National\J? Arbor Day Foundation*Surround yourself with fabulous opportunilles and unbeatableweaiher when you relocate to sunny Florida. More ihan 50Florida hospitals will be on-hand to fill you in on Ihe excitingNURSiNG positions Ihey have lo offer during our 16"'annual:FHAHealth Care Job FairTuesday, March 11, 20039 am - 2 pmRosen Plaza HotelOrlando, FloridaFlorida has so much more to otfei tdati uopica! breezes alone:there's no state income taK. plenty of affordable housing, year-round sports, and beaches that can't be beat. Plus, many par-ticipating hospitals offer relocation assistance and sign-onbonuses. Do yoursell-and your career-a favor and head southto tfie Sunshine State.For more information,please call 1-800-275-1474 or visit www.flia.org.FLommHOSPTIALASSOOATKWCOMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM March 2a03/Vol 46, No 3 