 Communications of the Association for Information Systems˝*,.ˆˇ--/*''*  %.%*)*,&.$6-!'˛%-)!*,-4%˛.!,%*/#$*/,)˛'˜.,%˚,˛,!˜˜!+.!*((/)%˜˛.%*)--*˜%˛.)"*,(˛.2-.!(/.$*,%3! (%)%-.,˛.˜.,%˚,˛,(˛.'!˛-*).˛˜.!'%˚,˛,-)!*,#ˆ!˜*((!) !%.˛.%*)˛,$**(˛) '˘+!)%)*51˛,) /-.,˛-ˇ˘*',.0˛%'˛˚.$6-!'˛%-)!*,*- Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 800- 811 800 
Opening Up Of The Software Industry: The Case Of SAP, by A. Farhoomand 
  OPENING UP OF THE SOFTWARE INDUSTRY: 
THE CASE OF SAP1,2  Ali Farhoomand 
School of Business 
University of Hong Kong 
Ali@business.hku.hk
 ABSTRACT 
With globalization, outsourcing, changing regul
ations and rapid technological innovations, 
companies are forced to embrace more agile business architecture.  This in turn calls for 
enterprise applications that are based on open standards, simple to implement, and easy to 
modify and upgrade.  In response to these stru
ctural changes in the market and customer 
demands, and facing fierce competition in a saturated market, SAP had to rethink its strategic 
position. This case discusses how SAP transformed
 itself by turning its proprietary software 
products to an open development and integration pl
atform so that custom
ers could modify them 
to suit their specific needs.  The implications of
 this new strategy for software industry as a whole 
are discussed. 
Keywords:
 strategic fit, SAP, software industry 
                                                      
 1 An earlier version of this paper was presented at the 
8th World Congress on the Management of 
e-Business
, 12-13 July 2007, Toronto, Canada. 
2 A teaching note is available from the author to
 any faculty member listed in the MISRC/ISWorld 
directory. 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 800- 811 801 
Opening Up Of The Software Industry: The Case Of SAP, by A. Farhoomand 
OPENING UP OF THE SOFTWARE INDUSTRY: 
THE CASE OF SAP I. INTRODUCTION 
Companies in the 2000s were increasingly challenged to devise and implement new business 
models in order to adapt to the changing economic landscape. This entailed putting in place 
enterprise applications that were open-source, si
mple to implement and easy to integrate within 
and without the organizational bounds. Because trad
itional enterprise resource planning (ERP) 
systems were generally complex, proprietary and diffi
cult to install, ERP systems providers had to 
reposition themselves strategically. SAP, the leadi
ng company in this spac
e, faced this challenge 
by transforming itself from a closed source software developer to an open source software 
integrator. By opening up its proprietary so
ftware products as an open development and 
integration platform, SAP would allo
w its customers to modify their 
ERPs to suit their specific 
needs. This new strategy, however, would fund
amentally affect the company™s business 
architecture. In other words, SAP had to rethin
k the totality of how it would define its value 
proposition, identify and target 
its customers, deploy its resour
ces, configure its business 
processes, manage its alliances, and develop and maintain its profit and growth engines.  
II. BRIEF HISTORY OF SAP SAP was founded in 1972 by severa
l former IBM software engineers.
 Led by Hasso Plattner, the 
company started its business in
 Walldorf, a small town outsi
de Frankfurt, Germany. SAP was the 
vanguard of developing application systems wh
ich aimed to automate the entire enterprise 
operations rather than focusing on individual busine
ss functions. Such application packages were 
later referred to as enterprise resource planni
ng (ERP) systems in the software market. Many 
large businesses were changed by this new breed of software that seamlessly integrated all the 
vital information flowing through companies. 
In 1973, SAP launched its first major product, R/1, an instantaneous accounting transactions 
processing system. Six years later, SAP successful
ly developed R/2, the successor to R/1. The 
mainframe software package was able to link external databases and communications systems. 
In the late 1980s, SAP went public. Around the same time, Pl
attner began to create the next 
version of the software package that would be 
able to work in the decentralized computing 
environment. In 1992, as sales of its R/2 
mainframe software began to slow down, SAP 
introduced R/3, the client/serverŒbased ERP sy
stem. In 1998, SAP was listed on the New York 
Stock Exchange (NYSE). In the same year, 
Henning Kagermann, a former academic in 
theoretical physics and a veteran executive of
 the software company, was named co-chairman 
along with Plattner. This also marked the pinnacle of the German software company in the 1990s, 

as it was considered by many as a second Microsoft [Lower 2006]. 
III. THE REVOLUTION 
IN THE BACK-OFFICE 
Before ERP, companies spent a fortune on tailor-
made application systems to support their back-
office functions such as distribution, accoun
ting, human resources (HR) and manufacturing. 
Companies spent millions of dollars to integrate 
their systems, e.g., building highly customized 
interfaces between application systems and thei
r individual databases, and frequent patching and 
data cleanup to ensure data integrity and consistency. It was ERP that came to change how large 
companies™ businesses operated in the 1990s. 
ERP was a successor to materials requirement planning (MRP) systems, which were designed to 
automate and manage production scheduling, includ
ing ordering the appropriate materials. In the 
1980s, with the introduction of ERPs, separate 
MRP systems were no longer required, as their 
main features and functions were incorporated in
 this new breed of enterprise application. ERP 
could support a broad range of activities in 
businesses, including product planning, parts 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 800- 811 802 
Opening Up Of The Software Industry: The Case Of SAP, by A. Farhoomand 
purchasing, maintaining inventorie
s, interacting with 
suppliers, providing customer service and 
tracking orders. ERP could also include application modules for the finance and HR aspects of a 
business. 
Building a single software program that served t
he multiple needs of various departments was a 
tremendous challenge, as each department often h
ad its own IT system designed specifically to 
address its needs. ERP did just thatŠit combi
ned all the diverse needs of an enterprise™s 
departments together into a single, integrated
 software program that operated on a single 
database. Thus, the various departments could share information and communicate with each 
other more easily. Such an integrated approach 
could yield a tremendous payback if the software 
was correctly installed.  
In the pre-ERP era, after a customer issued an or
der, the details of an order were often entered 
and re-entered into different departmental IT system
s. As there were multiple data entry and re-
entry steps required to capture an 
order™s details into different IT 
systems, errors were often rife. 
Meanwhile, it was difficult to truly know what th
e status of the order was at any given point in 
time. For instance, the finance department could not
 get into the warehous
e™s IT systems to see 
whether the item had been shipped or not. 
With ERP, there was no longer a need for stan
d-alone systems in finance, HR, manufacturing 
and warehousing. Now a single unified application 
made up of various modules could replace all 
the old stand-alone systems. The modules were tigh
tly integrated and finance could now look into 
the warehouse to check if an order had been shipped.  
Many companies would need months, or even years,
 to implement the entire ERP package with a 
process that often involved five 
to six times the original cost of the software. These often included 
the costs of hiring external consultants to c
onduct large scale reengineering in a number of 
business processes and organizati
on structures, and to facilitat
e the implementation of such 
changes within an enterprise. 
IV. IMPACT OF ERP ON ENTERPRISES 
BASF Aktiengesellschaft was one of the successf
ul SAP implementation stories. As a German-
based chemical company and a lo
ng-time customer of SAP sinc
e the 1980s, the company had 
more than 82,000 employees worldwide and sales of US$45 billion in 2004. The chemical 
company leveraged SAP to form a co
re platform to link up various functions 
of the company, from 
finance to procurement, and from production to wa
rehousing and inventory. After more than two 
decades, with substant
ial savings and added values, BASF 
continued to invest in SAP to 
standardize the processes of all divisions within the enterprise [Sullivan 2005]. 
Although an ERP system was designed to be an 
off-the-shelf package, companies often found 
the system overly complex to install and run.
 In particular, ERPs often changed how people 
worked and how businesses were run. For instance, Dell Computer attempted to implement the 
SAP R/3 system to support its manufacturing op
erations in 1994, and had 
to abandon the project 
in 1996. Terry Kelley, Chief Information Officer 
at Dell, commented: ﬁSAP was too monolithic to 
be altered for changing business needs – Over the two years we were working with SAP, our 
business model changed from a worldwide focus to a segmented regional focusﬂ [Stein 1998]. 
There were many other leading corporations besi
des Dell that also took on SAP projects and quit 
in the middle of their implementation phase. Some
 were able to exit without much financial 
setback. Others were not so lucky. For instan
ce, Kmart attempted to implement a SAP system in 
the 1990s, but it had to write off the US$130 million 
project that never got off the ground [Worthen 
2002]. In addition to the overall impact on a company™s business model, overlooking its process and 
people aspects in implementing a SAP project could 
also be devastating. In 1997, Nestle USA, the US$8.1 billion subsidiary of the Swiss consum
er goods giant, embarked on a project to install 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 800- 811 803 
Opening Up Of The Software Industry: The Case Of SAP, by A. Farhoomand 
SAP™s ERP system to centralize se
veral of its divisions. The 
company rushed to install the 
software to meet the Y2K deadline, ignoring those that were affected by the new processes as 
well as the organizational structur
es embedded in the SAP system. 
Subsequently, users rebelled, 
morale sank and employee turnover increased. 
In June 2000, Nestle USA halted the project and 
restarted from scratch. By the time it was comple
ted in 2003, the total time the project took was 
six years and the cost had escalated to US$210 million.
 Nestle USA claimed, however, that the 
project was worth the effort, as it
 saved the company US$325 million. 
Based on their implementation experiences, a numbe
r of consultants suggested that the only way 
to reap full benefits of the software was to submit to SAP by making minimal changes on the 
software. Nonetheless, Thomas Davenport, a pr
ofessor at Boston University, warned that 
companies might lose their distinct charac
ters and competitive advantages by molding 
themselves into the models defined by SAP [T
he Economist, 1998]. To 
address such issues, 
some companies adopted a hybrid strategy by cu
stomizing the ERP software at the code level. 
However, such an approach often posed a high risk of maintaining and upgrading the 
modifications, particularly while incorporating the changes with new releases of the software 

packages. 
Instead of taking an ERP package in its entir
ety, some companies adopted a best-of-breed 
approach, in which separate software packages (m
odules from major ERP vendors or products 
from niche software makers) were selected for eac
h process or function and then pieced together 
using custom-built interfaces. According to a 
survey conducted by Harvard Business School 
(HBS), 60 percent of the respondents indicated 
their companies had adopted this particular 
approach. A successful case in point was Dell 
Computer [Stein, 1998]. In 1997, a year after 
abandoning the SAP project, Dell assembled its 
own ERP system by selecting specific 
functionalities from a wide range of packages,
 including i2 Technologies (for materials 
management), Oracle (for order management), and 
Glovia (for manufacturing such as inventory 
control and warehouse management).  
V. DOWNFALL OF THE ERP MARKET 
By 1999, the ERP market was losing its glamour
. SAP™s major competitors,
 like PeopleSoft, were in disarray. SAP™s share price plummeted for the fi
rst time since its initial public offering in the U.S. in 1998. This was partly owing to the high failure rate (over 50 percent) in ERP 
implementations, according to a survey conducted by HBS. Although the definition of failure was 
arguable, it mainly referred to the user acceptan
ce of process and organization changes, projects 
going over budget, time delays, lack of 
appropriate skills, and technical failure.  
Besides the negative implementation experiences, 
customers found that most ERP vendors (and 
their products) were misaligned with the new te
chnical and business requirements under the 
networked environment based on the Internet. In 
terms of the technical requirements, SAP was 
slow to make its software Web enabled. The comp
any was confident that 
its R/3 product could 
cope with any form of distributed computing in
troduced by the Internet and hence it (and many 
other ERP vendors) was reluctant to adapt the We
b-based computing architecture. Moreover, as 
the original design of ERP systems was aimed 
to improve only the internal operations of an 
enterprise, typical ERP software lacked the capa
bilities to link up companies, suppliers and 
customers operating in an interconnected environ
ment. In terms of the business requirements, 
the changing model of the business of enterpr
ise applications software was challenged by an 
alternative offered by Web computing. Trad
itionally, ERP vendors assumed that a small 
proportion of the workforce (around 10 percent of 
the workforce in a large global company) would 
access the application. Hence, th
e license fees were often set at a high level. With the arrival of 
the Internet and Web computing, however, a diffe
rent approach was made possible. Applications 
could reside on servers and be accessible to anyone through a browser running on any Web-

enabled device. In light of this change, a volume
 pricing model was now preferable to the high 
license fee model. 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 800- 811 804 
Opening Up Of The Software Industry: The Case Of SAP, by A. Farhoomand 
For these reasons, traditional ERP players were inadequate to help companies become e-
businesses. Customers were forced to source various components from a number of software 
players, integrate the disparate software produc
ts and form links to the ERP systems. These 
component software makers included Ariba 
and Commerce One for procurement; IBM for e-
commerce platform; and Siebel and Onyx for sales and front-office functions. As some industry 
analysts described, this was almost like havi
ng a second ﬁbackboneﬂ on top of the current ERP 
system and IT infrastructure. This so-called enter
prise application integration (EAI) took up half of 
the time and resources of many corporate IT departments [The Economist 1999]. 
SAP decided to catch up with all the changes in 
the e-business era. In 
late 1999, SAP launched a 
Web-based version of its flagship product, call
ed mySAP.com. It aimed to become a full-fledged, 
business-to-business portal that would support on
line transactions and other services arising in 
the networked economy. To strengthen its e-business capabilities, SAP invested in Commerce 
One through its US subsidiary, SAP Markets, to 
obtain a minority stak
e of the e-procurement 
software company. In 2001, SAP acquired enterprise
 portal software provider
 Top Tier Software, 
and renamed it SAP Portals. Meanwhile, SAP ra
ised its Commerce One ownership stake to 
around 20 percent. 
In the early 2000s, the IT indust
ry experienced the worst economic downturn in history triggered 
by the burst of the dotcom bubble. Although it
s revenues grew remarkably from 1997 to 2000, 
SAP began to suffer from a lack of 
revenue gain and a decr
ease in net income
 in 2001 and 2002 
[see Figure 1 and 2]. Facing t
hese industry-wide difficulties, SAP improved its products by 
integrating key offerings from its subsidiari
es, SAP Portals and SAP Markets, into its mySAP 
product. As a number of newly founded software companies collapsed during the economic 
downturn, customers once again turned to establ
ished software vendors that offered integrated 
and sustainable products. These new requirements certainly played to SAP™s traditional 
strengths.  
  
   
  Figure 1. SAP™s Revenue betwe
en 1997-2002 (Euro million) 
  
     Figure 2. SAP™s Net Income between 1997-2002 (E
uro million) 0100020003000400050006000
70008000199719981999200020012002
Revenue
0100
200
300
400
500

600

700
199719981999200020012002
Net Income
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 800- 811 805 
Opening Up Of The Software Industry: The Case Of SAP, by A. Farhoomand 
VI. INDUSTRY DYNAMICS AFTER THE DOTCOM CRASH 
After three years of declining technology sales [s
ee Figure 3], the global IT industry returned to 
growth in 2003 and the outlook seemed positive. 
According to a study conducted by McKinsey & 
Co. in 2004 on IT spending trends, chief info
rmation officers (CIOs) from the Fortune 500 
companies said they would increase their IT 
budgets. Nonetheless, they would spend money 
quite differently. CIOs expected to get more out 
of their technology investments. Companies were 
more concerned about the value of IT and enf
orced stringent rules and guidelines for IT 
spending. For instance, procurement departments became more involved in the IT purchasing 
process. Many were applying formal bidding mechanisms that required vendors to go through a 
competitive process in getting t
he complex deals. In addition, CEOs became more demanding in 
the return on investment (ROI) on new technology
 spending. As such, CIOs were now required to 
develop stronger business cases to support their 
investments, and to tie 
the overall performance 
of IT to their personal performance measures. Su
bsequently, the growth of overall IT spending 
was expected to be more modest from 2003 onward (around 4 to 6 percent). This was far below 

the double-digit figures of the heydays in the 1990s 
[Davis et al. 2004; Red Herring 2005; Nystedt 
2005; Bartels 2004]. 
  
   
  
 
 Figure 3. Aggregate Capital Expenditure of U.S.
 Companies on IT (US$ billion), adopted from 
[Davis et al. 2004]. The IT industry was also considered to be in t
he middle of an eight-year period of ﬁtechnology 
digestion,ﬂ explained following. Hence, senior
 managers were reluctant to make any major 
technology investment. According to Forrester Research, investment in IT had continued to 
increase in the 60 years since 1956. In the U.S., 
the ratio of IT investment to gross domestic 
product (GDP) increased from 1 percent in the mi
d-20th century to more than 4 percent at the 
beginning of the 21st century. However, such growth was not always constant. In fact, it was 
characterized by periods (eight to ten years) of
 fast growth followed by equally long periods of 
slow or negative growth. Based on previous histor
ical data, three growth periods were identified 
in the IT industry corresponding to the introduction of new technologies [see Figure 3]. The first 

period saw the introduction of mainframe computing between the mid-1950s and mid-1960s. The 
second period introduced personal computing from
 the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s. The third 
period introduced network computing between the early 1990s and the early 2000s. In these 
periods, companies invested in new technologies often on faith and without strong links to ROI 
measurements. Consequently, companies went
 many years before fully exploiting the technologies. During these ﬁtechnology digestionﬂ periods, companies often focused on changing 
the relevant business processes and the corres
ponding organizational structures to lower 
spending on new technologies. These spending lags
 were also noted by researchers from MIT™s 
Centre for E-Business. Based on large-scale statis
tical results, they cited that companies often 
implemented new technologies years before they co
uld get value from them. This was particularly 
true in terms of infrastructural investments [Brynjolfsson and Hitt 1998]. 
130 1661881591541997
 1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
130 1471661881591541997
 1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
130 1471661881591541997
 1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
First annual decline since 1958 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 800- 811 806 
Opening Up Of The Software Industry: The Case Of SAP, by A. Farhoomand 
NEW TREANDS AND STRUCTURAL CHANGES IN THE SOFTWARE INDUSTRY 
Software spending was expected to recover and reach US$325 billion by 2008. The growth rate 
of the market was expected to be between 3 
and 7 percent annually. In general, the software 
market was categorized into the following two gr
oups: system software (a layer of software that 
operated between IT hardware and application softw
are and accessed only by IT staff such as 
system administrators) and application software (ope
rated by business users in their respective 
functions or processes) [Davis et al. 2004; 
Bartels 2004; Kerstetter and Hamm 2005; The 
Economist 2005]. 
In the short term, software spending would 
be driven by systems software (e.g., systems 
management, storage, database and security). Sy
stems management software would mainly be 
purchased to monitor and manage distributed computing resources such as PCs. The purchase 
of storage and database software was driven by t
he increasing demand for data storage capacity 
owing to Sarbanes-Oxley compliance and increasi
ng needs of customer data. Lastly, security 
applications would aim to mitigate risks such as 
data leakage in the networked environment [The 
Economist 2005]. 
With regard to the spending on application so
ftware, companies were expected to look for 
specific point solutions (e.g., business intelligence, portals, enterprise content management and 
collaboration) to enhance the effect
iveness of their business proc
esses. Consequently, the sale 
of traditional enterprise application packages 
(e.g., customer relationship management (CRM), 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) and supply 
chain management (SCM) systems developed by 
players such as SAP and Oracle) wa
s expected to be slow. This sl
owing down would be a result 
of the massive organizational impact that t
he implementation of these enterprise software 
packages had in the 1990s and early 2000s. Moreover, CRM, ERP and SCM applications were 

challenged by increasingly complex integration issu
es. Historically, these enterprise applications 
were stitched together via some loose interfaces
. As many of these enterprise software packages 
were developed by using proprietary codes, they 
became highly incompatible with each other if 
developed by different vendors. Companies were th
erefore not able to leverage these application 
packages as a holistic solution for their enterprises. 
As a result, purchases in relation to the integrat
ion of the various enterprise applications were 
expected to rise. In particular, as the conc
ept of service-oriented architecture (SOA)Šan 
approach that emphasized code reuse and business modelingŠwould take hold in enterprise 
computing in the long term, associated technologies such as Web services would become the 
main drivers of software spending. As Web se
rvices would form an open-system platform, it 
would enable the diverse application software system
s to be melded into a holistic solution. This 
new trend would then allow enterprise software vendors to adopt a more integrated approach and 

would give them an extended scope of offering
s. In turn, these vendors were expected to 
transform themselves from mere product vendor
s to comprehensive solution providers [Heng 
2005]. Besides building software that would be easily inte
grated with other vendors™ products, industry 
players were expected to introduce software as a 
service, particularly for the small and medium-
sized businesses. Under this new arrangemen
t, end users would not have to deal with the 
complexities and costs of on-site implementati
on of the enterprise software packages. All the 
technologies would be run off-site by the v
endors and the end user would only need to pay as 
they used. As users would no longer own the so
ftware, software companies would be impacted 
by the reduction in sales 
of their software licenses. 
Service-Oriented Architecture and Web Services 
Customers constantly looked for ways to modify
 and upgrade their enterprise applications to 
complement their changing business needs.  To ad
dress this issue, the SOA concept began to 
take hold as a conceptual framework to develop 
and integrate applications. The concept was an 
evolution of distributed computing based on t
he loosely coupled design paradigm. With this 
architecture (i.e., its specification), developers 
could package business logics and functions as 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 800- 811 807 
Opening Up Of The Software Industry: The Case Of SAP, by A. Farhoomand 
Web services consumable across different env
ironments. All Web services could then be 
connected with each other through the Inte
rnet (the common communication backbone). 
Developers could then build applications by coupl
ing one or more of these services without 
knowing the underlying implementation details of the services.  
Computing environments were increasingly heter
ogeneous across diverse operating systems, 
applications and infrastructure. In addition, many
 applications were tightly integrated with 
business processes. Hence, it would be nearl
y impossible for an enterprise to build a new 
homogenous infrastructure from scratch. By le
veraging SOA and Web services, companies could 
develop new applications (without concerning the sele
cted platforms as long as they met the pre-
defined SOA and Web services specifications) to 
address new business requirements, and could 
thereby continue to leverage their current investment
s in applications and infrastructure. In this 
way, companies could develop and modify their application systems within a much shorter 
timeframe. Moreover, a number of Web services 
modules were expected to be pre-packaged so 
that companies could purchase them off the shelf to 
reduce their internal coding efforts. Major IT 
players including Microsoft, IBM, SAP and Orac
le had already jumped onto the SOA and Web 
services bandwagon. 
Although SOA and Web services were taking hold rapi
dly, there was no universal starting point 
for implementing the architecture and technology.
 Hence, companies would need to carefully 
consider their initial needs as well as future pot
entials, in order to determine the appropriate SOA 
and Web services platforms to avoid a lock-in. 
Pay-As-You-Go Application Services 
Because of the over-purchase of IT during 
the dotcom boom, companies now wanted to access 
the latest software packages without large up-fr
ont capital investments. In addition, small and 
mid-size businesses often wanted to acquire world-class application packages without the high 
investments in hardware, software and support
ing staff. In view of these new customer 
requirements, a number of industry players were expected to introduce a new pay-as-you-use 
model by delivering software as services. This
 approach was based on the concept of utility 
computing, which was defined as the provision of
 services wherein a service provider made 
computing resources (e.g., applications) and in
frastructure management available to the 
customers on need basis. This service provis
ioning approach was analogous to other utility 
services (e.g., electrical power, water) that ai
med to meet the fluctuating needs of customers, and 
charged for the resources based on usage. 
Software-based services were first introduced in the dotcom boom through the application 
services providers (ASPs). These providers 
managed and distributed appl
ication services to 
customers across a wide area network from a cent
ral data centre. In essence, ASPs were a way 
for companies to outsource some or all aspects of their application needs. However, the ASP 

model was not fully exploited. In 2002, with 
the introduction of utility computing, software 
companies re-explored the potential of this se
rvice provisioning model. Pay-as-you-go computing 
services could be broadly categorized as ﬁhoste
dﬂ and ﬁon-demandﬂ serv
ices. Hosted services 
indicated an arrangement wherei
n customers outsourced their ha
rdware but purchased licenses 
from the software vendors. Customers would pay
 for the usage of their hardware on a need 
basis. With on-demand services, customers outso
urced both their hardw
are and software to a 
third party. Customers would therefore pay for 
both application services and hardware usage on a 
need basis. Players such as Siebel and Salesforce
.com Inc. were actively promoting their sales 
force automation and CRM products, delivered as 
on-demand service offerings, by providing the 
application service through the Internet with mont
hly billing cycles. Traditional ERP vendors such 
as Oracle were beginning to sell their products as
 hosted service offerings by selling the software 
license on a one-off arrangement, but charging the hardware usage on a need basis. 
Enterprise applications delivered as pay-as-you-go
 services were attractive alternatives. This 
model allowed customers to signi
ficantly reduce the total cost of ownership of enterprise 
applications (i.e., the up-front investment in hardw
are, software, services
 and supporting staff, 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 800- 811 808 
Opening Up Of The Software Industry: The Case Of SAP, by A. Farhoomand 
and ongoing maintenance costs), to increase flex
ibility and responsiveness to the changes in 
their business models, to switch easily to other
 vendors without significant attachment, and to 
provide updates centrally without deploying an 
army of consultants to install new releases 
periodically.  
Nonetheless, in order to deliver such services
, enterprise applications vendors would need to 
either partner with someone who could provide scalable hardware and network connections, or 
invest in building their own supporting infrastructure. Moreover, as companies were not required 

to buy the licenses of the applications software unde
r this service provisioning model, the sales of 
software would likely be impacted. Hence, softwar
e vendors would need to carefully calculate the 
pricing models and ensure the sustainability of the services. 
VII. SAP™S NEW STRATEGIC POSITION AND BUSINESS DESIGN 
As companies modified and upgraded their enterpr
ise applications more frequently, the software 
had to be simple to implement. Additionally, customers could no longer wait for software updates 
available only in a rigid schedule. Besides 
the changing market conditions and customer 
requirements, the growth rates of the enter
prise applications market had been saturated, 
particularly among large multinational companies. Major vendors were consolidated into a handful 

of players. Moreover, the market growth had si
gnificantly decreased since the end of the dotcom 
boom. Enterprise applications players were required to expand into new functional areas and 
industries. To anticipate the shifts in industry 
dynamics in the 21st century, Chairman and CEO of 
SAP, Henning Kagermann, led the company to pursue a new busine
ss strategy. This strategy 
had fundamentally altered SAP™s existing business design, i.e., the totality of how SAP would 
define its functional coverage; select its industry
 focuses and market segments; develop targeted 
product offerings; and configure its resources 
to support the new design [Slywortzky 1996]. 
EXPANSION OF FUNCTIONAL COVERAGE 
As the market leader in the 
fast-saturating ERP market, SAP enjoyed a steady stream of 
recurring licensing and service revenue provided by its huge installed base. Under increasing 
pressure from its investors to pursue new area
s of growth, SAP leveraged its prominent position 
in the traditional ERP market, and expanded into related new areas including CRM, PLM and 
SCM. The expansion of the product lines had part
icularly intensified the competition between 
SAP and its archrival Oracle. 
DEEPENING INDUSTRY KNOWLEDGE 
Following Oracle™s acquisition of its ERP ri
val PeopleSoft, SAP acquired TomorrowNow, a 
PeopleSoft support firm, in an effort to lure customers away from Or
acle. In early 2005, SAP agreed to acquire retail software specialist Retek, 
but it was eventually outbid by Oracle. In mid-
2005, SAP acquired Lighthammer Software De
velopment Corp., a manufacturing software 
maker, to bridge the gap between its back-office app
lications and shop-floor production systems. 
Although the costs associated with
 these acquisitions were relatively small, such moves 
symbolized the growth challenges facing global ent
erprise applications companies. As the market 
of enterprise applications was saturated, the pl
ayers began to look for ways to attract new 
customers. In order to penetrate various nic
he markets and meet the specific needs of these 
smaller customers, enterprise ap
plications vendors needed to so
urce niche software products in 
more targeted segments, such as retailing or banki
ng, to complement their existing cross-industry 
products. By providing cu
stomers with functionality specific
 to their industry, SAP hoped to lure new customers and get them lo
cked into the SAP product family. PENETRATION OF MID-MARKET 

Although SAP™s reputation was based on serving the world™s largest enterprises in the Fortune 
Global 100 list, in actuality two-thirds of the 
software company™s business was contributed by 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 800- 811 809 
Opening Up Of The Software Industry: The Case Of SAP, by A. Farhoomand 
small and mid-size customers (defined as t
hose with annual revenues of US$600 million or less) 
[SAP 2005]. To strengthen its po
sition in this mid-market, 
SAP released two scaled-down 
versions of its ERP product designed specifically 
for small and mid-sized businesses, as well as 
the complementary software development tools and services. These two solutions were mySAP 
All-in-One and SAP Business One. 
Besides the lower-pri
ced products, SAP was in the process of 
rolling out pay-as-you-go offerings in 2005. The firs
t of such offerings would be a CRM offering 
combining elements of both hosted and on-demand computing to win small and mid-size 
customers with an attractive pricing model [Blau 2005]. 
DEVELOPMENT OF NEW FLAGSHIP PRODUCT OFFERING 
In 2001, SAP acquired a technology start-up in 
Silicon Valley called TopTier Software and hired 
its CEO, Shai Agassi, as the chief of corpor
ate product development. The dynamic executive 
subsequently led one of the mo
st daring corporate campaigns in
 SAP™s 33-year-old historyŠto 
open up the proprietary software through its new technology, namely NetWeaver.  
In view of the increasingly 
heterogeneous nature of the co
mputing environment, SAP determined 
to address the IT industry integration issue. After putting in more than US$1 billion in research 
and development, SAP introduced NetWeaverŠan open pl
atform that allowed applications to be 
developed and accessed as Web services. This ne
w technology was designed to link up various 
applications (packaged as Web serv
ices) running on different syst
ems, from legacy mainframes 
to Internet-enabled devices and ent
erprise applications. By leve
raging NetWeaver, SAP was able 
to break up its software products into open and 
modular pieces. Customers could then pick and 
choose the specific SAP Web services modules t
hat met their own needs. Moreover, customers 
could add in modules developed by other companies as long as these products met the 
specifications of the NetWeaver 
framework. As a result, customers could more rapidly create and 
modify their own applications, improve the ov
erall fit of the applications, and reduce the 
associated development costs incurred. 
Since the software products would be broken in
to smaller chunks, SAP could change the mode of 
delivering new features and functi
ons for their products. Rather th
an waiting for massive releases 
to take place periodically (minor releases coul
d take months and major releases years), the Web 
services approach would allow constant
 updates of the software products.  
With this new engineering approach, SAP had soli
cited tremendous custom
er support. In 2003, 
SAP began to release the early version of NetWeave
r as free bundled software in order to bridge 
SAP and non-SAP software programs by reducing th
e need for building customized links. The full 
version of the software was scheduled to be launched in 2007. By mid-2005, more than 1,300 
customers had already tested NetWeaver and some
 of them were highly satisfied with the 
product and would welcome the opportunity to recommend the product to future buyers.  
Although NetWeaver had not contributed to SAP™s rev
enues yet, if it were able to maintain this 
momentum and succeed, the technology could tr
ansform the development approach of business 
applications in the coming future. By leveraging
 the universally accepted platform, thousands of 
individual developers could develop specialized 
modules that would serve highly targeted 
industry segments, traditionally
 too fragmented to be addressed 
with the old one-size-fits-all 
approach. This was particularly important for SAP in penetra
ting the millions of new small and medium-sized enterprises around the world. 
CONFIGURATION OF RESOURCES 
In order to realize its platfo
rm strategy based on NetWeaver, SAP 
was required to foster a new 
ecosystem. In the past, SAP mainly relied on it
s internal programmer
s (mostly residing in 
Walldorf, Germany) to develop its products. With the new NetWeaver platform, the software 
company would need to change from being an industry introvert that focused on its supreme 

engineering capabilities to an extrovert that c
ould attract tens of thousands of individual 
developers in joining the virtual development net
work. To address such dramatic shifts, SAP 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 800- 811 810 
Opening Up Of The Software Industry: The Case Of SAP, by A. Farhoomand 
lured George Paolini in early 2005. Paolini was t
he executive who successfully marketed the Java 
programming language for Sun Microsystems Inc., and who was brought in build the developer 
networks and communities. As of mid-2005, th
ere were already 132,000 individuals who formed 
part of the online network. Besides building the 
virtual taskforce, SAP al
so recruited about 200 
top managers from competitors such as Oracle, BEA System
s and Siebel Systems to join the 
company. 
VIII. LOOKING AHEAD 
With NetWeaver as the centre of SAP™s new strat
egy, the software giant was ready to leverage its 
engineering excellence and to embark on a new path of growth. Nonetheless, the new pricing 
structure of SAP™s products based on the NetWeaver technology was yet to be disclosed to the 

public. Potentially, with the new modular approach, customers would source less from SAP and 
increase purchases from other pl
ayers as long as these products were able to connect with the 
NetWeaver platform. Moreover, as many existing 
partners were also developing their own rival 
programs on Web services, Ne
tWeaver would take SAP into new
 battlegrounds and force the 
company to compete with some of its most trusted partners including IBM and Microsoft. 
Consequently, this could jeopardize the existi
ng relationships and reduce future business 
opportunities brought by these partners. 
The most prominent threat to 
SAP would be from its archrival, 
Oracle. Following its shopping 
spree in company acquisitions, including PeopleSo
ft and Siebel Systems, Oracle was in a much 
better position to put SAP on the defensive. In part
icular, if its existing a
pplications and database 
software would successfully combine with the 
features and functions brought by the newly 
acquired companies, Oracle could offer the 
most comprehensive and integrated enterprise 
computing platform to be found in the industry. 

Battles over acquisitions and invasions of new 
markets made by SAP, Oracle, Microsoft and IBM 
marked the dawn of the platform war in the ent
erprise software industry. Most customers would 
likely switch to (or remain with) one of the four platforms provided by these major software 
makers. For SAP, however, the immediate challeng
e was to convince the software developers 
and systems integrators around the world to work 
on its NetWeaver platform. As of mid-2005, 
there were 150 third-party programs already 
built for NetWeaver, and the number would exceed 
500 in 2006, according to SAP. Nonetheless, t
he strengths of the Ge
rman software company had 
been in its hardcore engineering. The question remained whether SAP would have the tenacity or 
clout to attract the global army of independent dev
elopers in supporting its platform strategy. 
REFERENCES 
Bartels, A. (2004). 
IT Spending Outlook: 2004 to 2008 and Beyond
, Cambridge MA: Forrester 
Research Inc. 
Blau, J. (2005). ﬁSAP Promises Ne
w Type of Hosted CRM Service,ﬂ 
Computerworld
, August 12. 
Brynjolfsson, E. and L. Hitt. (1998). 
Beyond the Productivity Paradox
, Cambridge MA: Centre for 
eBusiness, MIT. 
Davis, K. B., A. S. Rath and B. L. Scanl
on. (2004). ﬁHow IT Spending Is Changing,ﬂ 
McKinsey 
Quarterly
, 2004 Special Edition. 
Heng, S. (2005) 
Software Houses: Changing from Product Vendors into Solution Providers
, Frankfurt: Deutsche Bank Research. 
Kerstetter, J. and S. Hamm (2005). ﬁSoftwar
e: Expect the Giants to Stay Sluggish,ﬂ 
Business 
Week
, January 10. 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 800- 811 811 
Opening Up Of The Software Industry: The Case Of SAP, by A. Farhoomand 
Lower, J. (2006). ﬁSAP Aktiengesell
schaft,ﬂ Hoover™s Company Inform
ation, Hoover™s Inc., Austin TX. Nystedt, D. (2005). ﬁIDC
 Lowers 2005 Global IT Spending Growth Forecasts,ﬂ 
Computerworld
, May 4. Red Herring. (2005). ﬁIT Spending Growth to Slow,ﬂ 
Red Herring
, August 1. SAP. (2005). SAP Annual Report 2004, Walldorf, Germany: SAP AG. 
Slywortzky, A. J. (1996). 
Value Migration
, Boston: Harvard Business School. 
Stein, T. (1998). ﬁDell Takes ‚Best-Of-Breed™ Ap
proach In ERP Strategy,ﬂ InformationWeek, May 
11. Sullivan, L. (2005). ﬁERPzilla,ﬂ 
InformationWeek
, July 11. The Economist. (1998). ﬁSAP™s Rising in New York,ﬂ 
The Economist
, June 30. 
The Economist. (1999). ﬁERP RIP?ﬂ 
The Economist
, June 24. 
The Economist. (2005). ﬁThe Leaky Corporation,ﬂ 
The Economist
, June 23. 
Worthen, B. (2002). ﬁNestlé™s ERP Odyssey,ﬂ 
CIO Magazine
, May 15.  
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
Ali F. Farhoomand
 is professor of Information Syst
ems and the founding director of the 
Asia 
Case Research Centre
 at The University of Hong Kong
. He has taught and conducted research in 
universities across Asia Pacific, North Amer
ica, and Europe, including executive development 
engagement at INSEAD and as a Visiting Scholar 
at MIT Sloan School of Management. He has 
written several books and published numerous refereed articles in outlets such as 
Communications of the ACM
, MIS Quarterly
, MISQ Executive
 and 
IEEE Transactions
. He has developed more than 100 case studies, several hundred thousand copies of which distributed 
worldwide. He is a three-time winner of the 
Society for Information Management
 International 
Paper Award, recipient of several case writi
ng awards, and a postgraduate teaching award. In 
2006 He conceived and produced the 
FocusAsia Business Leaders Video and Case Studies 
Series, which was aired by America's Public Broadca
sting Services (PBS) and several Asian TV 
stations.  
 Copyright © 2007 by the Association for Information 
Systems. Permission to make digital or hard 
copies of all or part of this work for personal or cla
ssroom use is granted without 
fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for pr
ofit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and full citation 
on the first page. Copyright for components of this work owned by others than the Association for 
Information Systems must be honored. Abstracting with credi
t is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires 
prior specific permission and/or fee. Request permission 
to publish from: AIS Administrative
 Office, P.O. Box 2712 Atlanta, GA, 
30301-2712 Attn: Reprints or via e-
mail from  ais@aisnet.org
   
      . ISSN: 1529-3181
                                    
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 
Joey F. George 
Florida State University 
AIS SENIOR EDITORIAL BOARD 
Guy Fitzgerald 
Vice President Publications  
Brunel University 
Joey F. George 
Editor, CAIS                                
Florida State University 
Kalle Lyytinen 
Editor, JAIS Case Western Reserve University 
Edward A. Stohr 
Editor-at-Large Stevens Inst. of Technology 
Blake Ives                                
Editor, Electronic Publications  
University of Houston 
Paul Gray 
Founding Editor, CAIS 
Claremont Graduate University 
CAIS ADVISORY BOARD   
Gordon Davis 
University of Minnesota 
 Ken Kraemer 
Univ. of Calif. at Irvine M. Lynne Markus  

Bentley College 
Richard Mason 

Southern Methodist Univ.   
Jay Nunamaker                    
University of Arizona 
Henk Sol 

Delft  University 
Ralph Sprague 

University of Hawaii 
Hugh J. Watson 
University of Georgia  
CAIS SENIOR EDITORS  
Steve Alter 
U. of San Francisco 
Jane Fedorowicz 

Bentley College 
Chris Holland 

Manchester Bus. School 
Jerry Luftman 

Stevens Inst. of Tech. 
CAIS EDITORIAL BOARD   
Michel Avital 
Univ of Amsterdam 
Dinesh Batra 

Florida International U. 
Erran Carmel 

American University 
Fred Davis 
Uof Arkansas, Fayetteville 
Gurpreet Dhillon 
Virginia Commonwealth U 
Evan Duggan 

Univ of the West Indies 
Ali Farhoomand 
University of Hong Kong 
 Robert L.  Glass 
Computing Trends 
Sy Goodman  
Ga. Inst.  of Technology 
Ake Gronlund 

University of Umea 
Ruth Guthrie 
California State Univ. 
Juhani Iivari 

Univ. of Oulu K.D. Joshi Washington St Univ. 
Chuck Kacmar 

University of Alabama 
Michel Kalika 

U. of Paris Dauphine 
Jae-Nam Lee 

Korea University 
Claudia Loebbecke 
University of Cologne 
Paul Benjamin Lowry 

Brigham Young Univ. 
Sal March 
Vanderbilt University 
Don McCubbrey  

University of Denver 
Michael Myers 
University of Auckland 
Fred Niederman 

St. Louis University 
Shan Ling Pan 

Natl. U. of Singapore 
Kelley Rainer 

Auburn University 
Paul Tallon 
Boston College 
Thompson Teo 

Natl. U. of Singapore 
Craig Tyran 

W Washington Univ. 
Chelley Vician 

Michigan Tech Univ. 
Rolf Wigand  
U. Arkansas, Little Rock 
Vance Wilson 

University of Toledo 
Peter Wolcott 
U. of Nebraska-Omaha 
Ping Zhang 

Syracuse University 
DEPARTMENTS 
Global Diffusion of the Internet.  Editors: Peter Wolcott and Sy Goodman 
Information Technology and Systems.  

Editors: Sal March and Dinesh Batra 
Papers in French 
Editor: Michel Kalika 
Information Systems and Healthcare 

Editor: Vance Wilson  
ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL                                                                              
James P. Tinsley 
AIS Executive Director 
 Chris Furner CAIS Managing Editor 
Florida State Univ. 
Copyediting by Carlisle 
Publishing Services 
  