 contributed articles
AUGUST 2010  
|  VOL. 53  
|  NO. 8  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    135DOI: 10.1145/1787234.1787269BY 
MARC N. HAINES AND 
MARCUS A. ROTHENBERGER
SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT PRACTICE
S HAVE EVOLVED 
substantially during the past decade. As so called ﬁagileﬂ approaches have gained more acceptance and applications have become progressively more distributed in terms of their physical execution and 
the development of components, the service-oriented approach to IT architecture has become an important alternative to traditionala software development.1,9 Another impetus for the trend to a Service-Oriented Architecture (SOA) is provided by enterprise system 
vendors as they are incorporating the service-oriented paradigm into their products. Substan
-tial efforts related to open standards 
(such as Web service standards) and 
open source products (such as open 

source enterprise service bus, devel
-opment tools) are further driving a 
service-oriented approach for informa
-tion systems. A key question is whether SOA adopt
-ers are going to be ready for this change 

and whether they can provide a techni
-cal and an organizational environment 

in which SOA-related technologies can 
be leveraged to their full potential. 
There is some indication that currently 
this may not be the case. In fact, some 
organizations that have embarked on 

SOA-related projects early have experi
-enced disappointments. As with other 
technology waves, the important ques
-
tion is not whether SOA is inherently 
a good or a bad idea, but rather how 
it can be done right in a given context. 

This article tries to answer this ques
-tion with respect to the software devel
-opment process.While much of the literature, both 
in academia and industry, has focused 

on business implications of SOA,
3 tech
-nological realization, architectural 
issues,4,10 and implementation guide
-lines,7 few publications have addressed 
the impact of SOA on the software de
-
velopment process and its methodolo
-gy. As with any organizational change, 

modi˜cations to software develop
-ment processes or practices entail 
switching cost. Therefore, individuals 

as well as organizations are inclined to 
stay with ﬁprovenﬂ methodologies,
5,12 although adjustments based on task 

requirements and technology charac
-teristics should be key drivers for the 
methodology choice
6 and are needed 
to help adopters leverage the full po
-
tential of SOA.
This article examines the differences 
and discusses which parts of develop
-
ment process and methodology may re
-quire adjustments to effectively leverage 
a SOA. It presents the results of a ˜eld 
How a 
Service-
Oriented 
Architecture 
May 
Change 
the 
Software 
Development 
Processa  Typically software development using an n-tier Client/
Server approach that does not rely on distributed and 
platform agnostic interfaces and messaging. 136    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  AUGUST 2010  
|  VOL. 53  
|  NO. 8
contributed articles
may reside at an external location and 
outside of a domain of direct control. 
Services frequently rely on the public 
Internet. Also, contrary to other com
-
ponent-based technologies,
11 services 
are usually not purchased as a soft
-ware package from a third party and 
implemented within the organization. 

This has potential consequences for 
the software development process not 
only from a technical, but also from a 
managerial perspective (such as inter-
organizational arrangements and trust 

issues). Standardization is perhaps the key 
underlying enabler for a modern SOA, 

solving many of the interoperability is
-sues that plagued previous distributed 
technologies (such as CORBA) and 
allowing vendors to create tools that 
automate important steps in the soft
-
ware development process that previ
-ously required a manual programming 
effort. Therefore, some development 

activities, particularly those related to 
the connectivity aspect of distributed 
application development are likely to 

be deemphasized. The unique features of SOA, and spe
-ci˜cally technologies related to Web 

services, merit an investigation into a 
number of development activities, as 
certain activities may need to be add
-ed, emphasized, or rearranged, while 
others may need to be deemphasized. 

Not making such needed adjustments 
may reduce the overall bene˜ts of SOA. 
For example, an organization that aims 
to reduce the overall time-to-market 
of new business services can realizes 

time reductions in the implementa
-tion phase, as SOA-based composite 
applications effectively reuse existing 

IT capabilities. However, if testing was 
study suggesting changes to software 

development practices that are neces
-
sary to accommodate the unique prop
-erties of the service-oriented approach.Service-oriented 
ArchitectureService-oriented Architecture (SOA) is 
de˜ned in the OASIS reference model 
as ﬁa paradigm for organizing and 
utilizing distributed capabilities that 

may be under the control of differ
-ent ownership domains.ﬂ
8 It can also 
be viewed as an architectural style for 

building software applications that 
uses available services in a network,
10 where the service interface along with 
its description is a critical part.
b A SOA 
should provide ˚exibility regarding the 

technical execution environments be
-hind the service interfaces, as well as 

˚exibility for creating new interfaces 
and new composite services. However, 
once a service interface is established 
and used by potentially a multitude of 
consuming applications, changes to 

the interface need to be kept to a mini
-mum to avoid disruptions in the con
-suming applications and provide con
-
tinuous business operations. Development in the context of SOA 
entails two major tasks: One is estab
-lishing a service infrastructure (such 
as, core services, management, and se
-
curity); the other is creating composite 
applications (or services) based on the 
service infrastructure.
3 Both types of 
development have different character
-istics. The infrastructure can be viewed 
as the combination of the interface 

layer and the attached execution envi
-ronments. Figure 1 illustrates both as
-pects of SOA-based development. The 

services may be used by a multitude 
of client applications and the execu
-tion environment may also change, as 
long the interface contracts are not vio
-lated. Consequently the interface layer, 

which encompasses securing, monitor
-ing, and managing the services, is the 
pivotal element and requires a holistic, 

global view and very rigorous develop
-ment with a long-term horizon. A typical SOA scenario consists of 
composite applications constructed 
from services that may be provided 

internally or by a third party. Thus, 
functionality provided by the service 
not appropriately adjusted, synchroni
-zation problems between development 
and quality assurance may diminish 
the gains made in the implementation 

phase. Negative consequences can also 
arise from a lack of attention to service 
interface and message design. This can 
lead to interoperability challenges and 
additional mediation work, which then 

adversely impact productivity gains 
and cost reduction goals.cThe Field Investigation
Since the unique properties of SOA sug
-gest differences in the software devel
-opment environments that deploy this 

paradigm, this study seeks to investi
-gate the practical realities and needs of 
software development in the context of 
SOA, and provide insights into neces
-sary modi˜cations to the systems de
-
velopment process based on the analy
-sis of the empirical evidence.The key data source for this ˜eld 
study is a set of semi-structured inter
-
views with software developers and 
IT managers from ˜ve organizations. 

The interviews were guided by a set of 
questions that speci˜cally address the 
issue of software development in the 

context of SOA-based on Web services.
d The purpose of the mostly open-ended 
questions in the interview structure is 
to help the researcher to consistently 

address key issues identi˜ed in the lit
-erature and prior research, while still 
Figure 1.  SOA
 layers.c  Future research may be able to assess the extent of 
productivity and cost reduction when using traditional 
development processes instead of SOA-driven processes, 
by conducting an analysis of quantitative data of both 
types of development settings.
d  A SOA may be realized with technologies other than WS-* 
standards based Web services. However, Web services 

play a pivotal role in a majority of SOA initiatives and are 

supported by the major development tool and enterprise 

package vendors.
b  Some industry analysts even suggested referring to this 
architecture as the ﬁInterface-oriented Architecture.ﬂ
9  contributed articles
AUGUST 2010  
|  VOL. 53  
|  NO. 8  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    137maintaining the opportunity for elicit
-ing new and unexpected insights from 
the participants. Participants subse
-quently reviewed summaries of the in
-
terviews and provided feedback on the 
correct representation of the content. 
The information obtained in the inter
-
views was supplemented with insights 
acquired from company documents 
and Web sites. Table 1 summarizes the 
research methodology employed.Individuals from one consulting 
˜rm and from four ˜eld companies par
-
ticipated in the study. The consultant is 
nationally recognized for enterprise in
-
tegration and has been involved in the 
development of SOAs based on Web 
services for several years. All companies 
participating in this study employ Web 
services and have established or are in 

the process of moving to a SOA; they 
are from the insurance, the ˜nancial 
services, and the entertainment indus
-
try, as well as from the judicial branch 
of state government. The participants 

are working either as enterprise archi
-tects, including one IT director, or as 
senior developers involved in projects 

related to SOA and Web services. While 
the companies reported pockets of ag
-ile development, we observed overall 

two typical baseline scenarios for soft
-ware development practices prior to 
the introduction of SOA. The majority 
of software was developed using either 
a customized methodology based on 

the Rational Uni˜ed Process (RUP) or 
a controlled waterfall-style process. Ta
-ble 2 provides a summary of the nature 

of SOA and Web service use in the four 
˜eld settings.Software 
Development 
 Process Changes
According to the shared views of all par
-ticipants, there are signi˜cant differ
-ences between software development 

in the context of SOA with Web servic
-es, compared to previous software de
-
velopment. While some attributed the 

differences to general SOA principles 
and a focus on the application inter
-face, others mentioned issues related 
to using open standards and web ser
-vices (such as, assessing viability and 

maturity of standards). The interviews con˜rmed the dual 
nature of software development within 

the context of SOA. As one participants 
pointed out, ﬁthere are two sides to 
Web services.ﬂ Building the service in
-frastructure and using the services for 
composite applications were viewed as 

substantially different tasks. Building 
the service infrastructure requires a 
rigorousŠand perhaps more waterfall-

styleŠapproach focusing on long-term 
planning to achieve well-designed and 
reusable services. On the other hand, 

composite application development 
may in many circumstances bene˜t 
from using a more agile, yet rigorous, 
software development approach. The 
results suggest that software develop
-
ers should consider these as two dis
-tinct tasks with potentially different 
requirements. All participants identi˜ed some as
-pect of the software development pro
-
cess that needed to be adjusted in the 
context of SOA with Web services. The 
comments relate to the overall process, 

as well as to speci˜c activities. Below 
is a presentation of the key ˜ndings as 
they relate to the ˜ve major phases
e of 
software development. Planning. There was agreement 
among the participants that this phase 

differs substantially, particularly if no 
prior experience with service-oriented 
development exists in an organiza
-
tion. The consultant pointed out that 
this is where 90% of the projects fail, 
as it is a labor intensive, often boring 
and dif˜cult activity. According to a 
participant, there is less certainty in a 

service-oriented environment, as many 
aspects are less predictable and harder 
to control as they are executed by other 

business units or external parties. This 
makes, for example, the estimation of 
service consumer projects more dif˜
-cult. Another participant pointed out 
that planning has to be more holistic 
Table 1.  Qualitative research approach
Selection of Interview Questions
Based on the school of thought to grounded theory research introduced by 
Strauss and Corbina and the 
methodology proposed by Eisenhardtb, the research is initially guided by the existing literature, however, 

it then lets the data drive the development of the ˜ndings.  Accordingly, the interview outline included 

questions on the role of web services in the organization, methodological differences, organizational 
constraints to methodology modi˜cations, future direction of the development process, perceived success, 
and process maturity.  Further, information about the organization and the interviewees™ roles and 

experiences were solicited.  During the interviews, ad-hoc follow-up and probing questions were asked to 
obtain clari˜cations and additional details on emerging themes.  Participant 
Selection & Data CollectionParticipant section was guided by theoretical sampling.  
This means that the participants were selected to 
maximize the diversity of their insights and therefore their contribution to the ˜ndings of the study.  
Thus, 
employees from organizations with different characteristics, including industry, size, geographic location, 

and ownership were interviewed.  
Semi-structured interviews were conducted with each participant, lasting 
about 40 to 70 minutes each.  Supporting documents and information from company web sites were also 
obtained.  The interviews were recorded and transcribed. Interview reports were written based on the 

transcripts and were made available to the participants who provided feedback and made corrections; the 
feedback was incorporated into the subsequent analysis.
Analysis
The researchers went through several iterations of data collection and analysis.  First, interviews were 
analyzed individually by developing a detailed understanding of what was said.  A detailed write-up of 

each interview was developed based on the transcript and supporting documents.   
Second, the insights 
obtained from the individual ˜eld settings were compared examining similarities and differences from each 
setting and ˜ndings were developed.  All ˜ndings are based on aggregated insights obtained from multiple 
participants, thus, the results of the study were based on multiple sources of evidence.
Validity
The study follows a number of techniques that ensure the validity of qualitative research identi˜ed by 
Dube and Parec: participant selection based on theoretical sampling, use of interview protocols and 
transcripts, participant reviews of case reports, and the maintenance of an interview database with coded 
quotations.  Further, developing the results from a-priori speci˜cations of constructs utilizing multiple 

sources of evidence promoted construct validity.  Identifying results by comparing insights from across 

multiple ˜eld settings (treating additional interviews as replication, rather than additional responses) and 
basing the ˜ndings on explanations provided by the participants ensured the internal validity of the results.  
External validity of the results of qualitative research addresses the transferability of the results; providing 

a description of the ˜eld contexts enables the reader to assess whether transferring the results to another 
context makes sense. Further survey-based research may also investigate the extent of generalizability of 
the methodology changes identi˜ed in this study.
a  Straus, A. and Corbin, J. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Procedures and Techniques (1990)
b  Eisenhardt, K.M.. Building Theories from Case Study Research. Academy of Management Review 14 (1989) 532-550
c   Dube, L. and Pare, G., Rigor in Information Systems Positivist Case Research: Current Practices, Trends, and 
Recommendations. MIS Quarterly 27 (2003) 597-635
e  Planning, analysis, design, implementation, and testingŠ
we divided the phases based on a standard software 
development life-cycle with testing representing a 
separate phase from implementation.
 138    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  AUGUST 2010  
|  VOL. 53  
|  NO. 8
contributed articles
tions being built. The location and level of service dis
-tribution was stressed by the consul
-tant who cautioned that building com
-
posite applications with ﬁhundreds of 
services and 20 of them being remoteﬂ 
is not workable in the short run, as the 

tools for managing these services are 
currently not available. Considering 
the maturity of the technology and re
-lated tools at the time of the research, 
incorporating too many remotely locat
-
ed services in a composite orchestra
-tion would be considered bad design.Implementation. Business agility is 
one of the key promises that are touted 
by SOA proponents. This includes the 

ability to quickly develop and deploy 
new or improved functionality with
-out disrupting other business interac
-
tions. Interoperability should improve, 
and consequently it should be easier 
to effectively develop ﬁenterprise ser
-vicesﬂ that can be leveraged through
-out the organization. It becomes es
-sential that effective communication 

channels among the stakeholders that 
participate in a SOA initiative are estab
-lished. An important effort in the plan
-ning stage is the assessment of stan
-dards, since current SOA efforts are 

typically leveraging a combination of 
several open standards. This includes 
determining which particular sets of 

standards are of interest, viable, and 
supported by each potential vendor. 
Analysis. The participants suggested 
that the analysis phase requires the 
least modi˜cation. However, develop
-
ment in a service-oriented context re
-quires at least as much rigor and dis
-cipline as in previous architectures, 

which is at times ignored. One partici
-pant pointed out that traditional ana
-lytics is one of the most important skill. 

ﬁCreate the future vision, and then map 
out how you are going to get there. That 
is where people are falling today. They 
jump right into the new architecture, 
because it is fun.ﬂ Another participant 

pointed out the importance of ensuring 
in the analysis phase that the common 
data models and schemas have all the 

required data available, as SOA requires 
a more global perspective. On a positive 
note, the participants agreed that devel
-opment toolsets are improving and are 
now better supporting the analysis ac
-
tivities for SOA-based development. 
Design. The participants observed 
substantial differences in this phase. 

ﬁ[Design] is where the most radical 
change is occurring,ﬂ according to the 
consultant. The three key issues in the 

design phase are the initial contract in
-terface using WSDL, the granularity of 
the services, and the accessibility and 

performance of remote services. Due to their pivotal role in a SOA, 
it is important to de˜ne interfaces 
well up-front as the cost for changes 
increases in later phases. While this 

increase of costs is true for most soft
-ware development contexts, it is even 
more pronounced in a SOA context, 
because of the distributed nature and 
the often lesser control over each com
-
ponent. When moving from an existing 
SOA based on proprietary technology 
to standard-based SOA using Web ser
-
vices, the design of the backend sys
-tems (execution environment) may not 
change. However, the development of 
the interfaces will change dramatically 
as WSDL and other standards needed 
for the service contract must be in
-
corporated. Despite the availability of 
tools that support the generation of 
interfaces, this requires a solid under
-
standing of these standards not only 
from a technology perspective, but also 
from standard maturity and tool avail
-ability perspectives.Service granularity has already 
gained much attention in the litera
-
ture.2,8 While coarse-grained services 
are generally considered good in a SOA 
context, there are important trade-offs. 

Services that are too ˜ne-grained and 
require many roundtrips to complete a 
business transaction may cause perfor
-
mance problems, while services that 
are too coarse-grained limit reusability 
and may result in the wrong applica
-Table 2.  SOA
 Use in the four ˜eld settings.InsCoInsCo is a large national insurance company.  
The company has a heterogeneous I
T infrastructure including 
IBM mainframes with applications programmed in P
L1, J2EE application running on Web
Sphere, rich client applications developed with Microsoft .
NET, as well as a number of packaged applications. The integration 
has been primarily been done with IBM MQ 
Series.The company has established a 
SO
A based on proprietary XM
L messaging protocols about a decade ago.  
When possible the payload of the messages is structured according to industry standards (e.g., ACC
ORD).  It 
has been using Web services in production with external business partners in B2B scenarios for about two 
years. Currently a major initiative is underway to establish a 
SOA based on Web services and the company 
is starting to transition to Web services in the internal application-to-application (A2A) space. 
The current 
implementations are leveraging 
SOAP, W
SDL, UDDI, and WS-Security. Eventually Web services should 
become the preferred integration technology. A study started in 2004 provided a high level infrastructure and 

roadmap for Web services. 
The implementation of the ˜rst pieces outlined in the road map started in 2005.
FinCoFinCo is a ˜nancial services provider. A majority of applications runs on mainframes. Front-end applications 
typically are J2EE applications running on 
UNIX servers. 
There is a small amount of .NET solutions. The 
J2EE solutions are divided into a UI tier, messaging tier, and a host tier. 
The messaging tier is used to integrate a variety of third party vendor products and uses proprietary XM
L-based messaging.The proprietary XM
L messaging solution was developed prior to 
SOAP and other Web services standards. More 
recent implementations are using XM
L Web services as some business partners are now demanding interaction 
based on standard XML Web services. Eventually 
SOAP is expected to replace the proprietary protocol.
Currently there are implementations leveraging 
SOAP, W
SDL. There is also a major initiative to move 
towards a SOA. This initiative goes beyond Web services and encompasses service management and other 
aspects of SOA. StateGov
StateGov is a state government agency from the judicial branch. 
The agency is mostly using Microsoft 
Windows servers, but is starting to introduce 
Linux servers as well. Most applications are custom 

developed, however a state-wide Peoplesoft system is also used by the agency. 
The Web services related 
applications are Java applications developed with Eclipse tools on 
Linux.Web services are currently leveraged for e-˜ling court documents. Another project is focusing on building 
a data exchange between the courts and other state agencies, leveraging industry standards such as the 
Global Justice XML Data Model (GJXDM). The Web services have to support processing of PDF documents 
attached to XML messages.Currently there are implementations leveraging 
SOAP, W
SDL, and SAML. An implementation of a registry 
based on UDDI is planned.Entertain
CoEntertainCo is a major entertainment organization that operates worldwide.  
The company uses a service-oriented approach in four key components which are all in production: guest management, offers 

management, loyalty program, and central reservation. Further expansions (e.g., retail) are planned and 

additional functionality will be provided to existing services.
The company™s 
SOA is based on proprietary standards that are similar to XM
L Web services standards. We 
services are now being considered for interaction with external business partners. 
 contributed articles
AUGUST 2010  
|  VOL. 53  
|  NO. 8  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    139to provide new services internally or to 
business partners that leverage open 
SOA standards. Thus, SOA should have 
a very positive impact on implementa
-
tion and deployment.However, it is important to under
-stand the tools that support the imple
-mentation and deployment. Based on 
the comments made by participants, 

implementation tools are improving, 
but there is still a need for further de
-ployment automation. With an increas
-
ing number of services, their manage
-ment becomes a critical issue, as any 
service may be a potential single point 
of failure in a composite application. 
Because of the distributed nature of a 

SOA, implementation and deployment 
entails a high level of coordination be
-tween the parties that are involved. As the parties tend to be relatively 
independent from each other, they 

are likely to be at different maturity 

levels in terms of Web services tech
-nology. This may entail providing mul
-tiple channels for services interaction 
(such as, some business partners may 
be able to handle speci˜c Web service 

standards, while others may not; units 
may prefer different interfaces, such as 
REST vs. SOAP). Business partners that 

lack the necessary SOA expertise may 
initially even require hands-on imple
-mentation support for applications 
from the services provider, as one par
-ticipant pointed out. Testing.
 Testing is also considered 
a stage with potentially substantial 

changes in the context of SOA and Web 
services. In a SOA, more work on inte
-gration testing needs to be done. Test 

plans also need to ensure that services 
work in different environments with 
different types of service consumers 
(such as, portal applications versus 
mobile device applications). The test 

plans need to anticipate most of the 
client application types that are likely 
to use the service.The two sides to service-oriented 
development, the development of the 

services (and related infrastructure) 
and the development of the applica
-tions that leverage services may occur 

simultaneously, making it necessary to 
use two test environments. The service 
developers need to be able to quickly 

generate test clients. The client applica
-tion developers need to be able to run 
their applications against test services. 

There are also some Web service spe
-ci˜c testing activities that need to be 
considered, such as checking the com
-pliance of services with the Web service 
standards or Web services interoper
-
ability organization (WS-I) Pro˜les.Consequently it is important to 
have a highly coordinated process and 

to consider testing throughout the life-
cycle. Tools that help automating the 
process play an important role in effec
-tive testing by addressing not only the 
functional issues, but also security and 

performance. Discussion
The ˜eld interviews provided several 
examples of differences that the par
-ticipants are experiencing in their 

SOA and Web services related software 
development activities. Most differ
-ences occur in development activities 
typically associated with planning and 
design. But other phases, particularly 

implementation and testing, require 
noteworthy differences as well. Table 3 
summarizes the ˜ndings of this study 

with regards to the phases of the soft
-ware development life-cycle. It also 
shows that ﬁtraditionalﬂ structured 
analysis and design skills are still very 
important. Some aspects of service-ori
-
ented development may in fact require 
even more discipline and a more holis
-tic mindset than previous development 

scenarios.To address the organizational as
-pects of these differences, companies 

have designated new employee roles for 
education, promotion, and tracking of 
standards relating to SOA concepts, de
-veloper support, security, service man
-agement, and services cataloging. With 

regards to the development process, 
they have emphasized the importance 
of several new or changing activities, 

such as planning and interface design. 
However, there is little indication that 
organizations are explicitly considering 
a concerted change effort that address
-es the differences in the development 

process. Only few participants noted 
that their organizations may be look
-ing into new methods or mentioned 

that more agile approaches would ben
-e˜t some aspects of SOA development. 
Consequently, there appears to be the 

potential for a gap between the exist
-ing development process and a devel
-opment process that is well suited for 

SOA and Web services-based software 
development.Composite applications built on ser
-vices need to quickly respond to chang
-ing requirements and have potentially 

short life spans, thus they need to have 
short development cycles. Services, or at 
least their interface, on the other hand, 
may be used by multiple applications, 
need to be well-designed, and may not 

be easily changed or retired without 
breaking client applications. From 
this perspective agile development ap
-
proaches should generally constitute 
a good ˜t for composite client applica
-Table 3.  Summary of changes needed in the software development life-cycle phases.
Phase AdjustmentsImportant 
Characteristics and 
ChangesPlanning 
substantial
 

 

 
Analysis
 lowest
 

Design 
most radical



standards and tool availability




Implementation 
some



of Web services

Testing
 
substantial 

as well as test services


 140    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  AUGUST 2010  
|  VOL. 53  
|  NO. 8
contributed articles
tions, while the services and supporting 
infrastructure may require approaches 
that emphasize planning and rigorous 
design up-front. Of course, task and 

technology are not the only determi
-nates and other in˚uences, such as reg
-ulations and documentation require
-ments, cannot be neglected and may 
lead to a different choice. 
ConclusionBased on the experiences shared by 

the participants, there are important 
differences between the traditional 
software development process and 
software development in the context 
of SOA with Web services. Organiza
-
tions appear to take measures to sup
-port some of these changes. These 
measures are currently focusing on the 

organizational structure, such as new 
roles or organizational units, but not 
much on adjustments of the software 

development process. We argue that adjustments to the pro
-cess are also necessary to provide a good 
˜t for SOA development. Not accommo
-dating the unique properties of the SOA 

architecture in the development pro
-cess would be like building a new high
-way system, but leaving the same speed 

limits and regulations. While faster and 
more ˚exible transportation would be 
possible, the structures and processes 
of the old system are inadequate and 
may therefore lead to a slowdown and 

missed opportunities.The ˜ndings of the study have pro
-vided an overview of critical areas of 

change and are not speci˜c to a partic
-ular methodology. This ensures a high 
degree of applicability to other organi
-
zational settings. Subsequent research 
may be able to focus on a speci˜c phase 
or a speci˜c methodology in a given or
-
ganizational context using a single in-
depth case study or a quantitative ˜eld 
survey. The recommendations made 
in this study were obtained from the 
analysis of SOA adopters. SOA scenar
-
ios typically exhibit a number of com
-mon underlying characteristics (such 
as, highly distributed functionality, 
decoupled architecture, and standard 
interfaces), which are not exclusive to 

SOA. While our study provides insights 
for the context of SOA, it is left to future 
studies to relate software development 

changes to these underlying character
-istics and to examine if some recom
-mendations, made here for the context 
of SOA, also apply to other develop
-ment paradigms. References 1. Ciganek, A., Haines, M., and Haseman, W. Horizontal 
and vertical factors in˜uencing the adoption of Web 
services. In 
Proceedings of the Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
, Big Island, HI, (2006), 109-118.
 2. Erl, T. 
Service-Oriented Architecture Concepts, 
Technology, and Design
. Prentice Hall PTR, Upper 
Saddle River, N.J., (2006). 
 3. Hagel, J. and Brown, J. S. Your next IT strategy. 
Harvard Business Review 79
, 9 (2001), 105-113.
 4. Kazi, A. Enabling real-time business through service-

oriented and event-driven architecture. 
Business Integration Journal
, (Oct. 2005), 38-40.
 5. Kozar, K.A. Adopting systems development methods: 
An exploratory study. 
Journal of Management Information Systems 5
, 4 (1989), 73-86.
 6. Kwon T.H. and Zmud, R.W. Unifying the fragmented 

models of information systems implementation. In 
Critical Issues in Information Systems Research
, R. J. Boland and R. A. Hirschheim, Eds. New York: John-
Wiley, (1987), 252-257.
 7.
 Linthicum, D. 10 best practices for creating a service-
oriented architecture. Business Integration Journal
 (Oct. 2005), 24-27.
 8. MacKenzie, C.M., Laskey, K., McCabe, F., Brown, P.F., 

and Metz, R. Reference model for service oriented 

architecture 1.0. OASIS
, Committee Speci˚cation soa-rm-cs, (2006). 9. Natis, Y. V., Pezzini, M., Schulte, R. W., and Lijima, K. 

Predicts 2007: SOA advances. 
Gartner
, Research Report G00144445, (2006).
 10. Papazoglou, M. P. and Georgakopoulos, D. Service-
oriented computing. Comm. ACM 46
, (2003) 24-28.
 11. Ravichandran, T. and Rothenberger, M.A. Software 
reuse strategies and component markets. 
Comm. ACM 46
, 8 (Aug. 2003), 109-114.
 12. Riemenschneider, C.K., Hardgrave, B.C., and Davis, 

F.D. Explaining software developer acceptance of 
methodologies: A comparison of ˚ve theoretical 

models. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 
28, 12, (2002) 1135-1145.
Marc N. Haines (marc@ictect.com) is a senior architect at Ictect, Inc. in Milwaukee, Wisconsin and conducted this 
research as a faculty in the Sheldon B. Lubar School of 
Business at the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee.
Marcus A. Rothenberger (marcus.rothenberger@unlv.edu) is an associate professor and the chair of the 
Department of Management Information Systems at the 
University of Nevada Las Vegas.
© 2010 ACM
 0001-0782/10/0800 $10.00
