 96    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  MARCH 2015  |  VOL. 58  
|  NO. 3
last byteIMAGE BY DAVID MONNIAUX
we knew about program correctness. Design by Contract is a transposition to software of concepts that everyone is familiar with. If I want to buy some-
thing from you, I have a certain set of 
obligations to satisfy, and on your side, you also have obligations. Your obliga
-tions map into my bene˜ts and con-versely. So, too, with preconditions and 

postconditions in software.Let™s talk about your move to ETH Zu-rich, where you™ve been since 2001.It was not planned, but it has 
worked out very nicely. In 2000, 
Niklaus 
actually ahead of the curve. So coming back from Portland, we refocused the 
company on Eiffel.You are also known for the idea of ﬁDe
-sign by Contract,ﬂ a method of assur-ing a program™s correctness by specify-ing the conditions that each element must satisfy; there are preconditions, 
which state what an operation expects, and postconditions, which state what an operation guarantees. Did that idea 
evolve in tandem with Eiffel?Yes. After reading the works of 
Hoare and Dijkstra, it seemed like a di-rect, practical application of everything FRENCH-BORN COMPUTER SCIENTIST 
Bertrand MeyerŠbest known as an 
early advocate of object-oriented pro-gramming techniques and creator of 
the programming language and envi-
ronment EiffelŠhas enjoyed a varied 
career in industry and academia. Cur-rently a professor of software engineer-ing at ETH Zurich, the Swiss Federal 
Institute of Technology, he also has 

worked at Électricité de France (EDF) 
and at the University of California, 
Santa Barbara, and he continues to 

serve as CEO and chief architect at the 
California-based company he founded 
in 1985, Eiffel Software.After receiving degrees from Stanford and the University of Nancy, you spent nearly 10 years in industry at Électricité de France (EDF). When did you begin 

working on Eiffel, the object-oriented language and environment that you continue to re˜ne and develop?In 1983, I got to spend a sabbatical at the University of California, Santa 
Barbara. A Japanese company got ex-cited about a structured editor we had 
developed, and in 1985, we decided to 
found a company that™s now called Ei-ffel Software.We were looking for a program
-ming language. We didn™t like what 

was available, so I designed a notation that became Eiffel. Initially, I didn™t pay much attention to it. But in 1986, we attended the ˜rst OOPSLA (Object-
Oriented Programming, Systems, Lan
-guages, and Applications) conference 
in Portland, and that™s where we real
-
ized that what I thought obvious was DOI:10.1145/2716347  Leah Ho˜mannQ&A 
 Object LessonsThe creator of the Eiffel programming language discusses his career 
 in industry and academia, ﬁDesign by Contract,ﬂ and his views on 
Agile software development.[CONTINUED ON P. 95]
Bertrand Meyer, professor of software engineering at ETH Zurich, and CEO and chief 
architect of California-based Eiffel Software. 
 MARCH 2015  |  VOL. 58  
|  NO. 3  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    95last byte 
What are the best elements of Agile, in your opinion?Among the best is the idea of devel-oping in short iterations of two to six 

weeks. This has profoundly transformed 
the software industry for the better, and 
no one develops software anymore by 
assembling a few groups who tackle dif-ferent parts of the program and will see 

each other in six months.Another example is what I call the 
closed-window rule, an absolutely bril-
liant ideaŠthat when you have an itera-tion, you schedule a certain number of 
tasks, and absolutely no one, regardless 
of rank, is permitted to add anything dur-ing that iteration. This rule has a num-
ber of bene˜ts. It stabilizes the whole 
process and prevents bosses and man
-agers from interrupting the iteration. It 
also has the bene˜t of weeding out bad 
ideas, because many suggestions that 
seem brilliant don™t look so good when 

you wake up sober the next day. 
And the worst?In the opposite camp, you have the 
general rejection of what™s derisively 
called ﬁbig upfront anythingﬂŠbig up-front requirements, big upfront design. 
The Agile credo is that you should start 

implementing part of the system right 
away and not engage in long, early phas-es of architecture or investigation. The 
Agile world has this phobia of not pro-ducing anything that™s not deliverable to 

the customer. And as is so often the case 
with Agile ideas, there™s a grain of truth 
in this rejection, because the customer 

does not need speci˜cations. The cus-tomer needs results. But the idea that 
it™s bad to spend an appropriate time 

at the beginning of the project to clarify 
the overall requirements and design is 
nonsense. You do need at some point to 
focus on the deliverables; but until then 
you should take all the time necessary 

to address the big issues of speci˜ca-tion and design. I™ve seen projects fail 
miserably for blindly applying the Agile 

catechism: we™re Agile, we don™t need 
to stop and think, we just go ahead and 
code! Not surprisingly, what they code is 
junk and they have to redo it, but maybe 
at that point the money has run out and 

the customer has lost faith. Leah Hoffmann
 is a technology writer based in Piermont, NY.
© 2015 ACM 0001-0782/15/03 $15.00
where to take the introductory pro-gramming course offered at ETH.Coming from industry, the last thing I expected to do was to teach 
bright-eyed 19-year-olds the rudiments of programming, let alone in German, or my imitation of it. Yet it has been 
one of the most exciting things I have done at ETH. I started looking in depth 
at how we can teach programming to-day to kids who have been using smart-phones and videogames all their lives, 
and need the competitive advantage of becoming true professionals. I use Eiffel and Design by Contract right from the start. The experience 
resulted in a textbook, Touch of Class
, 
and more recently I dived head-on into MOOCs, ˜rst producing a kind of skunkworks MOOC outside of any or-
ganizational structure at the initiative of my colleague Marco Piccioni. Now we have redone it in a completely of-
˜cial context and it™s an edX offering. It applies the same pedagogical prin-ciples as our course and also bene˜ts from our research on distributed soft
-ware development; students can com-
pile and run programming exercises online, as quizzes in the course, and see the results right away. 
You also recently published a book 
on Agile development methods with 
the subtitle ﬁThe Good, the Hype and 
the Ugly.ﬂ 
Usually, when you see a novel idea in software engineering, you can quickly 
recognize whether it™s good or bad. 
What™s special about Agile is that it™s a mix of the best and the worst. My book is a cool-headed attempt to separate 
the wheat from the chaff.
Wirth had 
retired from ETH and I received an 

invitation to take on a chair. It took 
me a year to organize the transfer, be-cause I had my company to deal with, 
and I couldn™t just drop it overnight. 
And it™s a long flight from Santa Bar-
bara to Zurich. Nonetheless, I dived 
headfirst into the academic world. 
Yet you have remained involved with 
Eiffel Software.The trick for me has been not to de-velop a dual personality. I™m the same 
person whether I work as a professor or 

whether I™m devoting time to the com-pany, and my research is still in the con-text and philosophy of Eiffel. If you want 

to survive as a company, you have to do 
what the customers want. In academia, 
you can play with crazy ideas and experi-
ment without regard to what you can 
sell. You™re not going to hit the scienti˜c 
jackpot every time. But once in a while, 
you are ahead of the game and do things 
that you cannot do in a company if you 

are focused on the bottom line.What speci˜c elements of EiffelStudio have evolved through your academic work?Eiffel offers you the ability to test programs automaticallyŠand it really is completely automatic in the sense 
that everything is generated by the soft-ware, even the test cases. That started out in an academic context at ETH and 
was re˜ned through several excellent Ph.D. theses. The much more ambitious goal, 
which has been made possible by a suc-
cession of Ph.D. theses, is the idea of 
fully veri˜ed software. For a long time, 
that looked like a purely intellectual 
pursuit, but it™s now becoming a real-
ity. We call it EVE, the Eiffel Veri˜cation 
Environment. There™s still a lot of work 
to be done, and we have bene˜ted from 

tremendous advances in technology, in 
particular the Boogie tools from Micro-soft Research. But it™s becoming realis
-tic to imagine that we can take large, re-al-life programs and prove that they™re 

correct. And if they™re not correct, we 
can alsoŠthat™s another part of the EVE 
researchŠautomatically suggest ˜xes.On the teaching side, you helped pro-duce a MOOC (Massive Open Online 

Course) that enables students any-ﬁThe trick for me has 
been not to develop 
a dual personality. 
I™m the same person 
whether I work as 
 a professor or 

whether I™m devoting 
time to the company.ﬂ
[CONTINUED FROM P. 96]
