 DECEMBER 2016  |  VOL. 59  |  NO. 12  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    63IN HIS PAPER
 entitled ﬁIndustrial Scale Agile,ﬂ9 Roly 
Stimson characterizes industrial-scale agile as:˜ ﬁAgile at any scale.ﬂ
˜ ﬁAgile as the rule, not the exception.ﬂ 

˜ ﬁAgile sustainably, forever,ﬂ not just as an 
unrepeatable ﬁone-off.ﬂ
This means being able to sustain-ably apply agile strategies appropriate-ly to anything and everything that can bene˜t from them. This includes: ˜Being able to do ﬁagile at scaleﬂ as 
and when appropriate. ˜Doing small-scale agile as and when possible/appropriate. ˜Evolving the entire application landscape and not just individual ap-plications.Although it is important, and a nec-essary precursor to industrial-scale 

agile, scaling agile is not the challenge here. Rather, it™s about how to achieve 
sustainability of the following: ˜The way of working in the face of ever-changing teams.  ˜The systems in the face of rapid change.  ˜The application landscape as a whole.  ˜Individuals and their careers, and 
the development organization as a 
whole.  ˜Long-term investment in IT.
There are many ways to illustrate how fragile IT investments can be. You 
just have to look at the way that, even 
after huge investments in education and coaching, many organizations 
are struggling to broaden their agile adoption to the whole of their organi
-zationŠor at the way other organiza
-
tions are struggling to maintain the momentum of their agile adoptions as Industrial-Scale AgileŠ
From Craft to 

EngineeringDOI:10.1145/3009830    Article development led by 
 queue.acm.orgEssence is instrumental in moving 
 software development toward 
 a true engineering discipline.BY IVAR JACOBSON, IAN SPENCE, AND ED SEIDEWITZ
 64    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  DECEMBER 2016  
|  VOL. 59  
|  NO. 12
practice
Why is it important to move from craft to engineering?Doing so will help us cope with the ever-increasing challenges of a more automated, more interconnected worldŠwhere small improvements in 
software performance can make the difference between pro˜t and loss; where a reputation for robustness, 
scalability, and security can add mil-lions to the share price; and where soft-ware is more and more the public face 
of the business.The codi˜ed knowledge and profes-sionalism of an engineering discipline are necessary for: ˜Sustaining and growing delivery capability through changes in technol-
ogies, teams, and suppliers. ˜Predictably scaling operations 
from early prototypes to global rollouts. ˜Taking control of investments and 
knowing when to pivot to solutions 
more likely to deliver favorable returns. ˜Systematically growing the levels of reuse and interoperability of solu-
tion components and systems. ˜Producing long-lived solutions with affordable costs of ownership. Perhaps not everybody needs to move 
from craft to engineering. As Mary Shaw 
says, ﬁThe greatest need for engineering 
discipline exists for software systems 
that are fully automated and are oper-ating unattended and where the con
-sequences of failure are catastrophic. 

Examples are telecom equipment, nu-clear safety devices, medical implants, 
self-driving cars, and stock-trading 

programs. The need for engineering in 
software development depends upon 
how serious the consequences are when 
things go wrong and whether human 
beings can take action in time to mini-
mize the consequences.ﬂ There is also 
a strong need for engineering systems 
used for e-commerce, ˜nance, electron-
ic medical records, and even human re
-sources. The consequences of failures 
in such systems may not include the im
-
mediate loss of life, but they can still be 
ﬁcatastrophicﬂ to either the businesses 
or the individuals affected.Thus, for many organizations and software systems craft is not enough.The good news is there is a way for-ward that maintains the values of agile 

while making software development 

more of an engineering discipline than a craft. It involves:their teams change and their systems mature. Another frequent example of unsus-tainability is in the way many compa-nies are facing an uncontrolled explo-sion in the number of applications they 
have to support and the overall cost of ownership of IT as a whole. So industrial-scale agile requires much more than just being able to 
scale agile. It also means taking a disci-plined approach to ensuring IT invest-
ments result in sustainable bene˜ts for 
both the producing organization and its customers.This involves adopting a different 
approach to many aspects of agility. 

We need to look beyond small-scale ag
-ile, beyond independent competitive 
islands of agile excellence, beyond 

individual craftsmanship and heroic 
teams, and beyond the short-term in-stant grati˜cation that seems to be the 
focus of many well-intentioned but self-centered agile teams. It is this adoption 

of a more holistic approach that we call 
moving from craft to engineering. (See 
Jacobson3 for more background.)From Craft to Engineering

The move toward agility has led to many 

bene˜ts for the software industry. It has 
broken the tyranny of the prescriptive 
waterfall approach to software engi-neering, an approach that was causing 
more and more large project failures, 

and it has allowed software developers 
to keep up with the ever-increasing de-mand for more innovative IT solutions.It has enabled many companies to do great things but in many cases has 
led to a culture of entitlement, heroic programming, and short-term think-ing that threatens the sustainability of 
the parent companies and the IT solu-tions on which they depend. Little or no thought is put into maintainabil-
ity, the heroes become potential single 
points of failure, and the cost of keep-ing the lights on just keeps growing 
and growing. What is needed is a way to maintain the values of agility while making soft-ware development more an engineer-ing discipline than a craftŠa new form 
of agile software engineering ˜t for the 
Internet age. What are craft and engineering? The term craft is usually applied to peo-
ple occupied in small-scale production of bespoke goods and trades where skills are passed in person from master to apprentice. Engineering, on the other hand, is de˜ned by Wikipedia as ﬁthe application of mathematics, empiri-cal evidence and scienti˜c, economic, 
social, and practical knowledge in or-der to invent, innovate, design, build, maintain, research, and improve struc-
tures, machines, tools, systems, com-ponents, materials, and processes.ﬂ There have been many discussions about whether or not the term engi-
neering should be applied to software development and whether or not soft
-ware engineers are actually engineers. With the rise of cloud computing, big 
data, and the Internet of Things, how-ever, it is clear there are many types of software and many aspects of software 
development that would bene˜t from an engineering approach.In her 1990 seminal paper, ﬁPros
-pects for an Engineering Discipline of 
Software,ﬂ7 Mary Shaw suggested a de˜-nition of software engineering would 
include these clauses: ﬁCreating cost- effective solutions – to practical prob-lems – by applying scienti˜c knowledge 
– building things – in the service of 
mankind.ﬂ She also said about software 
work that ﬁmost tasks are routine and 
not innovative,ﬂ but it ﬁis treated more 

often as original than routine,ﬂ imply-ing that there is a lot of potential for im-proving quality and shortening time to 

market ﬁif we captured and organized 
what we already knowﬂ by codifying our 
knowledge, possibly even automating it.Her observations are still highly rele-vant; at the GoTo Amsterdam 2015 con
-
ference on software development, she 
talked about the progress made toward 
establishing a software engineering dis-
cipline. According to Shaw, the charac-teristics of engineering are as follows: ˜Limited time, knowledge, and re-sources force decisions on trade-offs. ˜The best-codi˜ed knowledge, pref-erentially science, shapes design deci-
sions. ˜Reference materials make knowl
-edge and experience available. ˜Analysis of design predicts proper
-ties of implementation.Although software development shares many of the characteristics of an engineering discipline, we are not 
there yet. The rise of agile is not a prob-lem unless this is where we stop. DECEMBER 2016  |  VOL. 59  |  NO. 12  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    65practice
Engineering of software. This 
means the holistic engineering of all 
software to improve the application 
landscape as a whole, as well as the 

individual point solutions. Practices 
are needed that help teams engineer 
their software for capturing require-ments and for developing software 
designed for engineering great prod-
ucts. It also means encouraging in-novation in the large as well as the 
smallŠinnovation of new business 

and new product opportunities as 
well as innovation that addresses the 
total cost of ownership impacting the 
whole organization, rather than just 
individual users and applications.Engineering of methods. Methods 
should be engineered to support the full 

range of development challenges faced 

today and in the future. The emerging 
best practice should be captured and 
codi˜ed in a way that makes it easy to 

communicate and share among teams, 
and enables each team to compose the 
method they need from this growing 
set of reusable, proven practices.Furthermore, moving from craft to engineering provides a robust platform 
for encouraging, establishing, and sus-taining true organizational agility.
Engineering of software. How would software be developed if the craft were 
already a real engineering discipline? As in other engineering disciplines, it would be engineered by using com-
monly accepted, consistent practices that would be supported by models and 
analysis based on a common ground of 
foundational knowledge.In the past, such an engineering 
mindset has been misinterpreted as 

meaning ﬁbig upfront design,ﬂ with 
everything downstream of this being 
akin to manufacturing rather than 
engineering. Upfront blueprinting is, 
indeed, often necessary for the engi-
neering of physical artifacts such as 
buildings, bridges, and cars. This is 
done so that proper analysis can be 

carried out on the upfront models 
and blueprints, because of the capi
-tal cost required to build those things 
and the difficulty of changing them 
once built. Software, however, is a 

different kind of artifactŠone that 
does not require manufacturing in 
the physical sense.Agility in software development 
takes advantage of this characteristic, allowing software to be developed in a rapid and incremental, but still re-liable, way; however, there is a place 
for disciplined design within an agile development approach. It is just that, with software, developers can also car
-
ry out analysis and evolve designs in
-crementally, as they build the software system itself. 
What is needed is, in fact, a merger of 
the agile mindset with the engineering 

mind-set, combining incremental devel-opment with the disciplined application 
of foundational knowledge. In such an 

approach, not everyone will necessarily 
be an engineer, but developers will con-tinue to be treated as skilled craftsmen, 
not factory workers. (See the sidebar 
ﬁCraftsmanship and Engineering.ﬂ)It is common in agile approaches to talk of the emergence of the design of a 
software system as that system is itera-
tively developed. This is the very em-bodiment of evolutionary design as op-posed to big upfront design. It can be 
very effective in allowing a team to ex-plore alternatives creatively, while still converging on a good solution with a clear overall design.Such emergent design, however, tends to produce point solutions for 
speci˜c teams. Serious software de-velopment organizations, though, are 
almost always dealing with multiple teams working on multiple projects within an overall enterprise-level appli-cation landscape. Various project-level 
solutions need to ˜t into this evolving 
landscape. Indeed, the development of a large software system often requires multiple teams whose products are 
components that must ˜t together to 
create the overall system.Dealing with design at this level is the province of software architecture, which, at both the system and enter-prise levels, can and should still be evolutionary. Rather than being en
-tirely emergent, however, key archi-
tectural decisions, presented in a de-velopment roadmap, often need to be made in advance of the corresponding development work in order to provide common guidance across projects and 
teams. This is where engineering prac
-tices can be particularly important, al
-lowing for innovations that bene˜t the 

organization as a whole, based on care
-ful analysis of business bene˜t versus 
engineering cost. Engineering of methods. Moving 
from craft to engineering relies on 

the codi˜cation and sharing of knowl-edge. What is needed is for organiza-tions to engineer their methods in order 

to be more effective at engineering 
their software.Most methods in use today are at the extremes, either monolithic or tac
-
it. The agile space is experiencing the rise of a number of competing, mono-lithic scaled agile methods, such as DAD (disciplined agile delivery), SAFe 

(Scaled Agile Framework), LeSS (Large-scale Scrum), and SPS (Scaled Profes-sional Scrum). All these methods have 
their special strengths and weakness-es. They have their own camps of sup-porters, but their monolithic nature doesn™t make it practical to borrow ideas from one another, even less to 
borrow complete codi˜ed practices. This situation is very similar to what we had in the past with methods such as 

RUP (Rational Uni˜ed Process), Open, 
Structured Analysis and Design, and Related to the idea of 
craft is craftsmanship, performed by a person who practices or is highly skilled in a craft. Software development will always need craftsmanship 
that can stand on more or less science, more or less engineering, and more or less 
structured knowledge. We would, for example, describe an engineer as a craftsman using 

engineering practices in developing software. The new software craftsmanship movement 
is supportive of many engineering practicesŠfor example, they are strong supporters 
of design and architecture patterns, domain-driven design, among others. They take 
pride in using the right tools, techniques, and design methods to achieve high-quality 
software. They do not believe in heroics, but in quality of work and in tools. They believe in 
sustainability, and in keeping the system ﬁcleanﬂ and able to absorb change and rework. 
The craftsmanship movement, however, doesn™t fully address the whole engineering 
space and, in particular, how to systematically grow knowledge about the discipline. Craftsmanship 
 and Engineering 66    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  DECEMBER 2016  
|  VOL. 59  
|  NO. 12
practice
so on. We have also observed that, at 
many large organizations, the success of tacitly applied agile practices has led to a situation where the previously used 
and codi˜ed (documented) methods have been replaced by undocumented agile folklore.The paradox here is the discomfort 
caused by not having a documented 

method causes many organizations to 
seek to replace their tacit agile meth-ods with one of the new monolithic 

methods. What they don™t realize is 
that it will end up being rejected in 
the same way as the original method 
as teams seek to innovate and meet 
the day-to-day challenges inherent 

in their systems and circumstances. 
This often leads to a constant churn 
as method replaces method with little 

or no rhyme or reason. The industry™s 
habit of constantly switching between 
no methods and the latest ﬁone true 

wayﬂ (an af˚iction that is sadly affect-ing even the agile community) is not 
the way forward.Instead, organizations need an effec-tive way of using what they learn from 

effort to effort, applying and adapting 
it to new projects. Moving blindly from 
one fad method to another provides no 

consistent basis for building common 
Figure 1. Simple Essence-based health monitors.˜˚˛˝˙ˆ˝˜
˛


˜˙ˇ˘


Figure 2. Four compatible governance life cycles de˚ned using the Essence kernel.
‡‡⁄—ˇ€
ˇ
 DECEMBER 2016  |  VOL. 59  |  NO. 12  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    67practice
knowledge. Mandating a one-size-˜ts-all process for all projects does not sup-port the need for continual learning and 
adaptation, however, and suppresses 

craftsmanship and creativity.
The move from craft to engineering requires ˜rst freeing the practices, pre-senting them in an accessible, reusable way that allows engineers con˜dently 
and predictably to select the right engi-neering practices for their context and the problems they are trying to solve.Essence: A Hope for a Better Future 
Software development is a multidimen-sional endeavorŠwhere human ingenu-ity meets human need meets collective 

endeavor meets codi˜ed knowledgeŠthat would bene˜t from the judicious 
application of engineering practices. 

The path from craft to engineering 
progressesŠfrom ad hoc practice to 
codi˜ed professional engineering 

practicesŠthrough scienti˜c learning. 
The key to this transformation is the ability to readily capture, share, and improve the practices. Essence is a simple intuitive lan-guage and kernel of foundational el-
ements for the capture, description, and assembly of practices and meth-
ods. Work on Essence has been going 
on for more than 10 yearsŠfor the last 
six years within the SEMAT (Software 
Engineering Method and Theory) com-munityŠresulting in a new interna-
tional standard, adopted by OMG (Ob-ject Management Group) in 2014.5 It goes beyond just providing syntax and 
notation for describing practices to es-tablishing a solid common groundŠa 
kernelŠthat enables teams to: ˜Describe their practices on top of a 
universal, shared kernel.  ˜Easily share, adapt, and plug and play with their practices to create the innovative ways of working they need to excel and continuously improve. ˜Understand and visualize the prog
-ress and health of their endeavors, re-gardless of their way of working.Essence has several roles to play in the move from craft to engineering: It is 

helping to achieve the right balance in software engineering endeavors; help-ing to codify and capture engineering practices; and acting as the basis for a 
new kind of engineering community.
The use of Essence alone won™t 
turn craftspeople into engineers, but its adoption will help an organization make this important transition and, moreover, help the industry prepare 
for the future.Balancing progress and health. Es-sence provides a kernel of elements that establishes a common ground for carrying out software engineering en-
deavors. This can be used in a number of ways to increase the effectiveness of software engineering teams.Actively monitoring the health of an 
endeavor.
 The kernel defines seven 

aspects of concern for any software 

engineering endeavor: opportunity, 
stakeholders, requirements, team, 
work, way of working, and the soft-ware system itself. For each of these 
elements Essence defines a series 

of states, with checklists, represent-ing healthy progress. As shown in 
Figure 1, these can be used to create 

practice-independent health moni-tors that can be used to check that 
the endeavor is on course and pro-ceeding in a healthy manner. On the 
top, the radar chart (an interactive, 

online version complete with check-lists is available1) represents progress 
as growth from the center; and on the 

bottom, on the milestone map (avail
-able from the App Store as the Alpha 

State Explorer app by Ivar Jacobson 
International), all the states are laid 
out in order from top to bottom, 
with achieved states shown filled 

in. The second example also shows 
the checklist used to confirm the 
achievement of the Software System 
Demonstrable state.The kernel can also be used to create lightweight governance and compli-
ance practices to help ensure the team achieves the required level of engineer
-
ing rigor. By basing the governance 
and compliance on the kernel itself, this can be achieved in a practice-inde-
pendent fashion allowing the teams to 
safely innovate and own their own ways of working. Figure 2 shows the four dif-ferent governance life cycles that were at the heart of Munich Re Essentials, 

the modern practice-based software development method created by Mu-nich Reinsurance.
4 The four life cycles are Exploratory, Feature Growth, Main
-tenance, and Support, and the check
-points (milestones) of each life cycle 
are de˜ned by the states to be achieved for each alpha. Assessing the effectiveness of methods. 
Essence at its roots gives a detailed de˜nition of software engineering. In 

the search for a GTSE (general theory 
of software engineering),6 several re-searchers use Essence as such a defi-
nition, and more is expected to come 
out of this work. A key aspect provid-Figure 3. Simple Essence-based activity map.
˜˚˛˝˙ˆˇ˘˙˚˘
˜˚˛˝˙ˆˇ˘













ˆ
 68    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  DECEMBER 2016  
|  VOL. 59  
|  NO. 12
practice
the design and sustainability of the 
systems produced. This is not to say 
the former isn™t important. Indeed, it 
is crucial to the success of any devel-
opment organization. As the integra-tion of software into the fabric of our 
daily lives grows, however, the need 
for proven, reusable engineering 
practices grows as well. 
Practices are needed that help 
teams engineer their software: prac-
tices for working with requirements, 

such as use cases, features, and sto-ries; for developing components and 
services; for applying an appropriate 
pattern or framework; for testing com-plex, distributed systems; that encour-
age reuse; and that help engineers 
code with con˜dence. In particular, 
practices are needed for dealing with 

architectural concerns such as con-currency, security, user experience, 
microservices, and data protection, as 

well as for addressing broader archi-tectural concerns such as enterprise 
architecture, product-line architec-ture, service-oriented architecture, 
and the architecture of systems. Many 

of these practices already exist codi-˜ed in the Essence language (see the 
section ﬁSharing practice: Methods 

and practice librariesﬂ).These engineering practices need to be streamlined (lean), agile, and, 
most importantly, composable into complete methods to provide guide-
lines for teams working with a multi-tude of practices for complex systems. They are needed to help deal with the 
complexities of modern software en-gineering. They need to be available to all engineers whether they are work-
ing alone, in small teams, or in larger teams of teams, regardless of the style 
of team working or work-management practices adopted.Globally, we want a robust and ˚ex-ible library of codi˜ed professional 
engineering practices that re˚ect the multidimensional nature of software 

development and that can be used to support the many different types of software being developed today and in the future.These practices can only come from 
engineering teams working on the cut-
ting edge of technology, and these teams 
need a better way to capture, communi-
cate, and share their practices.A new method architecture. With 
ed by such a theory is the capability to 

be predictive.A construction engineer can use 
material science and the theory of 
structures to understand at an early 
stage whether a proposed building is 

likely to stand or fall. Similarly, using 
Essence, one can understand whether 
a proposed method is well construct-
ed, whether or not there are any gaps 
or overlaps in its practices, and if 
there are gaps or overlaps, how to re
-
solve them.The kernel has many mechanisms 
for method analysis, the simplest of 
which is provided by its high-level activ
-ity map. This is a set of 12 activity spaces 

organized into three areas of concern. 
An activity space is a generic placehold
-er for method-speci˜c activities. These 

activity spaces, as shown in Figure 3, 
can be used to assess the spread of the 
team™s activities. In this example, the 
team has added notes to the map to in-dicate their activities and red circular 

markers to highlight the danger areas.Note: Without understanding the 
meaning of the Essence language, the 

symbol of a pointed arrow to repre-sent an activity space can make them 
appear sequential, which is not the in-tended meaning. The activity spaces 
and the activities that they contain 
can of course be applied iteratively, 
concurrently, or in any order the prac-tices require.These are just a few simple exam-ples of the kernel™s capabilities, but 

they illustrate the many ways it can 
help teams and organizations assess the effectiveness of their methods. Codifying and capturing engineer-ing practices. In addition to the kernel, 
Essence provides a language for creat-ing practices on top of the kernel and then composing methods from those practices. This is extremely important 
for moving from craft to engineering. As discussed previously, most 
current practices are embedded in 

monolithic methods that aggres-sively compete with one another. 
Rather than admit that they share 
practices and encourage reuse and 
cross-pollination, they willfully slan-
der and steal from one another. Even 
worse, from an engineering perspec-tive, they are all concerned with the 

design and sustainability of the de-velopment organization rather than 
The terms used in the method space are often ill-de˜ned or confused. For example, 
what is the difference between a method and a methodology? A practice and a process? Composition: The process of merging practices into practices and methods. It is important to understand that practices are separate concerns composed through a 
merge operation and not components interacting through messages.Essence kernel: An actionable reference model of software engineering that provides a framework for the de˜nition of practices and the assembly of methods.Essentialization: The process of rendering a method or practice down to its essence and capturing it using the Essence language.Method: The documentation of a team™s way of working. A method may or may not be documented using Essence. If it is documented in Essence, then it is the composition 
of the Essence kernel and a set of practices to ful˜ll a speci˜c purpose. A method could 
belong to a single team or be shared among teams.Methodology: A collection of practices known to share a common set of values and work 
well together. It™s a form of practice library.
Practice: A repeatable approach to doing something with a speci˜c objective in mind. Practice library: A collection of potentially competing practices. For example, a 
requirements management practice library could contain many different competing 
practices such as declarative requirements, use cases, and user stories.Starter pack: A partially built, often incomplete method that a team can use as a framework to seed their own method. Way of working: 
This is what a team actually does. It may or may not match their method.Some De˚nitions DECEMBER 2016  |  VOL. 59  |  NO. 12  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    69practice
the Essence kernel as common 
ground, you can use the Essence lan-guage to describe any practices, in-cluding engineering practices, in a 

way that allows them to be composed 
seamlessly together to form methods. 
Figure 4 illustrates a three-layer meth
-od architecture with the kernel as the 
foundation, generic practices in the 

middle, and domain-speci˜c practic-es at the top. 
Starting from the bottom of the 
stack, the three layers are:The Essence kernel. This provides the common ground for all practices and 

methods and the underlying founda-tion for the de˜nition and composition 
of the practices.Generic practices. These are prac
-tices that are applicable across many 

software engineering domains. Ex
-amples of generic practices include 
Scrum, use cases, user stories, test-

driven development, and acceptance-
test-driven development. Many en-gineering practices will be generic, 
but many of the most valuable will be 
domain-speci˜c.Domain-specific practices. These 
practices are explicitly targeted to a 

speci˜c domain such as business in-
telligence, data warehousing, or tele-communications. Domain-speci˜c 
practices are equally as important as 
generic practices, if not more so. For 
example, many domain-specific prac
-
tices are needed to develop solutions 
for the Internet of Things; these prac-tices cater to things such as asset in-
tegration architecture and different 
technology profiles. Just as generic 
practices extend the kernel to provide 

specific guidance, domain-specific 
practices are often extensions/spe-cializations of the generic practices. 
For example, an asset integration ar
-chitecture practice could be present-
ed as an extension to a generic agile 
architecture practice.The separation of generic practices from domain-speci˜c practices helps 

teams ˜nd the practices that they need and helps organizations establish com-mon ways of organizing and tracking their work. It is not uncommon for an 
organization to standardize on a small set of generic practices as the founda-tion for all of its teams™ methods.Liberating practices in this way is very powerful. Once practices are codi
-˜ed in Essence, teams can take owner-ship of their ways of working and start to assemble their own methods. This 
can start with even a simple library of practices, as shown in Figure 5. This capturing and sharing of en-gineering practices, both generic and 
domain-speci˜c, in a way that lets 

them be applied alongside popular 
management practices (agile or other-
wise), provides the codi˜ed knowledge 
needed to support a true software en-gineering discipline. It is also the key 

to moving away from monolithic man
-agement methods and isolated engi-neering practices. 
Sharing practice: Methods and prac-tice libraries. It™s easy to say that teams Figure 4. The Essence method architecture.






Figure 5. Three teams sharing a simple practice library.
˜˚˛˝˙ˆ˚˛ˇ˘˛
˛
ˇ


˜˚˛˝˙ˆˇ˘˝˛˝
˜˚˛˙ˆ˚˛ˇ˘˛

˜˚˛˝˙ˆ˚˛
ˇ˘˛


ˇ˘˛˝
ˇ

˛
 70    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  DECEMBER 2016  
|  VOL. 59  
|  NO. 12
practice
of scaled agile methods, where each 
method contains many of the same 
practices tangled up with a few new, 
unique, and innovative practices in 

such a way that the safe separation of 
the new practices for use with another 
method is nearly impossible.In contrast, Figure 6 outlines a 
starter pack of agile practices based on 
Essence, called Agile Essentials.2 It in-cludes practices from Scrum, Kanban, 
and XP (extreme programming). This is a small library of seven prac-tices, which, when composed together, 
form a starting point for a team™s agile method. Scrum, user stories, and use cases have also been ﬁessentializedﬂ and can be used alongside the Agile Es
-
sential practices. Thus, with Essence, a library of ge-neric, reusable practices can be cre-
ated, from which a team can select 
the ones they want to use and they can compose together to kick-start their own method. The Ignite Internet of Things method-ology.
 Ignite is a methodology devel-
oped for the Internet of Things.
8 It sup
-ports a number of different approaches 
and attempts to bridge the gaps be-tween ﬁmachine guysﬂ and ﬁInternet 
guys,ﬂ and between ﬁ˜ve-year think-ingﬂ and ﬁcontinuous beta.ﬂ Ignite can easily be described as a set of practices on top of the Essence kernel. Figure 7 demonstrates what Ignite looks like 
when presented using Essence. This picture readily illustrates a number of key points: ˜Ignite clearly contains and reuses a number of generic practices that are applicable in many more domains than the Internet of Things, including 

those already available as part of the Agile Essentials practice library.
 ˜Successful development for the Internet of Things requires many do
-
main-speci˜c engineering practices. ˜Whenever anyone wants to cre-ate a new method, they currently have 

to rewrite, re-present, and, in many 
cases, rebrand already established ge-
neric practices. 
 ˜The more comprehensive the ap-proach, the less likely it is that anyone 
will use all of it. For example, no one is 
ever going to use all of these practices 
at the same time. Clearly, there are many methods that could be built from the practices contained within the Ig-will be able to plug and play with sets of practices to build their own meth-ods and take ownership of their way of 
working. But where are the practices going to come from?Let™s take a look at two concrete ex-amples.Agile methods. The industry has 
seen an explosion in the number of ge-neric agile practices being published 
and promoted. Unfortunately, most of 
these ﬁbelongﬂ to one method or an
-other and, even though they share the 

same values, are rarely presented in a 
way that lets them play well together. 
This is particularly true in the area 
Figure 6. Agile essentials with its seven practices.
˜˚˛˝˙ˆ
˜˚˛˝˙˙

˜˚˛˝˙
˜˚˛˝˙Figure 7. Ignite expressed as a set of Essence practices.
˜˚˛˚˝˙






‘’š


 DECEMBER 2016  |  VOL. 59  |  NO. 12  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    71practice
nite methodology, but without the use 
of Essence this will be very dif˜cult, if 
not impossible, for teams to do.Many other practices could be use-ful for teams developing for the In-
ternet of Things. Some of these will 
be innovations unknown at the time 
of writing this article or the creation 
of Ignite. This can easily lead to the 

approach becoming out of date and 
unfashionable. The presentation of 
Ignite as a practice library allows the 

practice set to respond to the needs of 
the users, who may regularly add new 
practices and retire those that are no 
longer needed. 
The process of extracting the prac-tices from an existing method or meth-
odology is called essentialization. Es-sence is designed to allow people to 
extract the essence of any method or practice, so essentialization of a meth-od means identifying the method™s 
practices and practice architecture. 
Moreover, each practice is described/codi˜ed in terms of the elements in Es-sence and the Essence language with 
new practice-speci˜c elements added 
as needed. As of this writing, the Uni-˜ed Process has been essentialized, and DSDM (dynamic systems develop-
ment method) is in process. Several other methods are in the planning stages to become essentialized. Many companies around the world are now using the Essence standard to essen-
tialize their methods. The value of essentialization is that 
people can easily learn what really 

matters about a practice, compare it 
with other practices, compose it into 
a method (with many other proven 

practices), and easily modify/change 
the method as new knowledge be
-comes available. Applying Essence 
also makes it easier to govern the 
methods you have in your organi-
zation, so you create an effective 
learning organization. Moreover, 
an essentialized method is not just 

a static description, but helps the 
team while they actually use the 
method, allowing them to measure 
progress and health at any moment 
during their endeavor. 
Less work has been done to capture 
the domain-speci˜c practices needed 

to bridge the gap between craft and 

engineering. As discussed earlier, the 
concepts can be illustrated using Ig
-nite8 and other popular methodolo-gies, but a vibrant and committed en-
gineering community must ˚esh out 
and complete the necessary set of en-
gineering practices. 
There are two ways to accelerate the transition: ˜Slice the popular methods into practices and design these practices so that they can be composed in any rea
-sonable way teams want, maybe result-
ing in a method with practices from several existing methods such as DAD, SAFe, LESS, and SPS.
 ˜Codify existing or new practices so 
that they can be composed with other 
practices to form complete methods. 
There are already hundreds of prac
-
tices in the world, but they are not 
described in a way that allows them 
to be easily composed. Now this can 
be done without having to describe a 
complete method.In both cases Essence is key as it provides the foundation for this work 
and for the industry to transition suc-
cessfully from craft to engineering.ConclusionAs software becomes more essential to the world™s day-to-day activities, it is 
time for software development to move beyond a craft-based approach to be-come a true engineering discipline.This will require a shared base of codi˜ed engineering practices that can 
be reused across various technical do-
mains and various types of software; this set of practices will grow and adapt as better ways of developing software come along.This is not going to happen over-night, but it is a challenge to which our 

industry needs to rise as it matures and evolves into something beyond agile 
and other current practices.We still need the dedication, inno
-vation, and invention of craft, embod-ied in: ˜Skilled professionals, passionate about their subjects and committed to 

mastering new, complex, fast-moving technologies. ˜Local experts who understand complex problems in depth and re-spond rapidly to changing needs, per-ceptions, and challenges.However, we also need the codi˜ed knowledge and professionalism of an 
engineering discipline to be able to: ˜Sustain and grow delivery capabil
-ity through changes in technologies, teams, and suppliers. ˜Predictably scale operations from early prototypes to global rollouts. ˜Take control of investments and 
know when to pivot to solutions more 
likely to deliver favorable returns. ˜Systematically grow the levels of reuse and interoperability of solution 
components and systems. ˜Produce long-lived solutions with affordable costs of ownership. This is what we mean by moving 
from craft to engineeringŠa journey 
that must be made practice by prac-tice, domain by domain. Thanks to Es-sence, that journey can start today for 
all of us.  References1. Graziotin, D., Abrahamsson, P. A Web-based modeling 
tool for the SEMAT Essence theory of software 
engineering. J. Open Research Software 1
, 1 (2013), e4; http://dx.doi.org/10.5334/jors.ad.
2. Ivar Jacobson International. Agile Essentials, 2015; https://www.ivarjacobson.com/sites/default/˜les/
˜eld_iji_˜le/article/agile_essentials_paper.pdf.
3. Jacobson, I., Seidewitz, E. A new software 
engineering. acmqueue 12, 10 (2014); http://queue.
acm.org/detail.cfm?id=2693160.4. McDonough, A. Munich Re and ESSENCEŠKernel and 

Language for Software Engineering Methods: A Case 
Study. Object Management Group, 2014; http://www.

omg.org/news/whitepapers/Munich_Re_Essence_Case_Study-2014-12-01_JP.pdf.
5. Object Management Group. EssenceŠKernel and 

language for software engineering methods (Essence), 
2014; http://www.omg.org/spec/Essence/.
6. Ralph, P., Johnson, P., Jordan, H. Report on the ˜rst 
SEMAT workshop on general theory of software 
engineering. ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering 

Notes 38, 2 (2012): 26-28.
7. Shaw, M. Prospects for an engineering discipline of 

software. 
IEEE Software 7
, 6 (1990), 15Œ24.
8. Slama, D., Puhlmann, F., Morrish, J., Bhatnagar, R. 

Enterprise Internet of Things: Strategies and Best 

Practices for Connected Products and Services. 
O™Reilly, 2015.
9. Stimson, R. Industrial scale agileŠchallenges and 
solution strategies. Ivar Jacobson International, 
2015; https://www.ivarjacobson.com/publications/

white-papers/industrial-scale-agile-challenges-and-solution-strategies.
Ivar Jacobson is a father of components and component 
architecture, modern business engineering, the Uni˜ed Modeling Language, and the Rational Uni˜ed Process. 
His latest contribution is a formal practice concept that 
promotes practices as the ﬁ˜rst-class citizensﬂ of software 

development. Jacobson is also one of the founders of 
the SEMAT (Software Engineering Method and Theory) 
community.
Ian Spence is CTO at Ivar Jacobson International and 
the team leader for the development of the SEMAT kernel. 
An experienced coach, he has introduced hundreds of projects to iterative and agile practices. 
Ed Seidewitz 
is the former CTO, Americas, for Ivar 
Jacobson International and is currently chair of the 

ongoing Essence Revision Task Force. With Ivar Jacobson 
International, he has led agile system architecture and development engagements in both the commercial 
and government sectors and participated in practice 
development.
Copyright held by owners/authors.  Publication rights licensed to ACM. $15.00
