 56    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  DECEMBER 2015  
|  VOL. 58  
|  NO. 12
practice
DOI:10.1145/2814346    Article development led by 
 queue.acm.orgCatering to developers™ strengths 
 while still meeting team objectives.
BY KATE MATSUDAIRA
ONCE UPON A time (and isn™t that how all good stories start?) I was managing a software team and we were working on several initiatives. Projects were assigned based on who was available, their skillsets, and their 
development goals. This resulted in two developers, 
let™s call them Mary and Melissa, being assigned to the same project.Mary and Melissa had been working together for a few weeks when I started hearing complaints in my 
one-on-ones with each of them about the other. Mary 
was complaining that Melissa was taking too long to 
do her part, and spending time on unit tests that did 
not make sense because things were in ˜ux with the project. Meanwhile, Melissa was complaining that Mary wrote sloppy code and did not 
write enough tests (she even showed me 
comments in the code like ﬁhack:–.ﬂ 
and ﬁto do: someone should add more 

error handling hereﬂ). Each of them had 
valid points and feedback for the other.
I spent the next few weeks coaching 
each of them on how to improve and ad-dress the other™s concerns. With Mary 

I was focused on pushing her to write 
more tests and not just throw things to-gether, and with Melissa I was focused 

on having her prototype something 
quickly and then add the polish after it 
was working. Both of them tried really 
hard, and both were miserable. It just 
was not what they were meant to do.These two women were just not meant to collaborate. This got me 
thinking: how could we change the 
process so they both could write code the way they liked to create (and that catered to their strengths) and we 
could still meet our team objectives?From this was born the v1/v2 devel-opment process.You see, certain developers love 
building the ˜rst versions or prototyp-
ingŠthey are the ones who love hack-ing things together to get something 
working quickly. They love (and are 

best at) building version 1 of a prod-uct. The other type of developers love 
building the second version. They see 
their code as a craft and write unit 
tests for everything. ﬁTest coverageﬂ 

and ﬁbeautiful codeﬂ are phrases they 
use a lot.And of course this de˜nition is not 
black and whiteŠthere are people who 

fall on different sides of the line at differ-ent times, so it is more like a spectrum.Typically, the v1 person does not like working with the v2 person, and 
vice versaŠnot for personal reasons, but because of the ways they think and create software. At the heart of it, the 
fundamental thing they enjoy about what they do is different.By changing the way we thought about software, we were able to ad-
dress this concern and actually make the team more agile and solve some business problems along the way.
Lean Software 
DevelopmentŠ

Building 
 and Shipping 
 Two Versions
 DECEMBER 2015  
|  VOL. 58  
|  NO. 12  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    57The V1/V2 ProcessWhen it comes to software develop-ment there are many ways to build and 
create products.In my experience it is dif˜cult to 
build the right product the ˜rst time. 

By ﬁrightﬂ I do not just mean something 
customers will want and use, and that 
hopefully will generate revenue, but 

also the right technical solution. How 
customers will use products can be dif-˜cult to predict. For example, before 

you ship the ˜rst version of a product it 
can be dif˜cult to answer questions like: ˜How quickly will the data grow? ˜How fast will writes need to be? ˜Will it be feasible to write directly to the data store or do you need a queue 
to manage writes? ˜What will the throughput be, and is it enough? ˜Will the system scale with usage?Even if you could reasonably an-swer these questions, or if you built a 
system that took all these things into 
account such that you could ﬁjust add 
hardware,ﬂ the effort would probably be larger than if you had simply pushed to ship a ˜rst version quickly. And it is 
possible (if not always probable) such 
a system would be over-engineered (since it was designed to solve prob-lems or scale in a way that may not be 
useful), or even have other unforeseen issues. While there are certainly pros 

to doing it right the ˜rst time, in prac
-tice it is very dif˜cult to get it right, and building the end-all system will take 
longer, delaying the answers to all of the questions indicating you are mov
-ing in the right direction.There is a popular movement called Lean Startup that advocates fast itera-
tion and data collection to home in on the right product and requirements as quickly as possible. It is all about 
˜guring out what customers will use and then building those things. These 
ideas can also be applied to the techni-
cal ways we build products.Build V1 Fast, Then Build V2 Right
Similar to creating a minimum viable product (MVP), build the minimum viable technical implementation that 
meets the business goals (meaning the product can meet current usage re-
quirements and performance).Most engineering teams have been taught to think about software design and architecture from the beginning and to build something that can scale. 
However, if you do not have any cus-tomers yet, scaling really is not your challenge. So in some ways, designing 

for scale when you do not have to scale 
yet is solving the wrong problem.Of course I am not advocating doing something stupid, or writing bad code, 

but do not over-engineer or solve prob
-
lems before you have them. Here are some examples: ˜Foregoing the deployment of a 
multi-node Cassandra cluster and stor-
ing the initial data in a single database (with backup) that is fast and easy to 

make arbitrary queries against; ˜Faster UI development using stan
-dard forms and charts versus interest-ing shapes or fancy custom graphs; and ˜Cutting corners on unit tests (be
-cause the units are in ˚ux) or com
-
ments and documentation.All these shortcuts will help you get something out faster. They may not be 

best practices but they do ensure you are building the right thing.In many ways, this process is about looking at the problems differently 
and, instead of solving the ﬁbigﬂ prob-lem, focusing on speed and ef˜cien-cyŠgetting the highest ROI (return 
on investment) for your development resources.So you modify your development process to ship the ˜rst version quick-IMAGERY BY 3D-SPARROW
 58    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  DECEMBER 2015  
|  VOL. 58  
|  NO. 12
practice
The v2 will take much longer than the v1. I have personally seen this process evolve across four projects (no, it is not a large sample set), and in each case 
the v2 took more than twice as long as the v1 to create and launch. Of course, every v2 I have launched had a lot of ex-tra features, and they did not always le-verage a lot of the v1 code. Some people 
assume the v2 will be faster, since ﬁyou have already built it once before,ﬂ but I have not found this to be the case.Have a tight feedback loop with your customers. Make sure it is easy to get 

insight into what people use, what they like, and what they do not likeŠthat way you can build a great v2.Make sure v1s and v2s are celebrated equally. 
Sometimes teams or compa-nies celebrate the ˜rst launch of a fea
-
ture in a much grander way than the next version. But in this case the next version is what you need to grow your 
business. It is just as important as v1, if not more so. Make sure you value 
each of these equally, or people will gravitate to the project with the most fanfare, not necessarily the one suited 
to their strengths and talents.Be open to people being good at both 
v1s and v2s. Sometimes I think I have 

someone pegged and then they prove 
me wrong. Be open to the fact there are 
not two types of people, and some peo-ple are just good at everything. (I just 
wish I was one of those people!)I hope some of these ideas will prove useful for you and your team. If any-
thing, let this anecdote inspire you to 
question the way you are doing things, and look critically at innovative ways to improve how you build software.   Related articles 
   on queue.acm.orgA Conversation with Tim Bray

http://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=1046941
Big Games, Small ScreensMark Callow, Paul Beardow, and David Brittain

http://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=1331296
Major-league SEMAT - Why Should an 
Executive Care?

Ivar Jacobson, Pan-Wei Ng, Ian Spence, and 

Paul E. McMahon

http://queue.acm.org/detail.cfm?id=2590809
Kate Matsudaira 
(katemats.com) is the founder of  her own company Popforms. Previously, she worked 
 in engineering leadership roles at companies such as  Decide (acquired by eBay), Moz, and Amazon.© 2015 ACM 00010782/15/11 $15.00
ly, and then once v1 is out in the wild, plan to start on v2 right afterward.Then your v2 can address all the problems with the ˜rst version of the 
product. You can improve usability, 
cut or add features based on custom-er usage and feedback, pick the right technology and libraries to power the 
product, and spend time writing accep-
tance tests and unit tests are unlikely to change. From a business perspective, you get the product out there faster, so 
it is easy to see if this product is going to drive revenue and success.Why This Process Makes SenseIt reduces the risk of over-engineering. As noted earlier, getting something 
out quicker and understanding how 
it is used (or how successful it is in 

the market) will help confirm you 
are building the right product and 
solving the right technical problems 

for your business. This allows you to 
mitigate the risk of building or scal-ing out systems that may not address 
the production issues.If you build the wrong thing you can correct it. Since the product is truly the minimum viable product, you reduce the risk of wasting resources creating 
the wrong product. Furthermore, you will get feedback earlier in the release cycle and can pivot or make changes faster (since it is always more dif˜cult to change a system with a plethora of 
moving parts). Chances are you will get to market 
faster. 
Building something quickly will help you launch sooner, which will 
help you test and determine the viabil-ity of your product faster than waiting 
for the bigger launch. This means you will not spend time building software your customers will not use or you can-not sell.Staf˜ng and personnel happiness. This is one of the biggest upsides to 
this method. Software engineers get to do what they love, in a way that caters to 
their strengths. Moreover, they are not forced to work with people who do not share their approach, and they do not 
have to work in a code base they cannot sculpt into their desired piece of art.So, What Are the Downsides?Total time to build is more than if you 

just got it right the ˜rst time. In this model it is likely v2 development will 
be ˜nished later and the total develop-ment time will be greater than if you built the product once. If you build the v1 using one technology (say, a MySQL 
database that will not scale the way you 
need it to), and then the v2 needs a dif-ferent one (say, a proper key value store 
for faster queries), the team will spend time shipping and building expertise 
on one database, only to have to learn and manage another.
Operations can be a headache.
 Most 
seasoned engineers will tell you that 

building something really fast can 
result in operations nightmares if 
the usage or data grows in a way that 
was not considered. No team likes 

being operational and ˜ghting ˜res. 
Of course, if this is a problem it prob
-ably means your product has achieved 

some adoption and success, so at 
least you are solving something that 
produces real value. However, even for 

the v1 it is still worthwhile to identify 
risks and potential bottlenecks, so in 
the event there are problems the team 
will have some ideas for solutions.So You Want to Try It 
 at Home – Err – Work?
Like any software process or method-
ology it is important to assess if this makes sense for your business, prod
-uct, and companyŠit certainly is not a one-size-˜ts-all. However, it de˜nitely 
has its merits, so feel free to steal the 
pieces you like.If you do embark on this journey, 
here are some pointers from my expe-
rience:Get management buy-in. This is really critical, because a key to this approach 
being successful is always building a v1 and a v2. If you do not have buy-in and your boss is content to keep and operate the v1, your team is going to hate you. Seriously. No one wants to 

get stuck supporting crufty v1 soft-ware inde˜nitely. So make sure every
-one knows and understands the plan 
ahead of time.Measure everything. In order to build the right v2 you need to know what to build. Where are your bottlenecks? How is the data growing? Without this 
data it is very dif˜cult to realize many of the advantages of this model. Make sure you think about what you need to 
measure, and how you will measure it, before the product ships.