 72February  2005/Vol. 48, No. 2COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM
 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM
May  2005/Vol. 48, No. 573Organizations must carefully assess their readiness 
before treading the path of agility.
BySridhar Nerur, RadhaKanta Mahapatra, andGeorge MangalarajSoftware development methodologies are constantly 
evolving due to changing technologies and new demands
from users. TodayÕs dynamic business environment has

given rise to emergent organizations that continuously
adapt their structures, strategies, and policies to suit the new 

environment [12]. Such organizations need information systems

that constantly evolve to meet their changing requirementsÑbut

the traditional, plan-driven software development methodologies

lack the flexibility to dynamically adjust the development process. 
ILLUSTRATIONBY
RICHARDDOWNSChallenges of Migrating to Agile Methodologies 74May  2005/Vol. 48, No. 5
COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM
While object-oriented (OO)approaches provide a viable

method to incrementally

develop information systems, a
host of new methods called agile development

methodologies or lightweight methodologies claim to

go a step further in overcoming the limitations of tra-

ditional plan-driven ones. A number of software

development methods such as extreme programming

(XP), feature-driven development, crystal clear

method, scrum, dynamic systems development, and

adaptive software development, fall into this category

[1, 4, 7]. Our objective here is to articulate the chal-

lenges that CIOs and project managers must be cog-

nizant of in their endeavors to

embrace the agile philosophy
of software development. 
While traditional method-ologies, such as life cycle-

based structured and OO

approaches, continue to domi-

nate the systems development

arena, numerous opinion

pieces and several surveys

clearly demonstrate the grow-

ing popularity of agile
methodologies. The advent of

these methodologies has
divided the software develop-

ment community into oppos-
ing camps of traditionalists
and agilists, with each group

proclaiming the superiority of

its own methodology. A more

balanced view of the two com-

peting methodologies is
offered by a few who suggest

that each method has its
strengths as well as limitations, and is appropriate for

specific types of projects [1, 2, 6, 10]. According to

Boehm, Òorganizations must carefully evolve toward

the best balance of agile and plan-driven methods that

fits their situation [1].Ó Clearly, most organizations

cannot ignore the agile wave, but for organizations

steeped in the traditional systems development

methodologies, adoption of agile methodologies will
likely pose several challenges, since the two software

development methodologies are grounded in oppos-

ing concepts. Past research shows that software development
process changes represent complex organizational

change phenomena and cannot be accomplished
merely by replacing current tools and technologies

with new ones [11]. Such changes may impact several
aspects of the organization including its structure,
culture, and management practices. Therefore,

understanding organizationwide ramifications of a
change phenomenon is a critical first step in planning
and managing such changes. In this article, we have

consciously taken an organizational and managerial
perspective of this change phenomenon primarily

because such a perspective, although critical in imple-

menting organizational change, is largely missing
from the current discourse on adoption of agile

methodologies. We provide a brief comparison of

agile development methodologies with traditional

systems development methodologies, and discuss the

challenges of adopting agile methodologies.Software development is a
complex activity character-
ized by tasks and require-

ments that exhibit a high
degree of variability [2, 8].

Uncertainties are further
compounded by the diversity

and unpredictability of peo-

ple who engage in such tasks
[5, 6]. The changing nature

and sophistication of tools

(for example, a development

environment including pro-

gramming languages, tech-

niques, and so on) may also
exacerbate development

problems. A rationalized,

engineering-based approach

has dominated software

development almost since its

inception. Such an approach,

grounded in the principles of

hard systems thinking,

assumes that problems are
fully specifiable, and that an optimal and predictable
solution exists for every problem [3]. Extensive upfront

planning is the basis for predicting, measuring, and

controlling problems and variations during the devel-

opment life cycle. The traditional software develop-

ment approach is process-centric, guided by the belief

that sources of variations are identifiable and may be

eliminated by continually measuring and refining

processes [4]. The primary focus is on realizing highly

optimized and repeatable processes. Thus, planning

and control accomplished by a command and control

style of management provide the impetus for develop-

ing a software product [8]. 
Systems development in the traditional approach is
guided by a life cycle model such as the waterfall

model, the spiral model, or some variations of these.
most organizationscannot ignore the
agile wave, but for
those steeped in 
traditional systems
development, 
adoption of agile
methodologies will
likely pose several
challenges. The life cycle model specifies the tasks to be per-
formed and the desired outcomes of each phase, and

assigns roles (such as systems analyst, programmer) to

individuals who will perform these tasks. In addition

to the end product of working code, these method-

ologies also produce a large amount of documentation

that codifies process and product knowledge. Com-

munication among project participants is formalized

through these documents. Customers play an impor-
tant role during specification development, but their
participation is minimal in other activities. These

methodologies are appropriate both for OO and non-

OO technologies. Unlike the traditional methodologies, agilemethodologies deal with unpredictability by relying

on people and their creativity rather than on

processes [5]. They are characterized by short itera-

tive cycles of development driven by product fea-

tures, periods of reflection and introspection,

collaborative decision making, incorporation of rapid

feedback and change, and continuous integration of
code changes into the system under development [4,

7, 8]. A project is broken down into sub-projects,

each of which typically involves planning, develop-

ment, integration, testing, and delivery. Developers

work in small teams with customers (representing

system users) as active team members. The features to

be implemented in each development cycle are

jointly decided by the customer and the rest of the

development team. Collaborative decision making

involving stakeholders with diverse backgrounds and

goals is thus a characteristic of agile development.

Agile methodologies favor a leadership-and-collabo-
ration style of management where the project man-
agerÕs role is that of a facilitator or coordinator [8]. 
The deliverable of each development cycle is work-
ing code that can be used by the customer. Agile

methods discourage documentation beyond the

code. Product knowledge, therefore, becomes tacit.

Rotation of team membership ensures this knowl-
edge is not monopolized by a few individuals. Fur-

ther, the iterative strategies that characterize agile
methodologies are best supported

by OO technologies. The evolu-
tionary-delivery model proposed

by Gilb provides a meaningful
framework to guide agile software

development [9]. 
To summarize, agile develop-
ment is characterized by social

inquiry in which extensive collab-

oration and communication pro-

vide the basis for collective action

[5, 6, 8]. Diverse stakeholders

including developers and end

users go through repeated cycles

of thought-action-reflection that

foster an environment of learning

and adaptation. Team members,

empowered with more discre-

tionary and decision-making

powers, are not confined to a spe-

cialized role. This increases the

diversity/variety of the teams and

enables them to self-organize and

respond with alacrity to emergentsituations. Table 1 summarizes
the comparison between traditional and agile

methodologies. Making Agile Methodologies Work
For decades organizations have relentlessly pursued
the goal of creating optimized and repeatable

processes [4, 7, 8]. The stability they yearned for

presents one of the biggest hurdles to adopting agile

development methodologies. The variations

between traditional and agile methodologies previ-

ously detailed suggest that organizations must
rethink their goals and reconfigure their human,
managerial, and technology components in order to

successfully adopt agile methodologies. Here, we

identify the key management, organizational, peo-
ple, process, and technological issues in adopting

agile methodologies. Table 2 summarizes the main

issues involved under each component.
Management and organizational issues. Organiza-
tional culture has a significant impact on the social
COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM
May  2005/Vol. 48, No. 5
75TraditionalFundamental AssumptionsControl
Management Style

Knowledge 
Management
Role AssignmentCommunication
Customer™s Role

Project Cycle

Development Model 
Desired Organizational 
Form/Structure
Technology
Systems are fully specifiable, 
predictable, and can be built 

through meticulous and 

extensive planning.
Process centric

Command-and-control

ExplicitIndividualŠfavors 
specializationFormalImportant

Guided by tasks or activities

Life cycle model (Waterfall, 
Spiral, or some variation)
Mechanistic (bureaucratic 
with high formalization)
No restriction
AgileHigh-quality, adaptive software can be 
developed by small teams using the principles 

of continuous design improvement and 

testing based on rapid feedback and change. 
People centricLeadership-and-collaboration
Tacit
Self-organizing teamsŠencourages role 
interchangeability
Informal

Critical
Guided by product features

The evolutionary-delivery model
Organic (flexible and participative 
encouraging cooperative social action)
Favors object-oriented technology
Table 1. Traditionalversus agile software
development. structure of organizations, which in turn influences
the behavior and actions of people [3, 6, 8]. The val-

ues, norms, and assumptions of an organization are

stabilized and reinforced over time, and are reflected

in the policies embodied in organizational routines.

Culture exerts considerable influence on decision-
making processes, problem-solving strategies, innova-

tive practices, information filtering, social

negotiations, relationships, and planning and control

mechanisms. Neither culture nor mind-sets of people

can be easily changed,
which makes the move to

agile methodologies all
the more formidable for

many organizations [2].As mentioned, agilemethodologies require a

shift from command-and-

control management to

leadership-and-collabora-
tion. The organizational
form that facilitates this
shift needs the right blend
of autonomy and cooper-
ation to achieve the

advantages of synergy

while providing flexibility

and responsiveness [3].

The project managerÕs traditional role of planner and

controller must be altered to that of a facilitator who

directs and coordinates the collaborative efforts of

those involved in development, thus ensuring that the

creative ideas of all participants are reflected in the

final decision [8]. The biggest challenge here is to get

the project manager to relinquish the authority he/she

previously enjoyed. 
Knowledge management is of vital importance to
organizations. Traditional development approaches

create much documentation. Such records serve as

useful artifacts for communication and traceability of

design. Agile methodologies, on the other hand,
encourage lean thinking and cutting down on over-

head, particularly documentation. Much of the

knowledge in agile development is tacit and resides in

the heads of the development team members [1, 8].

This can make the organization heavily dependent on
the development teams and can potentially shift the

balance of power from the management to the devel-

opment teams. Such a situation may not be accept-

able to many organizations. This impasse can be
resolved by determining which knowledge should be
codified and what may remain tacit. 
Agile development relies on teamwork, as opposed
to individual role assignment that characterizes tradi-
tional development. Performance measurement and
reward systems, therefore, must be suitably designed
for successful adoption of agile methodologies. People-related issues
. A cooperative social process
characterized by communication and collaboration

between a community of members who value and

trust each other is critical for the success of agile

methodologies [5, 8]. For programmers accustomed

to solitary activities or working with relatively homo-

geneous groups of analysts and designers, the ideas of
shared learning, reflec-

tion workshops, pair-

programming, and

collaborative decision

making may be over-

whelming. At the present time,
there is little evidence to

suggest that agile princi-
ples will work in the

absence of competent
and above-average peo-

ple [1, 2]. This can pose
serious problems related

to staffing and morale.
First, it will be difficultto find enough personnel
to staff software develop-
ment teams that use agile
methodologies. Second, it will

create a culture of elitism within
the systems development group that may affect the

morale of non-agile developers. 
In an agile environment, the development team
comprising software developers and the customer

makes most of the decisions. This creates a pluralist

decision-making environment due to the diverse

backgrounds, attitudes, goals, and cognitive disposi-

tions of the team members [3]. Decision making in

this environment is more difficult compared to the

traditional approach where the project manager is

responsible for most decisions. It may take an organi-
zation enormous effort, time, and patience to build a

culture of trust and respect among its employees to

facilitate such collaborative decision making.
The success of agile development hinges on find-
ing customers who will actively participate in the

development process. Further, the customers are

expected to be ÒCollaborative, Representative, Autho-

rized, Committed, and KnowledgeableÓ [2]. It is not

an easy task to find such persons, especially for com-
plex systems.     
Process-related issues.
The problem of changing atti-
tudes and practices from process-centric to people-
76May  2005/Vol. 48, No. 5
COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM
Management and organizational
PeopleProcess
Technology (Tools and Techniques)
e

orm

e Development Knowledge

ward Systems
orking effectively in a team
vel of competence

elationshipsŠcommitment, knowledge, proximity, trust, respect
om process-centric to a feature-driven, people-centric approach
t, iterative, test-driven development that emphasizes adaptability

, scalable projects

ppropriate agile method
opriateness of existing technology and tools
w skill setsŠrefactoring, configuration management, JUnits
Table 2. Key issues inmigrating to agile. centric is acute. Organizations that have for years
attempted to achieve higher levels of CMM are par-

ticularly susceptible to this problem. The idea of

changing a process to fit the capabilities and compe-

tencies of people and the characteristics of the project,

rather than using a rigid process encompassing stan-

dardized activities may be sound [5], but can be

achieved only through significant investment of time,

effort, and capital.
Traditional processes are
compliance-driven and activi-

ties- and measurement-based,

aimed at providing assurance

[1, 2, 7]. Agile methodologies
rely on speculation, or planningwith the understanding that
everything is uncertain, to

guide the rapid development of

flexible and adaptive systems of

high value [7, 8]. They stress

the importance of assessing as

opposed to measuring, and are

highly tolerant of change. One

of the biggest barriers to migra-
tion is the change in a process

model from a life cycle model

to one that supports feature-

based development using evolu-

tionary and iterative

development. Such a change

entails major alterations to
work procedures, tools and

techniques, communication
channels, problem-solving

strategies, and roles of people. 
Agile methodologies place a premium

on testing, urging developers to

develop the test code upfront [8].

The notion of test-driven develop-
ment (TDD) is becoming increasingly popular within

the agile community. TDD is motivated by the fact

that thinking about and writing tests prior to coding
will make the code more understandable and main-

tainable. TDD also facilitates continuous integration
of new code and/or changes without adversely affect-

ing the existing code base. However, the firmly

entrenched tradition of writing code prior to testing

must be overcome to institutionalize the practice of

early and frequent testing. TDD also redefines the

role of the quality assurance function in systems devel-
opment.  Questions have also arisen about the efficacy of
agile approaches with regard to large projects where
scalability is paramount [2, 10]. Due to the novelty of
agile methodologies, very little empirical data is avail-

able regarding each method. The biggest challenge

facing the project manager, therefore, is the selection

of an appropriate method from the host of agile meth-

ods currently available. This is very much like the

predicament that early adopters of object technology

faced. While all agile methods, to some extent, con-form to the tenets outlined in
the agile manifesto, they are not

all alike in every respect. They

differ in terms of team size,

code ownership, duration of

each iterative cycle, emphasis

on upstream and downstream

activities, and the mechanisms
for rapid feedback and change
[2, 7]. In the absence of a uni-

fied agile approach, organiza-

tions must decide which is

most compatible with their
existing practices.Technological issues.An orga-nizationÕs existing technology

can impact the efforts to

migrate to agile methodologies.
Companies that rely solely on

mainframe technologies may
find it difficult to assimilate
agile methods compared to

those that use OO develop-

ment techniques. Tools play 

a critical role in successful

implementation of a software

development methodology.

Organizations planning toadopt agile methodologies must invest in tools that

support and facilitate rapid iterative development,

versioning/configuration management, JUnits, refac-
toring, and other agile techniques. Of course, tools

alone cannot make software development successful.

People must be trained to use them correctly.
ConclusionThe principles of agile methodologies parallel theideas delineated in ChecklandÕs Soft Systems Method-

ology and AckoffÕs Interactive Planning [3]. These

reflect the essential characteristics of complex adaptive
systems [4, 7, 8], and have the potential to endow

organizations and systems with emergent properties.

While the opportunities and benefits that agile

methodologies afford make them attractive, organiza-

tions should be circumspect in embracing them or in

integrating them with existing practices [1]. COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM
May  2005/Vol. 48, No. 5
77While the opportunities and
benefits that agile
methodologies
afford make 
them attractive,
organizations
should be 
circumspect in
embracing them 
or in integrating
them with existing
practices.  Agile methodologies are ideal for projects that
exhibit high variability in tasks (because of changing

requirements), in the capabilities of people, and in the
technology being used [8]. As Highsmith notes, they

are also appropriate for projects where the value of the

product to be delivered is very important to cus-

tomers. Organizational forms and cultures conducive

to innovation may embrace agile methods more eas-

ily than those built around bureaucracy and formal-

ization. Organizations must carefully assess their

readiness before treading the path of agility. The
issues raised in this article are invaluable in making

this judgment.References1. Boehm, B. Get ready for agile methods, with care. 
Computer(Jan.2002), 64Ð69.2. Boehm, B. and Turner, R. 
Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide forthe Perplexed. Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 2004.3. Cavaleri, S. and Obloj, K. 
Management Systems: A Global Perspective.Wadsworth Publishing Company, CA, 1993.4. Cockburn, A. and Highsmith, J. Agile software development: The
business of innovation. IEEE Computer(Sept. 2001), 120Ð122.5. Cockburn, A. and Highsmith, J. Agile software development 2: The
people factor. IEEE Computer(Nov. 2001).6. Cockburn, A. 
Agile Software Development. Addison-Wesley, Boston,MA, 2002.7. Highsmith, J. 
Agile Software Development Ecosystems.Addison-Wesley,Boston, MA, 2002.8. Highsmith, J. 
Cutter Consortium Reports: Agile Project Management:Principles and Tools 4, 2 (Feb. 2003), Cutter Consortium, Arlington,MA.9. MacCormack, A. Product-development practices that work: How
Internet companies build software. MIT Sloan Management Review(Winter 2001), 75Ð84
10. Orr, K. CMM versus Agile Development: Religious Wars and Software
Development. Agile Project Management Executive Report 3, 7 (2002),Cutter Consortium, Arlington, MA.11. Sircar, S., Nerur, S.P., and Mahapatra, R. Revolution or Evolution? A
Comparison of Object-Oriented and Structured Systems Development
Methods. MIS Quarterly 25, 4 (Dec. 2001), 457Ð471.12. Truex, D.P., Baskerville, R. and Klein, H. Growing systems in emer-
gent organizations. Commun. ACM 42, 8 (Aug. 1999), 117Ð123.Sridhar Nerur (snerur@uta.edu) is an assistant professor of information systems at the University of Texas at Arlington. RadhaKanta Mahapatra (mahapatra@uta.edu) is an associateprofessor of information systems at the University of Texas at Arlington.George Mangalaraj (mangalaraj@uta.edu) is a doctoral studentat the University of Texas at Arlington.Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal orclassroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full cita-
tion on the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redis-
tribute to lists,  requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.
© 2005 ACM 0002-0782/05/0500 $5.00c78May  2005/Vol. 48, No. 5
COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM
STAY ON TOP OF ACM NEWS WITH 
MEMBERNETNOW IN MEMBERNET: 
The awards issue: • ACM A.M. Turing Award recognizes pioneers of the Internet
• Reports from SIGCSE• CS&IT Education Symposia• Career News launches • Previews of Computers, Freedom and Privacy and Human Factors in Computing
Systems (CHI) conferences• Updates from Job Migration Task Force, Computer Science Teachers Association
And much more!All online, in MemberNet: www.acm.org/membernet.
