 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACMAugust  2006/Vol. 49, No. 867Therehas been much discussion as to whatdegree iterativeand agile processes and soft-ware evolution are different from previously
promoted practices based on the waterfall life cycle

model. Here, I argue that the departure is funda-
mental and, in fact, it represents a new paradigm. 
The notion ÒparadigmÓ was used by Kuhn [8] to
describe a Òcoherent tradition of scientific researchÓ
that includes knowledge, techniques, research
agenda, and so forth. Kuhn collected extensive his-
torical data and proved that change from an old par-adigm to a new one takes place when the old
paradigm is in crisis and cannot explain compelling
new facts. It is a genuine revolution in a particular
branch of science and it represents a discontinuity in
the development of that branch.
Kuhn argues that thereis always a substantialinvestment in the old paradigm that causes a resis-tance to the paradigm change. This resistance is
fueled by the fact that as a result of the paradigm
change, knowledge accumulated up to that pointmay lose its significance. This makes the advantages
of the new paradigm disputable, especially among
those with the greatest knowledge of the old para-

digm. Those who have a vested interest in the old
paradigm will always attempt to extend that para-digm to accommodate newfacts. Thus, the final vic-toryof the newparadigm can only be guaranteed byageneration change. With just a slight shift in the meaning, I use the
notion of ÒparadigmÓ as Òcoherent tradition of soft-
ware development,Ó and argue the current movement
toward software evolution and agile and iterative

processes of software development represent nothing
less than a paradigm change. Inorder to describe the
scene in which this change is taking place, it helps to
reviewthe historyof softwaretechnology.
Software separated in the 1950s from the under-
lying hardware and emerged as a distinct technology,

turning out independent products and requiring a
Software evolution, iterative, and agile development represent a 
fundamental departure from the 

previous waterfall-based paradigm 

ofsoftware engineering. CHANGINGthePARADIGM
ofSOFTWARE ENGINEERINGBy V⁄clav Rajlich  68August  2006/Vol. 49, No. 8COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACMspecialized set of skills. Original programmers were
recruited mostly from the ranks of hardware engineers
and mathematicians who used ad-hoc techniques
they carried from their former fields. 
The first paradigm change occurred in the late
1960s. It was precipitated by the fact that the ad-hoc
techniques did not scale up to the large systems. The
situation is vividly described by Brooks in [2] where
the demands of the new operating system OS/360
taxed the limits of the programmers, project man-

agers, and the resources of IBM Corp. The result of
the crisis was a paradigm change that established anew academic software engineering discipline and

introduced the waterfall metaphor into the produc-
tion of software. 
The waterfall metaphor is widely used in the con-
struction industry and product manufacturing. It
requires the developer first to collect the requirements
that describe the functionality of the futureproduct,
and then to create a design that
will be followed during the entire
construction. When the product isfinished, it is transferred to the

user and any residual problems
that may surface afterward are
resolved through maintenance. 
The waterfall metaphor is anintuitively appealing metaphor.

Common sense dictates to try to
avoid the expensivelate rework;requirements elicitation up front
and good design based on theserequirements lessens the need for
the expensiverework. Waterfall
became the dominant paradigmthrough which the software devel-
opment was viewed. 
However, in the context of
software development, waterfall is
beset byaserious problem of requirements volatility.
Requirements arenot fully known in advance and are
often added during the course of the project. For
example, Cusumano and Selby [3] found that 30% of

the requirements for Microsoft projects were not
elicited in advance, but emerged only when the devel-
opment was already under way, possibly as a result of

the developerÕs learning. Any design based on volatile
requirements must of necessity be only temporary
and cannot guide developers through the entire devel-
opment process. Additional data indicated that in spite of wide-
spread use of waterfall, there were very few successful

projects [7]. In an oft-quoted report, the Standish

Group revealed that in 1995, 31.1% of all software
projects were canceled, 52.7% were ÒchallengedÓ
(completed only with great difficulty, and with large
cost or time overruns), and only 16.2% could be

called successful. Obviously, the waterfall metaphor

did not solve the problems of software development. 
Although use of waterfall is in decline in the
industry, it still explicitly or implicitly drives
much of the discussion and research. As in
other scientific revolutions, there are attempts to
extend the waterfall in order to adapt it to the new
data and address the most glaring deficiencies. One

such approach calls for the anticipation of the future
changes and proposes to build the software in such a
way that those changes will be easily implemented.
This again is a commonsense idea, but it requires a
crystal ball that often is not available. Examples of dra-
matic unanticipated events are unexpected company
mergers that require companies to unify their IT
efforts (example: Daimler Chrysler), unexpected
changes in the law, unexpected changes in technology
(arrival of the Internet) and so forth. AnticipatingfuturechangesÑif at all possibleÑcan only lessen theproblem of requirements volatility, but cannot solve it.
Another approach advocates software prototyping.
The prototype is a first throw-away version of the
software and its purpose is to elicit the requirements.
This is only a partial solution to the problem; it

assumes the programmers elicit all requirements while
prototyping. In reality, late new requirements emerge
due to environment volatility and the developer
learning that still goes on through the rest of thedevelopment. Both anticipation and prototyping
lessen the problems of volatility, but they do not offer

acomplete solution. Indeed, a complete solution can
only come from a new paradigm. 
Incremental changedesign. THENEWPARADIGMISBASEDON
SOFTWAREEVOLUTIONThe current revolution in software engineering is the
response to the data that proved the waterfall life

cycle, including its change anticipation and proto-

typing variants, cannot solve the problem of require-
ments volatility. As in other scientific revolutions,
the new paradigm comes from several independent

sources. It gained momentum recently and surfaced
as a flood of new ideas, books, and articles.
One source is the empirical studies of actual soft-
ware life cycles, which resulted in a staged model [9]
that divides the software life cycle into five stages.
There is initial development that creates the first ver-

sion of the software, and establishes the fundamental
commitments that will characterize the software
through the rest of its life cycle. The next stage, evo-

lution, consists of iterations that adapt the software to
the changing requirements caused by the environ-
ment volatility and add new functionality and other
new properties. The value and size of the software
grows during the evolution, so sometimes the evolu-
tion is called Ògrowth stage.Ó The factor that stops the evolution is either a man-
agement decision or the code decay [4] that brings theloss of architecture coherence and the loss of the
knowledge about the program. The software enters the
servicing stage, wherethe value no longer grows andchanges are limited to patches and wrappers that only
fixminor deficiencies. The life cycle ends with the
phase-out stages, whereno moreservicing is providedand the users workaround the known deficiencies, and
close-down that discontinues the software use. 
Iterative program development is another source of
the new paradigm [6]. It is based on the observa-
tion that during the program development, there
is a contradiction between the need of programmers
to have a predictable and stable environment and the
volatility of requirements. The attempt to freeze the
requirements for the entireduration of the projectdoes not work, because the accumulation of both the
external and internal changes is too large and results

in project failures. The opposite extremeÑflooding
the programmers with the constant stream of
changesÑalso does not work because it creates project

chaos. A reasonable compromise is to freeze the envi-
ronment for a limited time, called iteration. Atthe end of the iteration, the stakeholders (pro-grammers, managers, users) evaluate the progress, takeinto account the changes in the environment, and
decide the direction for the next iteration. The itera-

tions provide feedback and lessen the risks of the sur-

prises and failures. Fast iterations are recommended
by agile processes like eXtreme Programming (XP)
[1]. In terms of the staged life cycle, iterative program
development extends the stage of evolution at the

expense of the initial development, which becomes

just one of the iterations. THENEWRESEARCHAGENDAWith its emphasis on software evolution, the new
paradigm focuses on the modifications in the exist-ing software. This puts a new research agenda into

the spotlight. One of the increasingly important top-
ics is incremental change
(IC), the purpose of whichis to add a new functionality or a new property to

the existing software [10]. Under the old paradigm,
IC was supposed to happen only rarely, because all
required functionalities and properties should have

been identified in advance and implemented during
the initial development. In the modified old para-
digm, whereall changes are anticipated, all changes
should be local and trivial. As the result of these
views, IC was largely ignored by researchers and edu-
cators as something of little importance; in fact, cur-rent programmers must learn it on their own. 
Software evolution, iterative development, and
agile development are all based on repeated IC.
Because of that, IC is poised to move into the center
of the research interest. The questions are: can thepractice of IC be summarized, modeled, formalized,
improved, taught, and supported by tools? For exam-
ple, many issues of the IC design areopen and requireadditional research. IC design has been divided intotwo closely related activities: concept location and
impact analysis (see the accompanying figure). 
Concept location[10] starts with the change request
and determines where in the existing software the
change should be made. ProgrammerÕs knowledge
might be sufficient for concept location in small and
familiar programs, but it fails in large or unfamiliar
ones. Ideally in that situation, there should be an
external documentation that guides the programmersto the proper place in the code. However, such docu-
mentation is very rare and the programmers must rely
on their skills. A crude but widely used string pattern

matching technique locates identifiers or commentsthat indicate the presence of the concept in the code.
Unix utility ÒgrepÓ is the best known example of a pat-

tern-matching tool and therefore this technique is
often called grep technique. For example, if the pro-
grammers want to locate the concept Òpay stubÓin thecode, they look for identifiers Òpaystub,Ó ÒpayStub,Ó
Òpaystb,Ó and so on.
In spite of its wide use, ÒgrepÓ has serious limita-
tions as it depends on the presence of relevant com-
ments and identifiers in the code. It frequently fails
COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACMAugust  2006/Vol. 49, No. 869 because of the use of synonyms or homonyms thatlower precision and recall. Search for better concept
location techniques is one of the important research

issues of IC. The new concept location techniques

broadly fall into static and dynamic categories, where
static techniques analyze the static software source
code while dynamic techniques analyze results of the

program execution [12]. 
Impact analysis
[10] is also a part of IC design and
it determines full extent of the change, by finding all

software components that will be affected by the IC.
After the actual change in the software was made,
change propagation
[10] finds all places where the sec-
ondary changes are to be made in order to complete
the change. Program dependency analysis plays an
important part in both impact analysis and change

propagation. 
Refactoring
is a change to the software that does not
modify the functionality but modifies the structure.
After repeated incremental changes, the architecture
of the program can become disorganized and refac-
toring reintroduces the order.Opportunistic refactor-
ing prepares software for a specific incremental
change. There are many different refactoring transforma-
tions, starting with simple renaming of an entity of
the program, and including moresophisticatedchanges like refactoring a base class, refactoring

design patterns, and so forth. Refactoring has been
covered in numerous articles and books [5]. Manycurrently available software environments are
equipped with tools to support at least some refactor-
ing transformations. Code decay[4] causes transition from the stage ofevolution, where large changes in the functionality are
possible, to a servicing stage where only minor patches
and wrappers are possible, therefore substantially low-

ering the value of the software. Software managers
should be aware of this phenomenon, as it can happen
byaccident. Therehas been very little research into
what causes code decay and howto prevent it. Cognitive aspects
of software development and pro-
gram comprehension [11] are also emphasized by the

newparadigm. The software evolution presents an
opportunity for the programmers to learn, and this
learning will determine the success of the project.

New programmers joining the project must absorb
project knowledge and current documentation sys-
tems fail to capturethis knowledge adequately, mak-
ing the entrance of the newprogrammers into an oldproject difficult. It was speculated that the code decay
is characterized by the situation where complexity of

the code outruns the cognitive capabilities of the pro-

grammers [9]. CONCLUSIONThe old waterfall paradigm tried to freeze require-
ments for the duration of software development and

created a situation where requirements volatility

caused too many project failures, while the new par-
adigm addresses this shortcoming by its emphasis on
software evolution. The new paradigm brings a host

of new topics into the forefront of software engi-
neering research. These topics have been neglected
in the past by the researchers inspired by the old par-

adigm, and therefore there is a backlog of research
problems to be solved.  
References1. Beck, K. 
Extreme Programming Explained.Addison Wesley, Reading,MA, 2000.2. Brooks, F.P. The Mythical Man-Month.Addison-Wesley, Reading,MA, 1982.3. Cusumano, A.M. and Selby, R.W. How Microsoft builds software.Commun ACM40,6(June 1997), 53Ð61.4. Eick, S.G., Graves, T.L., Karr, A., Marron, J.S., and Mockus, A. Doescode decay? Assessing the evidence from change management data.IEEE Trans. Software Engineering 27,1(2001), 1Ð12.5. Fowler, M. Refactoring: Improving the Design of Existing Code.AddisonWesley, Reading, MA, 1999.6. Jacobson, I., Booch, G. and Rumbaugh, J. The Unified Software Devel-opment Process.Addison Wesley, Reading, MA, 1999.7. Johnson, J.H. The CHAOS Report.The Standish Group International,Inc., (1994); www.standishgroup.com/sample_research/ index.php.8. Kuhn, T.S. The Structure of Scientific Revolutions.The University ofChicago Press, Chicago, 1996.9. Rajlich, V. and Bennett, K. A staged model for the software lifecycle.Computer 33,7(July 2000) 66Ð71.10. Rajlich, V. and Gosavi, P. Incremental change in object-oriented pro-gramming. IEEE Software 21(July/Aug. 2004), 62Ð69.11. Xu, S., Rajlich, V., and Marcus, A. An empirical study of programmerlearning during incremental software development. In Proceedings ofthe IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Informatics (2005),340Ð34912. Wilde, N., Buckellew, M., Page, H., Rajlich, V. and Pounds, L. A com-parison of methods for locating features in legacy software. J. Systemsand Software 65,2(Feb. 2003), 105Ð114.This research was supported in part by grants from the National Science Foundation(CCF-0438970), the National Institute for Health (NHGRI 1R01HG003491), andby 2005 IBM Faculty Award. Any opinions, findings, conclusions, or recommenda-tions expressed in this material are those of the author and do not necessarily reflectthe views of the NSF, NIH, or IBM.V⁄clav T. Rajlich (rajlich@wayne.edu) is a professor and former chair in the Department of Computer Science at Wayne State
University, Detroit, MI. Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or class-
room use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for
profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on
the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute tolists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.©2006 ACM 0001-0782/06/0800 $5.00c70August  2006/Vol. 49, No. 8COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACM