 COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACMOctober  2006/Vol. 49, No. 1041lobal sourcing and distributed software development have
become a common business reality. Moreover, the current
dynamic business environment requires organizations to
develop and evolve software systems at Internet speed. As a
consequence of these major trends, software development
organizations have been striving to blend agile software
development methods like Extreme Programming
and distributed development to reap the benefits of both.
However, agile and distributed development approaches
differ significantly in their key tenets. For example, while
agile methods mainly rely on informal processes to facili-
tate coordination, distributed software development typically relies on formal
mechanisms.CAN DISTRIBUTED SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT BE AGILE?
GBy BALASUBRAMANIAM RAMESH, LAN CAO, KANNAN MOHAN, 
and PENG XU 
Three organizations studied here suggest the answer is Òyes,Ó when the 
unique characteristics of both environments are successfully blended. 42October  2006/Vol. 49, No. 10COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACMCan such differences be recon-
ciled to support agile distributed
software development? What are

the challenges that arise from

blending agility with distributeddevelopment? How can these chal-
lenges be addressed? We investi-

gated these questions by studying
three organizations that have
adapted their practices to support

such development. 
The table here summarizes the
challenges to distributed develop-

ment and identifies how adopting
an agile approach creates a new set
of challenges to agile distributed
development. 
CHALLENGESINAGILEDISTRIBUTEDDEVELOPMENTCommunication need vs. communication impedance.Distributed software development relies on formalmechanisms such as detailed architectural design
and plans to address impediments to team commu-
nication that result from geographical separation.
As agile development relies more on informal inter-
actions than explicit documentation, it poses a realchallenge in a distributed environment. How can

we achieve a balance in formality of communica-
tion in agile distributed environments? Fixed vs. evolving quality requirements.
Due to thelimited ability to control activities of remotely
located teams, distributed development often relies
on fixed, upfront commitments on quality require-
ments. In contrast, agile development relies on ongo-
ing negotiations between the developer and the
customer for determining the acceptable levels of

quality at various stages of development. How can we
achieve a balance between the fixed and evolving
quality requirements?People- vs. process-oriented control. In distributeddevelopment environments, control is often achieved
by establishing formal processes. Agile environments,

on the other hand, are more people-oriented and
control is established through informal processes.
What would be the appropriate balance between

people- and process-oriented control in agile distrib-
uted development?Formal vs. informal agreement. 
Contracts in agileenvironments are loosely and informally defined. Incontrast, distributed development relies on explicit
targets, milestones, and detailed specification of
requirements. What is the appropriate level of for-
mality in developing contractual agreements in agile
distributed development?
Lack of team cohesion.In distributed development,
participants at different sites are less likely to perceive
themselves as part of the same team when compared
to co-located participants. Lack of cohesiveness and
shared view of goals are problems in such an envi-
ronment. These problems are even more pronounced
in agile development, which emphasizes constantcooperation on all aspects of the project. How can

team cohesion be improved given the constraints of
a distributed environment? 
Project teams involved in agile distributed devel-
opment must adopt practices that address these ques-tions. We present some successful practices observed

in three organizations we refer to here as Telco,
Manco, and Consult (see the sidebar for details onhow the multi-site case study was conducted). Thesepractices leverage the unique characteristics of agile
and distributed development to form a successful
blend. THEBALANCINGACT: PRACTICESTO
ACHIEVEDISTRIBUTIONAND
AGILITYThe practices that may be characterized as agile but
disciplined have evolved in the three organizations
after repeated experimentation. These practices arein the spirit of ÒlightweightÓ methods, but havebeen adapted to meet the competing demands ofdistributed development as well. We have classified

these practices into five groups. 
1. Continuously adjust the process.
Instead of
strictly following the agile development practices as

commonly defined, the companies continuouslytweak them to fit the evolving needs of their projects. 
Planning iterations to finalize requirements and
develop designs.Skeptical of agile development thatdoes not include adequate upfront design, both
Manco and Consult devoted the first two or three

iterations of a project to finalize critical require-
ments and develop a high-level architecture. Con-
Impact of agility on challenges to distributeddevelopment. sult used a SCRUM-like process during two upfront
design cycles for this purpose.
Documenting requirements at different levels of for-
mality.
Telco and Manco altered their requirements
analysis process significantly for agile distributed
development. Short use cases and user stories were
employed instead of detailed use case specifications.

Also, product managers and customer representatives
were encouraged to clarify requirements by sketching
out acceptance tests. At Telco, the offshore team felt

that such minimally documented requirements were
more helpful than just informal communication.
2. Facilitate knowledge sharing.
Knowledge shar-
ing between and within teams was supported to
enhance developersÕ shared understanding of the
application and business domains. Processes and

tools were developed to minimize the overhead to
participants in knowledge-sharing activities.
Maintain product/process repository.
Rather thanrelying exclusively on informal means for project
tracking and monitoring, Manco and Telco devel-
oped a database to help teams report issues, assignpriorities, and track project status. However, in the

spirit of an agile process, only minimal documenta-
tion was created.
Focus on well-understood functionality rather than
critical new functionality.Agile methods emphasizedelivering value to the customer early in the process
and therefore often advocate the development of fea-
tures prioritized as critical by the customer. However,
in Manco, the project manager first wanted to build

an atmosphere in which both the developers and the

client representatives were acclimatized to the
processes, tools, and the application. Therefore, the
team worked on well understood functionality in the

early iterations to ease the learning curve rather than
on complex requirements even when they were prior-
itized to be more critical.
Short cycle but not time-boxed development
. A com-mon characteristic of most agile development proj-
ects is time-boxed development. Telco and Consult

realized early on that this approach, while successfully
practiced in their co-located teams, was not very suc-
cessful with distributed development. In Telco, early

iterations in three previous projects encountered dif-
ficulties because the development team did not have
sufficient understanding of the business needs of thecustomers. In Consult, critical requirements identi-
fied by the clients in the first iteration were too broad
in scope to be implemented within a short iteration.Both the organizations adopted a flexible short-cycle

approach in which two to three development cycles
were allowed to take two-to-four weeks each,
depending on the complexity of the functionalityand the setup time needed to understand the businessdomain. COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACMOctober  2006/Vol. 49, No. 1043HOW THE STUDY WASCONDUCTEDWe conducted detailed case studies ofagile, distributed development in three
companies (referred to here as Telco,
Manco, and Consult) that have software
development operations in India sup-
porting customers located in the U.S.
The objective was to understand the difficulties faced in managing such a development process and the
practices designed to address them. Data collection was carried out through open-ended (semi-structured) interviewing. We interviewed atotal of 18 software developers, project managers, and customer representativesÑone to three times
eachÑfrom both locations in these companies over a period of nine months. We used grounded theory methodology [6] to
analyze the data. This analysis identified five groups of practices and how they address challenges in distributed, agile devel-opment. Telco is a large telecommunication company that is embarking on large-scale offshore development and maintenance ofits applications. At the time of the study, the organization was completing several pilot projects aimed at identifying practices
that can be rolled out throughout the organization. Manco is a large manufacturing company that had just finished a project in its offshore development center. The projectextended the functionality of a complex supply chain system. Consult is a veteran in the global delivery model using offshore development. It was working with a U.S.-based client todevelop a CRM system to support a complex customer network. It had dedicated a small facility exclusively for the U.S. cus-
tomer, with the expectation of a significant long term partnership. The table here lists some of the salient characteristics of
the companies and projects studied. cDetails about the companies and projectsstudied. 3. Improve communication.
The companies adopted several
ways to improve the quality of

communication among the team
members. Synchronized work hours. 
While24x7 development is sometimes

claimed to be a benefit of distrib-uted development, this was 
far from reality in the three orga-

nizations. Separation by nine 
time zones created serious com-
munication bottlenecks. Asyn-
chronous work was found to be
quite inconsistent with the con-stant communication needed for
agile development. In order to
Òshare the painÓ of synchronizing
work schedules, early morningmeetings for onshore customer
representatives and product man-
agers and late evening shifts foroffshore developers were the norm

in all the three organizations. 
Informal communication but
through formal channels. 
Therewere several incidents of miscom-munication among the distrib-uted teams in Manco. These were
attributed to over reliance on informal communica-tion. To minimize this problem, one project lead was
designated as the primary point of contact for each
location. They were responsible for facilitating com-
munication across the teams. Also, the organizationalculture in Telco that values formal channels for com-
munication demanded a very similar structure. In
both organizations, informal communication among
the team members was facilitated through formal
channels. Balanced coordination. Whereas typical agile devel-opment teams rely on minimal coordination of theteamÕs activities by project managers, in all the three
organizations, the coordination roles of project man-

agers/leads were significantly more important. In
Telco, the management maintained a formal struc-
ture of reporting and responsibility. Project leads and

champions were expected to coordinate the activities
of the offshore and onshore teams to help achieve
project goals.Constant communication. A variety of mechanismswere used in each organization to maintain constant
communication. At Telco, short morning meetings

were held each workday to identify issues, track proj-
ect status and invite ideas and critiques. Also, theteams used online chat and Short Message Service
(SMS) extensively. Project leads and champions atConsult were on call almost round-the-clock via
their Blackberries. The instant availability, while con-
sidered beneficial, also was a significant burden tothese individuals who were the designated gatekeep-ers of communication channels. Further, at both
Telco and Manco, senior managers used videoconfer-
encing on a weekly basis to initiate new development
cycles, assess progress at the end of each cycle, and
discuss critical issues. 4. Build trust.
The companies realized that trust
between teams is very essential in an agile distributed
environment because there was minimal formal con-
trol. Several practices were used to build the trust
between the teams.Frequent visits by distributed partners. 
All three
companies organized regular visits by customers or

surrogates (product managers) with the development
team. Consult instituted a practice of having a smallgroup of analysts and developers in their customer

sites. Telco and Manco organized visits to customer
sites by developer representatives. In Manco, the
complexity of the application required many more
and longer visits than either group had anticipated.In Telco, key customer representatives spent several
weeks in their offshore development center. In fact,

one group stayed at the development center for four
complete iterations. These visits were more intense in
44October  2006/Vol. 49, No. 10COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACMMapping between challenges and practices that address them. the early development cycles as well as when major
changes were implemented.
Sponsor visits.
Senior managers of the sponsoring
organizations also visited the development teams atthe beginning of the project to establish ground rules
and finalize contractual arrangements (in Consult),and evaluate project progress at predetermined criti-
cal milestones (in Telco and Manco). These visits also
helped establish trust among the senior members of
the teams. Build cohesive team culture.
Telco created a cohe-
sive team culture by requiring that each team wasmade up of members who had developed prior work-
ing relationships with each other and collectively pos-
sessed all the required expertise. The managementinsisted on such an arrangement to minimize whatthey perceived as chaos in agile approaches. Consult
adopted a similar strategy and created high-perfor-
mance teams. In all three organizations, the tremen-
dous demand for qualified developers posed a
significant challenge in retaining a cohesive team
throughout the project.
5. Trust but verify.
Deviating from agile methods,
the companies introduced several practices to for-
mally verify process and product quality. 
Distributed QA.The senior management ofManco insisted that the onshore QA team be
involved in ensuring that the practices followed by

the offshore development team were of acceptable
quality. During each iteration, this QA team
reviewed the test procedures created by the offshore

development team. In Telco, the onsite technical per-
sonnel participated in design reviews to ensure that
the offsite development met their quality standards.Supplement informal communication with docu-mentation. In the spirit of agile development, even
Telco, which traditionally favors a formal structure,

adopted an informal atmosphere to facilitate collabo-
ration among the geographically distributed teammembers. However, the management insisted on
supplementing informal communication with docu-mentation of critical artifacts. A similar practice was
also considered necessary at Consult to formalize the
vendor-client relationship. Often many documents
were developed after the actual work was completed;
for example, requirements documents were finalized
toward the end of the development cycles rather than
at the beginning so that they represent the actually
implemented functionality rather than the initiallyconceptualized requirements that invariably changed
during development.MAPPINGCHALLENGESTO
PRACTICESEach group of practices discussed here addresses thechallenges faced while incorporating agility in dis-tributed software development. Even though each
group of practices addresses each of the challenges
to a varying degree, here we illustrate how each
challenge is addressed by the most relevant groups
of practices. A summary of this mapping is provided
in the figure on the previous page.
The communication need vs. communicationimpedance challenge is addressed by two groups of
practices: improve communication and facilitateknowledge sharing. Improved communicationachieved through a wide range of balanced channels
for anytime anyplace access was the key to mitigating
this challenge. These practices helped increase theefficiency and effectiveness of informal communica-
tion that was a challenge in a distributed environ-

ment. A limited amount of structure imposed on this
communication was also useful in enhancing coordi-nation among team members. The practices that
facilitated knowledge sharing helped developers gaina shared understanding of the business domain and
the functionalities required. 
The fixed vs. evolving quality requirements chal-
lenge is addressed primarily by the trust but verify
COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACMOctober  2006/Vol. 49, No. 1045THE PRACTICES THAT FACILITATED
KNOWLEDGESHARINGHELPEDDEVELOPERSGAINASHARED
UNDERSTANDINGOFTHEBUSINESSDOMAINANDTHE
FUNCTIONALITIESREQUIRED
. group of practices. Distributed QA provides control
over the quality of the system without a detailed con-
tract upfront. Also, documentation of critical deliv-
erables and processes helped ensure the evolving

needs of quality were adequately addressed by the
flexible process. 
The people- vs. process-oriented control challenge
is addressed by two groups of practices: continuously
adjust the process and trust but verify. Continuous
adjustments to the processes help ensure they areÒjust enoughÓ for the current needs, without unduly
constraining the development to a fixed process.
Planned iterations helped in setting direction and in
understanding the initial set of requirements.
Requirements were documented at different levels offormality to provide a balance between the need for
structure demanded by the distributed nature of
development and the needs of agile project manage-ment. The trust but verify practice allowed the organiza-
tions to keep a level of control that was considered
essential to satisfy organizational norms and policieswhile at the same time providing necessary flexibility.
The three organizations allowed the development to
progress with the level of informality demanded by

high-speed development, but built checks and bal-
ances to ensure that the process was under control. 
The formal vs. informal agreement challenge isaddressed by the build trust group of practices. Thetrust built between the teams helped in limiting the
formality with which agreements were specified and

thus enabled the development teams to rapidly adaptto the changing needs of the project. 
The lack of team cohesion challenge is addressed by
the build trust group of practices. While the site visits
by sponsors and distributed partners added a signifi-
cant overhead, they helped the customers and devel-
opers understand and trust the informal processesfollowed during development and build a cohesive
team. Also, efforts to foster a cohesive team culture

helped the teams operate with a common purposeeven though they were geographically distributed.
CONCLUSIONReturning to the questions that guided our study,
we conclude that careful incorporation of agility in
distributed software development environments is

essential in addressing several challenges to commu-
nication, control, and trust across distributed
teams. The practices presented here demonstrate
how a balance between agile and distributed
approaches can help meet these challenges. REFERENCES1. Beck, K. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change.Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2000.2. Ebert, C. and Neve, P.D. Surviving global software development. IEEESoftware 18,2 (Mar./Apr. 2001), 62Ð69.3. Herbsleb, J.D. and Mockus, A. An empirical study of speed and com-munication in globally distributed software development. IEEE Trans.on Software Engineering 29, 6 (June 2003), 481Ð494.4. Highsmith, J. and Cockburn, A. Agile software development: The busi-ness of innovation. IEEE Computer 34,9 (Sept. 2001), 120Ð122.5. Matloff, N. Offshoring: What can go wrong? IT Professional(July/Aug.2005), 39Ð45.6. Strauss, A. and Corbin, J. Grounded theory methodology: An overview.Handbook of Qualitative Research.N.K. Denzin and Y.S. Lincoln, Eds.Sage, London, 1994.Balasubramaniam Ramesh (bramesh@gsu.edu) is a professorin the Department of Computer Information Systems, Georgia State
University, Atlanta.Lan Cao (lcao@odu.edu) is an assistant professor in the Department of Information Technology and Decision Sciences, 
Old Dominion University, Norfolk, VA.Kannan Mohan (Kannan_mohan@baruch.cuny.edu) is an assistant professor in the Department of Computer Information 
Systems, Zicklin School of Business, Baruch College, New York City.Peng Xu (peng.xu@umb.edu) is an assistant professor in theDepartment of Management Science and Information Systems, 
University of Massachusetts, Boston.Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or class-room use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for
profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on
the first page. To copy otherwise, to republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to
lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee.© 2006 ACM 0001-0782/06/1000 $5.0046October  2006/Vol. 49, No. 10COMMUNICATIONSOF THE ACMTHE TRUST BUILT BETWEEN THE TEAMS 
HELPEDINLIMITINGTHEFORMALITYWITHWHICHAGREEMENTSWERE
SPECIFIEDANDTHUSENABLEDTHEDEVELOPMENTTEAMSTORAPIDLY
ADAPTTOTHECHANGINGNEEDSOFTHEPROJECT
.