 contributed articles
118    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  OCTOBER 2009  
|  VOL. 52  
|  NO. 10
DOI: 10.1145/1562764.1562794BY GIRISH 
H. SUBRAMANIAN, GARY KLEIN, JAMES J. JIAN
G, AND 
CHIEN-LUNG CHANTHE SUCCESS OF SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT IS MOST OFTEN 
gauged by three primary indicators: the number of days 
of deviation from scheduled delivery date, the percentage 

of deviation from the proposed budget, and meeting the 

needs of the client users.4 Tools and techniques to help 
perform well along these dimensions abound in practice 

and research. However, the project view of systems 

development should be broader than any particular 

development tool or methodology. 
Any given development philosophy or approach can be inserted into a systems development project to best 
˜t the conditions, product, talent, and goals of the 
markets and organization. In order to best satisfy the 
three criteria, system development project managers 
must focus on the process of task completion and 
look to apply controls that ensure success, promote 
learning within the team and organization, and end 
up with a software product that not only meets the 
requirements of the client but operates ef˜ciently and is ˜exible enough to be modi˚ed to meet 
changing needs of the organization. In 

this fashion, the project view must ex
-
amine both process and product. 
Often, tasks required for project 
completion seem contradictory to or-

ganizational goals. Within the process, 

managerial controls are applied in or-

der to retain alignment of the product 

to the initial, and changing, require-

ments of the organization. However, 

freedom from tight controls promotes 

learning.9 The product also has con-
tradictions among desired outcomes. 

Designers must consider tradeoffs be-

tween product ef˚ciency and ˜exibil-

ity, with the trend in processing power 

leading us ever more toward the ˜ex-

ibility side. Still, we rage between con-

˜icting criteria, with the advocates of a 

waterfall system development lifecycle 

(SDLC) usually pushing more for con-

trol aspects and ef˚cient operations 

while agile proponents seek more of a 

learning process and ˜exible product. Regardless of the development 
methodology followed, project manag
-
ers must strive to deliver the system on 

time, within budget, and to meet the re
-
quirements of the user. Thus, both prod
-
uct and process are crucial in the deter
-
mination of success. To compound the 

dif˚culties, those in control of choosing 

an appropriate methodology view suc
-
cess criteria from a different perspective 

than other stakeholders. Understand
-
ing how different stakeholders perceive 

these factors impacting eventual proj
-
ect success can be valuable in adjusting 

appropriate methodologies. Our study 

looks at these relationships using well 

established instruments in a survey of 

IS development professionals to better 

clarify the importance of these variables 

in system project success and any per
-
ceived differences among different play
-
ers in IS development (see the sidebar 

on ﬁHow the Study Was Conductedﬂ).
Product Ef˜ciency and Flexibility
Two of the more global quality char-

acteristics that characterize software 

systems from an organizational view 

are ef˚ciency and ˜exibility. Ef˚ciency 
Balancing 
Four 
Factors 
in 
System 
Development 
Projects OCTOBER 2009  
|  VOL. 52  
|  NO. 10  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    119contributed articles
are effective in the learning process. Controls are coveted by manage-
ment as a means to ensure success. 
Controls detect deviations from the 

schedule, budget, and goals that war-

rant corrective action. ﬁIn many orga-

nizations, particularly large ones, a 

primary criterion for the usefulness of 

any procedure is its predictability and 

the degree to which it allows us to ap-

ply control.ﬂ
1 The capability maturity 
model (CMM) model is a common rep-

resentation of control practices. The 

focus of the CMM model is to provide 

improvement in the control of systems 

development projects through use of 

metrics and software process improve-

ment. CMM, with its emphasis on more 

detailed processes and procedures, ˚ts 

best with an SDLC approach. The development methods, such 
as agile development, argue for less 
considers aspects associated with sys-

tems that run according to a schedule 

and produces expected output accord-

ing to the demands of the organization. 

Flexible systems are readily changed by 

the organization to meet changing en-

vironmental conditions with minimal 

resources spent in conducting essen-

tial maintenance.One goal of the SDLC is to build 
software products based on stable and 

well-de˚ned requirements in order to 

deliver an ef˚cient product. However, 

˜exibility to better respond to chang-

ing customer needs is often lost in the 

quest to come up with an ef˚cient prod-

uct. Agile development approaches the 

world from a more ˜exible view, not 

only in the development process but in 

a product that is readily adjusted to the 

needs of an organization. Views toward 

one extreme or the other is a limiting, 

and wrong, characterization, but meth-

ods and philosophies do tend to shape 

the product as well as the process. Process Learning and ControlLearning represents the ability of an 

organization to pick up best practices 

from external entities as well as dis-

tribute knowledge and lessons learned 

throughout the company. Control re-

fers to the more rigid practices in place 

that monitor progress and quality of an 

ongoing project and enforce social roles 

and relationships in the project. The 

two certainly do not con˜ict. Controls 

are developed out of knowledge and 

modi˚ed as learning occurs. Learning 

is best fostered in an environment with 

some controls, and control procedures 

to return knowledge through feedback 
control and stress learning.
2 Such ap-
proaches are part and parcel to organi-

zational learning concepts that involve 

feedback and iterative cycles. ﬁSuccess 

is then measured by achievement of 

the goal of delivering value to the cus-

tomer within the reasonable business 

constraints imposed on the business, 

not by mindless adherence to a plan.ﬂ
1 These methodologies argue for project 

managers to give away their control 

function and act as facilitator and act 

to promote continuous learning.
10 This 
may be dif˚cult, as project managers 

and IS managers both view control as 

the most crucial of all four factors in 

success of IS projects.The Importance of 
All Four FactorsNot surprisingly, the results of our 
study indicate clearly that all four con-

siderations are important predictors of 
Figure 1.  Importance of 
Factors to Project Performance
Table 1: Descriptive 
ItemsLearning
knowledge acquired by the organization about: the use of key technologies 
development technologies 

business functionality
Controlcontrol over project costs 

control over project schedules 

adherence to audit and control standards Ef˜ciencyreliable software 

ef˜cient cost of operations 

quick response timesFlexibility
ef˜cient cost of adapting to changes in business 
rapid adaption to changes in business 

ef˜cient cost of maintaining the systemProject Performance
the ability to meet project goals 

the expected amount of work completed 
the quality of work completed 

adherence to schedule 
adherence to budget 
ef˜cient task operations
How the Study was ConductedWe mailed survey instruments to 1,000 randomly selected 
IEEE Computer Society members with an expressed interest in 

software engineering. 
These individuals are likely familiar with 

development activities in their organization and can provide 

knowledgeable responses. A total of 492 responded after an 
initial and follow up mailing. The items in Table 1 summarize the four outcome variables plus project success. Respondents 
subjectively evaluated each item on a scale of 1 to 5. 
The respondents consisted of IS managers (31%), project leaders 
(48%), IS professionals serving on a project team (19%), and others 
(2%). About 25% were female and 75% were male. Some 37% 

worked in companies that had an average of eight or more persons 

on project teams. About 49% of the projects were completed within 

one year and 37% more completed within two years. Figure 1 graphs 

the regression coef˜cients to represent the declared importance of 

each factor to project performance for each subgroup. contributed articles
120    COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
   |  OCTOBER 2009  
|  VOL. 52  
|  NO. 10
project success. All three of the major 
stakeholder groups viewed the same 

factors as signi˚cant, but managers 

clearly place a much higher magnitude 

of importance on controls. While de-

velopment methodologies and project 

team members may lean toward one 

factor over the other, a good project 

manager must incorporate all four 

considerations into a single view to 

ensure project success. Whatever the 

success measures ultimately selected 

for any project, organizational expecta-

tions and involved stakeholders de˚ne 

success. Meshing these expectations 

across the variety of stakeholders to 

achieve a consonance of goals and un-

derstanding is fundamental.
6 In the 
absence of consonance, success mea-

sures would be applied and narrowly 

de˚ned to satisfy a particular stake-

holder rather than bene˚t the entire 

organization. Thus, success must come 

under a project umbrella that views the 

interests of more than the developers 

or particular set of developers in an 

organization. Figure 2 illustrates how 

overlapping interests should succumb 

to a more global view for projects that 

considers the entire set of tradeoffs in 

process and product. What To Do? Looking at it strictly from a project 
manager™s perspective, control cannot 

be abandoned. Yet, clearly, an orga-

nization excels in the long run when 

learning occurs during the develop-

ment process. Just as clearly, the prod-
uct needs to be amenable to changes 

as the business environment changes, 

but inef˚ciencies creating tardy access 

to information could prove devastat-

ing. This requires that each approach 

speci˚cally place features promoting 

all four aspects into the development 

processes. Though there will always 

be tradeoffs, the four considerations 

need not be contradictory and can be 

enhanced in several fashions:Use control but promote learning.
 As many projects are large and operate 

within large organizations, control is 

vital. Control is needed by the project 

manager to maintain roles and respon-

sibilities, and avoid scope deviations, 

schedule slippages, and cost overruns. 

This may explain why the managers 

in the sample strongly emphasized 

controls. Still, even in the traditional 

development environment, learning 

is important to bring in best practices 

learned by the organization from simi-

lar projects. Post-project reviews are an 

essential practice of control, designed 

to mitigate future risks, yet are not ef-

fective unless the organization fosters 

an environment of learning. The CMM 

considers learning by promoting con-

tinuous process improvements. In that 

sense, learning is linked to achieving 

better control of system projects and 

processes.Set standards of quality to promote 
both ˜exibility and ef˚ciency.
 Most 

quality standards within the CMM and 

traditional SDLC methods focus on 

standardizing and optimizing the prod-
uct to a pre-speci˚ed set of customer 

requirements. It is quite possible that 

these quality standards will result in a 

rigid but ef˚cient product which may 

or may not satisfy customer needs over 

time. Project managers need to adopt 

quality measures and standards that 

promote both product ef˚ciency and 

˜exibility. Measures for product ef˚-

ciency are already commonly applied 

and need to be supplemented with 

measures on ˜exibility. A metric to 

measure requirements volatility and 

the response to change would be an ef-

fective measure for ˜exibility. 
In primarily agile developments.
 Ag
-ile development methods argue for a 

feedback cycle approach to learn more 

about the user needs. Controls need to 

be goal-oriented,
1 not task-oriented. 
Control needs to be exercised on pro
-
cesses and people through effective 

communication and promoting team 

work. Informal controls that enforce 

organizational practices and team roles 

should also be particularly effective.
5 Feedback cycles can provide control 

points just as phases of a life cycle do. In 

particular, reviews can be used to moni
-
tor continued quality and progress. Ap
-
plication of software quality standards 

can be accomplished through rigorous 

testing of the product after each cycle, 

with lessons learned about the quality 

fed into the next cycle.In primarily traditional environ-
ments. Learning can be established at 

various points in a traditional project 

environment through checkpoints, re-

views, and experiential learning. Learn-

ing can also be promoted by a knowl-

edge management system that codi˚es 

some of the knowledge learned by the 

team that would be valuable to the or-

ganization.8 It becomes crucial that 
organizations examine their process 

and controls to be certain that learning 

capabilities are built into the project 

management framework. Post-project 

reviews are effective only when the 

knowledge gained is absorbed by fu-

ture project teams.Keep the entire project in view.
 Keep-
ing a project level view does not stray to 

one side or the other of the process and 

product debates. A combined view of 

the two approaches, shown in Figure 2, 

should be to adopt the methodology to 

˚t the system project on hand based on 

their strengths and limitations, then 
Figure 2. A Global Project View OCTOBER 2009  
|  VOL. 52  
|  NO. 10  
|  COMMUNICATIONS OF THE ACM
    121contributed articles
adjust the methods as suggested in the 
preceding discussion and summarized 

in Table 2. According to Boehm,
3 orga-
nizations must evolve toward the best 

balance of plan-driven and agile meth-

ods to arrive at a blend that best meets 

their needs. In that case, organizations 

need to apply control and learning 

while looking to develop a system that 

is ef˚cient and ˜exible. Striking a bal-

ance among these four considerations 

is necessitated by the system develop-

ment project. It is not any particular 

methodology that drives project risk 

but how well it ˚ts a given project.
11 Per-
ceived differences among stakeholders 

on the importance of these four indica-

tors should be reconciled prior to the 

beginning of any development proj-

ect to arrive at a consonance of ideas.
6 Project techniques that promote com-

munication and collaboration should 

be considered as processes to arrive at 

mutual goals and agreement on mea-

suring achievement of the goals.7 References  1. Armour, P. G. The business of software: To plan, two 

plans. Comm. ACM 48
, 9 (Sept. 2005), 15-19.
 2. Augustine, S., Payne, B., Sencindiver, F., and Woodcock, 

S. Agile project management: steering from the edges. 
Comm. ACM 48
, 12 (Dec. 2005), 85-89.
 3. Boehm, B. Get ready for agile methods, with care. 

Computer (Jan. 2002), 64-69.
 4. Hardgrave, B. C. and Armstrong, D. J. Software 

process improvement: it™s a journey, not a destination. 

Comm. ACM 48
, 11 (Nov. 2005), 93-96
 5. Kirsch, L. Deploying common systems globally: The 

dynamics of control. Information Systems Research 

48, 4 (2004), 484-498.
 6. Klein, G., Jiang, J., and Sobol, M. Consonance in 

information systems, in Strategies and Organizations 

in Transition
, C. S. Galbraith, ed., Elsevier Science, Ltd., 

(2001), 191-210. 
 7.
 Larson, E. Partnering on construction projects: a study 

of the relationship between partnering activities and 

project success. IEEE Transactions on Engineering 

Management 44, (1997), 188Œ195. 
  8. Nerur, S, Mahapatra, R and Mangalaraj, G. Challenges 

of migrating to agile methodologies. 
Comm. ACM 48
, 5 
(May 2005), 72-78.
  9. Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H. 
The Knowledge-Creating 
Company, Oxford University Press, NY, 1995.
  10. Procaccino, D. Verner, J. and Lorenzer, S. J. De˜ning 

and contributing to software development success. 

Comm. ACM 49
, 8, (Aug. 2006), 79-83.
 11. Tiwana, A. and Keil, M. The one-minute risk 

assessment tool. Comm. ACM 47
, 11, (Nov. 2004), 

73-77.
Girish H. Subramanian
 (ghs2@psu.edu) is Professor of Information Systems in the School of Business at Penn 

State Harrisburg, Middletown, PA, USA. 
Gary Klein
 (gklein@uccs.edu) is the Couger Professor of Information Systems in the College of Business and 

Administration at the University of Colorado, Colorado 

Springs, USA.
James J. Jiang
 (jjiang@bus.ucf.edu) is Professor of Information Systems in the College of Business at the 

University of Central Florida, USA and National Taiwan 

University, Taiwan.
Chien-Lung Chan (clchan@im.yzu.edu.tw) is Associate 
Professor of Information Systems and chair of the 

Department of Information Management at Yuan Ze 

University, Taiwan. 
© 2009 ACM
 0001-0782/09/1000 $10.00
  Table 2.  Key 
Improvements
ApproachTypically 
Incorporates
Should Work 
TowardTraditional 
Waterfall 

MethodologiesControls through formal 
checkpointsLearning by placing feedback cycles on reviews and foster continuous improvement methods
Ef˜ciency characteristics of 

the productIncluding volatility and change response metrics as 

part of the quality system to promote ˚exibility
Interactive 

Agile 
MethodologiesLearning through experience and interactions
Goal-oriented informal controls designed to support 

team roles, responsibilities, communication, and 
recording of lessons learnedFlexibility of system to meet 

user requirementsIncorporating rigorous testing of quality standards at 

multiple cycles