 APRIL 2012  |  VOL. 55  
|  NO. 4  
|  COMMUNICATION
S OF THE ACM
    71IN THE MID-1990˚, the prescribed means of keeping software development projects out of trouble and on schedule was to follow a heavyweight software development methodology consisting of a complete 
requirements document, including architecture and 
design, followed by coding and testing based on a What Agile 
Teams Think 
of Agile 

Principles 
DOI:10.1145/2133806.2133823Even after almost a dozen years, they 
still deliver solid guidance for software 
development teams and their projects. 
BY 
LAU
RIE WILLIAMS thorough test plan. The philosophy 
was often summarized as ﬁDo it right 
the ˜rst time.ﬂ Common belief among 

software engineers at the time was that 
projects run into trouble when they do 
not  strictly adhere to a methodology, 

and, if only they did, all would be well. 
In reality, all was rarely well. 
At the same time, a simmering under
-current that had begun to undercut this 

doctrine was to follow an exceedingly iter
-ative, lightweight software development 

methodology. Purportedly, a number 
 of independent ﬁrogueﬂ consultants 
were rescuing projects in trouble 
through variations of these methodolo-gies. The ˜rst to stand up and say, ﬁLook 

at me,ﬂ and attract wide attention, was 
Extreme Programming1 in about 1999. 
The creators of other methodologies, 
including Adaptive Software Develop-
ment, or ASD,6 Crysta,4 Dynamic Sys-tems Development Method, or DSDM,11 Feature Driven Development, or FDD,
8 and Scrum,
10 followed suit with ﬁHey, 
I™m doing something like that, too!ﬂ 
Then, in February 2001, something 
remarkable happened: Rather than fo
-cus on their differences and the ﬁcom
-petitive advantageﬂ of their own meth-odologies, 17 creators and supportersa of the lightweight methodologies gath-ered in Snowbird, UT, to discuss their 
a Software engineers in attendance in Snowbird 
included Kent Beck, Mike Beedle, Alistair Cock
-burn, Ward Cunningham, Martin Fowler, James 
Grenning, Jim Highsmith, Andy Hunt, Ron Jef
-
fries, Jon Kern, Brian Marick, Robert Martin, 
Steve Mellor, Ken Schwaber, Jeff Sutherland, 
Dave Thomas, and Arie van Bennekum. 72    COMMUNICATION
S OF THE ACM
   |  APRIL 2012  |  VOL. 55  
|  NO. 4
contributed articles
common interests and philosophies, coining the term ﬁagile software devel-opmentﬂ to describe their methodolo-gies. This unity rocked the software in-
dustry. In Snowbird, the Manifesto for 
Agile Software Development
b and Prin
-ciples Behind the Agile Manifestoc were 
born and endorsed by all 17 attendees, 

spelling out their values like this: 
Manifesto for Agile  Software Development We are uncovering better ways of devel
-oping software by doing it and helping others do it. Through this work we have come to value:  ˜ Individuals and interactions  over processes and tools;  ˜ Working software
  
over comprehensive documentation;  ˜ Customer collaboration
  
over contract negotiation; and  ˜ Responding to change
  over following a plan. That is, while there is value in the items 
below (not bold), we value the items 
above (bold) more. The Agile Manifesto and the agile 
principles thus began to serve as a ral-lying cry for some and the bull™s-eye in 
the dartboard for others. ﬁReligiousﬂ 

methodology wars ensued between 
the agilists and those supporting what 
came to be known as ﬁplan driven,2 methodologies, the term that came to 
be used for ﬁnot agileﬂ methodologies. 
These wars have since subsided. Ob
-servations at international agile con-
ferences indicate that companies in all 
industrial domains have generally come 
to coexist peacefully with agile method-ologies. Many have embraced them, 
b http://agilemanifesto.org/c http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.htmlwhile some use many agile practices 
and others just a few. Meanwhile, agile 
practices have evolved, with new ones 
emerging and others fading away. 
So how well do the Agile Manifesto and its 12 principles still capture what 
is valued by practicing software engi-neers in industry and by teams that have adopted agile methodologies as 
their own practices have matured and evolved? How do agile teams regard the principles today? Here, ﬁagile teamsﬂ 
refers to teams claiming to use an agile software development methodology. 
Surveys 
I conducted two surveys in 2010 at 

North Carolina State University to weigh 
the community™s view of the principles 
and use of associated practices. I ad-
ministered them through surveymon-key.com, advertising the ˜rst survey on 
a number of agile-related user groups 

(such as those on Yahoo! and LinkedIn). 
Additionally, I emailed approximately 
100 personal contacts, inviting them 
to participate and forward the survey 
to their colleagues. Respondents from 

the ˜rst survey could optionally provide 
their email address if they wanted me 
to send aggregated results of the sur-
vey. When respondents received these 
results, I further invited them to partici
-pate in a follow-on survey. 
The ˜rst survey focused on the origi-nal principles and commonly used soft
-
ware development practices, as of 2010, 
beginning the ˜rst set of questions with 
the following instruction, followed by a 

list of the principles in random order: 
How important is this principle that 
comes from the original agile principles 

authored in 2001 for agile teams in 
2010? (1=not very important; 5=essen-tial, the team is not agile if it doesn™t fol-low this principle) 
I began the second set of questions 
with the following instruction, followed 

by a list of 45 software development 
practices typically associated with agile: 
What practices are essential for a team 
to be considered agile? (1=not important; 

5=essential, a team is not agile unless it 
does this practice) With each set of questions, I offered 
respondents space to provide textual 

commentary to augment their quantita-tive responses. 
The ˜rst survey was completed by 
326 respondents with extensive experi-ence in agile software development (see 

the ˜gure here). Those indicating they 
had been using an agile methodology 
for 10 years or more were using what 

came to be called an ﬁagile methodolo-gyﬂ post-Manifesto. Respondents were 
primarily from North America (59%) 
and Europe (29%). Of the 326, 18 (55%) 
indicated they worked on teams with 

30 or more members; 313 (96%) worked 
in a distributed fashion, with 110 (34%) 
having teams all in the same country, 

42 (13%) all in the same continent, and 
160 (49%) spread across different con
-tinents; and 52 (16%) indicated they 
worked on safety-critical projects. 
I based the follow-on survey on the 
optional textual commentary provided 

by respondents of the ˜rst survey (see 
Table 1), distilling the most common 

comments from the ˜rst survey in 
a revised agile principle and asking 
their opinion of the revised principle. 

The motivation behind creating the 
suggested revision was to highlight 
emerging industry trends and possible 
missing subtleties and/or evolution of 
the original principles; for example, I 

changed the original principle ﬁWork
-ing software is the primary measure 
of progressﬂ to ﬁValuable, high-qual
-
ity software is the primary measure 
of progress at the end of each short, 
timeboxed iteration.ﬂ The follow-on 
survey sought feedback on the revised 
principle, though my intent was not to 

replace the original principle. Respon
-dents in the follow-on survey re˚ected 
roughly the same characteristics as 

participants in the ˜rst survey in terms 
of professional experience and geo-graphic location, with 93 of the origi-
nal 326 respondents providing feed-back on each of the revised principles. 
The second survey also asked how 
valuable respondents considered the 
principles, as well as ﬁWhy are the 

agile principles valuable?,ﬂ letting re-spondents pick as many responses as 
they felt were applicable, along with 

the opportunity to provide additional 
comments. 
The personal comments in the sur-vey™s ﬁOtherﬂ category are best repre-sented by this one: ﬁThe purpose of any 
principle is to provide a simple, clear source of guidance and inspiration. The agile principles are important be-
cause they distill the values of ‚agile™ into as little text as possible. By review- key insights
    The 12 original agile principles created 
by 17 software engineers in 2001 
defined the agile trend that continues to 

transform the entire software industry.
    Rather than view one another solely as 

competition, these same engineers also 

wrote the 
Agile 
Manifesto, cooperatively 
focusing on their common interest in agile 

development and greatly magnifying any 

of their potential individual contributions. 
    Supported by this foundation, agile 

practices used by software development 

teams today continue to evolve to 

address ever-changing user expectations 

and development team challenges. 
 contributed articles
APRIL 2012  |  VOL. 55  
|  NO. 4  
|  COMMUNICATION
S OF THE ACM
    73ing them as we consider implementa-tion speci˜cs, we can make sure our day-to-day processes are serving the purposes that presumably we decided 
we wanted to meet.ﬂ Original Principles 
My discussion here highlights the most noteworthy of the 93 textual com-
ments from both surveys and the sup-porting data analysis rather than look-ing to explain each principle. Note that 
11 of the 12 had a mean score of 4.1 out 
of 5 or higher, indicating a high level 
of support for principles that had been 
spelled out 10 years earlier. 
Tier One (mean 4.6) Principle 1 (standard deviation 0.8). 
Our highest priority is to satisfy the cus-tomer through early and continuous de-livery of valuable software. 
Principle 3 (standard deviation 0.7). 
Deliver working software frequently, 

from a couple of weeks to a couple of 
months, with a preference for the short-er timescale. 
Respondents™ commentary empha
-sized delivery of a solution with ﬁhigh 

business valueﬂ to a customer early and 
often, along with willingness to respond 

to feedback. One respondent suggested 
that principles 1 and 3 were probably re-dundant, a view supported by statistics 
based on overall survey responses. The 
Pearson™s 
r values for these two princi-ples was 0.31, among the highest corre-lations between any two principles. 
Tier Two (mean 4.5) 
Principle 5 (standard deviation 0.9). 
Build projects around motivated indi-viduals. Give them an environment and 
support they need, and trust them to get 
the job done. 
Principle 7 (standard deviation 0.8). 
Working software is the primary mea
-
sure of progress. 
Principle 12 (standard deviation 0.8). 
The team regularly re˚ects on how to be 

more effective, tuning and adjusting its 
behavior accordingly. 
Respondents™ comments concern
-ing principle 5 emphasized the need to empower and respect motivated in-
dividuals while making them ﬁfeel they can make a difference and [are] part of building something out of the ordi-
nary.ﬂ Some respondents said provid
-ing the ﬁsupport they needﬂ included removing obstacles so the team could 
operate ef˜ciently. 
Principle 7 attracted the most com-ments, with respondents saying that 
it, in particular, along with the full set 

of principles, in general, did not ade-quately emphasize the need to produce 
high-quality software and test and elicit 

nonfunctional requirements. The short-
term, functional focus of iterations can 
lead to trouble. ﬁFlaccid Scrumﬂd is the 
term coined by Martin Fowler, a noted 
author and speaker on software devel
-opment, to refer to teams using only 

Scrum™s project-management practices 
without also following sound engineer-ing practices. Progress eventually slows 
for all Flaccid Scrum teams, according 
to Fowler, because they have not paid 

enough attention to the quality of the 
code. In some cases, only the easiest 
scenario of a feature (often called the 

ﬁhappy pathﬂ) is demonstrated at the 
end of an iteration. The feature can 
then be considered ﬁdone,ﬂ with project 
focus then turning to implementing a 
d http://www.martinfowler.com/bliki/Flaccid
-Scrum.htmlnew set of features. Teams today more 
often de˜ne and adhere to sound ﬁdone 
criteria,ﬂ stipulating the quality and 
testing steps a team must take before a 

feature is considered done (see Table 2). 
Reacting to principle 12, respon
-dents showed strong enthusiasm for holding retrospectives at least every it
-eration if not more often ﬁfor feedback 
and creating a culture of continuous improvement and building respect.ﬂ Tier Three (mean 4.4) 
Principle 9 (standard deviation 0.8). Continuous attention to technical ex-cellence and good design enhances agility. 
Respondents gave strong support for 
this principle but provided no further 

commentary or clari˜cation of their 

views. 
Tier Four (mean 4.3) 
Principle 2 (standard deviation 0.8). 
Welcome changing requirements even 
late in development; agile processes 
harness change for the customer™s com-petitive advantage. 
Principle 10 (standard deviation 1.0). Survey respondents™ experience with agile software development. 
How long have you been doing agile software development?
30.0%25.0%10.0%15.0%10.0%5.0%0.0%< 1 year1Œ2 years
3Œ4 years
5Œ6 years
6Œ9 years
10+ years7.4%
14.7%
25.4%14.0%
15.1%23.5%Table 1. Value of agile principles. Why are the agile principles valuable?Response Percent
They aren't really; the important thing is to use agile practices. 
9.8%They aren't really; the important thing is to look at the 
Agile Manifesto. 0%Because they guide teams new to agile. 48.8%Because all agile teams choose among software development practices, 
but, if they want to be agile, they should choose practices that are in line 
with the principles. 64.6%They aren't really; no one looks at them anyway. 
0%Other [please comment] 20.7% 74    COMMUNICATION
S OF THE ACM
   |  APRIL 2012  |  VOL. 55  
|  NO. 4
contributed articles
Simplicity, the art of maximizing the amount of work not done, is essential. Some commenters on principle 2 suggested a project™s requirements 
should change only at the beginning of each iteration. Agile methodologies aim to reduce waste associated with ﬁthrashing,ﬂ or progress implement
-ing a feature, stopping and starting and maybe never being complete due 
to constantly changing priorities. This wasted effort can be reduced through a rule stating that once a feature is start
-
ed, it must be completed. One commenter described prin
-ciple 10 as ﬁBuild great software–that addresses users™ needs without unnec-essary features.ﬂ Tier Five (mean 4.1) 
Principle 4 (standard deviation 1.0). 
Businesspeople and developers must 

work together daily throughout the 

project. 
Principle 6 (standard deviation 1.0). 
The most effective method of conveying 
information to and within a develop-ment team is face-to-face conversation. 
Principle 8 (standard deviation 0.9). 
Agile processes promote sustainable 

development; sponsors, developers, 

and users should be able to maintain a 
constant pace inde˜nitely. 
Concerning principle 4 several re-spondents said that developers (often 
seen as those writing the code) should 

not be the only ones to work with busi-nesspeople (a.k.a product owners). 
Rather, the whole team, including user-

interface analysts, testers, project man-agers, developers, and businesspeople 
should collaborate. Others commenters 

said, ﬁEvery day often isn™t realistic, nor 
is it necessarily needed.ﬂ 
Principle 6 was generally supported, 
though some commenters said the ﬁre-quirement for face-to-face conversation 

is a severely limiting factor for distrib-uted teams, and it seems to be a genera-tional issue as well.ﬂ In today™s connect-
ed world, synchronous communication 
through instant messaging, Voice over 
IP, and WebEx may effectively stand in 
for face-to-face communication. 
Several representative comments on 
principle 8 indicating the commenters™ 

negative experience with relatively in-tense iterations ad in˜nitum: 
 ﬁAgile does not promote sustainable 
development but increases the kind of 

focus that leads to burnoutﬂ; 
ﬁSustainable pace is extremely im-portant, but we also sometimes have 
to slow down and think about things a littleﬂ; ﬁEmphasize scheduled downtime as 
part of sustainable paceﬂ; and 
ﬁThe team should have dedicated ex-ploratory study time that contributes to 
its ability to produce innovation.ﬂ 
Tier Six (mean 3.8) 
Principle 11 (standard deviation 
1.0). The best architectures, require-ments, and designs emerge from self-organizing teams. 
Concerning principle 11, sever
-al commenters suggested the need 

for a release vision and that teams 
Table 2. Agile principles. MeanStandard DeviationContinuous integration 
4.50.8Short iterations (30 days or less) 
4.50.8"Done" criteria 4.50.8Automated tests run with each build 4.40.9Automated unit testing 4.40.9Iteration reviews/demos 
4.30.8"Potentially shippable" features at the end of each iteration 
4.30.9"Whole" multidisciplinary team with one goal 
4.30.8Synchronous communication 4.40.9Embracing changing requirements 
4.30.8Features in iteration are customer-visible/customer-valued 
4.30.8Prioritized product backlog 4.40.9Retrospective 
4.21.0Collective ownership of code 
4.20.9Sustainable pace 4.20.8Refactoring 4.21.0"Complete" feature testing done during iteration 
4.10.9Negotiated scope 4.10.9Stand up/Scrum meeting 4.11.1Timeboxing 4.11.1Test-driven development unit testing 
4.01.0Just-in-time requirements elaboration 
4.01.0Small teams (12 people or less) 4.01.1Emergent design 4.01.0Con˜guration management 
4.01.2Daily customer/product manager involvement 
3.91.0Release planning 3.91.1Test-driven development acceptance testing 
3.81.0Team documentation focuses on  decisions rather than planning 
3.81.2Informal design; no big design up front 3.71.0Co-located team 3.61.1Team velocity 
3.61.1Requirements written as informal stories 3.61.110-minute build 
3.61.3Task planning 3.51.2Coding standard 3.51.2Kanban 3.41.6Acceptance tests written by product manager 3.41.2Pair programming 
3.31.2Burndown charts 
3.31.3Code inspections 3.21.3Design inspections 3.31.3Planning Poker 3.11.4Stabilization iterations 
3.01.5 contributed articles
APRIL 2012  |  VOL. 55  
|  NO. 4  
|  COMMUNICATION
S OF THE ACM
    75should understand how the product 
ﬁcontribute[s] to the larger goals of the 
[user] organization.ﬂ The principles do 
not explicitly state that a release plan 

must be developed, with agile teams 
often beginning their iterations with-out such a vision communicated to the 
whole team. However, agile methodolo-gies have always advocated producing a 

feasible, prioritized release backlog that 
also serves as the release vision. One 
commenter said, ﬁYou really need to do 

some systems engineering when build-ing large systems,ﬂ while some agilists 
may consider such systems engineering 
the equivalent of ﬁbig design up front.ﬂ 
Respondents also commented that 
the lean software development9 con-cept of minimizing work-in-process was 

missing from the principles but still 
important for agile teams. An emerg-
ing lean trend in agile software develop-ment that does not appear in the origi-nal principles is the use of kanban, or 
signboard or billboard in Japanese, as a 
possible replacement for iterations and, 

in general, a focus on limiting work-in-process. However, this trend is not in-consistent with the original principles. 

Finally, commenters also said the prin-ciples did not cover planning, learning, 
and collaboration, and communication 
was not emphasized enough. 
Overall, the results of both surveys suggested overwhelming support for 

the original principles, even after more than 10 years of use. However, survey 
commenters also said three concepts were missing from the principles but had still been part of the agile software 
development methodologies from the beginning. First, two principles in-cluded the term ﬁdeveloperﬂ in places 
where the intended connotation was more likely the ﬁwhole team.ﬂ Second, 
the principles did not explicitly say that a release vision would be created prior to starting incremental development. 
Finally, the principles did not insist 
that the working software produced should be valuable and of high quality, 
though this notion has been part of ag
-ile since it was ˜rst laid out. Revised Principles 
I assimilated the most common com-
ments from the ˜rst survey to revise the 
original principles through the follow-on survey seeking feedback on the revi-
sions, including: 
Principle 1. Our highest priority is to 
satisfy the customer through early and 

continuous delivery of valuable soft-ware. [no change] 
Principle 2. Welcome changing re
-quirements at the start of each itera-tion, even late in development; agile 

processes harness change for the cus-tomer™s competitive advantage. 
Principle 3. [delete; redundant with 
Principle 1] 
Principle 4. The whole team, from 
businesspeople through testers, must 

communicate and collaboratively work 
together throughout the project. 
Principle 5. Build projects around 
empowered, motivated individuals with 

a shared vision of success; give them the 

environment and support they need, 
clear their external obstacles, and trust 
them to get the job done. 
Principle 6. The most ef˜cient, effec-tive method for conveying information 

to and within a development team is 
through synchronous communication; 
important decisions are documented 

so are not forgotten. 
Principle 7. Valuable, high-quality 
software is the primary measure of 

progress at the end of each short time-boxed iteration. 
Principle 8. Agile processes promote 
sustainable development. The whole 
team should be able to maintain a 

reasonable work pace that includes 
dedicated time for exploration, vision-ing, refactoring, and obtaining and re-
sponding to feedback. 
Principle 9. Continuous attention to 
technical excellence and good design 

enhances agility. [no change] 
Principle 10. SimplicityŠthe art of 
maximizing the amount of work not 
doneŠis essential. [no change] 
Principle 11. The best architectures, 
requirements, and designs emerge 

from self-organizing teams guided by a 
vision for product release. 
Principle 12. With each iteration, the team candidly re˚ects on the success 
of the project, feedback, and how to be more effective, then tunes and adjusts its plans and behavior accordingly. 
The 93 respondents to the second survey also provided 164 textual com-
ments on the principles. About 11% of 
the comments (18 of 164) indicated the 
respondents preferred fewer words, as in ﬁkeep it simple.ﬂ The revised princi-
ples are often longer than the original. Principle 6 
(standard 
 deviation 1.0). 

The most 

effective method 

of conveying 

information to 

and within a 

development team 

is face-to-face 

conversation. 
 76    COMMUNICATION
S OF THE ACM
   |  APRIL 2012  |  VOL. 55  
|  NO. 4
contributed articles
However, the follow-on survey indi-cated general agreement with the revi-sions, with two exceptions: First, the most prominent reaction 
among survey commenters was when 

the word ﬁiterationsﬂ was added to a 
principle (such as in revised principles 
2, 7, and 12). The recent introduction of 
the lean software development kanban7 practice removed the notion of itera-tions for many teams. With kanban, a 
feature can begin at any time if the ﬁpull 

systemﬂ indicates the team has the ca-pacity to start new work. As a result, kan-ban teams often lack de˜ned iterations. 
Second, many commenters also reacted negatively to the switch from 
ﬁface-to-face communicationﬂ to ﬁsyn
-chronous communication.ﬂ Despite the fact (discussed earlier) that 96% of 

survey respondents worked on distrib-uted teams and the assertion by one commenter that the change was ﬁa nice update for the digital world,ﬂ survey re-spondents generally emphasized that 
nothing beats face-to-face for verbal and non-verbal communication alike, 
and wanted principle 6 to represent the 
ideal practice. Agile Practices 
Table 2 lists the results of the ˜rst sur
-vey, which asked whether agile practices 
are essential for a team to be considered 
agile; each agile practice is followed by 
the mean response and the standard 

deviation of the responses, with 1 indi-cating the practice is not very important 
and 5 that the practice is essential for 

agile teams. Note that the practices at 
the top of the list generally have a lower 
standard deviation (connoting greater 
consistency among survey respondents) 
than those at the bottom of the list. 
Many original agile practices (such 
as continuous integration and short it-
erations) are often at the top of such a 

list, while the more recent, emergent 
practices (such as Planning Poker, kan
-ban, and stabilization iterations) are at 

the bottom. Planning Poker
5 is a Wide-band Delphi3 practice for estimating 
team-based effort. Stabilization itera
-tions (generally two weeks) can occur at 
the end of all feature-producing itera-
tions or periodically throughout a lon
-ger release cycle. During stabilization it-erations, testers can perform additional 
integration, regression, and perfor-mance testing; the defect backlog can 
be reduced; the product backlog can be 

more intensively groomed; and some 
preliminary architecture, design, and 
dependency analysis for the next group 

of iterations can take place. Some teams 
˜nd that stabilization iterations mid-re-lease reduce burnout and provide time 
for exploration and learning. 
An agile practice that survey re-spondents said was left off the list was 

the ﬁspikeﬂ; that is, teams do spikes 
when they do not know enough about 

a feature to effectively estimate the re-sources needed for its implementation. 
A spike is a timeboxed experiment that 
allows developers to learn just enough 
about something unknown about a 

feature implementation (such as a new 
technology) to be able to estimate the 
effort required to deliver the feature. 
Conclusion 
The authors of the Agile Manifesto 

and the original 12 principles spelled 
out the essence of the agile trend that 
has transformed the software industry 
over more than a dozen years. That is, 
they nailed it. 
Acknowledgements 
Funding for my two-part study was pro-
vided by the Scrum Alliance (http://www.
scrumalliance.org/). Many thanks to the 
North Carolina State University Real
-search group (www.realsearchgroup.
org) and to the survey respondents.  References 1. B
eck, K. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace 
Change, Second Edition.
 Addison-Wesley, 
Reading, MA, 2005. 2. B
oehm, B. and Turner, 
R. Using risk to balance agile and plan-driven methods. 
IEEE Computer 36, 6 (June 
2003), 57Œ66. 
3. B
oehm, B.W. Software Engineering Economics. 
Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 1981. 
4. C
ockburn, A. Agile Software Development. 
Addison Wesley Longman, 2001. 5. G
renning, J. 
Planning Poker or How to Avoid Analysis 
Paralysis while Release Planning, 
2002; http://renais
-
sancesoftware.net/˜les/articles/PlanningPoker-v1.1.pdf 
6. H
ighsmith, J. 
Adaptive Software Development. 
Dorset House, New York, 1999. 7.
 Kniberg, H. and Skarin, M. Kanban and Scrum: Making the Most of Both. C4Media, Lexington, KY, 2010. 8. Palmer, 
S.R. and Felsing, J.
M. A Practical Guide to 

Feature-Driven Development. 
Prentice Hall PTR, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 2002. 
9. Poppendieck, 
M. and Poppendieck, 
T. Lean Software 
Development.
 Addison Wesley, 
Boston, 2003. 10. S
chwaber, K. and 
Beedle, M. Agile Software 
Development with SCRUM.
 Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 2002. 
11. S
tapleton, J. 
DSDM: The Method in Practice, Second 
Edition.
 Addison Wesley Longman, 2003. Laurie Williams (williams@csc.ncsu.edu) is a professor of computer science in the Department of 
Computer Science at North 
Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, NC, and an agile trainer and coach. 
© 2012 ACM
 0001-0782/12/04 $10.00
