 The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 1286Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u rn al hom epage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssReconciling perspectives: A grounded theory of how people manage the processof software developmentSteve Adolpha,, Philippe Kruchtena, Wendy HallbaElectrical and Computer Engineering, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, CanadabSchool of Nursing, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canadaa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 1 September 2011Received in revised form 27 January 2012Accepted 31 January 2012Available online 8 February 2012Keywords:
Software engineeringSoftware teamAgile manifesto agile software developmentScrum
Shared mental modelGrounded theorya b s t r a c tSocial factors are signiﬁcant cost drivers for the process of software development. In this ﬁeld studywe generate a grounded theory of how people manage the process of software development. The mainconcern of engineers involved in the process of software development is getting the job done. To getthe job done, people engage in a four-stage process of Reconciling Perspectives. Reconciling Perspectivesrepresents an attempt to converge individuals’ points of view or perspectives about a software project. Theprocess emphasizes the importance of individuals’ abilities to both reach out and engage in negotiationsand create shelter from environmental noise to bring a software project to fruition.© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionSoftware development is a risky and expensive proposition.Talking with software developers quickly illustrates the quagmirethat software development can become. Late delivery, defectiveproducts, cost overruns, and frustrated staff and stake holders aresome of the debris resulting from a failed or less than successfulproject. This is expensive debris considering that global softwaredevelopment is a 1.6 trillion US dollar industry (Bartels et al., 2006).Improving the productivity of software development teams andthe quality of delivered software will result in signiﬁcant economicreturns.Numerous studies have demonstrated that individual abilitiesand team social factors are signiﬁcant cost drivers for software engi-neering projects, often swamping all other factors (Boehm, 1984;Cockburn, 2002; Cockburn and Highsmith, 2001; Curtis et al., 1987;Jones, 2000; Lister and DeMarco, 1987; Sawyer and Guinan, 1998).Caper Jones (2000) data demonstrate that high levels of manage-ment and staff experience contribute 120% to productivity whileeffective methods and processes contribute only 35%. Cost driversassociated with personal factors from the COCOMO model “reﬂectCorresponding author.E-mail addresses: stevea@ece.ubc.ca, steve@wsaconsulting.com (S. Adolph),pbk@ece.ubc.ca (P. Kruchten), Wendy.Hall@nursing.ubc.ca (W. Hall).the strong inﬂuence of personal capability on software productiv-ity” (Boehm et al., 1995, p. 86). Earlier, Boehm concluded:“Personnel attributes and human relations activities provide byfar the largest source of opportunity for improving softwareproductivity” (Boehm, 1984)If social factors are the biggest cost drivers, and explain vari-ance in the productivity of software development teams, researchstudies that help us identify and understand social processes in soft-ware engineering should yield signiﬁcant beneﬁt to the industry. Inthe past, most software engineering research has focused on toolsand production methods, which have limited ability to accountfor and manage the variance in software projects (Glass et al.,2002; Sawyer and Guinan, 1998; Shaw, 2003; Sjoeberg et al., 2005;Zannier et al., 2006). Shaw’s (2003) analysis of papers accepted bythe International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE) showsthe majority of accepted papers to be“. . .reports [of] an improved method or means of developingsoftware that is, of designing, implementing, evolving, main-taining, or otherwise operating on the software system itself.Papers addressing these questions dominate both the submittedand the accepted papers” (Shaw, 2003, p. 727).In the past, procedures or techniques and tools and notationaccounted for the majority of the accepted papers (69%), while lessthan 10% of the accepted papers described empirical or qualita-tive models. Another survey of the software engineering research0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.jss.2012.01.059 1270S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 1286literature (Glass et al., 2002) reported a very small percentage (inmany cases less than 1%) of research papers explored organizationalissues or employed research methods useful in understandingsocial behavior.The software engineering research agenda is changing, withmore researchers investigating the inﬂuence that personalattributes and human relationships have on software projects(Dittrich et al., 2007). The Agile Manifesto and the Agile softwaredevelopment movement placed a spotlight on the importance ofsocial interactions with the ﬁrst article of the Manifesto for AgileSoftware Development:“Individuals and interactions over processes and tools”The emphasis on individuals and interactions motivatedresearch into social interaction (Chong, 2005; Hoda et al., 2010;Moe et al., 2008; Robinson and Sharp, 2005; Whitworth and Biddle,2007).However, we believe the state of software engineering researchcan still be summed up in Curtis et al.’s (1987) retelling of the 13thcentury story of a man who, after losing his keys, crosses the streetto search under a lamppost because the light is much better there.This should not come as a surprise to us because we are engi-neers and not sociologists. Engineers—especially at the researchlevel—are engineers because they enjoy solving technical problems.Developing tools and methods is what we are educated to do, andwhat we enjoy doing; however, if we are to better understand thefactors that have the greatest inﬂuence on software developmentperformance, our studies must also examine social processes.This paper is an extended revision of our Agile 2011 confer-ence paper (Adolph and Kruchten, 2011). For this research project,we had the opportunity to study a number of Agile softwaredevelopment teams in order to understand the variability in theproductivity of software development by creating a substantivetheory of how people actually do, or “manage” as we have referredto it, the process of software development. Our study makes twocontributions: the ﬁrst is our ﬁndings, and the second is our expe-rience using grounded theory (Glaser and Strauss, 1967). In thispaper, the conceptual elements of the theory are highlighted withan underlined italicized font; for example, the conceptual elementBunkering is highlighted as Bunkering. In Section 2 we present anoutline of our study and a description of our use of the groundedtheory method. In Section 3 we present our theory, and in Section 4we provide a discussion of our results within the context of existingtheories. Section 5 summarizes our results and recommendations.2. Our study2.1. MotivationThe study we conducted was aimed at understanding the socialprocesses that inﬂuence software team performance and the effectsof software methods on those processes. Methodologists argue thebeneﬁts of following a software development methodology, andthere are studies that demonstrate a positive correlation betweensoftware development method adoption and team effectiveness interms of product quality and productivity (Diaz and Sligo, 1997;Harter et al., 2000). On the other hand, industry data demon-strate that the effect of software methods on software developmentproductivity is limited (Jones, 2000; Sawyer and Guinan, 1998).Furthermore, the contribution of software methods to team effec-tiveness is frequently questioned (Cockburn, 2003; Dyba et al.,2005; Fitzgerald, 1998).What is going on here? Is it possible that low rates of softwaremethods adoption are a strong indicator that software practition-ers do not believe their needs are being addressed by softwaremethods? While there are anecdotes about methodology usage, orlack thereof, there is a gap in our empirical knowledge about theinterface between software developers and methods. A groundedtheory study, producing a substantive theory that explains howpeople manage the software development process, could diminishthat gap. Anecdotes about software development, unlike theory, arenot useful to guide policy. Questions arise, such as: “What are theneeds of those involved in the process of software development?”We chose a qualitative approach for our research because we wereinterested in understanding the issues that are relevant to softwareengineers. We chose grounded theory as our method because wewere interested in generating theory that explains how engineersmanage the problem of quality software development.2.2. Grounded theoryGrounded theory is a qualitative research method whereinresearchers construct theory from data. It is useful for explainingbehavioral patterns that shape social processes as people interactin groups (Glaser and Strauss, 1967). The goal of a grounded the-ory study is to understand the action in a substantive area fromthe point of view of the actors involved (Glaser, 1998). Groundedtheory is best for answering questions of the form: “What is goingon here?” Schreiber and Stern (2001) argued that grounded the-ory is useful for when we want to learn how people manage theirlives in the context of a problematic situation and about the pro-cess of how people understand and deal with what is happeningto them. An explanation of a phenomenon is developed that iden-tiﬁes major categories, their relationships, context, and process; agrounded theory of a phenomenon is much more than a descriptiveaccount (Becker, 1993).Co-discoverers Barney Glaser and Anselm Strauss named themethod “grounded” because a theory is systematically generatedfrom a broad array of data through a rigorous process of con-stant comparison. Grounded theory is different from the dominantlogico-deductive methods of inquiry because, rather than begin-ning with a theory and systematically seeking evidence to verify it,grounded theory researchers gather data and systematically gen-erate a mid-range substantive theory grounded on that data.Grounded theory is like Agile software development in the sensethat it is deceptively simple conceptually, yet rigorous and disci-plined in practice. Fig. 1 is reproduced from Adolph et al. (2011)and shows how we visualize the process of grounded theory.(A) A researcher begins collecting data on a phenomenon of inter-est, and analyzes the data by searching for patterns of incidentsto indicate concepts. Concepts are the building blocks of agrounded theory, and conceptualization is one of its distin-guishing traits. While Glaser tends to use the terms “concept”and “category” interchangeably, we chose to think of categoriesas an aggregation of concepts.(B) The theoretical properties of a category are developed by com-paring incidents in incoming data with previous incidents inthe same category. During the analysis, the “core category” isdeveloped. The core category captures the most variation inthe data (Glaser, 1978) while addressing the main concern ofthe study participants. The process of generating categories andtheir properties continues until the categories become “satu-rated”; that is, when further collection of data does not add anynew properties to the existing categories, the incidents are saidto be interchangeable.(C) After saturation, the substantive theory is compared to theoriesdescribed in the literature. The literature search is deferred tolate in data collection to avoid forcing pre-conceived conceptson the substantive theory being developed from the data. S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 12861271Fig. 1. The grounded theory method (Adolph et al., 2011).(D)Throughout
 the process, the researcher writes memos captur-ing his or her thoughts and analytic processes; the memossupport the emerging concepts, categories, and their relation-ships.From this overview, one could regard producing a groundedtheory as straightforward, mechanical, and rigorous: a process inwhich the researcher makes easy progress. We found it messy,tedious, and difﬁcult. Generating a grounded theory required cre-ativity and theoretical sensitivity on the part of the researchers todevelop the theory. Theory development most certainly did notprogress in a straightforward linear manner. As we describe inSection 2.5, it involved many false leaps, blind alleys, and deadends. Nonetheless, it was an extremely rewarding experience thatenabled us to explain the experience of software engineering froma very different perspective.Hoda et al. (2010) and Whitworth and Biddle (2007) havedemonstrated the utility of grounded theory for studying Agilesoftware development. Hoda generated a theory for organizingself-organizing teams and, while Whitworth did not completelygenerate a theory, her observations were conceptualized andconnected to Social Identity Theory. Section 2.5 provides somedescription of how we applied grounded theory in our study; wedescribe our experience with classical grounded theory more thor-oughly in Adolph et al. (2011).2.3. Grounded theory and literature reviewsGlaser (1978) strongly encouraged grounded theorists to con-duct their literature reviews after their theory has emerged to avoidundue inﬂuence by extant theory on emerging theory; however, hisadvice should not be interpreted as ban on conducting a literaturereview prior to undertaking a study, because any study must besituated in the context of current work. We conducted our literaturereview in two phases.The ﬁrst phase framed how the problem we were exploringled to the formation of our research question. The review gaveus conﬁdence there was value in conducting this research. Someof our prior research into software method adoption and use iscited in our motivation. The second phase of our literature reviewwas undertaken after we constructed our grounded theory enti-tled Reconciling Perspectives by comparing extant theory to ourgrounded theory. This comparison is described in the discussionsection of this paper.2.4. Research questionThe grounded theory method permits researchers to identify anactual problem that exists for participants in a substantive arearather than beginning with what professional researchers maybelieve is the participants’ problem. In a grounded theory study, theresearcher works with a general area of interest rather than witha speciﬁc problem until a problem is identiﬁed (McCallin, 2003).The opportunity to determine what was truly on the mind of ourparticipants appealed to us.For our study, we worked with a broadly deﬁned problemstatement of “how do people manage the process of software devel-opment?” Our question did not address Agile methods speciﬁcallybecause we were interested in creating a model of how people actu-ally develop software, with an eye to discovering gaps betweenthat model and current software methods. While we have somepreconceived ideas about potential problems (e.g., coordination,communication, adaptation), we left our problem statement openso that we could determine if any of our preconceived ideas mat-tered to software developers. Had we gone into the ﬁeld with arigorously deﬁned research problem, we likely would never havelearned that the process of Reconciling Perspectives was a way peo-ple have of Getting the Job Done. 1272S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 12862.5. Data collection and analysis2.5.1. Research sitesField research means going into the ﬁeld and immersing oneselfin the environment (Emerson et al., 1995). We were fortunate tohave good personal connections with many software engineeringorganizations, meaning that we did not have to conduct “ambush”interviews (opportunistically inviting anyone we met in a hallwayfor an interview). These strong connections also created opportu-nities for the primary researcher to be on site for extended periodsof time. The primary researcher used his personal connections withprincipals in each of the test sites to invite these sites to participatein this study. While some (Mulhall, 2003) have expressed concernabout selecting ﬁeld sites simply because they are accessible to theresearcher, when the choice is between ambush interviews at aconference and an opportunity for an extended engagement, acces-sibility wins. After agreement was reached between the researchersand participants, a formal letter of invitation was sent to the orga-nization in accordance with University research ethics guidelines.We engaged in the ﬁeld study from February 2009 throughJanuary 2010, collecting data (using semi-structured interviewsand participant observation) and analyzing data over the 12-monthperiod. Participant observation was a major data collection methodrather than a supplement to our interviews because it allowed theprimary researcher to observe what people did rather than havingthem comment on what they believed they did. In total, over theyear, the primary researcher conducted 20 interviews and spentsome 42 days observing participants at work. We were able tocollect ﬁeld data from the three different software developmentorganizations listed in Table 1.After gaining access to a site, the principal investigator madea concerted effort to maintain a regular visitation schedule, usu-ally once a week for local sites and once a month for out-of-townsites. There were times when we collected data faster than we couldanalyze it. We sometimes stopped the visitation schedule untiladequate analysis had occurred because grounded theory requiresconcurrent data collection and analysis. Unfortunately, the resultof such stoppages was that we had difﬁculty in re-engaging thesites. Once a researcher is out of sight, he or she is out of mind,especially for busy software development teams. In addition, Site1 abruptly dropped out of the study part way through due to cir-cumstances unrelated to the study. The loss of Site 1 was somewhatmitigated by the product customization teams at Site 2 that wereoften deployed like Site 1 at a customer site.While most teams participating in this study claimed to followScrum (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002), the reality was that all wereoperating in a mixed-methods environment. The Site 1 team wasembedded within a non-Agile organization. The product develop-ment teams at Site 2 were using Scrum, while their product supportcounterparts tended to only follow elements of the Scrum method.Teams at Site 3 who participated in this study followed Scrum butalso worked within the context of a formal stage gated software lifecycle. At the enterprise level, Site 3 was starting an Agile transition.2.5.2. InterviewsResearch ethics did not permit us to directly recruit interviewsubjects. When a site agreed to participate in the study, we sched-uled a kick-off meeting with the participant groups to explain thestudy and, speciﬁcally, the ethics of informed consent. People werethen invited to contact the primary researcher, if they wished todirectly participate in the study. Some 53 individuals were availableto interview from all three sites according to our count of signedinformed consent forms. Much to our delight, people respondedenthusiastically to our invitations, and the only real problem withinterviewing was ﬁnding time in a busy individual’s scheduleand a free conference room. Study participants varied in age andexperience from front line developers 5 years out of school toexperienced, seasoned individuals with 19 years experience. Mostsubjects were directly involved with the creation and delivery ofsoftware, and had job titles such as project manager, softwaredevelopment manager, business analyst, quality assurance engi-neer, and developer. Table 2 lists the individuals who participated instudy interviews. All study participants were drawn from the engi-neering side of the organization and but, unfortunately, the closestwe came to interviewing the business side of the organization wasa project manager and a business analyst.On average, the primary researcher spent approximately 1 hformally interviewing each subject. With three of the subjects,we were able to conduct a formal secondary or follow-up inter-view to clarify and probe deeper into new concepts that emergedfrom their interviews. With most of the other subjects, follow-up interviews were much more ad hoc, often conducted as casualconversations in the subject’s work area, after which the primaryresearcher quickly jotted down ﬁeld notes. All interviews, with theexception of the follow-up interviews, started with the question,“Tell me in your own words how you create software here at sitex.” Subsequent interview questions were guided by the subject’sanswer to this question. Subjects were often asked to provide sto-ries of both successful and less-than-successful projects in whichthey had participated. As the study progressed, events from partici-pant observation generated further interview questions. Interviewswere digitally recorded and then transcribed. Observation ﬁeldnotes were written in lab notebooks and then later scanned.2.5.3. Participant observationOur observation data was collected either by observing meet-ings or by simply sitting quietly in a cubicle and observing what wastaking place around us. The second style of observation was morepassive, and consisted of simply being on site and watching people’sday-to-day interactions. The primary researcher was frequentlyinvited to regularly scheduled status and planning meetings, aswell as to ad hoc problem solving meetings. The researcher watchedpeople asking questions, observed their patterns of movement, andnoted who the “go to” people were. There were also many oppor-tunities for informal conversations between the researcher and thestudy participants. The settings provided opportunities to observeinteractions between people as they stood in front of large “infor-mation radiators” and conducted ad hoc problem solving meetingsand negotiations. These observations were all captured in our ﬁeldnotes.Because participant observation allowed observations of whatpeople actually did, it served as an important mainstream datacollection method. We considered the participant observationinvaluable because it demonstrated ﬁrsthand how participantsinteracted. The primary researcher was able to observe phenomenathat would not have been uncovered in interviews, from frustra-tion with the unreasonable demands of an important client to theintense negotiation of a sprint planning meeting. He was able toobserve the individuals who served as a group’s “go to” people andobserved how they put aside their tasks to help others. He observedspontaneous problem-solving meetings, and numerous NERF1Dartwars. Participant observation also helped us gather some data onthe business side of the organization either through informal con-versations or by observing representatives of the business duringstatus meetings.1NERF is an ofﬁcial trademark of Hasbro Corporation. S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 12861273Table 1Study site description.Site 1 An onsite customer support ﬁeld ofﬁce with 7 staff providing operational support and customized enhancements for a largequasi-government entity. The ﬁeld support team followed Scrum while the quasi-government organization followed awaterfall-based software development lifecycle.Site 2 A small e-commerce product company with approximately 150 employees. This company had two distinct development streams: onethat focused on developing and evolving the core e-commerce engine, and a second stream which customized the engine for clients.The product development stream used Scrum as the base of their software development method. The product customization teamsfollowed some Scrum practices at the team level, but mostly followed a waterfall-based software development lifecycle. Three teamsfrom product development and one team from professional services participated in this study.Site 3A software research and development center for a large multi-national software product vendor with over 1250 employees locally(350 are in engineering). One group of approximately 40 people participated in this study. While the organization ofﬁcially followed acorporate software development lifecycle, three teams in the study group were actively following Scrum.2.5.4. Document analysisTwo of the organizations (Site 1 and Site 2) made their inter-nal documentation, project data, and status reports available to us.At Site 1, we had unlimited access to their online bulletin boardand were able to review their process manuals and weekly statusreports, as well as their corporate organization charts. At Site 2, forthe product development team, most project data such as organi-zation charts, project time lines, and release plans where postedup on the large whiteboards that covered the walls. At Site 3, wewere not given access to internal company documentation. Docu-ment analysis helped us understand the context of the organization(e.g., the organizational charts), and the event history derived fromproject plans and status reports. From these, we were able to createquestions to ask interview subjects about what happened at thoseevents.2.5.5. SamplingGrounded theory does not use statistical sampling because thepopulation under study is that set of concepts that constitute thephenomena rather than individuals experiencing the phenomena.The sampling strategy must promote the development of sufﬁ-cient concepts to support a conceptually dense grounded theory.Grounded theory employs theoretical sampling where the ana-lyst “jointly collects, codes, and analyzes his data and decides whatdata to collect next and where to ﬁnd them in order to develop histheory as it emerges” (Glaser, 1978, p. 36). In other words, the ana-lytic process and developing concepts provide the direction forthe investigator to ﬁnd further incidents to develop the propertiesand dimensions of the concepts. Theoretical sampling is driven bythe emerging categories and hypotheses; therefore, it is an ongo-ing process that cannot be pre-determined. Theoretical samplingsupports the development of an emerging theory that is tightlyintegrated.We found starting the sampling process to beproblematic—somewhat analogous to the bootstrap problem.The evolving theory guides the sampling process but, without anydata to analyze, where do you start? We “booted up” the processusing “judgmental” (Marshall, 1996) sampling to recruit our ﬁrstinterview candidates. Our goal was to begin with a variety ofviews, and frame the topic by asking both line developers andmanagers from different companies to tell us their stories abouthow they managed the process of software development. This ﬁrstphase generated many, many open codes capturing how peoplepracticed software development. Clustering the codes quicklysaturated (no new data) the categories directly related to howpeople create software. At a conceptual level, people pretty muchcreate software the same way; however, we were interested inhow people manage the process of software development.2.5.6. AnalysisWe followed the grounded theory practice of coding and ana-lyzing our data as it was collected (Glaser, 1992). As new data werecollected, they were compared to existing concepts. We used whatwe learned from the analysis to adapt our interview and observa-tion protocols. Insights we had while coding the data and clusteringthe codes were captured in memos. We used Atlassian Conﬂuence(a Wiki) to manage the data and memos.There are three coding phases in classical grounded theory:open coding, selective coding, and theoretical coding. Open cod-ing (also referred to as substantive coding) generates concepts fromthe data that will become the building blocks for the theory (Glaser,1992). The process of doing grounded theory is based on a concept-indicator model of constant comparisons of incidents or indicatorsto incidents (indicators) (Glaser and Strauss, 1967). Indicators areactual data, such as behavioral actions and events observed ordescribed in documents and in interviews; they are often capturedin the words of the participants (Strauss, 1987, p. 25). An indicatormay be a word, a phrase, a sentence, or a paragraph in the data beinganalyzed. Concepts or categories are building blocks for a groundedtheory. They can be behaviors, or factors affecting behaviors, whichTable 2Interview subject description.Subject Id Role Experience EducationSite 1 Subject 1 Branch/Project Manager 13 years BASite 1 Subject 2 Developer 5 years MSc Computing ScienceSite 1 Subject 3 Developer 7 years BSc Computing ScienceSite 2 subject 1 Team Leader/Mentor/Developer 19 yearsSite 2 Subject 3 Business Analyst 5 years BASc, Systems EngineeringSite 2 Subject 4 Software Development Manager 10 years MSC Software EngineeringSite 2 Subject 5 Team Lead/Mentor/Developer 6 years MSC Mechanical EngineeringSite 3 Subject 1 Team Lead/Developer 8 years BMathSite 3 Subject 2 Team Lead/Developer 13 yearsSite 3 Subject 3 Software Development Manager 13 years BAScSite 3 Subject 4 Architect 14 years, 5 years as a developer Self-taught software developerSite 3 Subject 5Development
 Manager 10 years BA English literatureSite 3 Subject 6 Lead Architect/Project Leader 16 years experience BScSite 3 Subject 7QA
 Manager 12 years BASc Electrical EngineeringSite 3 Subject 8 Lead Program Manager 12 years 1274S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 1286help to explain to the analyst how the basic problem of the actorsis resolved or processed (Glaser, 1978).During open coding, concepts are generated by asking gener-ative questions (Glaser, 1978, p. 57) such as “What is this data astudy of?”, “What category does this incident indicate?”, “What isactually happening in the data?”. For example, when reading thefollowing passage in an interview transcript:“Otherwise, we have no control. And ah we’ll never make ourdates. Another example of a project that ran rampant and itah technically was on time and on budget, but there was somany change requests that it almost tripled in budget throughthe process of the project. And we um at the beginning of theproject they cut out all the scope and every single piece of it gotput in back through the course of the project. The project wassupposed to take six months; it took a year and a half. It wassupposed to be under $500,000; it took up $1.5 million. Um,things like ah they didn’t do a legal review until it was way justbefore they launched” Site 1 Subject 1We asked “what is going on here?” A project had run rampantbecause the original project leadership abdicated responsibility;it was not until new leadership was put in place that control ofthe project was regained and the project delivered. We capturedthis passage as an indicator, tagging it with the in vivo code “Oth-erwise we have no control”. When we reﬂected on “What conceptdoes this incident indicate?” what immediately came to mind was“Leadership” or, in this example, the lack of it. We immediately jot-ted down a conceptual memo referring to leadership as somethingthat steers a project toward completion.More indictors were developed with further reading of the inter-view transcript, and each new indicator was compared to previousindicators and concepts, once again asking the questions “What isgoing on here?” and “What category does this incident indicate?”Throughout this process of constant comparison, new insights wererecorded as memos, ﬂeshing out the concept of Leadership anddeveloping its properties and dimensions. Open coding is a tediousprocess, and it often took two or three days to code a 1-h inter-view. Field notes captured during participant observation were alsocoded.Open coding generates concepts very quickly, and it is easyto become enamored with concepts that support pet or precon-ceived ideas and also to become overwhelmed by the number ofconcepts. While the concepts are exciting and interesting, theyneed to be integrated into a story that explains how people resolvetheir main concern. We recognized that the constant compara-tive method was invaluable for helping us prune concepts becauseconcepts must “earn their way into the theory”. Many excitingconcepts simply fell by the wayside because we could not ﬁndother incidents to support them or because there was not enoughvariation to differentiate the concept from others we had alreadyidentiﬁed.Selective coding involves identifying the core category thatbest explains how study participants resolve their central con-cern. Without a core category, there is no grounded theory. Theoutcome would be, at best, an interesting collection of conceptswhich support thick description. Using grounded theory, we aimedto construct a well-integrated set of hypotheses that explained howthe concepts operated. Finding the center of gravity is a metaphorthat for us best describes the process of selective coding andexplains the role of the core category in integrating closely relatedconcepts.Discovering the main concern (that is: what problem people aretrying to resolve) helped us construct the core category. When wedirectly asked people to identify their main concern, we received avariety of answers; but, as we sifted through the data, we observeda pattern of near angst with Getting the Job Done. We were tryingto understand how people managed the process of software devel-opment to get the job done.There were many false starts for selective coding. One of ourearly false starts was considering the concept of “Scouting” asour core category. “Scouting” had much appeal as a core categorybecause it conﬁrmed what many of us believe to be true about theprocess of software development: it is a wicked problem (Ritteland Webber, 1973) where a solution requires an unpredictableexploration of unknown and possible dangerous territory. “Scout-ing” was certainly a recurring pattern in our data; it met some ofthe criteria for a core category, and could be seen as a method forGetting the Job Done. On the other hand, the “Scouting” category didnot explain most of the behaviors or events in our data. “Scout-ing” did not explain why people could go dark, or how experienceand leadership inﬂuenced the process. Finally, it did not explainthe efforts people made to “get everyone on the same page”. As wedirected our data collection to develop the properties of Scouting,we saw more and more incidents in the data that highlighted theneed to manage communications between individuals and groups.After more false starts, the concept of “Bunkering” began toemerge as another candidate core category. We conceptualized“Bunkering” as a boundary-setting process for how individuals andgroups protected themselves from complexity and uncertainty bylimiting their scope of concern. We invested considerable effortdeveloping the “Bunkering” category because it seemed to explainall the data we were collecting; however, the resulting theory failedGlaser’s quality criteria of parsimony. The theory of Bunkering was,in reality, many related theories, such as one describing the processof software development, another describing how people engage ina software project, and another describing the inﬂuence of leader-ship and personal relationships on how people engage in a softwareproject. A factor contributing to the lack of parsimony was ourlack of conceptualization. The concepts we were using to try tobuild the theory were too literal. We resolved this issue by ask-ing the generative question: “What is actually happening in thedata?” From this reasoning, the category “Reconciling Perspectives”,a process that participants use to reconcile their different points ofview and negotiate compromises, was constructed. It was surpris-ing, once we constructed a core category that “ﬁt”, how quickly wecould integrate the theory around it, like objects being drawn intoan orbit. It made us recall Glaser’s observation that the theory willintegrate if we do not force our pre-conceived concepts on it.“Theoretical codes conceptualize how the substantive codes mayrelate to each other as hypotheses to be integrated into the theory”(Glaser and Holton, 2004). Open coding breaks the data open andgenerates categories as the building blocks for the theory but agrounded theory is not a loose collection of categories. A groundedtheory explains how people manage a problem through an inte-grated set of hypotheses. For example, two categories generatedduring open coding were “Experience” and “Reaching Out”; theymay be theoretically coded as causal and associated with degrees.The more experience an individual has, the greater the likelihoodhe or she will reach out to others in order to ﬁnd compromises.Theoretical codes are not mutually exclusive and other theoreti-cal code families, such as the “Strategy” family, describe how in ouremerging theory individuals maneuvered others to remove imped-iments to “Getting the Job Done by Reconciling Perspectives”. For us,theoretical codes illuminated relationships between categories andprovided a vocabulary for describing those relationships.The primary researcher collected all data and performed thedetailed analysis of the data, while the other researchers providedguidance in clarifying, elaborating, and consolidating the emerg-ing concepts. During the many false starts and blind alleys, theother researchers provided “sober second thought” to restart theanalysis by simply asking generative questions of the primaryresearcher, such as “What is the data really indicating?” and “What S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 12861275is really going on here?”. Some of the most productive collabora-tions occurred when the other researchers suggested alternativeconcepts to those proposed by the primary researcher. These col-laborations helped sharpen the emerging concept and pointed to aneed for further data collection.2.5.7. ValidityResearcher bias is certainly a threat to validity in any researchand even more so in qualitative research because the results areour interpretation of the data. While another researcher analyzingour data may have a different interpretation of the data than ours, ifresearchers follow grounded theory practices, their theory must ﬁtthe data and offer the best explanation for the majority of the data.A useful metaphor may be to liken this to the work of two painterspainting the same sunset. Unless we ask them to provide a hyper-realistic descriptive representation of the sunset, the painters willeach interpret the scene differently and offer different insights intothe nature of the sunset beyond what is possible in a descriptivephotograph. One painter may choose to highlight the brilliance andbeauty of the sunset, while the other may highlight the feeling ofcalm as another day draws to an end; however, both paintings arevalid interpretations supported by the data.The quantitative criteria for research rigor and quality, withwhich software engineering researchers may be familiar, do notﬁt with qualitative tenets. Just as we are trying to answer a differ-ent type of question with qualitative approaches, we need to followdifferent criteria for rigor. We can frame the grounded theory rigorissue with two questions:(1) Is the story expressed in the theory a story that is supported bythe data and not a fabrication?(2) Is the theory a good story, one that people will ﬁnd interest-ing, that adds to the known body knowledge, and is useful forinforming policy?Lincoln and Guba (1985) answered these questions by deﬁn-ing the frequently cited criteria of trustworthiness for naturalisticinquiry, which has four aspects: conﬁrmability, dependabil-ity/auditability, credibility, and transferability.- Conﬁrmability: conclusions depend on subjects and conditionsof the study rather than the researcher.- Auditability: the study process is consistent and reasonably sta-ble over time and between researchers.- Credibility: the research ﬁndings are credible and consistent, tothe people we study and to our readers. For authenticity, ourﬁndings should be related to signiﬁcant elements in the researchcontext/situation.- Transferability: the ﬁndings/conclusions can be transferred toother contexts and help to derive useful theories.The interpretive nature of qualitative research makes replica-tion of results difﬁcult, but we demonstrated that our results werereliable by making them auditable. We maintained logs of ourinterviews and observations, which included date, time, and loca-tion. We created a large bank of both theory and process memosand have offered thick descriptions of concepts and categories.Auditability and thick description supports credibility, as does datatriangulation. We gathered data using different mechanisms anddifferent types of sites. We gathered data using multiple tech-niques, such as interviews, participant observation, and documentanalysis. Data were collected from sites with different project typesand different sizes of organizations.Another threat to validity was researcher bias, where the resultsreﬂected the opinions of the researcher rather than what was indi-cated by the data. Researcher bias was mitigated by using thegrounded theory approach to constant comparison and by theresearchers explicitly stating their biases.A signiﬁcant source of bias in this study was that the data wasobtained from people who mostly have what we could refer to asstrong personalities, some even to the point of extroversion; thesesubjects commented on problems associated with other people nottalking to one another. Unfortunately, we could not actively recruitinto the study examples of individuals who were reluctant to talk,so our interview data was biased toward those who like to talk. Thisbias was partially mitigated by our observation of teams during thestudy period, which included those team members who were notinclined to participate in the interviews.Another interview bias was that all participants in this studywere recruited from the engineering side organization ratherthan the business side of the organization. While several of thesenior people interviewed in this study have experience playingquasi-business roles (e.g., project manager), this remains anotherlimitation for our study.3. ResultsSoftware development takes place in the context of a diverseorganizational Eco-systemwhere an Acquirerrequests a Supplierto perform a Job for them. To perform a Job, the Supplier andAcquirermust agree on their expectations of the Job, including theWork Products that will be delivered as part of the Job and theschedule for their delivery. The Suppliercreates the Work Productsfor the Job and delivers them to the Acquirer for acceptance. Thediversity of the organizational Eco-system, with the narrow anddifferent specializations of the Acquirer and Supplier, may lead toa Perspective Mismatch where those involved in the process of soft-ware development have different expectations of the Job in termsof Work Products and schedule.We discovered that people use a process ofReconciling Perspectives to manage the process of softwaredevelopment and to resolve the problem of Perspective Mismatch.Their main concern is Getting the Job Done and the differentPerspectives individuals have of a Job impede Getting the Job Done.Reconciling Perspectives is the basic social structural processpeople managing the process of software development use toresolve Perspective Mismatches and remove impediments toGetting the Job Done. This is an iterative and recursive process;iterative because gaps in knowledge may require repeated appli-cations of the process to fully reconcile the Perspective Mismatch,and recursive because reconciling a Perspective Mismatch maylead to the discovery of another mismatch that must be resolvedbefore the original Perspective Mismatch can be resolved. Fig. 2 is aschematic of the process.In Reconciling Perspectives, there are two clear stagesthat account for variations in behavior: Converging andValidating. During Converging, individuals try to reach a sharedConsensual Perspective by Reaching Out and Negotiating Consensus.After achieving a Consensual Perspective, the individuals validatethe Consensual Perspective by creating the Job Work Products duringBunkering and then judging them during Accepting. The processhas four properties:Scopethe number of individuals in the organization affectedby the Perspective Mismatch.Cycle Time the interval of time from when thePerspective Mismatch is detected until thereconciliation is validated.Communications the frequency, volume, and diversity of Communicationbetween individuals in the organization.Team Dynamicsthe capability of a team to manage theirCommunications.When engaged in the process of software development, whetheras an Acquirer or a Supplier, individuals have a point of view 1276S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 1286Fig. 2. Reconciling perspectives.or Perspective which is how they see and understand a Job.When individuals reﬂect on Communicationsthey have heard orobserved regarding a software project, if their interpretation ofCommunicationsdoes not match their expectations then there isa Perspective Mismatch that can impede Getting the Job Done. ThisPerspective Mismatchcan impede the project because SuppliersandAcquires may have different expectations of the value, quality, andpriority of Jobfeatures, Job Work Products, and the schedule thatthe Work Products will be delivered to. When individuals recog-nize a Perspective Mismatch, they start a Converging process byReaching Out to engage others in Reconciling Perspectives. If the oth-ers agree to engage, then the parties begin Negotiating Consensusto create a common Perspective or Consensual Perspective. AConsensual Perspective may be as simple as reaching an informaldecision, or may be a formal signed off agreement that speciﬁesthe Job.While the Consensual Perspective removes an impediment tomoving forward, it is only tentative because the parties are eachassuming that they have a better understanding of how the oth-ers see the problem and its solution. While their Communicationsmay no longer indicate a Perspective Mismatch, the process isnot complete until it is validated (Validating) by creating theWork Product during Bunkering and presenting it to the Acquirer(Accepting). During Bunkering, people prefer to focus on creatingthe Job Work Products with minimal interference.Reconciling Perspectives is characterized by its observable prop-erties of Scope, Cycle Time, and Communication. The process variesfrom the large scope, where acquiring organizations engage withsupplier organizations through formally mandated and structuredmeetings, to the small scope and ad hoc that may begin with oneindividual seeking out another and asking: “Can we talk?” Theprocess Cycle Time may be short, with only a few minutes elaps-ing between Reaching Out and Accepting, or may be long, requiringmonths until a Work Product is accepted. Communication is the fre-quency and diversity with which people engage with others andexchange ideas. People may be actively and frequently communi-cating, sharing, and exploring ideas, and negotiating features andpriorities, or they may be quiet and isolated. People may only shareideas with their immediate colleagues, or they may seek diverseideas beyond their immediate colleagues.The outcome of the process is strongly related to Team Dynamicswhich is the team’s ability to manage communications.The degree to which an individual or team is open toCommunications is captured by the Team Dynamic propertyof Openness to Communications, which ranges from Exposedto Cut-off. One property of Team Dynamics that inﬂuencesOpenness to Communications is Personal Strength or the propensityof an individual to engage others. In all the projects observedduring this study, a common success driver is the presence of anindividual or group of individuals who have the Personal Strengthto initiate and engage in this process. While Personal Strength ispartly an innate trait of the individual or group, it is also relatedto the individual’s or group’s level of Experience. Experiencedindividuals tend to have developed a diverse set of Back Channelswhich they utilize to help them increase the diversity of theirCommunications and detect when something is amiss. A charac-teristic of more experienced individuals/groups is the increasednumbers of informal social networks they create. Personal Strengthis also the ability to prevent becoming Exposed by knowing whento say “no” and decline engagement offers from others that willdivert attention or interfere with Getting the Job Done.Managing Communicationsis a key skill forReconciling Perspectives because there is a Communicationstension between the Convergingand Validatingphases of theprocess. The Converging phase requires that individuals andteams be open to Communications, such that they have theopportunity to reﬂect on what they are seeing and hearing anddetect Perspective Mismatches. Individuals and teams must beopen to engaging in negotiations, and be able to communicateeffectively enough to converge their Perspectives and reach aConsensual Perspective. During the Validating phase, though,individuals and teams must focus on Getting the Job Done bycreating the Job Work Products; therefore, during Bunkering, theyprefer to reduce Openness to Communications in order to min-imize distractions. This works at cross purposes to the needsof Reconciling Perspectives where they must remain open toCommunications. To run to one’s cubicle and work in isolationcreating Job Work Products risks Cut-off, where an individual ora team disconnects from Communications and therefore missesCommunications indicating Perspective Mismatches. In contrast,not restricting Communications can leave an individual or teamExposed, wasting energy and not Getting the Job Done, becausethey are engaged in negotiations to resolve constantly shiftingrequirements and priorities, or being diverted to work on otherJobs.The Team Dynamic property of Leadership can not only encour-age inter-personal engagement but also protect individuals frombecoming Exposed, with the resulting time wasting interference.Leadership from an individual’s manager, or from a respectedthought leader within the organization, boosts Personal Strength bygiving individuals the conﬁdence that “their backs are covered”When individuals or groups believe their backs are covered, orbelieve that they will not be sanctioned for raising issues, they aremore likely to take risks and reach out. Leadership also plays a rolein moving the process forward by actively encouraging people toraise issues, confront Perspective Mismatches, and make decisionsto resolve them. Interview subjects used phrases like, “drum beat-ing” and “energizing” to describe efforts to by leaders to encouragepeople to communicate and reach out.Reconciling Perspectives is a fragile process that is stalled by inde-cision and disengagement, and Leadership drum beating createsa rhythm to keep the process from stalling or to restart a stalledprocess. Teams that were observed making progress had effectiveScrum Masters who diligently maintained the rhythm of the Scrumprocess and worked to remove impediments that could stall theteam. For many teams, the Scrum Master was a subject matterexpert and was, therefore, the “go to” person when an individualwas stuck for both that team and other teams. It was not unusual tosee a line-up forming around some individual leaders. There werealso numerous situations where the process had stalled and other S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 12861277individual team members took it upon themselves to restart theprocess.Effective leaders balance Openness to Communications betweenExposed and Cut-off for the team by buffering or Sheltering indi-viduals from interruptions and distractions during the Bunkeringstage of the process by relieving others of some of theirresponsibility for maintaining the frequency and diversity ofCommunications. While protecting individuals from wasteful inter-ruptions, effective leaders are also aware of issues that aresufﬁciently important to warrant interruptions because they indi-cated a Perspective Mismatch that affects the sheltered individuals.Some leaders do not balance Openness to Communications andeither leave the team Exposed or aggressively shelter teams fromthe organizational Eco-system. We encountered several stories ofleaders actually cutting their team off from the rest of the organi-zational Eco-system. In some cases, the Cut-Off was so extreme thatone person referred to a team as a “black hole” from which nothingever escaped.3.1. The software development contextSoftware development occurs in the context of a greater orga-nizational Eco-systemwhere an Acquirerhas a Jobthey wish doneand a Supplier, who has at least some of the ability to perform thatJob, creates Work Productsthat realize the Job. The concept of anEco-system provides the context and vocabulary for understandingthe theory of Reconciling Perspectivesand is not an integral conceptof the theory.The term “eco-system” best describes the software developmentcontext in the organizations we observed. Software developmenttakes place in a confusing and chaotic mix of formal and infor-mal software methods, corporate policies, competing interests,personal agendas, personality types, and formal and informal rela-tionships. In ecological terms, there is a great deal of bio-diversity,and organizations are anything but a monoculture. At all three sites,there was no single software development methodology used;rather, each site used a collection of methods existing within thecontext of a perceived interpretation of an advertised corporatemethod. As one subject explained:“Our team uses the scrum process. Um, so but unfortunately wehave to ﬁt within a larger organization that’s using ah a waterfallmethodology” Site 3, Subject 3Differences between groups were further highlighted by thelayout of the workspace and how the teams under study workedwith other teams in the organization. For example, Site 1 involveda small Scrum team working within the bureaucracy of a largequasi-governmental agency. The workspaces for the governmentalagency were uniform in color, shape, size, and furniture whereasthe Scrum team was relegated to what, at best, could be called awindowless basement with ofﬁce furniture that appeared to havebeen purchased at a variety of garage sales.3.2. Getting the job doneThe central concern of everyone interviewed and observedduring this study was Getting the Job Done, that is, deliveringthe best Work Products they knew how create. Impediments toGetting the Job Done were a major source of frustration.“Um for myself particularly the concern is ah being blocked tosomething. I can’t do, I can’t achieve by myself. I know that sup-plying this would be sort of would hamper progress (unclear).Sometimes maybe to the point where the project is completelyhalted for a long period of time until it’s resolved. And so I thinkthat’s my main concern is um is really just not being able to dothe work that ah that needs to be done” Site 1, Subject 3Participants deﬁned Getting the Job Done as creating workingsoftware that:•Appeases the customer or even makes the customer happy,•Satisﬁes the software team members’ needs to see the end andachieve a feeling of accomplishment, and•Satisﬁes the team members’ desires to minimize technical debt.Despite marketing hyperbole of “delighting customers”, thoseparticipating in this study set the customer satisfaction bar low atappeasement or, more forthrightly, at “anything that keeps the heatoff”.“They feel that they’re under pressure so they just have to ﬁnda way to get it to work” Site 2, Subject 5This was such a frequently recurring pattern that we referredto it as the “heat calculation”, where individuals and teams chosecourses of action that least antagonized a client. In one observedstatus meeting, a team explicitly debated whether they would draw“less heat” by delivering a deﬁcient product on time or by delayingthe release of the product.We did not observe such a strong concern for customer appease-ment in the teams that were not customer facing. For theseteams, Getting the Job Done was described more in terms of tech-nical craftsmanship. Much of the frustration expressed by softwaredevelopers during the interviews in Getting the Job Done was notonly to deliver software to the Acquirerbut to deliver quality soft-ware because all software developers participating in this studytook pride in their craft and had a strong desire to create qualitywork.“I don’t really enjoy solving a problem as much when I’m givenjust an hour to deliver something or a few hours to deliver some-thing that I know will—if I don’t spend more time it won’t be asgood quality as it should be.” Site 2, Subject 53.3. Perspectives mismatchesThroughout this study we discovered that a frequent and difﬁ-cult problem in software development is “getting everyone on thesame page”“And the biggest problem you have is—I can think of one caserecently where we had the team lead here and—one of themanagers here and a team lead at the (unclear) team kind ofdiscussing this bug and the three of us were discussing it in lieufor a week only to realize that all of us had completely differentinterpretations of it. . . So we weren’t even on the same page onit. So it leaves more room for miscommunication which is—nota good problem in software.” Site 2, Subject 3Everyone seems to have a different point of view or Perspectiveabout what the Job is and the process for delivering the Job. Muchlike how members of a choir must all sing from the same sheet ofmusic, everyone participating in the software project must also seethe Job the same way for the Job to get done (Getting the Job Done).The inability to get everyone on the same page is a signiﬁcantimpediment to Getting the Job Done. We referred to the sourceof these impediments, created by differing points of view toGetting the Job Done, as a Perspective Mismatch. There are four broadgroups of Perspective Mismatches based on the topic of the mis-match (Table 3):The diversity of the organization Eco-systemcontributed tothe Perspective Mismatch. There were many instances where 1278S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 1286Table 3Perspective mismatches topics.Features Different Perspectives regarding the behavior, scope (what features are in and what features are out), and quality of Job features.Priorities Different Perspectives on the order and relative importance of Job features with respect to other Job features and other Jobs.Method and work products Different Perspectives regarding what Work Products are created and when those work products are delivered.Schedule and statusDifferent
 Perspectiveswhen a Work Productis ready and the current quality of Work Products.individuals did not understand how others in the organizationassociated with the software project performed their work and con-tributed to the Job. One of the justiﬁcations for a software methodis that it provides a common perspective for all involved in a soft-ware project for how software will be created in the organization.Software methods are supposed to set the expectations of every-one associated with the project and get them on the same page.All organizations participating in this study did claim to have acorporate-wide method but what we saw in most projects was thatfew people had any interest in the corporate methodology:“Um, I’ll be honest—as somebody who’s a lot further down thechain I very rarely pay attention to that process or the milestonesassociated with it. I hear vague um speeches of it. You know,we’re hitting EMRA and whatever, or whatever the milestonename happens to be. And there are big meetings to prep for it.But as somebody a lot further down the chain, to me, it’s justdates” Site 3, Subject 1This Perspective Mismatch creates friction that can impedeGetting the Job Done, where individuals only understand their local-ized area:“I just ﬁnd it creates a lot of friction because people don’t—onlyunderstand their layer” Site 3, Subject 6Perspective Mismatches were not only the result of differencesof opinion on what features should be included in system, but alsothe result of quality trade-offs. A signiﬁcant area of mismatch waspriorities, what should be delivered ﬁrst:“you know each person has their own ah priorities”. Site 3, Sub-ject 73.4. ConvergingConvergingis ﬁrst stage of Reconciling Perspectives, whereindividuals recognize that a Perspective Mismatch is impedingGetting the Job Done and reach out (Reaching Out) to engage oth-ers in negotiations (Negotiating Consensus) to converge theirPerspectives sufﬁciently and decide on a course of action(Consensual Perspective). While the Consensual Perspective can tem-porarily remove the Perspective Mismatch as an impediment toGetting the Job Done, it is only a hypothesis because it is reachedby individuals agreeing that they are on the same page. The pro-cess of Reconciling Perspectives is not complete until the consensusis validated (Validating) by the delivery of a Work Product. It’s a bitlike the old expression “the proof is in the pudding”.The Converging stage ends when everyone agrees that theyunderstand what the Job is and can decide on a course of actionin the form of a Consensual Perspective.3.5. Reaching outReconciling Perspectives begins when individuals reﬂect on theFeedback in the Communications they are receiving about the Job,believe Getting the Job Done is impeded by a Perspective Mismatch,and begin Reaching Out. They reach out by inviting others toengage with them to resolve the mismatch. Perspective Mismatchesare discovered when individuals critically reﬂect on what theybelieve they are hearing in the Feedback in their Communicationswith others (verbal or written), and realize their understandingor expectation of the Job does not match the content of thoseCommunications. Reaching Out may occur in an ad hoc manner whenan individual takes the initiative to question something that, forthem, does not sound right.“Mostly because I ﬁnd any issue especially let’s say a bug ﬁxwhich doesn’t look like it’s super huge—when you need youknow more that you know 2 days worth of discussion aboutit—something’s off. Either the thing is way bigger and actuallyrequires refactoring or you’re not understanding one another”Site 2, Subject 3Without the Communications, there is no opportunity forFeedback, and without Feedback, there is no opportunity to reﬂectand determine if what one is hearing matches one’s Perspective.One interviewee succinctly expressed the need for Communicationswhen describing a challenged project:“But there just weren’t enough conversations taking place” Site2, Subject 3Once an individual recognizes the possibility of aPerspective Mismatch, he or she needs to reach out and engageothers to investigate and resolve the mismatch. Personal Strengthis the propensity of individuals to act when they believe aPerspective Mismatch is impeding Getting the Job Done. This can beproblematic if the individual’s Personal Strength is low. Many ofthe interview subjects voiced the common stereotype of softwaredevelopers as quiet or introverted individuals who are reluctant toreach out.“And maybe that’s another thing. Is the—is this sortof—developers aren’t the most social people at times right? Sothey-they don’t go and speak to people about their problemsnecessarily. Being able to—so to some extent maybe it’s a lackof conﬁdence in the—if you’re seen to ask—or people seem tothink that asking for help is a sign of weakness or something”Site 2, Subject 4Leadership contributes to Personal Strength and gives individualsthe conﬁdence that their back is covered when they are raisingissues that may have serious consequences for the Job.“as long as you’ve been open with <name> and treat him withrespect and integrity um he will back you up. So, you’re not goingto get—you’re not going to get backstabbed by him. And that’sa very important thing. It relaxes me and I think it goes downto you—you—he gives us support. . . So, I would say that it—itallows me to take some—some risks if I know what I’m doing isright and I am open enough about it” Site 3, Subject 8Leadership also has the potential to shut down individuals whoexpress concerns about Perspective Mismatches between them andtheir Leadership. Leaders are in a position to either support or blockan individual Reaching Out.“Communication and not being afraid to express ideas andhave-have discussion you know? I’ll have one way of viewingsomething or designing something but I don’t feel if—I’m afraidto say it because I’ll get trampled on by somebody who’s moreexperienced or more senior. But everyone is able to offer theirview and kind of like learn—everyone can be involved in the S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 12861279kind of—the learning experience. And then contribute to youknow—some good quality code being delivered” Site 2, Subject5It is not enough for an individual to recognize aPerspective Mismatch and have the Personal Strength to reachout, because those individuals who are intended recipientsof reaching out may choose not to engage. The process ofReconciling Perspectivescannot continue if the individuals to whomthe person is reaching out will not engage in the process.“it was very typical of projects that kind of go astray. Wherepeople live in denial for too long. And—people who voice theirconcerns are kind of ignored—until it just bubbles up. I—don’tthink that anybody was really quiet about it. I don’t think thatanybody—who was being realistic or worked on it—like every-body could say well hey this thing is really not going very well.I just don’t think that that was percolating all the way up” Site2, Subject 3, follow-upReaching Out transitions to Negotiating Consensus when theother parties agree to participate in the dialog. This may be as sim-ple as agreeing to the question “Can I talk to you about this?” or asformal as placing an agenda item on a change control meeting.3.6. Negotiating consensusNegotiation is the activity that stands out in software develop-ment. It seems that everyone is always negotiating: stakeholdersand developers negotiate features and budget, development teamsnegotiate resources, team members negotiate task assignments,and developers negotiate Application Programming Interfaces(APIs) and allocation of behaviors to modules. One interestingobservation made during this study was that during the inter-views no one deﬁnitively distinguished between the activities ofplanning, requirements gathering, analysis, and design. All werecollectively described as negotiation. It could be said that softwaredevelopment is an ongoing process of negotiation.Negotiating Consensus is a dialog between an Acquirer and aSupplier intended to converge their expectations for what the Jobis about and to create a Consensual Perspective that will enablethem to remove impediments to Getting the Job Done created by thePerspective Mismatch. The Consensual Perspective sets the Acquirer’sexpectations for what Work Products they can expect to receive,and also sets the Supplier’s expectations for Work Products they arecommitting to deliver. Many colloquially view negotiation as a pro-cess for making trade-offs and, while this is part of negotiation, itis also a discovery process for both the Acquirer and the Supplierto share and create knowledge, thereby enabling them to discoverbetter informed trade-offs.Negotiation occurs at all levels and at all scopes, from CTOs,analysts, and product managers negotiating product features withlarge external customers, to individual developers negotiating aninterface. Software development is an ongoing multi-level negoti-ation. Negotiating Consensus may be a short, single-phase, informal,simple agreement characterized by this stylized conversation heardover and over again between software developers:Or Negotiating Consensus may be a long, protracted, andmulti-phased process, cycling repeatedly through many cycles,of negotiating a preliminary Consensual Perspective and thenValidating the agreement to generate the information necessary toimprove future decisions.The properties Cycle Timeand Scope characterizeNegotiating Consensus. Many negotiations, much like the onecharacterized in Fig. 3, are common conversations, short, andmeasurable in minutes if not seconds. The scope of these nego-tiations is very narrow and speciﬁc and conducted betweenindividuals without much formality or structure. Other negoti-ations could be between informal groups, or between formallydeﬁned groups such as Scrum teams or even organizational divi-sions. As the scope increases, the formality of the process increasesto accommodate the more complex coordination needs of theparticipants for established meeting times, meeting facilitationrules, agendas, action items, and follow-ups. There were timeswhen a Consensual Perspective was reached during a meeting, andother times when the agreement was to continue investigating anissue. This type of negotiation was fairly common at the beginningof projects where Acquirers and Suppliers are negotiating projectscope and budget. A common strategy in these situations wasProgressive Reﬁnement, decomposing large, poorly deﬁned featuresinto a set of smaller and more precisely deﬁned requirements. Mostgroups participating in this study had a multi-cycle negotiationprocess for reaching a Consensual Perspectiveon scope and budget.A common failure pattern was an excessively long Cycle Timeor stalling during Negotiating Consensusand never reaching atimely Consensual Perspective. Several challenging projects thatwere observed or reported during this study could be explainedby their never reaching an explicit Consensual Perspective.“I’d-I’d much rather know it has to work. It has to work. It has tobe somewhat releasable—maybe not every iteration but everymonth. And with 14 months that’s 14 times it needs to be—andwe weren’t there. We-we were broken for quite a while. Whichtook—took—you know—the decision making capabilities awayfrom the business—which isn’t what we’re about” Site 2 Subject4Many of the stories about out-of-control projects, such as theone above described by Site 1 Subject 1, could in part be explainedas never explicitly reaching a Consensual Perspective. Project par-ticipants deﬁned their expectations of the Job from their ownmismatched perspectives. In some of these situations, we observedpeople stepping in and ﬁlling the Leadership vacuum to obtain anexplicit Consensual Perspective. This is an example of Leadershipdrum beating, maintaining a rhythm that leads to a decision in atimely manner. We frequently observed problem-solving sessionsbreaking down into arguing about minutiae or hypotheticals. Therewere many instances of leaders forcefully driving an agenda, wherethe intent was not to force acceptance of the leader’s choice but tomake a decision in a timely manner, even if that decision was toacquire more data and meet at a later time. This was exempliﬁed bySite 2 Subject 4’s story of individuals stepping up to recover a nearcatastrophic project caught in what could best be called “leaderlessdrift”:“I don’t think—without that step up in leadership—and the otherteam lead—once he ﬁgure it out as well stepped up as well.And without that <JOB> wouldn’t—I don’t think I be sitting heretalking to you—not in this company anyway. I think it wouldhave been—if I’d carried on—it-it just never would have beenreleased. So it—stepping up—getting everyone to talk—gettingeveryone focused”. Site 2, Subject 4The ability to Compromise, or the cultivation of aFlexible Response, facilitates the Negotiating Consensus process. Ifthe opportunity for trade-offs is constrained, Negotiating Consensusdegenerates into a situation where either the Acquirer or Suppliersimply imposes an agreement on the other. In these situations, thepower of Consensual Perspective to resolve the Perspective Mismatchis weakened, or even nulliﬁed, because participants may acquiesceto the terms imposed by the other simply to move ahead in someassumed direction. As one senior developer explained it:“But—if you kind of attempt to have a perfectionist kind of takeon your work it’s a bit of a difﬁcult thing to sometimes weigh 1280S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 1286Dev 1 (A cquirer): 
 ÒHey can we talk?Ó 
Dev 2 (Sup plier) : ÒSu
 reÓ  Dev 1 (Acqu
 irer) :  ÒWhen we
  talked
  about this interfac
 e before I as
 sumed you were
  givin
 g th e contex t, now I find 
out thatÕs not the case. 
 Can you pass
  me the handle [for] the context?Ó 
Dev 2 (Sup plier) :  ÒSu
 reÓ  Fig. 3. Negotiating consensus.those options and you know you’ll say okay well I can reallysee how this should be working. But then you try and get thatkind of developer or technical view that will say okay that’s acool idea. And it makes sense but it will take us half a year toimplement. So that just gives you a more realistic perspectiveon maybe what—you know—you have one desire but—perhapsit’s far away from reality” Site 2, Subject 3We observed three broad strategies for Negotiating Consensusbased on what we observed as the general approach people tookto resolving their Perspective Mismatch: Translation, Broadening,and Scouting. Translation is a straightforward situation wherePerspectives are well aligned but the Acquirer and Supplier are sim-ply using different terminology to express themselves. It was easyto overhear these conversation conclude successfully with “. . .ohnow I see what you mean!” Translation was a strategy most oftenobserved in informal short cycle negotiations; however, examplesof Translation could also occur during more formal negotiations.“When we talk story points to our customers, they don’t likeit because it’s um abstract and amorphous to them. They don’tah—what they want is predictability. So, for them you know theydon’t care whether we’re saying, “Well, this is a 200 story pointproject.” What they care is um how much does the story pointcost and how long does it take to build it? And how much stuffcan I get for it? So, that’s the way we present it to the customer”Site 1, Subject 1The second strategy for Negotiating Consensus is Broadening,where an individual attempts to broaden their understanding ofthe Job by trying to understand the other’s point of view. Commonsources of impediment were software developers viewing the Jobfrom a technical perspective and not fully appreciating the businessimpact of their decisions, and Acquirersnot understanding the tech-nical consequences of their demands—for example: understandinghow a request may increase technical debt or limit opportunities togrow the product. The ability or desire to Broaden their Perspectivescertainly appeared to be a strategy commonly employed by moreexperienced individuals. One developer spoke of broadening interms of seeing the context or “bigger picture”.“I think kind of—one important thing is the context. So if a stake-holder is only aware of their—small item—is the most importantthing to them in-in the world. But if they’re able to see the bigpicture and have an understanding of what the whole big pictureis then I think that allows it.” Site 3, Subject 5The ﬁnal strategy is Scouting. In both Translation and Broadening,one or both parties have sufﬁcient knowledge to understand theJob, but cannot express it in a way that the other understands orcares about. Scouting becomes the Negotiating Consensus strategywhen neither the Acquirer nor the Supplier has sufﬁcient knowledgeto explain their view to the other party. The negotiation becomesblocked because neither side has sufﬁcient information to answerthe other’s questions. The purpose of Scoutingis to discover theinformation necessary to help the Acquirer and Supplier convergetheir Perspectives and make a decision that removes the impedi-ment to Getting the Job Done.A common source of failure for projects was Scouting Blowoutwhere Scoutingcontinued without end, a Consensual Perspectivewas not reached, and no decision was explicitly made on how toremove the impediment. The Supplier either continued to make per-ceived progress toward Getting the Job Done by working with theirPerspective of the Job, or remained stuck in Scouting and failed todeliver the Job Work Products. Both situations lead to unwantedSurprise. During a retrospective of a near failed project, we observedexemplars of these situations where a project appeared to have“wandered through the desert” for 6 months without creating a trueConsensual Perspective.Convergingtransitions to Validatingwhen aConsensual Perspective on what the Job is and what Work Productsare needed is created. The Consensual Perspectiveis based on ashared assumption by all participants that they have a sharedPerspective of the Job and that the impediment created by thePerspective Mismatch has been removed. The development processcan now move ahead.3.7. ValidatingThe Consensual Perspective reached during Converging is ahypothesis that must be tested, and is only validated whenthe Supplier creates a Work Product that is accepted by theAcquirer. There are two stages to Validating: Bunkering, andAccepting. Bunkering is a quiet stage during which the Supplierfocuses on creating Work Products that satisfy the negotiated Jobrequirements. What strongly characterizes this stage is the dropin Communications between Acquirer and Supplier. Accepting isthe ﬁnal stage of the process where the Supplier presents theWork Products to the Acquirer as evidence that they worked fromthe same Perspective.3.8. BunkeringWhereas during Converging individuals actively engage inconversations during Reaching Out and Negotiating Consensus,Bunkering is a “heads down” working “quiet” stage; using theknowledge gained from the Consensual Perspective created dur-ing Converging, the Supplier creates the Work Products they believewill satisfy the Acquirer’s Job requirements. A distinct drop inCommunications and interactions between Acquirer and Supplieroccurs during Bunkering. This “quiet time” is built into softwaremethods like Scrum, which most teams participating in this studyclaimed they were using; however, it also seems to be partof the culture, regardless of the software method used. Once aConsensual Perspective is reached, construction of a Work Productshould proceed relatively undisturbed until it is done. The desired,quiet, undisturbed environment created during the Bunkering stagecontributes to productively creating Work Products.“we were in a lot of ways kind of ﬂying under the radar. . . There-fore we didn’t have to answer to anybody—so directly. So we gota good chunk of time running like that on our own. We got a lotof stuff done” Site 3, Subject 4Bunkering is a boundary setting stage and the Team Dynamicproperty of Openness to Communications characterizes how per-meable to Communications individuals and teams are duringBunkering. During Bunkering, people can completely cut themselvesoff from all conversations and other sources of information that S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 12861281may reveal to them a Perspective Mismatch. Individuals, and oftenentire teams, cut themselves off from the rest of the organiza-tional Eco-system and are not open to the Communications thatmay raise indicators of a Perspective Mismatch. Cut-off reduces theopportunity for the process of Reconciling Perspectives to beginbecause the opportunity to receive and reﬂect on Feedback isreduced.“Like two people who work together and they maybe need tointegrate some stuff with the rest of the team but they kindof pigeon-hole themselves and you know only talk to eachother but not really interact so much with the rest of the teammembers and the end of it iteration approaches and you real-ize that they’ve been working on something that’s actuallynot—you can’t integrate with the rest of the team—with theircode. So—deﬁnitely kind of that isolated lack of talking to otherpeople” Site 2, Subject 3The opposite extreme of Cut-offis Exposed, where an individualor group engages with all Communications and therefore cannotfocus on Getting the Job Done. They have far too much work inprogress; they are also taking on more, or changing priorities, orescalations are constantly interrupting them. The diverse nature ofthe Eco-system means that not everyone has the same Perspective onwork priorities and there are numerous instances of people directlyapproaching developers to get what they perceive as a high priorityJob done. Individuals and teams that could not say no became, asone project manager put it, they are “their own worst enemies”.“But you’re your own worst enemy when you do that becausethe next thing you know, the BA’s asking this developer for anestimate on this and can you do that? And oh I found this newscenario and last week” Site 1, Subject 1The consequences of being Exposed were often evident inprojects at the tail end of a waterfall process, when individualsand teams were often panicking to remove defects. It was com-mon to see priorities rapidly changing in reaction to discovery ofnew defects, and partially ﬁnished work put aside to work on thesehigher priority defects. The result was that defect opening rates farexceeded defect closing rates, and the job simply did not get done.“. . .most of the developers were not happy about the way thingswere (unclear). It was it was—it got to this what we call a bug-ﬁxing hell of a state. There was so many bugs and we were tryingto ﬁx the bugs a couple of months. There was long days whenwe were trying to get this working” Site 2, Subject 1Bunkering can put Getting the Job Done at risk because of thepotential to suppress Reaching Out. During Bunkering, an individ-ual may encounter an inconsistency between how they understandthe Consensual Perspective and the results they are getting whilecreating the Job Work Products but they may be reluctant to startReaching Out or to engage with others reaching out to them.“So yes we’ve deﬁnitely had the time boxes blown out—by peo-ple just digging into things and then not making the progresswe expect and sometimes we don’t spot that in time.” Site 2,Subject 4Finding a balance between being Cut-off and Exposed is neces-sary for Reconciling Perspectives to resolve Perspective Mismatchesand lead to Getting the Job Done. Individuals and teams mustremain sufﬁciently open to Communications and be able to detectPerspective Mismatches and yet not be Exposed to the rapid changesand vagaries of the organizational Eco-system that can interferewith Getting the Job Done. This need to ﬁnd a balance betweenbeing Cut-off and Exposed highlights the inherent tension of theReconciling Perspectives process.“Um ah and I think we still haven’t got to a good place wherewe get that balance between you know short term, heads downfocus, but also a sense of where the vision of things are going”Site 3, Subject 6Leadership helped ﬁnd this balance by Sheltering individuals orteams from the turmoil of the organizational Eco-system. Leadershipfrequently protected the team from exposure by standing betweenthem and the Eco-system. One subject referred to this protective orbuffering role as a “ﬁrewall”.“Sometimes it’s a ﬁrewall kind of role. And our (unclear) playsthat role quite a bit as well—a ton. He insulates all of us from alot of that stuff” Site 3, Subject 7A leader in this role was able to stay open to communicationsand yet offer some measure of stability to those who were trying toGet the Job Done. How much a leader needed to stay open to com-munications was proportional to where the leader believed theirresponsibilities lay in the organizational hierarchy.“the higher up you move in the chain because you’re expectedto-to take on more—more responsibility right? So you’ll onlyget—you only really get shielded so far in as much responsibilityas somebody has given you. If you have a reasonable amountof responsibility you won’t be needed—you won’t need to beshielded that much” Site 2, Subject 5Bunkering transitioned to Accepting when the Supplier presentedthe Job Work Products to the Acquirer for their acceptance.3.9. AcceptingDuring Accepting, the Supplier presents the Job Work Product tothe Acquirer and solicits their approval. Accepting may be as simpleas the Acquirer informally stating, “Ok it’s good” or it may be a for-mal ceremony for transitioning and Accepting a Work Product. Onlywhen the Work Product is accepted is there objective evidence thatall involved were likely operating from the same Perspective.A negative result during Accepting is Surprise, where theWork Product delivered by the Supplier does not meet with theAcquirer’s expectations. We observed many situations in whichlengthy Bunkering stages directly inﬂuenced Surprise. Long cycleReconciling Perspectives processes therefore have a greater poten-tial to result in Surprise, or in larger Surprises, than shorter cycleReconciling Perspectives processes. A near catastrophic Surpriseoccurred at one site where Supplier and Acquirer teams effectivelycut each other off for over 6 months.4. DiscussionThis discussion of Reconciling Perspectives compares it to otherrelevant grounded theories and extant theory to both situateReconciling Perspectives within the existing body of knowledge andto generate policy recommendations. The Anticipation-eXecution-Expectation (AxE) model (Hsieh et al., 2006) and Organizing SelfOrganizing Teams (Hoda et al., 2010) are two grounded theo-ries that illuminate some properties of Reconciling Perspectives.The AxE model emerged out of a study of coordination betweenindividuals in teams, and suggests the inﬂuence that the pro-cess of Reconciling Perspective has on trust relationships. OrganizingSelf-Organizing teams provides greater depth on our concept ofLeadership and the leadership roles that individuals play.Glaser’s (1978) recommendation, to perform the literaturesearch after the theory emerges, enables us to use the grounded the-ory to sensitize us to search for comparative extant theory that mayfurther explain the situations we observed, and then use the extenttheory with its known body of knowledge to guide policy decisions. 1282S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 1286In this discussion, we compare Reconciling Perspectives to Men-tal Model Convergence (Cannon-Bowers et al., 1993; Cronin andWeingart, 2007; Firore et al., 2001; Johnson-Laird, 1983) and Con-tingency Theory (Burns and Stalker, 1961; Lawrence and Lorsch,1967; Woodward, 1958).All teams participating in this study claimed to follow anAgile software development method, speciﬁcally Scrum, althoughone team later claimed they had switched to Kanban. We useReconciling Perspectives to explain how Scrum teams function, andalso to explain some of the dysfunctions we observed during thisstudy. Finally, based on what we have learned during this research,we offer policy recommendations for improving how people man-age the process of software development.4.1. Anticipation-eXecution—Expectation modelThe Anticipation-eXecution-Expectation (AxE) model (Hsiehet al., 2006) explains coordination between individuals and teams.AxE emerged as a descriptive framework from a study of cultureand the impact of intercultural dynamics on global software devel-opment. What struck the researchers were the mishaps the teamsunder study experienced despite using tools and methods basedon Input-Process-Output (IPO) coordination models, “The inputs,the processes and the outputs are often apparently well-deﬁned, butstill all kinds of failures occur” (Hsieh et al., 2006, p. 9)At the heart of the AxE model is a work product handed fromparty to party (e.g., from Acquirer to Supplier) that is described bythe triple:Content deﬁnes the artifact in terms of what it is made of and how it isrepresented (e.g., a use case).Quality deﬁnes the quality of the artifact at hand-over time; forexample, is it simply a verbal expression of need or is it aformal and reviewed speciﬁcation?Time speciﬁes the time at which the handover occurs.We can use AxE to describe the process of software develop-ment. The Supplier has an anticipated outcome (Perspective) of thecontent, the quality, and the time they anticipate they will delivertheir outcome to the Acquirer. The Acquirer has an expected out-come (Perspective) of what they believe will be the content, thequality, and the time when the Supplier will deliver the outcome.Lastly, there is the executed outcome: what the Supplier actuallyhands over to the Acquirer and the time when the delivery takesplace. The deltas between the anticipated and expected outcomesare similar to the Perspective Mismatch in Reconciling Perspectives.AxE has a three-step process or “waltz” for creating outcomeswhere:1. the parties must communicate, and where their anticipated andexpected values are formed (Planning);2. the actual artifacts (work products) are handed over (Execution);and3. the delta between the anticipated results and the executedresults (the delivered results) is evaluated and communicated(Feedback).In the AxE model, a large delta between expectations and resultsleads to a decline in trust between the parties. A large delta betweenthe executed outcome and the outcome expected by the Acquireris expressed as Surprise in Reconciling Perspectives. A large deltabetween executed and expected outcomes also results in a declinein trust between Supplier and Acquirer, whereas a small delta mayincrease trust.Reconciling Perspectives extends AxE by offering a model of theCommunications between Acquirer and Supplier for setting expecta-tions. If the quality and volume of the Communication between theSupplier and Acquirer does not lead either to recognizing the dif-ference, speciﬁcally, deltas between their anticipated and expectedoutcomes, or if there is insufﬁcient Personal Strength to reach out orLeadership to encourage individuals to Reach Out, it is unlikely thatthe executed result will meet the expected outcome. The Bunker-ing stage of Reconciling Perspective maps to AxE’s execution phase,highlighting the need for appropriately managed communicationsduring execution.AxE extends Reconciling Perspectives by highlighting the declinein trust between Supplier and Acquirer when there are signiﬁcantdeltas between anticipated and executed work products (Surprise).4.2. Organizing self-organizing teamsHoda et al. (2010) investigation of self-organizing teams iden-tiﬁed six roles that team members play to facilitate the organizingof self-organizing teams:MentorGuides
 and supports the team initially, helps them to becomeconﬁdent in their use of Agile methods, and encouragescontinued adherence to Agile practices.Coordinator Acts as a representative of the self-organizing Agile team tocoordinate communication and change requests fromcustomers.Translator Understands and translates between the business languageused by customers and the technical terminology used by theteam in an effort to improve communication between the two.Champion Champions the Agile cause with the senior managementwithin their organization in order to gain support for theself-organizing Agile team.Promoter Promotes Agile with customers and attempts to secure theirinvolvement and collaboration to support the efﬁcientfunctioning of the self-organizing Agile team.Terminator Identiﬁes team members threatening the proper functioningand productivity of the self-organizing Agile team and engagessenior management support in removing such members fromthe team.While the focus of their study was on team self-organizationin companies adopting Agile software development methods, wecan still contrast their study ﬁnding with ours to characterizesome of the dimensions of Leadership that increase individualPersonal Strength, perform drum beating, and shelter others. Sev-eral of the roles are directly related to boosting Personal Strength:Mentor, Champion, and Promoter may all be seen as roles that giveteam members conﬁdence in the process, and conﬁdence to reachout and attempt to engage others when they believe they have aPerspective Mismatch. The role of the Coordinator concurs with therole we see in Leadership to shelter teams from interference yet keepthe team sufﬁciently connected to the organizational Eco-systemsuch that they are not closed or Cut-off from Communications. InOrganizing Self-Organizing Teams, both the Translator and the Pro-moter could also be seen as creating a rhythm, and being the “drumbeater” both within the team and to the outside organization.During our study, several subjects related to us stories of thedamage teams suffered from the lack of a Terminator. These storiesof project failures or dysfunctional teams were directly related toleaders who either let their teams become Exposed or deliberatelyCut-off the team from the organizational Eco-system. In one case, theeventual removal of an ineffective leader resulted in an immediateimprovement in team performance.4.3. Mental model convergence, knowledge communities,knowledge creation, and reconciling perspectivesWhat we are referring to as a Perspective is comparable towhat much of the psychology literature refers to as a mentalmodel (Johnson-Laird, 1983). Shared mental models are “knowl-edge structures held by members of a team that enable them to formaccurate explanations and expectations for the task, and in turn,to coordinate their actions and adapt their behavior to demands of[their unique domain]” (Cannon-Bowers et al., 1993). Furthermore,Firore and Salas (2001) assert that “Members of effective teams S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 12861283possessed a shared set of knowledge that facilitates their inter-actions. In particular highly effective teams must hold compatibleknowledge structures about a variety of facets of team tasks”.Cronin and Weingart (2007) describe mismatches between men-tal models as “. . .representational gaps, inconsistencies betweenindividual’s deﬁnition of the team’s problem, limit both of theseprocesses making it more difﬁcult for team members to inte-grate one another’s information and increasing the likelihood ofconﬂict”The Converging stage of Reconciling Perspectives concurs withwhat Sara McComb (2007) describes as “mental model conver-gence,” where team members’ mental models evolve into a sharedmental model through their interactions and observations of eachother. Convergence of mental models explains how individu-als socialize themselves into teams and, during our study, weobserved situations that suggested this process was occurringwithin teams. A signiﬁcant difference in Reconciling Perspectivesis that the process extends beyond the immediate team,and much of our interview data described interactions thatindividuals had with other individuals from other functionalgroups.Levesque et al.’s study (2001) challenges the prediction thatteam members’ mental models converge over time. Their studydiscovered a decline in shared mental models over time whichthey related to a decrease in interaction. Lévesque suggested thatincreasing specialization among team members contributed to thisdecline. Their ﬁnding supports the phenomena we observed dur-ing the Bunkering stage. Most software teams consist of peoplewith a variety of skills and domain knowledge and, once theyunderstand their sprint tasks, they often see no value in stayingconnected to other team members because there is little else thatother team members can do to help them. In many situations,once a Consensual Perspective had been reached, team membersreduced their interactions with others to work undisturbed atGetting the Job Done. Levesque’s ﬁndings suggest Bunkering maylead to cognitive divergence or Perspective Mismatch between teammembers. With long cycle time methods, this divergence can widenenough to risk Surprise during Accepting.Boland and Tenkasi (1995) characterized knowledge-intensiveorganizations as composed of knowledge communities that eachpossess highly specialized technologies and knowledge domains.Communication within a community that strengthens and devel-ops localized knowledge is a “perspective making” process, whilecommunication that improves a community’s ability to takethe knowledge of other communities into account is “perspec-tive taking”. If we characterize software developers, analysts,and project managers as belonging to different knowledgecommunities, then much of the data we collected on their inter-actions is supported by Boland’s and Tenkasi’s term “perspectivetaking”.Perspective making and perspective taking are knowledge cre-ation processes, and knowledge-based ﬁrms realize competitiveadvantage by leveraging their individuals’ ability to share and uti-lize their distinct knowledge. Reconciling Perspectives then becomesa knowledge creation process where individuals are PerspectiveTaking during the Negotiating Consensus stage. The negotiatingstrategy of Scouting clearly extends an organization’s body ofknowledge. The negotiating strategies of Translating and Broadeningalso create organizational knowledge by making knowledge that isknown in one community accessible and useful to another.A differentiating characteristic of Reconciling Perspectivesis that the process only starts if individuals recognize aPerspective Mismatch and are willing to do something aboutit. Organizational and personal barriers that prevent indi-viduals from Reaching Outimpede this knowledge creationprocess.4.4. Organizations as biological systems, contingency theory andreconciling perspectivesMorgan’s Images of Organization (2006) presents a survey ofmodels or metaphors for characterizing organizations, one of whichis Ludwig von Bertalanffy’s (1950) work comparing organizationsto biological systems. As biological systems, organizations aremodeled as a collection of interrelated sub-systems with wholescontained within wholes. Individuals are systems living in the con-text of a group living in the context of a department or largerdivision. These systems are open to their environment, an “envi-ronment deﬁned by organizations direct interactions with customers,competitors, suppliers, labor unions, government agencies, as well asthe larger contextual or general environment” (Morgan, 2006, p. 38).For the organization to survive, it must achieve an appropriate rela-tionship with its surrounding environment. von Bertalanffy’s workwas developed by others into what is collectively known as Con-tingency Theory (Burns and Stalker, 1961; Lawrence and Lorsch,1967; Woodward, 1958); one of the main themes is that there is noone best way of organizing and different approaches to manage-ment may be necessary to perform different tasks within the sameorganization.This biological view of the organization is in stark contrast tothe Taylorist (Taylor, 1911) scientiﬁc management philosophy thatcharacterizes the organization as a machine bureaucracy. Burnsand Stalker’s (1961) studies of a variety of industries establishedthe distinction between the Taylorist “mechanistic” approach andmore contingent “organic” approaches to organizing. Organizationsoperating in relatively stable environments that are routine andwell understood beneﬁt from being organized in a more mechanis-tic hierarchical way. Innovative organizations, operating in moreuncertain and turbulent environments, require a more organicapproach that adapts to the environment. Lawrence and Lorsch(1967) further reﬁne contingency theory by suggesting that stylesof organization may have to vary between organizational sub-unitsbecause of the detailed characteristics of their sub-environment.If we assume that software development occurs in uncertainand turbulent environments, organizations creating software mustbe organized more organically, likely with a fair degree of differ-entiation between the organization’s internal sub-units, and thesesub-units must interact and develop appropriate relationships witheach other. We clearly observed this distinction between organi-zational sub-units during our study. Reconciling Perspectives is onepart of the interaction between organizational sub-units, whetherthose sub-units are individuals, groups, or organizational divisions,because Reconciling Perspectives requires those sub-units to main-tain an appropriate openness and connection to their environment.The system must manage its relationship to the environment toobtain and reﬂect on feedback, to reach out, and to negotiate. This isin contrast to closed or so-called “mechanistic systems” where thesub-systems are cut-off from the environment and communicationoccurs in a strict “chain of command” like style. From their study,Lawrence and Lorsch (1967) declared that an appropriate mode oforganization for innovative organizations was the use of “multi-disciplinary project teams and the appointment of personnel skilled inthe art of coordination and conﬂict resolution” (Lawrence and Lorsch,1967)4.5. Agile methods and reconciling perspectivesReconciling Perspectives is a lens through which we can interpretthe Agile Manifesto (AgileAlliance, 2001a) and Agile Princi-ples (AgileAlliance, 2001b). It is straightforward to connect theConverging stage to manifesto articles of “Individuals and interac-tions over processes and tools”, “Customer collaboration over contractnegotiations” and “Responding to change over following a plan” In 1284S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 1286Reconciling Perspectives, individuals interact to reach out and nego-tiate a Consensual Perspective. Customers are one type of Acquirersand, if we do not collaborate with our customers and use a contractto Cut-Off ourselves from the customers, there is minimal opportu-nity for early detection of Perspective Mismatches. The same is truewith strictly following a plan that can again cut the team off fromthe organizational Eco-system. Converging a Perspective Mismatchmeans responding to change.Connecting the Validating stage to the Agile Manifesto slightlyblurs the interpretation because while it is straightforward to con-nect the Manifesto article “Working software over comprehensivedocumentation” to Accepting it is not straightforward to connectBunkering to the Manifesto. Reconciling Perspectives suggests indi-viduals and teams need quiet focused time to Get the Job Donewhich contrasts with the emphasis the Manifesto places on interac-tion and collaboration. The need for open communications is quiteclear in our data because the root cause for many project challengesobserved during this study was insufﬁcient communication, bothin volume and in diversity. However, many individuals were alsochallenged by too much communication and were unable to focuson Getting the Job Done. Too much of a good thing can be a problem.The need for focused time is perhaps captured in the Agile Prin-ciple “Build projects around motivated individuals. Give them theenvironment and support they need and trust them to get the job done”which could be interpreted as trust the team and give them thefocused time they need to Get the Job Done. Agile software methodssuch as Scrum are more explicit capturing the need for “focus” inthe ﬁve Scrum values. Moreover, the intention behind the intervalfrom the time a Sprint is planned until the Sprint Demo is that theteam has the opportunity to work without interruption and changeto their Sprint Backlog; the Scrum Master is tasked with protectingthe team from outside interference.All teams participating in this study claimed to be using Scrum(Schwaber and Beedle, 2002), which is a method for organizingteams to deliver a product or service. Scrum’s prescribed meetings,sprint planning, daily stand-ups, sprint review, and sprint retro-spective are all opportunities for those participating in a projectto check-in and, if necessary, start Reaching Out. The sprint plan-ning meeting is an opportunity to detect a Perspective Mismatchand Negotiate Consensus as the Scrum Product Owner (Acquirer)explains backlog items to the delivery team (Supplier). Once thedelivery team commits to the sprint, then the delivery teamfocuses on Getting the Job Done, without being Exposed to interfer-ing change (Bunkering). Team members are encouraged to regularlycheck-in with the team to prevent the Bunkering stage from dis-connecting them from others (Cut-Off). When the Work Productsfor a story (Job) are complete, they are presented to the Prod-uct Owner for acceptance (Accepting). Scrum’s short cycle time of2–4 weeks mitigates Surprise during Validating. The Scrum Master isa trained facilitator who owns the process, drum beating, and per-sonal strength boosting and, along with the Product Owner, Sheltersthe team from outside interference.During this study we heard many stories of failed Scrumprojects, and we can use Reconciling Perspectives to explain theseprojects. The common thread was teams that cut themselves off anddid not did not detect the Perspective Mismatches, or did not startthe Reaching Out process. They went “through the Scrum motions”but did not follow the intent of Scrum. A condition cited for an effec-tive Scrum team is a “strong” and available Product Owner, and ourobservations support this condition. We observed situations whereother strong team members mitigated this situation by steppinginto the vacuum created by an unavailable or disengaged ProductOwner.Ineffective Scrum Masters limited the effectiveness of the Scrumprocess by not taking ownership of the process, and by their inabil-ity to facilitate the process. Some merely “chaired” meetings andcould not boost personal strength, drum beat, or shelter the team.In many situations, some Scrum Masters simply either let the teambecome exposed, or completely locked it down, cutting it off fromthe rest of the organization. While many of these Scrum Mastershad Scrum Master training, the training often lacked emphasis onfacilitation skills.Another common failure was long cycle time. While most teamsclaimed to develop using short sprints, there were many storiesand examples of sprint commitments not being reached, and workthat was not completed simply being rolled over into the nextsprint. In other situations, the Work Products demonstrated duringthe sprint review were incomplete; therefore, they gave a mis-leading impression to the product owner. The true states of theWork Products were not revealed until much later, usually at a sig-niﬁcant product release milestone. The result was everyone actingas if they were operating on short cycle times and assuming thebeneﬁts of a short cycle time while, in fact, they had very long cycletimes.4.6. Enhancing software team performanceOne subject succinctly summed up the source for many of thedifﬁculties experienced in software projects:“But there just weren’t enough conversations taking place” Site2, Subject 3Simply getting people to talk to one another should beneﬁtsoftware team performance. Shared mental model theory predictshigher team performance when the members can have their men-tal models converge; people’s models converge when they observeand engage with each other. This suggests that enhancing theability of those engaged in software development to reach out(Reaching Out) and negotiate (Negotiating Consensus) when theyencounter impediments will enhance software team performance.Lawrence and Lorsch (1967) offer a solution in their recommenda-tion for multi-disciplinary teams and for the use of personnel skilledin the art of coordination and conﬂict resolution. Scrum, and specif-ically Scrum’s Scrum Master role, may be seen as a manifestationof this recommendation. However, the role of a facilitator is nota role that anyone can assume without appropriate training, andineffective Scrum Masters were a frequently cited as contributorsto software team failure.While individual traits such as extroversion and introversionwill pre-dispose individual behavior, there is precedence from theaviation industry suggesting that training people how to reach outand negotiate can improve team performance. Cockpit ResourceManagement (or Crew Resource Management) (Wiener et al., 1995)is training that is given to all airline transport pilots, teaching thosewho have been trained as individuals how to work as a team. Theprogram was instituted after investigating accidents blamed on“pilot error” in an effort to discover what was missing from pilottraining. What was discovered was not a deﬁciency in so-called“stick and rudder skills” but an inability of the ﬂight crew to func-tion as a team.The effectiveness of team training has lead to other professionswhere individuals must operate in teams, such as medicine to adoptCrew Resource Management like training. This study demonstratesa strong need for managed communications and yet our professionprovides little in the way of the necessary training. For example, theCertiﬁed Scrum Master (CSM) learning objectives (ScrumAlliance,2011) state individuals learn the responsibilities Scrum Master roleincluding:•serves the product owner and team,•removes the impediments, S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 12861285•coaches the Product Owner and team, and•protects the team.While these are necessary learning objectives for individualsand teams using Scrum and especially for those individuals step-ping into the role of the Scrum Master, they are not sufﬁcientbecause there is little opportunity within the CSM to teach ordevelop the necessary skills. From this, we can make two recom-mendations for improving software team performance:1) Team training should become part of the regular engineeringand software professional education, and2) For organizations practicing Scrum, greater attention should bepaid to the selection of the Scrum Masters, eithera. select individuals for the role with demonstrated leadershipand facilitation skills,b. provide facilitation training to stronger team members whohave the respect of their peers,c. hire or contract individuals skilled in facilitation to serve asprofessional Scrum masters.5. SummaryOur study explains how people manage the process of devel-oping software using the process of Reconciling Perspectives toremove impediments created by Perspective Mismatches that pre-vent Getting the Job Done. The process breaks down when:•Individuals and teams go dark (McCarthy and Gilbert, 1995)and the process simply does not start because the number ofCommunications is so low or intermittent that individuals areunable to reﬂect on the Feedback they are hearing in the commu-nications and do not realize that there is a Perspective Mismatch.•Individuals lack the Personal Strength to reach out; they are awarethat something doesn’t sound right, but choose not to engageothers in an attempt to negotiate a Consensual Perspective.•Others do not agree when those detecting thePerspective Mismatch reach out to them.•Negotiations bog down and do not reach a Consensual Perspective.The theory of Reconciling Perspectives holds few surprises forany reader of popular organizational theorists. Grounded theoryis not about creating surprising new substantive theories; it isabout understanding what is happening to those experiencing aphenomenon from their point of view. What did take us a littleby surprise is how most study participants framed as negotiationsall conversations associated with scheduling, requirements man-agement, and design. This suggests that negotiation is viewed asa dominant activity by those engaged in the process of softwaredevelopment.From our observations during this study, we can draw severalconclusions and make the following recommendations:(1) A necessary condition for the success of a software projectis that there is at least one individual who is sufﬁcientlyengaged that they can detect Perspective Mismatches, andwho has the personal strength to reach out and initiate theReconciling Perspectives process.(2) The health of a software project, and its probability of success,can be measured by the number of conversations where peopleare Reaching Out and Negotiating Consensus.(3)Team
 training and development of principled negotiation skillsfor software developers has good potential for improving teamperformance.This study adds weight to the argument that qualitative researchmethods are effective for creating software engineering knowledge.We demonstrated the utility of grounded theory as a software engi-neering research method, enabling us to see what is important tothose whose lives we are trying to improve.AcknowledgementsThe authors wish to express their thanks to the AgileAlliance, theScrum Alliance, and the Eclipse Foundation for their support of thisresearch. Our further thanks go to our reviewers, and especially theanonymous reviewer who introduced us to Boland’s and Tenkasi’spaper.ReferencesAdolph, S., Hall, W., Kruchten, P., 2011. Using grounded theory to study the experi-ence of software development. Empirical Software Engineering, 1–27.Adolph, S., Kruchten, P., 2011. Reconciling perspectives: how people manage the pro-cess of software development. Paper presented at the AGILE Conference (AGILE),August 7–13, 2011.AgileAlliance, 2001a. Manifesto for Agile Software Development, Retrieved fromhttp://www.agilemanifesto.org/.AgileAlliance, 2001b. Principles of Agile Software Development.Bartels, A., Holmes, B.J., Lo, H., 2006. US Slowdown in 2007 will Dampenthe $1.6 Trillion Global IT Market. Forrester Research, Retrieved fromhttp://www.forrester.com/Research/Document/Excerpt/0,7211,40451,00.html.Becker, P.H., 1993. Common pitfalls in published grounded theory research. Quali-tative Health Research 3 (2), 254–260.Boehm, B.W., 1984. Software engineering economics. IEEE Transaction on SoftwareEngineering 10 (1).Boehm, B.W., Clark, B., Horowitz, E., Westland, C., Madachy, R., Selby, R.W., 1995.Cost models for future software life cycle processes: COCOMO 2.0. Annals ofSoftware Engineering 1 (1).Boland Jr., R.J., Tenkasi, R.V., 1995. Perspective making and perspective taking incommunities of knowing. Organization Science 6 (4), 350–372.Burns, T., Stalker, G.M., 1961. The Management of Innovation. Tavistok, London.Cannon-Bowers, J.A., Salas, E., Converse, S., 1993. Shared mental models in expertteam decision making. In: Castellan, J. (Ed.), Current Issues in Individual andGroup Decision Making. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, New Jersey.Chong, J., 2005. Social behaviors on XP and non-XP teams: a comparative study.Paper presented at the Proceedings of Agile Conference, July 24–29, 2005.Cockburn, A., 2002. Agile software development joins the would-be crowd. CutterIT Journal 15 (1).Cockburn, A., 2003. People and Methodologies in Software Development. Universityof Oslo, Oslo.Cockburn, A., Highsmith, J., 2001. Agile software development, the people factor.Computer 34 (11), 131–133.Cronin, M., Weingart, L., 2007. Representational gaps, information processing, andconﬂict in functionally diverse teams. Academy of Management Review 32 (3).Curtis, W., Krasner, H., Shen, V., Iscoe, N., 1987. On building software process modelsunder the lamppost. Paper presented at the Proceedings of the 9th InternationalConference on Software Engineering.Diaz, M., Sligo, J., 1997. How software process improvement helped Motorola. IEEESoftware 14 (5), 75–81.Dittrich, Y., John, M., Singer, J., Tessem, B., 2007. For the special issue on qualitativesoftware engineering research. Information and Software Technology 49 (6),531–539.Dyba, T., Moe, N.B., Arisholm, E., 2005. Measuring software methodology usage:challenges of conceptualization and operationalization. Empirical SoftwareEngineering. 2005 International Symposium on, 17–18 November, 11pp.,doi:10.1109/ISESE.2005.1541852.Emerson, R., Fretz, R., Shaw, L., 1995. Writing Ethnographic Fieldnotes. University ofChicago Press, Chicago.Firore, S., Salas, E., Cannon-Bowers, J.A., 2001. Group dynamics and shared men-tal model development. In: London, M. (Ed.), How People Evaluate Others inOrganizations. Lawrence Erlbaum, New Jersey.Fitzgerald, B., 1998. An empirical investigation into the adoption of systems devel-opment methodologies. Information & Management 34 (6), 317–328.Glaser, B., Holton, J., 2004. Remodeling grounded theory. Forum Qualitative Sozial-forschung/Forum: Qualitative Social Research in Nursing & Health 5 (2),Retrieved from http://www.qualitative-research.net/fqstexte/2-04/2-04glaser-e.htm.Glaser, B.G., 1978. Theoretical Sensitivity. Sociology Press, Mill Valley, CA.Glaser, B.G., 1992. Basics of Grounded Theory Analysis. Sociology Press, Mill Valley,CA.Glaser, B.G., 1998. Doing Grounded Theory: Issues and Discussions. Sociology Press,Mill Valley, CA.Glaser, B.G., Strauss, A., 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies forQualitative Research. Aldine, Chicago, IL. 1286S. Adolph et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1269– 1286Glass, R.L., Vessey, I., Ramesh, V., 2002. Research in software engineering: ananalysis of the literature. Information and Software Technology 44 (8), 491–506.Harter, D.E., Krishnan, M.S., Slaughter, S.A., 2000. Effects of process maturity onquality, cycle time, and effort in software product development. ManagementScience 46 (4), 451–466.Hoda, R., Noble, J., Marshall, S., 2010. Organizing self-organizing teams. Paper pre-sented at the Proceedings of the 32nd ACM/IEEE International Conference onSoftware Engineering – vol. 1.Hsieh, Y., Kruchten, P., MacGregor, E., 2006. Matching expectations—when culturewreaks havoc with global software development. Paper presented at the WorkBeyond Boundaries: An International Conference on Tele-mediated Employ-ment and its Implications for Urban Communities, Emergence, Vancouver,Canada, June 15–17, 2006.Johnson-Laird, P.N., 1983. Mental Models: Towards a Cognitive Science of Language,Inference, and Consciousness. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.Jones, C., 2000. Software Assessments, Benchmarks, and Best Practices. Addison-Wesley, Boston.Lawrence, P., Lorsch, J.W., 1967. Organization and Environment: Managing Differ-entiation and Integration. Harvard University, Boston.Levesque, L.L., Wilson, J.M., Wholey, D.R., 2001. Cognitive divergence and sharedmental models in software development project teams. Journal of Organiza-tional Behavior 22 (2), 135–144.Lincoln, Y.S., Guba, E.G., 1985. Naturalistic Inquiry. Sage, Newbury Park.Lister, T., DeMarco, T., 1987. Peopleware: Productive Projects and Teams. DorsetHouse, New York.Marshall, M., 1996. Sampling for qualitative research. Family Practice 13 (6).McCallin, A.M., 2003. Designing a grounded theory study: some practicalities. Nurs-ing in Critical Care 8 (5), 203–208.McCarthy, J., Gilbert, D., 1995. Dynamics of Software Development. Microsoft Press.DMcComb, S., 2007. Mental model convergence: the shift from being an indi-vidual to being a team member. Multi-Level Issues in Organizations andTime 6.Moe, N.B., Dingsoyr, T., Dyba, T., 2008. Understanding self-organizing teams in agilesoftware development. Paper presented at the 19th Australian Conference onSoftware Engineering, ASWEC, March 26–28, 2008.Morgan, G., 2006. Images of Organization. Updated Edition. Sage Publications, Thou-sand Oaks, CA.Mulhall, A., 2003. In the ﬁeld: notes on observation in qualitative research. Journalof Advanced Nursing 41 (3), 306–313.Rittel, H., Webber, M., 1973. Dilemmas in a general theory of planning. Policy Science4, 155–169.Robinson, H., Sharp, H., 2005. Organisational culture and XP: three case studies.Paper presented at the Proceedings of Agile Conference, July 24–29, 2005.Sawyer, S., Guinan, P.J., 1998. Software development: processes and performance.IBM Systems Journal 37 (4), 552–569.Schreiber, R.S., Stern, P.N., 2001. Using Grounded Theory in Nursing. Springer Pub-lishing Company, New York.Schwaber, K., Beedle, M., 2002. Agile Software Development with Scrum. PrenticeHall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.ScrumAlliance, 2011. Certiﬁed ScrumMaster (CSM) Content Outline and Learn-ing Objectives, Retrieved from http://www.scrumalliance.org/system/resourceﬁles/0000/3640/CSM Content Outline and Learning Objectives Dec2011.pdf.Shaw, M., 2003. Writing good software engineering research papers: minitutorial.IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering.Sjoeberg, D.I.K., Hannay, J.E., Hansen, O., Kampenes, V.B., Karahasanovic, A., Liborg,N.K., et al., 2005. A survey of controlled experiments in software engineering.IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 31 (9), 733–753.Strauss, A., 1987. Qualitative Analysis for Social Scientists. Cambridge UniversityPress, Cambridge.Taylor, F.W., 1911. Principles of Scientiﬁc Management. Harper & Row, New York.von Bertalanffy, L., 1950. The theory of open systems in physics and biology. Science111.Whitworth, E., Biddle, R., 2007. The social nature of Agile teams. Paper presented atthe AGILE 2007.Wiener, E.L., Kanki, B.G., Helmreich, R.L. (Eds.), 1995. Cockpit Resource Management.Academic Press, San Diego.Woodward, J., 1958. Management and Technology. Her Majesty’s Stationary Ofﬁce,London.Zannier, C., Melnik, G., Maurer, F., 2006. On the success of empirical studies inthe international conference on software engineering. Paper presented at theProceeding of the 28th International Conference on Software Engineering.Steve Adolph is a PhD candidate in Electrical and Computer Engineering at the Uni-versity of British Columbia and an agile coach with Rally Software. His researchinterests include software process engineering, requirements management, andsoftware architecture.Philippe Kruchten is a professor of software engineering at the University of BritishColumbia, and NSERC Chair in Design Engineering. He led the development of theRational Uniﬁed Process.Wendy Hall is a nursing professor in the School of Nursing at the University ofBritish Columbia. Her research interests include research methods and parent childdevelopment.