 The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 2428Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u r n al homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssCountermeasure graphs for software security risk assessment: An action researchDejan Baca,
 Kai PetersenSchool of Computing, Blekinge Institute of Technology, Box 520, SE-372 25, Swedena r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 17 December 2012Received in revised form 8 March 2013Accepted 9 April 2013Available online 18 April 2013Keywords:
Software securityRisk analysisCountermeasure graphsa b s t r a c tSoftware security risk analysis is an important part of improving software quality. In previous researchwe proposed countermeasure graphs (CGs), an approach to conduct risk analysis, combining the ideas ofdifferent risk analysis approaches. The approach was designed for reuse and easy evolvability to supportagile software development.CGs have not been evaluated in industry practice in agile software development. In this research weevaluate the ability of CGs to support practitioners in identifying the most critical threats and counter-measures.The research method used is participatory action research where CGs were evaluated in a series of riskanalyses on four different telecom products.With Peltier (used prior to the use of CGs at the company) the practitioners identiﬁed attacks withlow to medium risk level. CGs allowed practitioners to identify more serious risks (in the ﬁrst iteration1 serious threat, 5 high risk threats, and 11 medium threats). The need for tool support was identiﬁedvery early, tool support allowed the practitioners to play through scenarios of which countermeasuresto implement, and supported reuse.The results indicate that CGs support practitioners in identifying high risk security threats, work wellin an agile software development context, and are cost-effective.© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionRisk and threat analysis are an important part of early vulnera-bility prevention. Threat models (such as Peltier (2001) and Verdonand McGraw (2004)) and abuse cases (McDermott and Fox, 1999;McGraw, 2006) are different methods of identifying and preven-ting risks. Each of the approaches focuses on different angles, e.g.abuse cases (McGraw, 2006) and misuse cases (Sindre and Opdahl,2005; Opdahl and Sindre, 2009) focus on the user perspective of theattacker, Peltier Peltier (2001) focuses on attacks and their proba-bility and severity, and attack trees (Schneier, 1999) focus on goalsand attacks. Overall, the challenge is to look at and incorporate allthese perspectives. For example, when not considering a user group(also referred to as agents or agents), we might miss their goals,and with that potential threats. Furthermore, the previous mod-els were general and did not consider the speciﬁc needs of agiledevelopment processes, these processes having small iterationsand incomplete designs.In response to the challenge Baca and Petersen (2010) proposeda combination of the user perspective (misuse and abuse cases)with the threat and risk perspective (Peltier and attack trees). TheCorresponding author. Tel.: +46 455385877.E-mail addresses: dba@bth.se (D. Baca), kai.petersen@bth.se (K. Petersen).approach incorporates attacker’s goals, agents, attacks the agentscan do, and countermeasures to prevent attacks. Furthermore,countermeasure graphs provide a mechanism to prioritize coun-termeasures, the priorities depending on the relative importanceof attacker’s goals, the likelihood of agents doing an attack, andthe damage an attack can do, as well as the cost of preventingan attack. The approach was illustrated through an example of anonline-game, but has not yet been evaluated in industry practice.In this research we evaluated countermeasure graphs throughparticipatory action research (cf. Kindon et al., 2007) in an indus-trial context where agile processes are used. In participatoryaction research researchers take an active part in introducing anintervention (in this case countermeasure graphs) into an organiza-tion. Based on observations and reﬂections during continuous usethe intervention is progressively improved. Our choice of actionresearch as a research method was motivated by the need ofincorporating feedback into the approach and to evaluate improve-ments made progressively. Furthermore, the authors are employedat the company working with security related issues, whichallowed them to easily participate actively in ongoing projectsat the company. Overall, the action research makes the followingcontributions:•Evaluation and improvement of countermeasure graphs from theuser’s perspective (in this case software developers who are not0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2013.04.023 2412D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 2428security experts using countermeasure graphs for risk assess-ment).•Assessment of countermeasure graphs for software security inthe context of agile software development, as no case studiesevaluated the use of the previous approaches (Peltier, attack trees,and abuse cases) in that context.Our proposition before evaluation was that the new approach(including tool support) is better suited to aid (agile) risk assess-ment as: (1) It eases the identiﬁcation of countermeasures byallowing non-security experts to look at the security analysis frommultiple perspectives (agent, goals, attacks, and countermeasures);(2) It stores traceability links between agents (also referred toas agents), goals, attacks, and countermeasures allowing to eas-ily update and reuse risk analyses; (3) supports agile developmentby providing tool support and hence being able to automaticallyupdate and capture changes in the risk analysis immediately (e.g.when a countermeasure is implemented, the risk analysis situationchanges). As a reference for an initial comparison to our approachwe used the Peltier risk assessment approach (Peltier, 2001). Peltierwas chosen as a reference for comparison as it was widely used atthe studied company.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: Section2 presents the related work of risk assessment approachesfor software security. Section 3 illustrates how countermeasuregraphs work. Thereafter, the research method (action research) isexplained in Section 4. The results of the research are presented inSection 5, followed by summarizing the updates made to counter-measure graphs based on the evidence (Section 6), and a discussionof the results (Section 7). Section 8 concludes the paper.2. Related workThe related work provides an overview of software engineeringrisk assessment in general, followed by risk assessment for softwaresecurity. To complement the related work, deﬁnitions of terms areprovided in Appendix A. Furthermore, we reviewed literature toidentify checklists that could be used as aid in risk assessment.2.1. Risk management in software engineeringRisks are associated with danger, threat, or loss. Furthermore,they are associated with uncertainty. In software developmentmanaging risk is divided into two main activities, namely riskassessment and risk control (cf. Boehm, 1991; Khan et al., 2012).The focus of this paper is on risk assessment for software security.In risk assessment risks are identiﬁed, analyzed, and prioritized(Boehm, 1991; Khan et al., 2012).During the identiﬁcation risk items are elicited and documented(Boehm, 1991). Different approaches have been used for that, suchas documentation through use case diagrams and requirements(Sadiq et al., 2010), listing of risk factors and use of questionnaires(23), checklists (Boehm, 1991), and use of software metrics data(Chee et al., 1995).Risk analysis determines the magnitude of the damage and theprobability of a risk occurring (Boehm, 1991). To obtain the val-ues, among others cost models (Boehm, 1991) and neural networks(Yong et al., 2006; Neumann, 2002).During risk prioritization the risks are ordered according to theirpriority based on the outcome of the risk analysis. Different factorsare taken into account when prioritizing risk, in particular risk pri-ority, as well as cost-beneﬁt analysis for risk reduction activities(Boehm, 1991). For prioritization with respect to the different vari-ables different techniques are available (cf. Berander and Andrews,2005), such as ranking (Berander and Andrews, 2005), AnalyticalHierarchy Process (Zahedi, 1986; Huang et al., 2004), or cumulativevoting (Sawyer and MacRae, 1962; Baca and Petersen, 2010).2.2. Software security risk elicitation and modelingPeltier (2004) deﬁnes a risk assessment process for informationsecurity. The process consists of the steps: asset deﬁnition, threatdetermination, determine probability of occurrence of the threat,assess impact of the threat, recommended controls, and result doc-umentation. By combining probability and impact into a matrix andplacing the threats into that matrix a decision support is given todetermine for which threat an action has to be taken (referred ascontrols, or in this paper referred to as countermeasures).Schneier (1999) introduced attack trees, which is a notation todescribe a system with respect to security. The root node of thetree describes what should be achieved (e.g. the goal is to accesssystem) and the child nodes describe attacks of how that could bedone (e.g. learn password). A child node can also have further childnodes of how to realize that attack (e.g. bribe administrator). Fur-thermore, a distinction is made between OR nodes (either chooseone attack or the other) as well as AND nodes (do both attackstogether). Each node (attack) can have a variety of attributes, suchas its cost, equipment needed, and possibility to conduct the attack.From these one can then e.g. derive the most likely and cheapestlow-risk attack, cheap high-risk attacks, etc. These then can guidewhich countermeasures to implement.Misuse cases (Sindre and Opdahl, 2005) are deﬁned based onUML use case deﬁnitions, a misuse case corresponds to a use casein UML, and an agent corresponding to a misuser. A misuse wouldcorrespond to an attack (in attack trees) or a threat (in Peltier’smethod), such as ﬂood system, get privileges, etc. Alternativesof how to attack the system can be expressed in the form ofmisuse case variants. However, from an empirical standpoint astudy using controlled experiments has shown that attack trees aremore effective than misuse cases, even though people had similaropinions about them (Opdahl and Sindre, 2009). Complementary,abuse stories (also referred to as misuse story) have been proposed(Singhal, 2011; Roeser, 2011) in analogy to user stories.Goal-oriented models have been introduced in the contextof modeling software security. Lamsweerde extended the for-mal KAOS approach (Dardenne et al., 1993) for goal orientedrequirements engineering to model security related goals (cf. vanLamsweerde (2004)). The goals are ﬁrst formulated as high abstractgoals, that are reﬁned into subgoals through AND/OR reﬁnement.That is, one can, for example, specify that all subgoals have to beachieved to realize a higher level goal. These are also referred to assystem-to-bo goals (cf. van Lamsweerde, 2004). Furthermore, Lam-sweerde proposed to add anti-models to the goal model indicatingobstacles that hinder goal achievement by violating the system-to-be goals. In order to express security goals speciﬁcation patternsare suggested that are formalized through logic expressions. Forthe anti-goals one then should also answer who will beneﬁt fromthat goal, and why an attacker would want to achieve the anti-goal. Once the obstacles are understood, a next step is to modelobstacle resolution. Different strategies have been proposed (vanLamsweerde and Letier, 2000), such as goal substitution, goal weak-ening, anti-goal mitigation, etc. The approach has been illustratedusing an example of a banking application.Tropos Bresciani et al. (2004) is another goal-oriented approachthat utilizes i*(Yu, 1995) as a modeling approach to model thegoals of agents and express dependencies between agents inachieving goals. Two types of goals are distinguished, namely soft-goals and hard-goals. Soft-goals are non-functional and qualitative,hence their achievement cannot be as easily determined. In i*models security could be modeled in the form of soft-goals. How-ever, no clear distinction is made between security and all other D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 24282413requirements. In order to clarify the distinction Mouratidis andGiorgini (2007) propose extensions to Tropos to incorporate secu-rity in i*. In particular, Mouratidis and Giorgini (2007) introducesecurity constraints, security dependencies, and security entities.To aid in the application of the approach Mouratidis illustrate themodeling approach through an industry example.When prioritizing goals, attacks, and countermeasuresapproaches with trade-off are deemed useful, such as AHP(Berander and Andrews, 2005) or cumulative voting (Sawyer andMacRae, 1962). AHP does a pairwise comparison and the stake-holder has to decide by how much one item is more important thanthe other. Cumulative voting (also called 100$ method) requiresthe user to assign dollars to items depending on their importance.If one item is twice as important as another item, it shall receivetwice as many dollars. AHP only allows for a very small number ofcomparisons, hence it is not feasible in most cases (Berander andAndrews, 2005). Cumulative voting is also efﬁcient when manyitems are to be prioritized (Berander and Andrews, 2005). Furtherdetails on the prioritization approach are provided in Section 3.In consequence, we proposed a new approach (countermeasuregraphs) that (1) combines the ideas mentioned above, and (2)allows for relative prioritization (Baca and Petersen, 2010).The above mentioned approaches are proposed as generalrisk assessment approaches, independently of any developmentmethodology. Recently, Williams et al. (2010) proposed anapproach that allows to assess the security risk associated withindividual requirements. It is a simple to use approach based onthe concepts of planning poker in agile teams on project level. Forrisk assessment Peltier’s approach of combining risk and impactwas used. The difference to countermeasure graphs is that theyare not driven by individual requirements, but the system levelperspective. However, a change of requirements might add newmalicious agents, and hence change the relative risk of other iden-tiﬁed threats/attacks.2.3. Classiﬁcations and taxonomies for software security riskAs mentioned earlier risk assessment approaches rely on check-list and knowledge of known risks (cf. Boehm, 1991). For softwaresecurity some checklists should be highlighted here that can beused to support the risk assessment process.Tsipenyuk et al. (2005) introduced a taxonomy of typical soft-ware security errors that can be exploited by attackers. Theso-called kingdoms represent lack of input validation and repre-sentation, API abuse, security features, time and state, errors, codequality, encapsulation, and environment. For each a number of vul-nerabilities have been identiﬁed, e.g. buffer overﬂows could be aconsequence of lacking input validation and representation.Gilliam et al. (2003) introduced a list of ten common exploitsto software systems, such as environmental variables, buffer over-ﬂows, script injection, race conditions, etc. Furthermore, theyprovide a checklist of 26 countermeasures that could be employedacross the development lifecycle. These include system level coun-termeasures (e.g. avoid storing secret passwords), but also processrelated measures (e.g. the introduction of security metrics in thedevelopment process).Besides having generic classiﬁcations domain speciﬁc ones havebeen proposed as well, given that security threats and countermea-sures might depend on the domain.Bierman and Cloete (2002) introduced a classiﬁcation of threatclasses and related countermeasures for the mobile applicationdomain. Four main threat classes have been identiﬁed (integrityattack, availability refusal, conﬁdentiality attack, and authenti-cation risk). Within these a total of ten threat subclasses werepresented, each having a list of countermeasures associated toit. For example, for theft of the mobile device temper resistanthardware, trusted execution environment, itinerary recording, andsliding encryption were proposed, which are primarily relevant forthe mobile domain.Yeh and Chang (2007) structure countermeasures for informa-tion systems in three main countermeasures, namely IT-related,non-IT-related, and regulation and legality. IT related counter-measures include software, hardware, and data. Non-IT-relatedmeasures relate to physical facilities and personnel. Regulationsrelate to deﬁnition of security policies, compliance with legalrequirements, and risk transference.In the following section countermeasure graphs, which are thesubject of evaluation in this paper, are further explained. In partic-ular, we explain the pilot version with which we started the actionresearch at the company.3. Countermeasure graphWe combined the ideas of misuse cases (Sindre and Opdahl,2005), attack trees (Schneier, 1999), and Peltier (2004) byconsidering agents and connecting them to goals, attacks, andcountermeasures. In the following we describe the elements ofcountermeasure graphs, the relationships between the elements,and the steps to be conducted in using them. The method asdescribed here was previously introduced in Baca and Petersen(2010).3.1. ElementsThe elements of countermeasure graphs are goals, agents (alsoreferred to as agents in this paper), attacks, and countermeasures.The elements are deﬁned as follows:•Goals: Goals describe why anyone would attack the product andwhat their gain would be.•Agents: Agents are users, roles and software that interact with theproducts. Preferably the entire range of possible users should bepresented from end users to administrators, and outside softwarethat interacts with the product.•Attacks: After combining Agents with Goals we then look forAttacks. This step of the threat analysis is made easier becausewe have a clearer idea who would attack the system and why theattack would occur. We do not focus on whether the attack wouldwork, only if it is a possible route for the Agents to take to achievetheir desired Goals.•Countermeasures: The ﬁnal step is identifying what Countermea-sure could be used to prevent an attack. A countermeasures canmitigate one or more attacks.3.2. RelationshipsFig. 1 presents the relationships between the elements goals,agents, and attacks.We consider the relationship between goals, agents, attacks, andcountermeasures. In attack trees there exists a 1 . .* relationshipbetween goals and attacks, i.e. one goal is related to several attackswhile one attack is only related to one goal. However, in practice anattack could be executed by several agents, or an agent could pursuemore than one goal. Hence, these relationships were extended to* . .*.Furthermore, we include priorities assigned to goals, agents,attacks, and countermeasures. The priorities are on ratio scale andare assigned by the person conducting the prioritization. The prior-itization method is further explained when presenting the processof creating the countermeasure graph (see Section 3.3). 2414D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 2428gentFig. 1. Metamodel of the extension to attack trees.We incorporate Peltier’s ideas by including countermeasures (inhis words called conduct), which are actions to avoid vulnerabilitiesto be introduced into the software product in the ﬁrst place. Hence,from an implementation perspective it is important to prioritizethe countermeasures, which is done by considering the priority ofattacks, as well as the effort to realize the countermeasure. With theinclusion of countermeasures the protection of the end-product issupported.An example of the countermeasure graph is shown in Fig. 3. Thenodes of the graph show the goals, agents, attacks, and counter-measures. The edges connect:•Goals to agents if the agent pursues the goal.•Agents to attacks if the agent is likely to be able to execute theattack.•Attacks to countermeasures if the countermeasure is able to pre-vent the attack.3.3. Steps in using countermeasure graphsFig. 2 illustrates the steps to be conducted when applying coun-termeasure graphs. The ﬁgure also illustrates the approaches usedin each step.3.3.1. Identify goals, agents, attacks and countermeasuresThe purpose of the countermeasure graph is to determine whatsecurity countermeasures would be useful to include in the prod-uct and at the same time identifying what countermeasures alreadyexist. We determine what the greatest threats to the products areand how well we prevent them. To achieve this we need to discoverwhat attacks can be executed and how they are stopped, with tradi-tional threat analysis or attack trees this process is direct and triesto immediately identify attacks. In this approach, we ask develo-pers to describe why one would attack the system (identifying thegoals), who could attack the system (agents), how they could do it(attacks), and how that could be avoided (countermeasures).The process of eliciting this information is similar to the oneof eliciting requirements for a system. Commonly used elici-tation techniques are interviews and workshops (Kotonya andSommerville, 1998). In the case of security analysis, we used work-shops as elicitation approach as identifying potential threats andcountermeasures is a creative task, and the interaction of differ-ent developers with their different expertise might give creativeimpulses, e.g. the idea of one developer can trigger new ideas ofanother.Having identiﬁed the goals, agents, attacks, and countermea-sures we are interested in which countermeasures are mosteffective.3.3.2. Prioritization of countermeasuresThe countermeasure graph consists of sets of goals, agents,attacks, and countermeasures. In the following we present the pri-oritization questions asked to the developers, and also providefurther explanation of the prioritization approach.•Goals: To what degree would the achievement of the goal damagethe system from either a cost or stability perspective? These areat ﬁrst general goals that the different Agents might be inter-ested in achieving. The Goals are connected to Agents that wouldbe interested in achieving them. Voting on the Goals is focusedon the damage that speciﬁc goal would sustain on the product.Depending on the goal the damage could be economical or systemstability.•Agent: How large is the threat of the agent for the system? With theAgents we determine how threatening the different roles are tothe product. Votes are based on how “scared” the product shouldbe of that Agent. As an example, a server product would considerend users more threatening than system administrators, whilethe opposite might be the case for privacy software.•Attack: How likely is the success of the attack for the agent it belongsto? The attack voting is per Agent and determines how likely it isfor that Agent to succeed with the attack.•Countermeasures: How efﬁcient is the countermeasure in preven-ting an attack? When voting on Countermeasures the focus is ontheir ability to prevent the attack compared to each other. In somecases two Countermeasures might be equally effective, but one ofthem might aid in preventing other attacks as well. The attackgraphs would then put higher priority on that Countermeasure.Each of the elements is prioritized according to the rules of hier-archical cumulative voting (HCV), originally introduced in Beranderand Jönsson (2006) and experimentally evaluated in Berander andSvahnberg (2009). Cumulative voting has the beneﬁt of (1) that it issimple to do, and (2) the distance of importance between two itemsis visible (cf. Berander and Andrews, 2005). The voting is done byproviding a number of points (e.g. 100$) and then distributing thembetween a set of items. In HCV the prioritization is done on eachlevel of the hierarchy (in this case goals, agents, attacks, and coun-termeasures). Cumulative voting has been found to be a reliableapproach for prioritization, and hence has been selected to sup-port countermeasure graphs. It has also been used extensively forresearch purposes (cf. Rovegard et al., 2008; Kuzniarz and Angelis,2011). Rovegard et al. (2008) investigated which issues arise in con-ducting change impact analysis, and applied HCV to prioritize them.Kuzniarz and Angelis (2011) investigated the relative importanceof research problems on model consistency.Fig. 4 shows the principle of HCV. The prioritization is done onall levels, in this case on level H0 no prioritization is necessary asthere is only one node on that level (i.e. a single agent). On level H1three nodes compete against each other for the points, i.e. nodestwo (information modiﬁcation), three (theft), and four (DoS). Theyrepresent the same element and hence are on the same level of D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 24282415Identify goals, actors, attacks, countermeasuresPrioritization of CountermeasuresCalculate Effectiveness of CountermeasuresEvaluate Countermeasure PrioritizationStepsApproachesInterviews/ WorkshopsHierarchical Cumulative VotingNormalization and Inheritance of importance ValuesEffectiveness/Cost GridFig. 2. Steps in using countermeasure graphs.the hierarchy. As an example, H1 would represent the attacks andthe prioritization would be done according to the question Howlikely is the success of the attack for the agent it belongs to?. The sameapproach is followed for each block (grey boxes) on the lower levelsof the hierarchy, where only items within each block are prioritizedagainst each other (e.g. in block H2.1 nodes 5 and 6 compete, in H2.2nodes 7, 8, and 9, etc.). These represent the countermeasures, whichare rated according to their efﬁciency in preventing an attack.3.3.3. Calculate effectiveness of countermeasuresOn the lowest level (H2) nodes within a block compete. Threeblocks are identiﬁed, one for each node on the next highest level.Later one would, however, like to compare nodes in H2.2 to nodes inH2.1. When comparing priority values between blocks (i.e. betweendifferent countermeasures in different blocks), then blocks with ahigh number of items are penalized as a given budged (e.g. 1000$) isto be distributed among a higher number of items. Hence, Beranderand Svahnberg (2009) conclude from their experiment that the useof a compensating factor is preferred. This is realized by ﬁrst nor-malizing the priorities of item in each block. The normalization iscalculated as: Xnorm,y= Xprio* ny/mmax, where Xnorm,yis the normal-ized priority of X in block y, Xpriois the priority assigned to X, nyisthe number of items in block y, and mmaxis the maximum numberof items in a block on the same level where X is located. Applied tothe example in Fig. 4 the normalized value of node 5 is calculatedas: 5norm= 5prio* 2/3.Fig. 3. Countermeasure graph with priorities and effectiveness calculation. 2416D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 24281423568 971011Voting H1 (Attacks)Voting H0 (Agent)Voting H2.1Voting H2.2Voting H2.3****** ****Voting H2 (Counter-measures)UserTheftDoSInformation ModiÞcation5: Detection objects6: Encryption7: Temper resist. HW8: Itinerary recording9: Sliding encryption10: Server replic.11: Path historiesFig. 4. Cumulative hierarchical voting.When the priorities are normalized we compute the value ofthe node by multiplying the path of its parent nodes. For example,to know the value of node 11 we calculate the product of pointsassigned to node 11, 4, and 1.Fig. 3 illustrates an example of a countermeasure graph includ-ing assigned priorities. At each node the hypothetical prioritiesgiven by practitioners are shown (white boxes besides the nodes),as well as the normalized values (grey boxes). Goals “Reset oth-ers Pin/Password”, “DoS Sys”, and “DoS User” are in one block andhence no normalization is necessary. However, on agent level theblocks related to “DoS Sys” and “DoS User” have only one agenteach, and goal “Reset others Pin/Password” has two agents. Hence,values for the agents needed to be normalized. One important sce-nario should be highlighted, namely when an attack is related totwo agents (such as “Massive amounts of resets”). Therefore, theimportance of attack “Massive amounts of resets” increases, as thesum of the priorities of agent “Partner” and agent “End User” is cal-culated. Two calculation examples to determine the effectivenessof the countermeasures are provided at the bottom of Fig. 3.3.3.4. Evaluation of resultKnowing the prioritization of the countermeasures with regardto effectiveness allows to combine them with costs in a matrix(see Fig. 5). The matrix shows different areas for the interactionof effectiveness and cost that can be used as support in decid-ing which countermeasures to focus on. The bottom-right areacontains countermeasures that are effective and have low costs.Hence, these should be implemented ﬁrst. The top-left area con-tains countermeasures that are ineffective and at the same timecostly, hence they should be avoided. In the middle of the two areasthe borderline-cases are shown, which could be implemented ifthere are enough resources available.Fig. 5. Combination of effectiveness with cost.4. Research methodThe evaluation is conducted in an iterative way using actionresearch. The steps of action research are planning of the inter-vention and the collection of the data to capture the interventioneffect, the implementation of the actual intervention, and the col-lection of data and their interpretation (Somekh, 2006). As pointedout by Martella et al. (1999) much can be learned by continuouslyobserving the effect of a change after inducing it. However, as theresearcher is actively involved in the team work action research isan effort intensive approach from the researchers’ point of view. Intotal we evaluated countermeasure graphs on four different prod-ucts and six cycles to arrive at a mature and practically usefulsolution.We followed the action research cycles of diagnosis (under-standing the problem), action planning (plan an intervention toimprove), action taking (implementing the intervention), and eval-uation. The cycles of action planning, action taking, and evaluationare conducted throughout several cycles (cf. McKay and Marshall,2001).4.1. Research contextDescribing the research context is of importance as it allows tounderstand the conditions under which the results were produced(Petersen and Wohlin, 2009).4.1.1. CompanyThe company studied is a large telecom vendor (Ericsson LM).Ericsson offers solutions to support telecom operators in providingtheir services. The development unit studied is ISO certiﬁed. Thecompany was working in a market-driven way, providing solutionsto a large set of potential customers.4.1.2. The agile process at the companyThe process model used at the company was incremental anditerative in nature. Due to the introduction of incremental and agiledevelopment at the company the following company speciﬁc prac-tices were introduced:•Small agile teams: The ﬁrst principle was to have small teams con-ducting short time-boxed projects. The duration of the projectdetermined the number of requirements selected for a require-ment package. Each project included all phases of development,from pre-study to testing. The result of one development project(DP) was an increment of the system. Projects can be run in par-allel.•Prioritized requirements backlog: The packaging of requirementsfor projects is driven by requirement priorities. Requirementswith the highest priorities were selected and packaged to beimplemented. Another criterion for the selection of requirementswas that they ﬁt well together and thus could be implemented inone coherent project.•Single branch with continuous integration: If a project was inte-grated with the previous baseline of the system, a new baselinewas created. This is referred to as the latest system version (LSV).Therefore, only one product exists at one point in time, helpingto reduce the effort for product maintenance. The LSV could alsobe considered as a container where the increments developedby the projects (including software and documentation) wereput together. On the project level, the goal was to focus on thedevelopment of the requirements while the LSV integrated pack-ages of requirements to create the overall system. When the LSVphase was completed, a new version of the system is ready to beshipped. D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 24282417Fig. 6. An overview model of the agile processes used by the examined projects.•High level architecture plan (anatomy): The anatomy plan deter-mined the content of each LSV and the point in time when anew LSV was supposed to be completed. It was based on thedependencies between parts of the system developed in DPs, thusinﬂuencing the time-line in which projects have to be executed.•Potential releases: If every release was pushed onto the market,there would be too many releases used by customers at the sametime that would need to be supported. In order to avoid this,not every LSV had to be released, but it had to be of sufﬁcientquality for a potential customer release. The release project wasresponsible for making the product commercially available, per-forming any changes required to alter a development version intoa release version.In Fig. 6 an overview of the development process is provided. Therequirements packages were created from high priority require-ments stored in the repository. These requirements packages wereimplemented in projects resulting in a new increment of the prod-uct. Such a project was referred to as a Development Project andhad a duration of approximately three weeks (time-boxed). EachDP contained design, implementation and testing of the require-ments. It might happen that a DP was started in one sprint to laterbe released in another. When a project was ﬁnished developing theincrement, the increment was integrated with the latest version ofthe system, referred to as last system version (LSV). From the LSVthere could be different releases of the system. These were eitherpotential releases or customer releases.4.1.3. Security and risk assessment prior to introductionPrior to the introduction of our approach the studied companyconducted risk analysis as part of its development process. The riskanalysis was modeled using Peltier risk analysis. The threats wererated with respect to likelihood of success and the severity of a suc-cessful attack. By multiplying severity and probability a risk levelwas produced.After the threats were determined and ranked the most severeones were analyzed to decide what action can be taken tomitigate them. The conduct of this risk analysis was mandatoryon all products at Ericsson and an essential part of the company’sstrategy to prevent vulnerabilities and have early vulnerabilitydetection. It was recommended to conduct the risk analysis at thebeginning of the development of a new software version.Since the introduction of the risk analysis, projects in Erics-son moved from waterfall to incremental and agile development.The change of development processes led to shorter developmentcycles and new baselines of the product were more frequently cre-ated. These changes affected the risk analysis method as it reliedon a ﬁxed product plan that could be evaluated early in the processand then stayed stable until release.4.1.4. ProductsFour products have been investigated in a series of projects. Inthe following the products are shortly characterized. All productsare developed using Java Programming Language.•Product A: Had 5 development teams with 5–7 developers perteam. One team specialized in veriﬁcation and validation. Theproduct had been in development for several years prior to thestudy. Risks analyses were only performed prior to major releaseversions.•Product B: Had 3 development teams with 5–6 developers perteam. One of the teams focused on veriﬁcation and validationactivities. The product was a spin-off from product A and usedthe same base framework.•Product C: Had 3 development teams with 4–6 developers perteam. All tasks were divided between the teams. Product devel-opment started during the study, meaning that no legacy riskanalyses existed.•Product D: Had 8 development teams with 6–8 developers perteam. One team focused only on requirements and one only onveriﬁcation and validation. The product had been in developmentfor a year prior to the study.Due to conﬁdentiality reasons no further information regardingproduct development units or products can be provided.4.2. Research questionThe research goal was to evaluate countermeasure graphs in thecontext of practitioners conducting security threat assessment inagile software development with respect to their ability to identifysecurity threats and countermeasures.The following research question was in the center of analysis:how should countermeasure graphs be modiﬁed to be useful in prac-tice? The answer to this question focused on what was workingwell with a version of the approach and what was not workingwell. Hence, the research allowed to provide explicit feedback onlessons learned while evolving the approach.4.3. Action research designFig. 7 provides an overview of the four products under inves-tigation, and the phases in which countermeasure graphs wereevaluated The vertical lines represent the timeline of investigation.The boxes represent projects run for the products, for which riskanalysis was conducted.In Cycle 1 (Diagnosis) Peltier was evaluated on products A andB, which were at that time analyzed as one product. The assess-ment was done by the developers and the result was reported in adocument outlining the results of the different steps (asset deﬁni-tion, threat determination, probability rating, assessment of threatimpact, recommended controls, and result documentation). In ouranalysis we focused on the outcome, i.e. the severity/probability 2418D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 2428Fig. 7. Action research approach.matrix to determine the threats identiﬁed. The severity ratingdetermined the damage an attack does, while probability relates tothe likelihood of a successful attack. Both were rated on a ﬁve-pointscale. The values for severity and probability were then multiplied,resulting in the risk level (see Fig. 7)In Cycle 2 (Prototype) the very initial version of countermea-sure graphs (prototype) as presented in Section 3 was evaluated onproduct A. The ﬁrst author was the moderator supporting the teamin conducting the risk assessment using countermeasure graphs.The outcome (countermeasure graph and matrix) were used foranalysis, as well as the observations and the feedback we receivedfrom the team. The team consisted of several developers that ful-ﬁlled different roles in the project. At a minimum one developerfor each of these roles were present, namely requirement engineer,programmer, and tester. Often there was more then on developerper role and the risk analyses consisted of 5–6 developers includ-ing the author moderating risk analysis. After the risk analysis hasbeen completed the author documented the outcomes of the meet-ing in a protocol capturing observations and results, as well as thefeedback given by the practitioners. In Cycle 3 (Redesign) a new ver-sion of countermeasure graphs was evaluated in two projects, onerelated to Product A and one related to Product B. After the redesignwe also saw a need for expansion, being evaluated in Products Aand C (Cycle 4 (Expansion)). Finally, having a good understandingof how to design countermeasure graphs we used the experiencesgained to deﬁne a way of working (Cycle 5 (Ways of Working)). Thatway of working was then evaluated in another project not relatedto Product A. During the risk analyses in the improvement phasethe developers themselves decided when to conduct the analysisand which developers should be part of it. The author was no longermoderating the analysis, but was instead one of the developers pro-viding expertise to the analysis. Since the author was still part ofthe analysis it was possible to observe problems and easily discussimprovements to the method and tool.In Cycle 6 (Cooperation) we achieved a matured version ofcountermeasure graphs. After the improvement phase the tooldeveloped to support countermeasure graphs was further extendedto better support cooperation. The risk analyses continued after thestudy had concluded and is part of the development process of theprojects now.5. Results5.1. Cycle 1 (diagnosis)Observations: Fig. 8 illustrates the results of the Peltier analy-sis. The ﬁgure shows that 20 threats with a risk level of low werefound, and 5 threats with a risk level of medium. Related to ProductA internal threats posed by the system administrator and hardwarefailures were identiﬁed. Only system threats are reported in theresults, no product speciﬁc features were mentioned. The threatsrelated to Product B were exclusively internal fraud by the sys-tem administrator and social engineering attacks from the outside.In order to increase the generalizability of the results, we inves-tigated another risk analysis using Peltier that was conducted atthe company (Product D). That product had 29 threats with thehighest risk of 8. The threats were on system level and focusedon the user accountability and shared account access. Overall, theresults of the two analyses were similar in terms of Peltier’s abil-ity to detect threats when using developers that are not softwaresecurity experts.Evaluation: The highest risk factor that one could actually ﬁndis 25 (i.e. multiplying 5 (probability) * 5 (impact)). Overall, thisshowed that the Peltier approach only identiﬁed low risk/impactthreats. However, it was likely that the systems had more sig-niﬁcant security issues given their nature (complexity, exposedto networks, many different users). One potential reason for notﬁnding more signiﬁcant threats was that Peltier did not seem tosteer the people in identifying the most critical ones. One potentialreason for this was that when not combining the ideas from thedifferent approaches, a more comprehensive and holistic pictureof the threat situation is lost.By observing the results of previous risk analyses and conduct-ing a workshop with the developers, we identiﬁed potential reasonswhy the method (Peltier) did not identify higher level risks, and D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 24282419Fig. 8. Peltier analysis (Cycle 1): Numbers in circles in the ﬁelds of the matrix show the risk level of the ﬁeld (product of probability and severity rated on ordinal scale;values show the number of risks identiﬁed for each ﬁeld in the matrixfocused only on speciﬁc types of threats (e.g. operating system levelthreats).The results from previous risk analyses had often not yielded anyrisk with a higher rating than low and only in ﬁve occasions threatsof medium risk level were identiﬁed. A root cause analysis revealedthat the identiﬁed risks focused on OS level threats. The developerswho performed the risk analysis acknowledged that they had prob-lems to steer the risk analysis towards business logic threats insteadof general system threats. The developers attributed this to lack ofexpertise and timing of the risk analysis.While risk analyses should be performed early to identify threatsbefore they have been implemented, this was seldom the case in theexamined products. The main reason for late risk analyses was theuncertainty with regard to requirements. The teams responsible forrisk analyses did not know if requirements would be implementedor how. As a consequence the risk analyses were performed shortlybefore a major release on already implemented features.Another important reﬂection on Peltier is that from a measure-ment theory point of view the multiplication of distinct variables(ordinal) is not sound to calculate a risk level. The risk level alsomight increase in a non-linear way, which could not be expressedon the scale used.5.2. Cycle 2 (prototype)Action planning and taking: In the pilot two risk analyses wereperformed. For the ﬁrst risk analysis we used post-it notes. The ideawas to use the method in an as agile friendly way as possible. How-ever, as the risk model grew it became time consuming to calculatethe risk of a threat or the effectiveness of a countermeasure dur-ing the risk analysis session. Combined with the need to share andreuse the risk model the need for a tool became apparent. Therefore,a prototype was created and a second risk analysis was conductedon products A and B using the tool.As these two risk analyses were the ﬁrst instance with counter-measure graphs the focus was on adding the existing knowledgeto them and to create a baseline for further analysis. As suchthe greatest focus was put on identifying all possible Agents thatinteract with the product and any threatening Goals the Agentsmight have.The risk analyses identiﬁed in Cycle 2 (Prototype) revealed 24threats to the products (see Table 1). Some countermeasures werealready implemented that mitigate threats identiﬁed by the users.For example, without the already implemented countermeasuresattack A5 would have been in the serious risk category.In comparison to the analyses conducted earlier, it was visiblethat threats of higher severity were identiﬁed. In particular, threatA22 was classiﬁed as serious, and A03, A06, A08, A04 as well asA16 as high. Furthermore, the number of medium threats increasedfrom 5 to 11.For the threats 37 countermeasures were identiﬁed, several ofthem prevent the same threats to different degrees (see Table 2).As such there were many more proposed countermeasures thenattacks. Each countermeasure was also weighed on its effective-ness to prevent an attack and its cost of implementation. Therefore,it was possible to generate a list of the most important counter-measures, and also the degree of threat mitigation for a set ofcountermeasures.The most signiﬁcant threat to the system was related to faultsand system errors (A22). To prevent this threat three countermea-sures stood out. First, node hardening was recommended (c26).Hardening the node created a smaller attack surface and hence asafer product. The second countermeasure was to integrate a staticcode analysis tool into the build system and continuously classifyand correct warnings (c24). Experiences of using static analysis ina security context have been reported in Baca et al. (2013). It wasalso required to correct all legacy warnings. The third countermea-sure involved operative system side protection preventing bufferoverﬂows and similar attacks on installed software (c7).User security and passwords was the next big threat (A03),requiring basic settings like minimal password length and expiredpasswords (c34,c35).The database was not sufﬁciently protected and was often sub-jected to user data (A16). It is therefore important to sanitize theuser input before it was sent to the database. Two high valuecountermeasures protect the database: An easier database input 2420D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 2428Table 1Overview of threats and their severity.Threat Description PeltierA22 System attacks, buffer overﬂows, race conditions, ram reading and so on SeriousA03 Login as another userHighA06 Activate hidden processes that are not seen by system administrators HighA08 Reading temp. &constant log ﬁles (ﬁle system) HighA04 Creating backdoor via the end user portal HighA16 SQL injection attack HighA19 Bruteforce passwords MediumA01 Use speciﬁc log ﬁle for replay attacks, automated replay functionality MediumA20 Reuse old passwordsMediumA24 Consume systems total number of session Id’s MediumA13 Remove all or speciﬁc users MediumA15 Steal a session ID of a higher user MediumA12 Lock out other user accounts or Change other password MediumA21 Scan backups copies MediumA09 Retrieving information about the network topology MediumA18 Flooding the system or network with requests MediumA14 Force system back to default users and passwords (deleting all users) MediumA02 Login as user ad perform task add subscriber even if not supposed tooLow
A05 Perform tasks as another user/hacking access proﬁle LowA07 Reading other operators database LowA10 Snifﬁng network trafﬁc LowA11 Asking other users for their password LowA17 Fool a higher user to perform your tasks LowA23 Increase sequence number for cai(3g) commands Lowcleaning solution that only sanitized data that is going into thedatabase (c5); a more complete input validation that sanitized alldata sent to the system (c3).Furthermore, there was a lack of role protection within the OSlevel and several improvements have been suggested (e.g. c6).The system supported locking users after a certain amount offailed logins. This opened a new attack where outsiders could lockany user they want (A12). Also the system had a limited numberof sessions it allows, this again opens attacks so users can lock thesystem by using all sessions (A24). To prevent users from locking,Table 2Countermeasures: prio represents the relative priority of countermeasures in % of the total importance, PH represents the estimated effort in person hoursID Prio PH Threat Lvl Descriptionc26 26.23 168 49% Node hardeningc14 18.50 35 47% Support expired passwordc24 15.02 100 43% Using static code analysis (automated analysis every build and constant classiﬁcation of results)c5 11.74 45 41% Mandatory database input cleaningc7 11.68350
 35% SELinux or AppArmorc34 8.81 21 34% Minimum length passwordsc6 8.45 105 32% Role based access controlc12 7.70 16 31% Limiting tmp folder access and using private tmp foldersc35 6.95 44 30% Minimum password complexityc3 6.47 70 28% Mandatory input validationc23 6.01 300 24% Use secure library (Secure C or Java, Type safe)c36 5.96 45 22% Per user max allowed session idsc25 5.89 83 17% Public/private key login (certiﬁcate logins)c37 5.42 48 15% Per IP max allowed session idsc11 5.11 29 15% Limiting log ﬁle read privilegesc1 3.79 43 14% Lock session to speciﬁc Ipsc30 3.75 45 13% Restrict access to the replay log ﬁlec29 2.60 65 12% Restrict access to the replay functionc2 2.58 48 12% User secure random generatorsc33 2.53 45 11% Time delay failed loginsc4 2.52 110 Input policy templatesc9 1.71 183 File system Intrusion detection systemc16 1.47 11 Limit access rights to Backup ﬁlesc8 0.92 750 Secure Kernel (grsec)c31 0.87 68 Lock failed attempts per IPc28 0.73 135 Verify replay logs checksum every read and writec15 0.6755
 Recover to default statesc17 0.50 44 Encrypted backup copiesc13 0.41 238 One place control (or command) to remove Users from all possible sources, single sign onc32 0.35 68 Lock failed attempts per browser sessionc27 0.33 195 Network Intrusion detection systemc10 0.20 100 Encrypt Cai interfacec22 0.18 101 System that is forced to default setting automatically goes non-live or sounds every alarm possiblec20 0.13 80 Per user session restrictionsc18 0.11 60 Backup server that collects ﬁles systemc21 0.10 225 Prevent cause that would force system back to default settings or remove default setting functionalityc19 0.08 300 Network throttling/ trafﬁc shaping D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 24282421the “Time delay failed logins” countermeasure had the best effec-tiveness and man hour cost, it does not lock users, but instead putsa small (seconds) delay between every failed logon attempt (c33).A more costly alternative was to lock the failed attempt based onIP address (c1).To prevent the session attack, we suggest setting a per IP addressmax allowed sessions and not a global max sessions (c36). Sessionsshould also be locked to a speciﬁc ip address (c37) to prevent usersfrom stealing other logins, this includes the “Use Secure random”countermeasure. Another relevant threat we identiﬁed was the Logreplay feature (A01) and the need to better protect the log ﬁle (c11).The developers have identiﬁed user accountability as a majorthreat against the system. User accountability focuses on loggingand verifying that operations are performed as they should. Har-vesting passwords to steal other users accounts (e.g. through A03,A19, and A20) was seen as the goal that would create the greatestdamage. Operative partners and system administrators were theAgents that presented the greatest threat to the system. As suchthe attacks and countermeasures focused on protecting users (e.g.c6), followed by DOS preventions (c33, c1, and c37).The developers in the end had to make a decision which coun-termeasures to implement based on available resources. This wasachieved by comparing the effectiveness of countermeasures to thecost (see Fig. 9). One countermeasure was clearly in the “imple-ment” area, namely c26. Countermeasures in the decision area weree.g. c24, c6, etc.Considering importance and cost, it was recommended that thefollowing countermeasures were at least to be implemented:•Node hardening (c26), protecting and minimizing threats to theOS as much as possible. Protect open ports, remove unnecessaryservices, update to latest versions and use encrypted protocolswhenever possible. Protect the tmp (c12) folder and use securetmp ﬁle handling. Use OS level security (c7 or c6).•Implementing expired passwords (c14), minimum length pass-words (c34). Implement password (C35) complexity on the entiresystem. Make sure secure random is used (c2) in any passwordor encryption generation.•Use static code analysis (c24) as part of the development processand verify whether the warnings are corrected.•Add input validation (c5 or c3) to the database input to clean allinput from possible injection attacks.Looking at the whole list of countermeasures, it would not havebeen cost efﬁcient to implement countermeasures beyond c33 asthe threat level was already signiﬁcantly reduced, and only smallimprovements would be made for high cost.Evaluation: Overall, it was visible that the approach allowed toidentify high level threats to the system. Furthermore, a large num-ber of countermeasures was identiﬁed and the developers weresupported to make informed decisions of what countermeasuresto implement.The need for tool support was identiﬁed, hence we developed atool and saw the following beneﬁts of doing so: (1) The prioritieswere automatically calculated while practitioners enter the data;(2) the model can be easily reused and provided a knowledge basefor risk analyses of similar systems.5.3. Cycle 3 (redesign)Action planning and taking: One change was made to the struc-ture of the relationships of the model. The main improvement tothe model was to decouple Agent and Goal. In the initial model aGoal was always connected to an Agent. The practitioners found iteasier that way to add information to the model, and also found itmore intuitive to connect goals directly to attacks to express whatthe purpose of an attack directly. The change did not affect anyweighting or require changes to previous risk analyses, as they didnot have any attacks that required the speciﬁc case.After the risk analysis in Cycle 2, the baseline for both prod-ucts was present focusing on system legacy. Risk analysis in theRedesign cycle could hence focus on new implementations insteadof legacy functionality for a new version of products A and B. Withrespect to the new features, each product was treated separately,as the analysis for their common platform and legacy was alreadydone in the previous cycle.For product A 5 new threats and countermeasures were added.However, these newly identiﬁed countermeasures and their relatedthreats were already prevented by implementing countermeasureson system level, as identiﬁed in the risk analysis in Cycle 2 (Pro-totype). Hence, the identiﬁed attacks would have a high level ofseverance, but a low probability.For product B 11 new threats (primarily related to authorizationand authentication system) were identiﬁed and 13 new coun-termeasures were proposed. Of the 11 new threats three wereconsidered as being of at least medium importance.It was also the ﬁrst time a suggested countermeasure createda new threat. In this case a suggested countermeasure against aDenial of Service attack meant that an IP address would be blocked,this made it possible for attackers to force the system to block ipaddresses and thus creating a new Denial of Service attack.The countermeasures from these risk analyses often solved thesame problem. Because of this the developers could experimentwithin the tool and see what happened with the countermeasureprioritization list if they would implement one of the countermea-sures. This aided the developers in deciding what countermeasureshould be implemented and in what order. As an example, the thirdhighest recommended countermeasure in the list would solve sev-eral of the other threats, but at the same time it would be costly doto, therefore lowering it in the list.Evaluation: For product B the practitioners were able to iden-tify additional threats/attacks of high importance on feature level,and found it easy to integrate/add them to the existing analysis.This showed that it was easy for them to reuse the already existinginformation in the model and to update it accordingly. The reuse ofthe model signiﬁcantly reduced the effort of risk-analysis on fea-ture level, and also assured to not implement countermeasures thesystem was already protected against.Another observation was that the developers played throughscenarios where they looked into what happens to the threatsituation when certain countermeasures were implemented, espe-cially if a set of countermeasures addressed multiple threats. Thisprovided the opportunity to play through different scenarios forcountermeasure implementation (e.g. with respect to order ofimplementation, what to implement for a ﬁxed budged, and soforth), and underlined the need for a tool to support in recalcu-lations of priorities.5.4. Cycle 4 (expansion)Action planning and taking: Based on the previous cycles wefound that countermeasure graphs with tool support worked asintended, and produced high level threats and a variety of coun-termeasure alternatives to mitigate them. Hence, in the followingcycles of the action research we focused on how to improve the tooland the feedback we received about working with a large model. Bythe end of this risk analysis iteration the different models consistedof 10+Goals, 10+Agents, 30+Attacks and 40+Countermeasures. Theold data was still useful and needed in both the analysis and thecalculation for prioritization, but at the same time it was clutteringthe tool. 2422D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 2428Fig. 9. Countermeasure effectiveness vs. cost.Developers therefore recommend that attacks can be groupedtogether and that they can be marked as “mitigated” when coun-termeasures were implemented. By placing an attack as mitigatedit was no longer used in the calculation for its countermeasures.Therefore, if an implemented countermeasure completely pre-vented an attack the risk analysis can now disregard the risk andrelated countermeasures as it was implemented. At the same timeany countermeasure that was only protecting against that attackcould be hidden from the graph and free up screen space. Attackgroups were also implemented so that the developers could hidea group and all the Attacks and Countermeasures of those Attackswould hide and free up additional screen space.In this iteration a third product has joined the study. The pur-pose of adding another product to the analysis was to increase thegeneralizability of the results. This new product did not share a plat-form or framework as products A and B do. However, it was still atelecommunication and client/server system using Java EE tech-nology. As such it was possible for the developers to reuse most ofthe Goals, Agents and some of the Attacks of previous risk analy-ses, even if they were done for a different product. Therefore, thestartup time for product C was considerably shorter than it was forproducts A and B. The ﬁrst risk analysis with product C thereforeimmediately produced features based risks instead of just systemlevel threats.The threats from this iteration focused on the new multivendorsupport for product A and B, while product C was a completelynew product and had several risks in its base requirements. All thenewly identiﬁed risks were based on the product features insteadof system level threats.Evaluation: We found that the knowledge base for risks andrelated countermeasures was reusable when introducing a newproduct. Hence, this indicates that there is a high potential ofreusability between similar products. Furthermore, the approachshowed that additional high level risks could be identiﬁed.5.5. Cycle 5 (ways of working)Action planning and taking: In this iteration Product D joinedthe investigation of countermeasure graphs. Because the producthad already conducted several major risk analyses (Peltier based)it ﬁrst needed to move the results from the Peltier analysis to thetool. After that initial startup analysis it also produced feature basedrisks instead of the general system level threats.With the inclusion of several projects it became necessary toconsolidate and determine exactly what a Goal, Agent, Attackand Countermeasure was. It was therefore recommended by thedevelopers to include the description of the elements in the tool andto create a guide that the developers can follow when conductingthe risk analysis.Since product D was a relative new product and had high pri-ority, it had a large amount of developers working with it. Therewas an interest in dividing the work of the analyses and not onlyfocusing on a single analysis per sprint or release. Instead the iden-tiﬁcation of general Goals, Agents and Attacks was performed in thebeginning of a new development cycle while the different devel-opment teams would take over the risk analysis and expand themodel with new Attacks and Countermeasures based on the fea-tures they were implementing in that sprint. The tool and methodsupported this way of working and it was encouraged for the otherproducts as well, but they did not see the need since they had sofew teams.Another recommendation by the developers was to use the datain the model to create a metric of the current security state of theproduct. By comparing what attacks have been prevented com-pared to the weighting of those that have not been prevented, it waspossible to get a security metric based on the risks in the product.Several new threats were identiﬁed and with the introduction ofa new product, some severe system level threats were discoveredas well.Evaluation: After having conducted several iterations with thecountermeasure graphs approach and tool, no new importantchanges were introduced to the approach anymore, and only minoradditions to the functionality of the tool were made. This indi-cated that the solution was stabilizing, and functioning well forrisk analysis.5.6. Cycle 6 (cooperation)Action planning and taking: At the end of the study eachproduct continued to use countermeasure graphs as part of itsdevelopment process. While the method itself has become stable,there have been some improvements in the way of working withthe tool.Since it was easy for product to share and reuse some parts ofeach other’s risk analysis it was decided to have a general repositorythat the products could use to share and safely store their risksanalyses. Since the tool uses a simple xml format to store the riskanalyses it was possible to generate change logs and verify thatrisk analyses have been performed for each release. It also madeit possible to tag the results the same way the source code wastagged, so that a risk analysis was associated with a certain sourcecode release. D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 24282423Because of the size and multi-site development of some of theproducts it was necessary to add network support to the tool. Withthe shared screen, result repository and the iterative way of work-ing with the tool it was possible to perform risk analysis with teamsthat were not located in the same place.The threats identiﬁed by the method have also focused on thenew features instead rediscovering the same system threats thatstill are not important enough to correct.Evaluation: In this cycle additional functionality was imple-mented to the tool, as many products were developed globally,hence supporting global software development. Recent researchhas emphasized the need for agile teams to work distributed, e.g.with shared screens (cf. Sharp et al., 2012).In order to capture process adherence and making sure that riskanalyses are conducted, the xml format supports in versioning andassociating the risk analyses to different releases. This is importantto base decisions on the correct (and always latest) version of therisk analysis, and also to support reuse (e.g. a risk analysis for a newproduct might be more comparable to the results of an early riskanalysis of a mature product).6. Updates to countermeasure graphsIn this section we summarize the changes made to the initial ver-sion of countermeasure graphs (see Section 3) based on the actionresearch.6.1. ElementsThe set of elements as deﬁned in Section 3.1 remained stable anddid not require any redeﬁnition. However, the elements receivedadditional attributes.•Goals have an extra monetary value that can be used to create anextra prioritization variable. Some developers wanted to dividethe damage a goal could do to a system and the possible monetarylosses.•Attacks can be grouped so it is possible to focus on a certain typeof attacks. If an attack was prevented it was made possible todeactivate it so that non-implemented countermeasures wouldnot be prioritized if they protect against an already preventedattack.•Countermeasures receive an additional variable to store cost, andalso a boolean value that allows to capture whether the counter-measure has been implemented.6.2. RelationshipsThe relations between goals, agents, and attacks have beenchanged. After the pilot we recognized that the relationship of GoalAgentAttack was not intuitive during the risk assessment pro-cess. The practitioners found it more intuitive to not being forced toidentify an actor to express whether a goal can be achieved througha speciﬁed attack (in the current model a goal can not be attached toan attack if no actor has been decided at the same time). Hence, nowit is easier to quickly add multiple actors and multiple goals in rela-tion to an attack. It was also more natural to directly express thatthe goal is the purpose of the attack if they are directly connected.Hence, we now connected agents directly to attacks, and goalsdirectly to attacks. The nodes of the graph still show the goals,agents, attacks, and countermeasures. The edges connect:•Goals to attacks if the purpose of the attack is the goal.•Agents to attacks if the agent is likely to be able to execute theattack.Fig. 10. Metamodel of the countermeasure graph.•Attacks to countermeasures if the countermeasure is able to pre-vent the attack.The meta-model for countermeasure graphs was updatedaccordingly. Fig. 10 shows the new meta-model, and Fig. 1 the oldone. The attributes of the nodes have been updated according tothe changes presented in Section 6.1.6.3. Prioritization and calculation of effectivenessThere was no need to make changes to the principle ofcumulative voting for calculating the severity of threats, and theeffectiveness of countermeasures.6.4. Evaluation of resultsIn the evaluation of the results, the matrix was working well insupporting developers to decide which countermeasures to imple-ment, and the recommendation given was followed by them. Wealso recommend to use scenarios and check how the threat levelchanges for prioritizing different alternatives of countermeasuresthat address the same threats. Furthermore, playing with the sce-narios supported the practitioners in deciding what to implementﬁrst.6.5. ToolIn order to make countermeasure graphs work well the needfor tool support was recognized very early in the action research.The ﬁnished tool is shown in Fig. 11. The values below the Goaland Agent names are their weighting compared to each other. Thevalues in the arrows show the weighting for that particular edge.The most important features added to the tool were:•Storage of risk analysis results in XML-ﬁles to allow for reuse andchange management.•Update of attributes to allow indicating implemented counter-measures and mitigated attacks. This allowed to quickly playthrough different scenarios of implementing countermeasures. 2424D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 2428Fig. 11. Open source tool that implements the countermeasure graph.•Implementation of attack groups that could be hidden to improvethe layout and save screen-space when the countermeasuregraph grows.•Tool-tips deﬁning the different elements to aid in using and learn-ing the countermeasure graph approach.•General repository for storing risk analyses across products tofacilitate knowledge transfer between products.•Network support to share the screen and being able to update thetool from different computers, due to that software developmentis often distributed.7. Discussion7.1. Ability to identify threats and countermeasuresThe legacy risk analysis based on Peltier was conducted withdevelopers having no specialization in software security. UsingPeltier, no high level security risks were identiﬁed by them in thecases of products A, B, and C. The developers performing the riskanalysis reported that they had problems identifying threats andthat they did not always know how or what would be implementedat the time of the analysis. Some developers tried solving this byperforming the risk analysis after implementation, but then theylost the entire beneﬁt of detecting threats before implementingthe design. Our proposition was that countermeasure graphs aiddevelopers in identifying threats/attacks and countermeasures bycombining the ideas of different risk assessment approaches.The results of the action research provide indications for theproposition being true. In particular, comparing the Peltier analysiswith the ﬁrst risk analysis using countermeasure graphs, we foundthat practitioners were identifying a higher number of threats withhigh risk level. In addition risk analysis on feature level, and foradditional products, further high risk threats and related coun-termeasures were identiﬁed. An exception was product A in theredesign cycle (Section 5.3), where the newly identiﬁed threats onfeature level were already resolved through implemented systemlevel countermeasures. Identifying high level risks is particularlyimportant as they are likely to harm the companys business more.With limited resources being available the risk level has to be takeninto consideration when planning actions.We observed that it is important to capture goals, agents,attacks, and countermeasures in a single risk model, as the identiﬁ-cation of one of those elements aids practitioners in ﬁnding furtherelements. For example, given the awareness for a new agent added,practitioners came up with new ideas of what that agent could do.Furthermore, the identiﬁcation of an attack spawned a new agentwho could also realize the attack. Based on identifying that agent asrelevant, new attacks related to the new agent could be identiﬁed.Hence, adding information to the risk model provides new ideasand helps extending the risk model further.One limitation in the analysis was that we made this obser-vations for developers without particular security experience andeducation. Which approach would be more effective for securityexperts can not be concluded based on this study. However, inpractice we observed that organizations often have no particularrole in relation to software security, even though this would bebeneﬁcial. Recently the studied company started to create securityrelated roles (referred to as Security Master). In addition, uni-versities start to offer Master and Bachelor programs focused onsoftware security. D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 24282425Potential validity threats for the observed observations arelearning effect and confounding factors (see Section 7.5.4.).7.2. Cost effectivenessRisk analysis is a time consuming activity that requires peoplewith good domain and product knowledge to participate. Duringthe action research two types of reuse found to be beneﬁcial. Theﬁrst type refers to reusing the risk analysis for a speciﬁc productthroughout increments of that product (as was the case in productsA and B). This allowed the practitioners to focus on new risks whilethe product evolves (see Section 7.2). The second type refers toreuse between products. In the case of similar types of systemsthat were developed using the same platform (Java EE) we foundthat the practitioners were able to reuse the risk model to a largedegree (as was the case for Product C in Cycle 4 (Expansion), thusthe practitioners were able to focus the risk analysis immediatelyon new features.Given the reusability, the risk analyses are now stored in a repos-itory so that the practitioners can access them easily for each newrisk analysis conducted.7.3. Reuse and evolvability of risk model supports agiledevelopmentEvidence on agile software development and how it is able tocope with security issues is scarce (Roeser, 2011). Roeser (2011)only identiﬁed two empirical studies on agile software security.Implementing agile security could be challenging. For example,Firesmith and Consulting (2003) recommends delaying architec-tural design decisions in relation to security due to that whencommitting to them too early, ﬂexibility for change is lost. Giventhat agile software organizations have to deal with frequentlychanging requirements and releases, they are required to committo design decisions on a frequent basis, and also be able to changethe design when needed (cf. Petersen, 2010a). To what degree com-panies can change commitments might depend on the situation.For example, in the company case complex systems were stud-ied, which had strict requirements on reliability, dependability, andsecurity (e.g. guaranteed up-time is contractually ﬁxed). Given thecomplexity of the systems and their high requirements on security,some high level architecture and design decisions (see anatomyplan in Fig. 6) need to be ﬁxed early. At a later point it would beextremely expensive to restructure the system, which also affectsthe degree of agility and ﬂexibility that could be achieved with suchkind of systems.In the studied case it was important is to be able to continuouslyupdate the risk situation in an efﬁcient way from a system point ofview as the system evolved on a regular basis due to continuouslyincoming requirements. Therefore, CGs were designed with a focuson reuse and ease of maintaining and updating the risk model. Assuch CGs providing the developers with the possibility to focus therisk analysis on the impact of new features on system security andignore mitigated legacy threats that were already in the model.The practitioners had the option to hide old countermeasures inthe tool and add new information. This simpliﬁed the model. Theywere always able to make legacy visible if necessary to determinewhat happened in previous increments and iterations. This posi-tively contributed to agile principles and practices. Simpliﬁcation ofrisk analysis: By hiding old risk information not relevant for currentor feature increments simpliﬁed the risk analysis model, and thusthe ease of updating and reading it.Planning and re-prioritization: By having the old threats in thecalculations and reusing goals and agents it was easier for develo-pers to focus and create threats for new features and increments.That is, by implementing a countermeasure in one incrementthe risks are re-prioritized and new risks can be added for thesubsequent increment. Such a situation occurred for products Aand B, where in the ﬁrst risk analysis system level threats wererevealed and the subsequent risk analyses were identifying addi-tional threats for new features added to the product’s increments.Flexibility in planning is required in agile development (cf. Larman,2003). Countermeasure graphs and the associated tool supportedthis situation, which was visible in Cycle 3 (Redesign) where thedevelopers played through different scenarios of implementingcountermeasures.Reuse and development speed: Risk models can be reused by dif-ferent products, which reduces lead-time and speed, which areconsidered essential measures in agile as well as lean softwaredevelopment (Petersen, 2010a,b; Larman, 2003). Furthermore, thetime of an iteration is very limited. Thus, when wanting to conducta risk analysis in an iteration, only a limited amount of time couldbe spent on it.7.4. Improvements to countermeasure graphsWe used action research to continuously improve counter-measure graphs by examining and reﬂecting on each evaluationconducted. As the initial solution proposed might be faulty, it wasiterated through several risk analyses. In retrospective we foundthat conducting several iterations of evaluation was important, aswith each iteration new improvements were added. In the begin-ning the improvements were related to countermeasure graphs assuch (see Sections 6.1 and 6.2), while later improvements primarilyfocused on supporting the risk analysis activity through the tool.We saw two beneﬁts of conducting an action research. First, bysolving the problem in an iterative way the developers acceptedthe solution easily and integrated it into their way of working, andcontinued using it after the study. Second, by using several itera-tions a more stable and mature solution was presented for furthertechnology transfer. Hence, we would highlight action research asa very useful way of conducting research projects together withindustry.Further improvements to countermeasure graphs can poten-tially improve them further.One potential for improvement is to complement them withchecklists. Examples of relevant checklists (generic ones as wellas domain speciﬁc ones) have been presented in Section 2.3. Fur-thermore, risk analysis in this study was primarily conducted withmore technical persons, while other perspectives (such as businessperspective) could be useful to consider as well.7.5. Validity threatsFour types of validity are commonly distinguished, namely con-struct validity, external validity, internal validity, and conclusionvalidity (cf. Wohlin et al., 2012).7.5.1. Construct validityConstruct validity is concerned with obtaining the right meas-ures for the concept being studied.•Reactive bias: One threat in action research is that the presenceof the researchers changes the natural behavior of the personsbeing observed. Hence, the researcher would affect the outcomeof the study. This threat was reduced as the authors are bothemployed at the studied company and have been collaboratingwith the people in the company for several years. However, theywere not part of their teams prior to the risk assessment, whichreduces the risk that they accepting the new approaches as usefulto please a colleague. Furthermore, the approach was continued 2426D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 2428to be used without intensive involvement of the researchers inmultiple products.•Correct data: Another threat to validity is that the practition-ers might understand countermeasure graphs incorrectly, andthe wrong application would lead to incorrect data. To reducethat risk the practitioners were trained in the method, and theresearchers were moderating the risk analysis to make sure theactivities are followed correctly.7.5.2. External validityExternal validity is concerned with the ability to generalize theresults.•Speciﬁc company: The studies have been conducted in one com-pany, and hence in a speciﬁc context, which is a threat togeneralizability. We took two actions to reduce the threat. First,we describe the context carefully, allowing to judge under whichcircumstances the results were produced (as recommended inPetersen and Wohlin, 2009). Second, we studied several productsto assure independence of the results from the context speciﬁcto a product.•Agile development context: The development context studied wasagile software development. The model allows updating andadjusting the priorities for countermeasures, and also allows hid-ing legacy analysis, which supports agile software development.The main difference to other development approaches is that theywould not have so frequent updates and changes in the model;however, they would still require change management and wouldpotentially have to deal with software maintenance after release.Hence, there is no indication that the model only ought to beuseful in an agile development context.•Scale: The products studied are of different scales when look-ing at the number of persons involved, ranging from more than12 persons for product C to more than 48 for product D. Thenumber of persons involved is a measure of scale in softwaredevelopment (Poile et al., 2009). The size of the teams in therange of 4-8 members, which is close to common team sizesfor software development in general (cf. Pendharkar and Rodger,2009), and agile software development in particular (cf. Salo andAbrahamsson, 2008).7.5.3. Conclusion validityConclusion validity focuses on the ability to repeat and repli-cate the study, and whether the same result would be achievedconducting the study in the same setting.•Interpretation by the practitioners and the researcher: The approach(countermeasure graph) relies on expert knowledge and judge-ment in order to determine threat levels and the effectiveness ofcountermeasures. This threat is always present as soon as humanjudgement is required. Three actions have been taken to reducethe threat. First, in each risk analysis several practitioners wereinvolved, so that the result does not depend on individuals. Sec-ond, the authors reviewed the risk analysis, as they have expertisein security. Third, the analysis was conducted in several iterationsand on several products, leading to similar results.7.5.4. Internal validityInternal validity is concerned with the ability to establish a causeand effect relationship between a treatment and a set of outcomevariables. The threat here is that the researcher might be unawareof another cause that inﬂuences the outcome variable.•Confounding factors: Whenever conducting industry researchnot all variables can be controlled (as is the case in controlledlaboratory experiments; Wohlin et al., 2012). One threat is, forexample, that a factor other than the use of countermeasuregraphs could have inﬂuenced the improved ability to ﬁndhigh-level threats and countermeasures. However, given thatthe team did not change, and hence the experience level was thesame, this threat was partially reduced. A relevant confoundingfactor could be the researcher involvement in the research, andhence unconsciously inﬂuence practitioners in ﬁnding moresevere threats. In order to reduce the threat, we made a consciousdecision to stay in the moderator role and inﬂuence the subjectsas little as possible, however, a potential unconscious inﬂuencecannot be ruled out completely, given that the authors are thedevelopers of the approach.•Learning effect: There is potential learning effect between assess-ments. In order to determine whether high-risk threats wereidentiﬁed as well without Peltier being used ﬁrst, we investigatedproduct C (triangulation). Overall, the research indicates thatcountermeasure graphs guide practitioners in also identifyinghigh level risks. However, we cannot make claims regardingthe size of the relative effectiveness of the approaches (coun-termeasure vs. Peltier) without a controlled experiment. Thereare indications that CGs helped security novices in ﬁnding moresevere threats, as per their feedback and reﬂection on the results.8. ConclusionWe have investigated how developers use software securityrisks analysis in an agile development process. The developersreported that they were not happy with the results given thatmainly low level risks were identiﬁed. The short developmentcycles and uncertainty of the ﬁnal design made it hard for themto conduct a useful risk analysis.In an attempt to solve the problem we conducted actionresearch the developers to improve a new risk analysis method(countermeasure graphs) and a tool supporting the method. Coun-termeasure graphs integrated the ideas of different risk analysisapproaches (such as Peltier method and attack trees). We improvedcountermeasure graphs and the tool in an iterative way with theaid and feedback of the developers that conducted the risk analysisas part of their development process.By ﬁrst identifying roles that interact with the system and goalsthose roles might be interested to achieve it was easier for the deve-lopers to identify high risk attacks and related countermeasures.The method also created a prioritized list the developers couldimmediately use in their planning of short development cycles. Ifa new features was added to the product the developers could re-examine the existing Goals and Agents and see if any new attacksare possible with the new features. Furthermore, the use of thetool allowed the developers to play through different scenarios ofimplementing countermeasures, and they could observe how thethreat level changes for each scenario.After several projects had joined the study a matured counter-measure method and tool emerged, that was generalizable enoughto work for all of the project and continued to be used after thestudy ended.Overall, the results indicate that the solution supports practi-tioners in identifying high risk threats, is working well in an agilecontext, and is cost-effective as it supports reuse of previous riskanalysesAcknowledgementsWe would like to thank all the participants in the studywho participated in the action research. Furthermore, we thankthe anonymous reviewers for valuable comments that helped in D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 24282427improving the paper. This work has been supported by EricssonAB and ELLIIT, the Strategic Area for ICT research, funded by theSwedish Government.Appendix A. Deﬁnition of termsAll deﬁnitions are identical or close to how they have been pre-sented in Matulevicius et al. (2008) where not stated otherwise.Matulevicius et al. (2008) has been chosen as it provides a consoli-dated conceptual model for security related terminology.•Agent: An agent is an agent that can potentially cause harm assets(Matulevicius et al., 2008).•Goal: Goals of attackers motivating why they would attack thesystem (own deﬁnition), in-line with the deﬁnition provided invan Lamsweerde (2004).•Attack: An agent takes an action to exploit vulnerabilities of thesystem with harmful intend.•Asset: The object of protection efforts. This may be variouslydeﬁned as a system component, data, or even a complete system(McGraw, 2006).•Risk: Risk is the combination of a threat with one or more vul-nerabilities leading to a negative impact harming the assets(Matulevicius et al., 2008).•Threat: A threat characterizes a potential attack or incident(Matulevicius et al., 2008).•Vulnerability: A vulnerability describes a characteristic of an assetor group of assets that can constitute a weakness or a ﬂaw in termsof security (Matulevicius et al., 2008).•Countermeasure: Countermeasures are designed to improvesecurity (Matulevicius et al., 2008) by threat mitigation.•Damage (also referred to as Impact): Describes the potential neg-ative consequence of a risk that may harm assets of a system oran organization, when a threat (or the cause of a risk) is accom-plished (Matulevicius et al., 2008).ReferencesBaca, D., Petersen, K., 2010]. Prioritizing countermeasures through the counter-measure method for software security (cm-sec). In: Product-Focused SoftwareProcess Improvement, 11th International Conference, PROFES 2010, Limerick,Ireland, June 21–23, 2010. Proceedings, pp. 176–190.Baca, D., Carlsson, B., Petersen, K., Lundberg, L., 2013]. Improving software securitywith static automated code analysis in an industry setting, Softw. Pract. Exper.43 (3), 259–279.Berander, P., Andrews, A., 2005]. Requirements prioritization. In: Aurum, A., Wohlin,C. (Eds.), Engineering and Managing Software Requirements. Springer Verlag,Berlin, pp. 69–94.Berander, P., Jönsson, P., 2006]. Hierarchical cumulative voting (hcv) – prioritizationof requirements in hierarchies. International Journal of Software Engineeringand Knowledge Engineering 16 (6), 819–850.Berander, P., Svahnberg, M., 2009]. Evaluating two ways of calculating priorities inrequirements hierarchies – an experiment on hierarchical cumulative voting.Journal of Systems and Software 82 (5), 836–850.Bierman, E., Cloete, E., 2002]. Classiﬁcation of malicious host threats in mobileagent computing. In: Proceedings of the 2002 Annual Research Conference of theSouth African Institute of Computer Scientists and Information Technologists onEnablement Through Technology (SAICSIT 02), pp. 141–148.Boehm, B.W., 1991]. Software risk management: principles and practices. IEEESoftware 8 (1), 32–41.Bresciani, P., Perini, A., Giorgini, P., Giunchiglia, F., Mylopoulos, J., 2004]. Tropos: anagent-oriented software development methodology. Autonomous Agents andMulti-Agent Systems 8 (3), 203–236.Chee, C.L., Vij, V., Ramamoorthy, C.V., 1995]. Using inﬂuence diagrams for softwarerisk analysis. In: Proceedings of the Seventh International Conference on Toolswith Artiﬁcial Intelligence (TAI 95), IEEE Computer Society, 28-.Dardenne, A., van Lamsweerde, A., Fickas, S., 1993]. Goal-directed requirementsacquisition. Science of Computer Programming 20 (1–2), 3–50.Firesmith, D.G., Consulting, F., 2003]. Engineering security requirements. Journal ofObject Technology 2, 53–68.Gilliam, D.P., Wolfe, T.L., Sherif, J.S., Bishop, M., 2003]. Software security checklist forthe software life cycle. In: Proceedings of the 12th IEEE International Workshopson Enabling Technologies (WETICE 2003), pp. 243–248.Huang, S.-M., Chang, I.-C., Li, S.-H., Lin, M.-T., 2004]. Assessing risk in erp projects:identify and prioritize the factors. Industrial management & data systems 104(8), 681–688.Khan, M.A., Khan, S., Sadiq, M., 2012]. Systematic review of software risk assess-ment and estimation models. International Journal of Engineering and AdvancedTechnology (IJEAT) 1 (4), 298–305.Kindon, S.L., Pain, R., Kesby, M., 2007]. Participatory Action Research Approachesand Methods: Connecting People, Participation and Place. Routledge, London.Kotonya, G., Sommerville, I., 1998]. Requirements Engineering: Processes and Tech-niques. John Wiley, Chichester.Kuzniarz, L., Angelis, L., 2011]. Empirical extension of a classiﬁcation framework foraddressing consistency in model based development. Information & SoftwareTechnology 53 (3), 214–229.Larman, C., 2003]. Agile and Iterative Development: A Manager’s Guide. PearsonEducation.Martella, R.C., Nelson, R., Marchand-Martella, N., 1999]. Research methods: learningto become a critical research consumer. Allyn and Bacon, Boston.Matulevicius, R., Mayer, N., Mouratidis, H., Dubois, E., Heymans, P., Genon, N., 2008].Adapting secure tropos for security risk management in the early phasesof information systems development. In: Proceedings of the 20th Interna-tional Conference on Advanced Information Systems Engineering (CAiSE 2008),Montpellier, France, June 16–20, 2008, pp. 541–555.McDermott, J.P., Fox, C., 1999]. Using abuse case models for security requirementsanalysis. In: in: 15th Annual Computer Security Applications Conference (ACSAC1999), pp. 55–64.McGraw, G., 2006]. Software Security: Building Security. Addison-Wesley, UpperSaddle River, NJ.McKay, J., Marshall, P., 2001]. The dual imperatives of action research. InformationTechnology & People 14 (1), 46–59.Mouratidis, H., Giorgini, P., 2007]. Secure tropos: a security-oriented extensionof the tropos methodology. International Journal of Software Engineering andKnowledge Engineering 17 (2), 285–309.Neumann, D.E., 2002]. An enhanced neural network technique for softwarerisk analysis. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 28 (9), 904–912,doi:10.1109/TSE.2002.1033229.Opdahl, A.L., Sindre, G., 2009]. Experimental comparison of attack trees and misusecases for security threat identiﬁcation. Information & Software Technology 51(5), 916–932.Peltier, T.R., 2001]. Information security risk analysis. Auerbach, Boca Raton, FL.Peltier, T.R., 2004]. Risk analysis and risk management. Information Systems Secu-rity 13 (4), 44–56.Pendharkar, P.C., Rodger, J.A., 2009]. The relationship between software develop-ment team size and software development cost. Communications of the ACM52 (1), 141–144.Petersen, K., Wohlin, C., 2009]. Context in industrial software engineering research.In: Proceedings of the Third International Symposium on Empirical SoftwareEngineering and Measurement (ESEM 2009), pp. 401–404.Petersen, K., 2010a]. Is lean agile and agile lean? A comparison between twosoftware development paradigms. In: Dogru, Ali H., Bicer, Veli (Eds.), ModernSoftware Engineering Concepts and Practices: Advanced Approaches. IGI Global,Hershey, Pennsylvania, US, pp. 19–46.Petersen, K., 2010b]. An empirical study of lead-times in incremental and agile soft-ware development. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on SoftwareProcess, ICSP 2010, Paderborn, Germany, July 8–9, 2010, pp. 345–356.Poile, C., Begel, A., Nagappan, N., 2009]. Coordination in Large-scale Software Devel-opment: Helpful and Unhelpful Behaviors, Technical Report. Dept. of ComputerScience, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, September.F. Roeser, Can Software Security be Successfully Implemented in Agile Soft-ware Development? A Systematic Literature Review, Technical Report 11/01,Hochschule der Medien, Nobelstr. 10, 70569 Stuttgart, Germany (January 2011).Rovegard, P., Angelis, L., Wohlin, C., 2008]. An empirical study on views ofimportance of change impact analysis issues. IEEE Transactions on SoftwareEngineering 34 (4), 516–530.Sadiq, M., Rahmani, M., Ahmad, M., Jung, S., 2010]. Software risk assessment andevaluation process (sraep) using model based approach. In: Proceedings of theInternational Conference on Networking and Information Technology (ICNIT2010), pp. 171–177.Salo, O., Abrahamsson, P., 2008]. Agile methods in european embedded soft-ware development organisations: a survey on the actual use and usefulness ofextreme programming and scrum. IET Software 2 (1), 58–64.Sawyer, J., MacRae, D., 1962]. Game theory and cumulative voting in illinois:1902–1954. American Political Science Review 56, 936–946.Sawyer, J., MacRae, D., 1962]. Game theory and cumulative voting in illinois:1902–1954. American Political Science Review 56, 936–946.Schneier, B., 1999]. Attack trees. Dr. Dobbs Journal 24 (12), 21–29.Sharp, H., Giuffrida, R., Melnik, G., 2012]. Information ﬂow within a dispersed agileteam: a distributed cognition perspective. In: Proceedings of the 13th Inter-national Conference on Agile Processes in Software Engineering and ExtremeProgramming (XP 2012), pp. 62–76.Sindre, G., Opdahl, A.L., 2005]. Eliciting security requirements with misuse cases.Requirements Engineering 10 (1), 34–44.Singhal, A., 2011]. Development of agile security framework using a hybrid tech-nique for requirements elicitation, Advances in Computing. Communication andControl 125 (1), 178–188.Somekh, B., 2006]. Action research: a methodology for change and development.Open University Press. 2428D. Baca, K. Petersen / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2411– 2428Tsipenyuk, K., Chess, B., McGraw, G., 2005]. Seven pernicious kingdoms: A taxonomyof software security errors. IEEE Security & Privacy 3 (6), 81–84.van Lamsweerde, A., Letier, E., 2000]. Handling obstacles in goal-orientedrequirements engineering. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 26 (10),978–1005.van Lamsweerde, A., 2004]. Elaborating security requirements by construction ofintentional anti-models. In: Proceedings of the 26th International Conferenceon Software Engineering (ICSE 2004), 23–28 May 2004, Edinburgh, United King-dom, pp. 148–157.Verdon, D., McGraw, G., 2004]. Risk analysis in software design, Security Privacy.IEEE 2 (4), 79–84, doi:10.1109/MSP.2004.55.Williams, L., Meneely, A., Shipley, G., 2010]. Protection poker: The new softwaresecurity “game”. IEEE Security & Privacy 8 (3), 14–20.Wohlin, C., Runeson, P., Höst, M., Ohlsson, M.C., Regnell, B., Wesslén, A., 2012].Experimentation in Software Engineering. Springer, Berlin.Yeh, Q.-J., Chang, A.J.-T., 2007]. Threats and countermeasures for information systemsecurity: a cross-industry study. Information & Management 44 (5), 480–491.Yong, H., Juhua, C., Zhenbang, R., Liu, M., Kang, X., 2006]. A neural networks approachfor software risk analysis. In: Proceedings of the Sixth IEEE International Con-ference on Data Mining (ICDMW 06), IEEE Computer Society, pp. 722–725.Yu, E., 1995]. Modelling strategic relationships for process reengineering, Disserta-tion, Department of Computer Science. University of Toronto.Zahedi, F., 1986]. The analytic hierarchy process a survey of the method and itsapplications. Interfaces 16 (4), 96–108.Dejan Baca is a security engineer at Ericsson AB, Sweden. He received hisPhD in computer science from Blekinge Institute of Technology in 2012,and his M.Sc. in computer science in 2004. His research interests includesoftware security, software processes, game development, and agile softwaredevelopment.Kai Petersen is an assistant professor in software engineering at Blekinge Instituteof Technology, Sweden. He received his Ph.D. and Master of Science in SoftwareEngineering (M.Sc.) from Blekinge Institute of Technology. His research interestsinclude empirical software engineering, software process improvement, lean andagile development, software testing and software measurement. He has over 30publications in peer-reviewed journals and conferences. He is the industry co-chairat REFSQ 2013, the 19th International Working Conference on Requirements Engi-neering: Foundations for Software Quality.