 The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 1353Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u rn al hom epage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssAgile requirements prioritization in large-scale outsourced system projects: Anempirical studyMaya Danevaa, Egbert van der Veena, Chintan Amrita,, Smita Ghaisasb, Klaas Sikkela, Ramesh Kumarb,Nirav Ajmerib, Uday Ramteerthkarb, Roel WieringaaaUniversity of Twente, Enschede, The NetherlandsbTata Research, Development and Design Centre, 54 Hadapsar Industrial Estate, Pune 411013, Indiaa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 8 August 2011Received in revised form15 November 2012Accepted 18 December 2012Available online 29 December 2012Keywords:
Agile requirements engineeringRequirements prioritizationOutsourced software developmentRequirements dependenciesLarge projectsDistributed project managementQualitative researchCase studya b s t r a c tThe application of agile practices for requirements prioritization in distributed and outsourced projects isa relatively recent trend. Hence, not all of its facets are well-understood. This exploratory study sets out touncover the concepts that practitioners in a large software organization use in the prioritization processand the practices that they deem good. We seek to provide a rich analysis and a deep understanding ofthree cases in an exploratory study that was carried out in a large and mature company, widely recognizedfor its excellence and its engagement in outsourced software development. We used in-depth interviewsfor data collection and grounded theory techniques for data analysis. Our exploration efforts yieldedthe following ﬁndings: (i) understanding requirements dependencies is of paramount importance forthe successful deployment of agile approaches in large outsourced projects. (ii) Next to business value,the most important prioritization criterion in the setting of outsourced large agile projects is risk. (iii)The software organization has developed a new artefact that seems to be a worthwhile contribution toagile software development in the large: ‘delivery stories’, which complement user stories with technicalimplications, effort estimation and associated risk. The delivery stories play a pivotal role in requirementsprioritization. (iv) The vendor’s domain knowledge is a key asset for setting up successful client-developercollaboration. (v) The use of agile prioritization practices depends on the type of project outsourcingarrangement. Our ﬁndings contribute to the empirical software engineering literature by bringing a richanalysis of cases in agile and distributed contexts, from a vendor’s perspective. We also discuss thepossible implications of the results for research and in practice.© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionAgile project development and management approaches arebecoming the preferred choice for an increasingly large numberof software organizations, be it large or small (Ramesh et al.,2010). A key pillar in any agile process of systems delivery is theclose and continual collaboration between clients and developers(Maiden and Jones, 2010), which culminates in making projectdecisions that optimize both the client’s and vendor’s businessvalue. The client–developer collaboration is also a well-recognizedfeature of most agile requirements engineering (RE) processes,Corresponding author.E-mail addresses: m.daneva@utwente.nl(M. Daneva),e.vanderveen@student.utwente.nl (E. van der Veen), c.amrit@utwente.nl(C. Amrit), smita.ghaisas@tcs.com (S. Ghaisas), k.sikkel@utwente.nl(K. Sikkel), ramesh.kumar@tcs.com (R. Kumar), nirav.ajmeri@tcs.com (N. Ajmeri),uday.ramteerthkar@tcs.com (U. Ramteerthkar), r.j.wieringa@utwente.nl(R. Wieringa).and speciﬁcally – of requirements (re)prioritization. Reprioritizingrequirements at inter-iteration time plays a pivotal role in agileprojects (Racheva et al., 2010). However, the question of how thereprioritization happens in real life has been investigated only incertain contexts, for example, in small and medium sized projects(Eckstein, 2004; Ramesh et al., 2010). Our literature review revealedthat in the area of agile RE, relatively few empirical studies addressthe project realities of large and distributed projects (Barlow et al.,2011; Sarker and Sarker, 2009). Even fewer studies focus on thecomplex RE settings unique to outsourced software development(Sarker and Sarker, 2009). Also, in the area of global software engi-neering (GSE), a tertiary study by Hanssen et al. (2011) on the signsof agile trends in GSE research found that most empirical studiesaddress the context of small and medium size projects.In this paper we explore the trade-off between the value forclients vs the value for vendors in agile requirements prioritiza-tion, in large and distributed projects, by means of an embeddedcase study (Yin, 2008; Scholz and Tietje, 2002). This case studywas carried out in a context whereby three large, multi-siteenterprise systems were delivered under a contract between a0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2012.12.046 1334M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 1353large and mature outsourcing vendor in Asia and three dispersedclient organizations. The overall research objective was to uncoverhow mid-course requirements prioritization takes place in largeprojects in industry, and what notions of value are included in itfrom the vendor’s perspective.We performed an embedded case study (Scholz and Tietje, 2002)that was exploratory in nature. Our purpose was to ‘look underthe hood’, to observe and identify those mechanisms that drive therequirements prioritization as a risk-value-balancing process. Theoutcome of the study is a rich analysis of how three real-life casescoped with RE when delivering large systems to clients as part ofan outsourcing relationship, and doing it successfully.The research reported in this paper offers two contributions: toagile RE, in particular, and to empirical SE, in general. First, whilemost case studies dealing with agile RE have focused on small-medium project organizations, our research explicitly speciﬁes theRE knowledge pertaining to those practices which (depending onthe outsourcing arrangement) work in large projects associatedwith a large and mature outsourcing vendor. Knowledge about howto adopt agile practices in large organizations has accumulated overthe past years (Hanssen et al., 2011), but this knowledge has beenevaluated from a client organization’s perspective, not from a ven-dor’s perspective. In a systematic review on distributed softwaredevelopment, Prikladnicki and Audy (2010, p. 790) called for morestudies from the vendor’s angle. Furthermore, the reviewed stud-ies focused on problems associated with agile in the large, not onthe solutions. The present research yields a rich analysis aimed atunderstanding the vendor from a technical standpoint. In particu-lar, we explicate what the vendor does within its own walls in orderto make agile practices work for a client in an outsourcing setting.Our explicit focus on what the vendor found to work is a uniquefeature of this study. This paper also provides a direct responseto two other calls: (1) the call by the empirical SE community formore empirical research on which SE process to use in which spe-ciﬁc context (Sjøberg et al., 2007) and (2) the particular call by theRE community for more empirical research in the sub-areas of RE(Cheng and Atlee, 2007).In what follows, we ﬁrst present our motivation, and then inSection 2, we review related work on agile RE in large projects. Wethen describe our embedded case study research design, its exe-cution, and its outcomes. Finally, we discuss the results and thelimitations of the study, reﬂect on the experiences and the practi-cal and theoretical implications, and conclude with suggestions forfuture research activities.1.1. MotivationOur motivation for this empirical research is grounded on therecent trends in the software industry, indicating the increased dif-fusion of agile into large projects in distributed and outsourcingcontexts. Facing the fact that we, as a community, know relativelylittle of how agile should or could work, we felt motivated toinitiate empirical research so as to approach this knowledge gapsystematically. The authors of the present paper brought relevantprofessional background and experience to this task. While someof the authors have been involved in empirical research on agileRE practices (Racheva et al., 2010), others have direct access tothe type of projects and the organizational settings important toour understanding of the phenomenon of agile requirements pri-oritization. In 2009 two of the authors (Daneva and Sikkel) wereactively involved in a systematic literature review (Racheva et al.,2009) on business value in agile RE, with the conclusion that thephenomenon of agile requirements prioritization was only partlyexplored. The review found no studies that clearly indicated howexactly individual agile practices or groups of such practices notonly create value, but also keep accumulating it over time, whileminimizing the risk for the vendor. In 2010, three of the authors(Daneva, Sikkel and Wieringa) studied the phenomenon of agilerequirements prioritization in small and medium-size agile com-panies. The result of this work was a descriptive model explaininghow agile requirements prioritization happens in agile small andmedium project settings. Drawing on these prior experiences, ourmotivation for the present embedded case study was to under-stand the mechanics of agile RE practices in large organizations.We acknowledge that large and complex projects (for example,distributed outsourcing projects) are likely to have many interde-pendencies and to require more coordination. This in turn, forcesthe organizations to adopt standardization and planning as a lessexpensive form of coordination (Barlow et al., 2011). As we will seein Section 2, little is however known about how a large organiza-tion with explicit standardization policies and norms engages inagile projects, while preserving the coordination forms on the ven-dor’s side and delivering agile business value on the client’s side.The fact that not much has been published beyond the four high-visibility research papers (Barlow et al., 2011; Sarker and Sarker,2009; Hanssen et al., 2011; Prikladnicki and Audy, 2010) and anec-dotal evidence, motivated us to provide insight into actual agile REin the large. In the next section we report on published empiricalstudies and indicate that there is an important gap in knowledge.2. Related workThis section summarizes related empirical research publicationson agile requirements prioritization in large projects and draws onthe consequences for our research.Essentially, requirements prioritization is a decision-makingprocess (Alenjung and Persson, 2008; Herrmann and Daneva,2008). Therefore, in this section we evaluate the related work froma decision-maker’s perspective. According to Alenjung and Persson(2008), such a perspective implies looking into the roles involved,the prioritization criteria being used, the contextual settings affect-ing the prioritization process, and the kind of trade-offs being made.Our choice of analysing the agile requirements prioritization pro-cess in this particular way agrees with the general characterizationof a software process recommended by Shari L. Pﬂeeger (2001).According to her, a process is deﬁned by people’s roles, artefacts(used or produced), and resources. In Section 2.1 we present thekind of studies dedicated to agile software engineering in the large.In Section 2.2 we evaluate in detail what these studies say aboutthe characteristics of the requirements prioritization process froma decision-making perspective. In Section 2.3 we discuss the liter-ature and motivate our research questions.2.1. Studies on agile RE in the largeTo identify related work on agile RE at the large, we searched theScopus digital library for papers published in the major agile confer-ences (AGILE and XP). We also looked at the papers included in the2010 and 2011 systematic literature reviews that dealt with agiletopics in global software engineering (Jalali and Wohlin, 2010), indistributed software development (Prikladnicki and Audy, 2010)and in large projects in general (Barlow et al., 2011). These reviewsprovided examples of the kinds of large projects and organizationsdescribed in recent publications by both researchers and practi-tioners. The relevant published sources indicated that many largeorganizations were indeed preoccupied with the question of howagile scales up. In most publications a discussion is provided by therespective company as to what works in their settings. We notethat all the reviewed literature sources (and included in this sec-tion) treated RE as part of agile SE for large projects. In spite ofour best efforts, we could not ﬁnd a report that was speciﬁcally M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 13531335Table 1Selected literature sources on agile at large.Source Business sector User stories Modiﬁed agile practices Was prioritization discussed?Auvinen et al. (2006) Mobile systems HintsElshamy and Elssamadisy (2007) IT service delivery (a vendor) HintsEckstein (2004) Telecom ExplicitlyMcDowell and Dourambeis (2007) Telecom – Not discussedSulfaro et al. (2007) National Post Services – Not discussedKoehnemann and Coats (2009)IT service delivery (a vendor)–Not
 discussedGat (2006) Enterprise IT infrastructuremanagement solutions– ExplicitlyLarman and Vodde (2010) Large governmentorganizations– ExplicitlyGary et al. (2011) Safety-critical systems – HintsGrewal and Maurer (2007)Oil & gas (a vendor)–
HintsSutherland et al. (2007)Digital library management (avendor)HintsValade (2008) ERP implementation HintsBosch and Bosch-Sijtsema (2011)Software product business (avendor)HintsHong et al. (2010)E-commerceHintsKendall et al. (2010) Physics-based computationalengineering– Not discussedChristou et al. (2010) Banking – Not discussedShatil et al. (2010) Defence system engineering (avendor)HintsHajjdiab et al. (2012) Government entity – Not discusseddedicated to agile RE in the large. Table 1 summarizes the exam-ples of large projects found using agile and indicates the businesssector of the company, whether the requirements were engineeredaccording to the user-story approach peculiar to agile, and whetherthe publication reported the use of speciﬁc new or modiﬁed agileSE practices. The last column indicates whether the authors con-textualized the use of speciﬁc practices in the observed setting,or parts thereof. Table 1 includes empirical reports which (i) referto projects with more than 60 members of staff and (ii) describeagile RE practices in detail. We do not claim that the list of includedsources is complete, but represents a sample with the relevant agilerequirements prioritization in contexts similar to ours (large, dis-tributed and outsourced). In Table 1, the ‘ ’ or ‘–’ marks signifywhether or not the use of user stories and new/modiﬁed agile prac-tices were clearly stated in the paper. The last column describesto what extent the requirements prioritization process wasdiscussed.Table 1 indicates that large project organizations which deliversoftware systems in a variety of application domains have beenrethinking their requirements documentation from an agile per-spective and have been adopting the user story approach torequirements. Those who do not adopt the user stories as anapproach for their business requirements, redesign their require-ments speciﬁcation practices to “become more agile” (Grewaland Maurer, 2007; Kendall et al., 2010; Christou et al., 2010;Gary et al., 2011). We observed that while the literature sourcesdiscuss the user story elicitation and documentation practicesexplicitly, they mostly provide hints regarding the requirementsof the (re)prioritization process at inter-iteration time. Thisimplies that the RE community is exposed to comparatively littleempirical evidence on how large-scale agile requirements pri-oritization happens and, in turn, little is known about whethertheory (e.g. the recommendations of leading agile methodol-ogists in their books) and practice are always consistent. Asindicated by Racheva et al. (2010), deviations of the real pro-cesses from the principles of agile development are rarelyreported –which
 does not necessarily mean that they do notexist.2.2. Requirements prioritizationIn this section we present what the sources say with respect tothe characterizing aspects of agile requirements prioritization froma decision-making perspective.2.2.1. Roles in the decision-making processAll the referenced sources in Table 1 indicate that the ultimatedecision-making on priorities lies with either the product owner orthe client. However, information inputs into decision-making areprovided by a number of team players on the vendor’s side. Theliterature suggests that this is necessary because in large projectsthere is a gap between (i) the level of detail in the user stories pro-vided by the client for iteration planning purposes and (ii) the levelof detail in the architecture and the system level features that devel-opers need for effort estimation purposes. To close this gap, clientsand vendors typically apply a ‘team of teams’ approach (Eckstein,2004) or a ‘stream of streams’ approach (Grewal and Maurer, 2007).Examples of roles introduced by companies to large agile projects toprovide input into requirements negotiation and decision-makingare: (i) ‘requirements architects’ (responsible for “taking the high-level features deﬁned by product management and decomposingthese, on a just-in-time basis, into the more detailed requirementsand stories needed to drive iteration planning” (Gat, 2006)) and(ii) business area owners (Larman and Vodde, 2010). The peoplein these roles collaborate with the overall project manager (or thescrum master) who is in charge of making sure that teams are work-ing in parallel and in a timely manner. The scrum master is wellaware of dependencies among teams and uses this knowledge toresolve them as soon as they arise (Hong et al., 2010).2.2.2. Decision making criteria for requirements priorities atinter-iteration time, in an outsourced contextThe agile RE studies suggest the generated business value isthe key prioritization criterion for the client and for the vendor,respectively. The agile literature sources implicitly assume that theclient’s value and the vendor’s value are both attributes of a largeagile project (Eckstein, 2004; Cheng and Atlee, 2007; Larman and 1336M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 1353Vodde, 2010; Grewal and Maurer, 2007; Bosch and Bosch-Sijtsema,2011; Kendall et al., 2010; Christou et al., 2010; Shatil et al., 2010).Yet, how these two concepts relate to each other, e.g. whether theyare opposing forces, and if so, how to balance them in a way that is awin–win for both parties, seems to be unknown. To the best of ourknowledge, there has not been an empirical study to explain theprocess of risk-minimization during agile RE. Moreover, our earlierresearch on business value generation by means of agile prioritiza-tion (Racheva et al., 2010) also found that very little research hasbeen carried out with respect to business value. Hence, how theseshould be balanced in an outsourcing situation is yet to be fullyunderstood and documented.2.2.3. Contextual factors affecting requirements prioritizationThe agile-in-the-large RE literature discusses four character-istics of the project setting which inﬂuence decision-making onrequirements (re)prioritization at inter-iteration time: (i) the needto embrace change, (ii) project constraints, (iii) scope and (iv) the num-ber of project staff. However, while (i) and (ii) have an impact onhow agile requirements prioritization happens in both large andsmall projects, the agile authors point out that characteristics (iii)and (iv) are unique to large projects. Eckstein (2004), a prominentagile author refers to them as “ﬁrst order dimensions” that deﬁnethe ‘largeness’ of a project. Scope characterizes the complexity ofthe requirements, while the number of project staff is related to theexposure to risk: the more people involved in a project, especiallythe larger the number of client representatives, the higher the riskof contradictory requirements. The agile literature sources (Table 1)acknowledge that agile RE practices need to be implemented dif-ferently in large projects because at a speciﬁc project size and modeof execution (such as offshore outsourced) “things do not work outthe normal way anymore” (Eckstein, 2004), and because new prob-lems may surface due to the largeness of the team (and those areeasier to handle in small teams).2.2.4. Value creation trade-offs: vendor vs clientEckstein (2004), Larman and Vodde (2010), and Grewal andMaurer (2007) indicate that a win–win client–vendor collabora-tion is possible if the project team is aware of the need to balancevendor’s value and client’s value. However, the question of what is a‘good’ balance and what is a ‘good’ way to achieve it in speciﬁc con-texts, is by and large under-researched. Racheva et al. (2010) givea clear indication that the vendor and the client perspectives dif-fer. However, the way in which these two perspectives may differdepends on project-speciﬁc context factors, e.g. if the contractualagreement is ﬁxed-price, or the level of trust between client andvendor. Eckstein (2004) and Larman and Vodde (2010) provideadvice on how to consolidate these two perspectives in a project.However, the advice is in the form of guidelines, assuming that thereaders have enough knowledge and experience to imagine howthe implementation of these guidelines would work in their ownsetting.2.3. Implications of the related work and research questions forour studyReﬂecting on what is known from empirical agile RE literatureon our phenomenon of interest (agile requirements prioritization inthe large), one might ask why so little, or why the important facetsof the agile prioritization process (roles, criteria, context and trade-offs), are under-researched. There are various possible reasons.Generally, there are many more small projects than larger projects.Ambler (2008) indicates that most agile teams have less than 10people and are co-located. It is easier to turn smaller projects intosuccess stories. In contrast, large projects have a higher chance offailure and, moreover, extending agile practices to large projectsis a more recent trend. Eckstein (2004), a prominent agile-at-the-large author suggests that fewer experiences from large projects arepublished merely because the failure rate of large projects is gen-erally higher. As we know, failed projects are less often the contextof empirical research published in scientiﬁc journals (Sjøberg et al.,2007). Speciﬁcally regarding agile, Cohen et al. (2004) observed:“there is a lack of literature describing projects where agile meth-ods failed to produce good results. There are a number of studiesreporting poor projects due to negligent implementation of agilemethod, but none where practitioners felt they executed properlybut the method failed to deliver on its promises”.There are recent examples of successful agile-in-the-largeprojects. However what these publications do not provide is athorough analysis of the underlying mechanisms that make theseprojects successful. Also, as described in the introduction, fewpapers focus on the complex RE settings unique to outsourced soft-ware development (Sarker and Sarker, 2009). For example, Batra(2009) states that in outsourced projects, requirements sign-off isusually done after initial discussions between project managers andclients and there is little scope for negotiations or reprioritizationsthroughout the development life cycle. This practice is followed inorder to overcome the challenges posed by distance and limitedin-person communication thereof. Agile RE however assumes fre-quent discussions, negotiations and reprioritizations. Doing justiceto agile practices in outsourced projects is a challenge, and it iseven more so in ﬁxed price contractual projects. Furthermore, itis also unclear how different outsourcing arrangements (Dibbernet al., 2004) can impact agile RE practices. For example, the agileRE work practices of ﬁxed price projects could differ from moreﬂexible cost/in-sourcing projects. More speciﬁcally, the question ofhow the client and the vendor can balance value generation withagile has only recently come to the attention of practitioners andresearchers. As a result, the phenomenon is only partly understood.Yet, while justiﬁably deemed important in any project, we note thatin large projects – where large vendors and large clients are con-tractually bound, poor value and risk trade-offs might often havesevere consequences (Eckstein, 2004).These issues and gaps in literature have motivated our followingresearch questions (RQs):RQ1: Who are the decision makers in the agile requirementsprioritization process? What are their roles and what are theyresponsible for?RQ2: What prioritization criteria do large project teams use tomake value driven decisions at inter-iteration time in an out-sourced mode?RQ3: What is the relationship between project settings andrequirements prioritization?RQ4: How does the vendor’s team combine value creation for theirown organization with value creation for their client?We conducted an embedded case study with the aim to answerthese questions. Our case study along with a discussion of theresulting insights could help reduce and eventually ﬁll this gap inknowledge. We present our research methodology and describe theembedded case study in more detail in the next section. In Section4 we discuss the results of our embedded case study along withspeciﬁc answers to the research questions posed above.3. Research methodOur embedded case study design follows the guidelines by Yin(2008) as well as Scholz and Tietje (2002). We chose the embed-ded case study form because we wanted to obtain a detail-rich,holistic and contextualized description – from multiple projects M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 13531337undertaken by a large outsourcing vendor, regarding how require-ments reprioritization took place. Yin (2008) makes a distinctionbetween a holistic and an embedded case study. While a holis-tic case study examines the global nature of a program or anorganization, an embedded case study includes outcomes fromindividual projects within the program. We applied purposefulsampling (Charmaz, 2007) when looking for suitable projects. Ourpurpose was to ﬁnd projects that had dispersed users, a large size(expressed in person/years to complete a project), and a projectteam that had already had some experience in using an agile deliv-ery model, or had at least used a collection of agile practices. Hence,as described in Section 3.1, our embedded case study involved morethan one unit, or object, of analysis (Charmaz, 2007).As the context of this study refers to large projects in a largeorganization and little is known about the phenomenon of interestin this context (see Section 2), we kept an open mind and did nothave any preconceived ideas of what the answers to our researchquestions would be. Recognizing the nascent stage of knowledgeon our phenomenon of interest, we designed our exploratory casestudy process by including the following steps:(1)compose
 an interview questionnaire;(2) validate the questionnaire with the help of an experiencedresearcher;(3) implement changes to the questionnaire based on the feedback;(4) do a pilot interview to check the applicability of the question-naire in a real-life context;(5) carry out in-depth interviews with practitioners according tothe ﬁnalized questionnaire;(6) sample (follow-up those participants who possess deeperknowledge or a more speciﬁc perspective).Consistent with the fact that our study was exploratory and thatwe wanted to get a rich analysis of real-life cases, we used in-depth interviews (King, 2010) as a data collection technique andgrounded theory (Charmaz, 2007) as a data analysis technique. Thein-depth interviews technique was selected for two reasons: (1) itis a suitable technique for an inquiry like ours, and (2) the result-ing data offers a robust alternative (King and Horrock, 2010) tomore traditional survey methods. This is especially the case whenthe absolute number of participants is less important than a richinvestigation of content. We triangulated the data collected frommultiple sources (e.g. participants across three different projectsand in different roles, whose experiences varied broadly based onthe speciﬁc role each one played). This was done to ensure thatour interviews provided a multidimensional image of composingactivities in our particular project setting.Our data analysis was guided by the reasoning and the logic thatunderlies the sense-making techniques associated with less proce-dural versions of the grounded theory (GT) (Bryant and Charmaz,2007). Speciﬁcally, we applied the techniques of coding and con-stant comparison as recommended by Charmaz (2007). Thesetechniques helped us to identify concepts grounded in the col-lected data and to link these concepts to higher-level categories.Our choice of using GT for data analysis agrees with Matavire andBrown (2011) who proﬁled the use of GT in information systemresearch. A notable example of a qualitative study of this nature isthe one by Ramesh et al. (2010). Below, we provide a summary ofGT as a research method, and in Section 3.3 we present how the GTsense-making techniques were used for data analysis.GT is a qualitative method applied broadly in social sciencesto construct general propositions (referred to as “theory” in thisapproach) from verbal data. This approach is exploratory andwell suited for situations where the researcher does not havepre-conceived ideas. By this, GT methodologists (Charmaz, 2007)mean situations in which the researcher does not start with anyhypotheses or a predeﬁned theory which requires proof. Instead,the researcher is driven by the desire to capture all facets of the col-lected qualitative data and then allows the “theory” to emerge fromthe data. In the ﬁeld of empirical SE, researchers have been usingGT to ﬁnd answers to questions that address relatively “unchar-tered land” (as Baskerville et al. (2011) refer to it), or a phenomenonabout which little is known. Recent examples of GT studies in SEinclude the publications by Baskerville et al. (2011), Coleman andO’Connor (2008), and Rose et al. (2007). In the RE ﬁeld, examplesof applications of GT as an empirical research approach were pub-lished by Urquhart (1997), Martin et al. (2009), Martin et al. (2012),and Ramesh et al. (2010).Grounded theory can be used for data collection and data anal-ysis, as done in the studies of Urquhart (1997), Martin et al. (2009),and Martin et al. (2012). In other studies, like the one by Rameshet al. (2010), it is used only for data analysis. We followed the latterapproach. The GT process is presented in more detail in Section 3.3.3.1. The data collection processWe carried out 16 interviews in total. They were about an hourand a half long on average. The interviews were conducted eitherface-to-face or facilitated through video conferencing. In each of theembedded cases, the ﬁrst interview was treated as a pilot interview.A special set of factual questions related to the context, scope, etc.of the project, were asked in these interviews. Before the start of aninterview, the interviewee was provided with information on theresearch purpose, the research process and the rights and responsi-bilities of the companies participating in the embedded case study.During the meeting, one researcher (van der Veen) and the inter-viewee went through the questionnaire, which served as a guide tothe interviews. The questionnaire was composed of two parts: theﬁrst part discussed the prioritization practice that each intervieweeexperienced in a project, while the second part included questionsrelated to risk, business value perception and how value and riskwere balanced as an essential part of the requirements prioritiza-tion decisions. The rationale behind this structure was to focus theattention of the participants on a concrete example, and then clar-ify the consideration of value for the client and for the vendor aspart of the prioritization decision-making process. Here, we note:(1) no substantial changes in both the questionnaire and case studyprotocol took place after the pilot interviews, thus these could beconsidered as being an integral part of the case study and (2) dur-ing the interviews there were instances when questions, other thanthose included in the questionnaire arose. These questions had notbeen previously anticipated; however, the researcher conductingthe study considered them interesting and pursued the interviewin that direction.3.2. The case study project organizations and interviewparticipantsTo investigate the vendor’s perspective of how value is cre-ated in agile RE, we examined three separate projects within thelarger organization. All projects used Agile, a form of Scrum thatwas adapted to the speciﬁc context. All the projects practiced AgileRE, with (re-)prioritization occurring regularly. Finally, all weredistributed projects, with at least two geographically separatedlocations being involved. Our study included 16 practitioners work-ing in various capacities on one of the three projects. This alloweda variety of perspectives of the studied phenomena to be included,which in turn, ensured triangulation of data in the research process(Yin, 2008; Patton, 1999).The case study projects are described in Table 2 in terms of(i) type of engagement, (ii) scope, (iii) number of team members(staff), (iv) contractual agreement regarding pricing structure and 1338M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 1353Table 2Details of the different embedded case study projects.Outsourcing project Project Alpha Project Beta Project GammaType of engagement (outsourcing arrangement) Single external client Collaborative external client Inter-departmental projectScopeLargeLarge
 MediumNumber of team membersNearly
 300 35–40 + Client Team ± 100 35–40 + client team ± 50Contractual agreement regarding cost and duration Fixed Flexible FlexibleSize in person/years 400 343 85Modularity of product architecture Low Low Highproject duration and (v) project size in terms of person/years. Forconﬁdentiality reasons, we refer to these projects as project Alpha,project Beta, and project Gamma. The three projects had a numberof broad similarities, as well as differences. All projects were out-sourcing contracts. In terms of scope, projects Alpha and Beta werelarge. Gamma on the other hand, was a medium size project. Con-cerning the nature of contractual agreement between vendor andclient, Alpha was a ﬁxed-price/ﬁxed-duration project, while Betaand Gamma had a ﬂexible timeline.Furthermore, the projects were called “agile”, but in reality amix of agile and structured practices were used. The interactionprovided to the client incorporated all the required agile practices:delivery of working (and tested) software in regular increments,intensive contact with the client, incorporating changes as appro-priate, and on-site customer representation throughout the project.Internally the vendor complied with those agile practices needed tomake the project ‘agile’ to the external world. However, the projectwas organized along traditional lines, hierarchical in structure andsupported by extensive documentation. A CMM-5 organizationcannot really make allowances for alternatives (Barlow et al., 2011).Also, software developers cannot change the core values from oneproject to the next (see Banerjee et al. (2011), for an account of thetensions encountered by a CMM-5 certiﬁed vendor when workingon agile projects). It is the vendor’s core value to satisfy the client,and a mature organization should set up the processes accordingly.Speciﬁc case study participants were selected from the threeprojects, based on the following criteria: (i) they had common pro-fessional characteristics pertaining to the topic of our study and (ii)they had the potential to offer information-rich experiences.The list of case study participants is presented in Appendix A,indicating the details of the participants’ roles in the company andthe mode in which the respective interviews were conducted.Theprojects Alpha, Beta and Gamma were successfully completed,although, they were still running projects, at the time of our anal-ysis (December 2010 to August 2011). We will now describe thecontextual setting of each case study project in more detail.3.2.1. Project AlphaThe practitioners in project Alpha were part of two programsinvolved in the development of a large software solution in theapplication domain of insurance process automation. The practi-tioners were experienced in working on large projects with theobjective to deliver a large enterprise system to a client in theinsurance business. The system was aimed at automating the corebusiness processes of this client’s organization.The development project teams were co-located, and theclient teams were dispersed globally. The case study participantsincluded: one scrum master, one business analyst, two businessanalyst leads, one delivery head (responsible for transforming theclients’ user stories into ‘delivery stories’, including architecturedesign decisions and non-functional requirements), one portfoliomanager (who was responsible for the group of clients’ projects,managed as a portfolio), and one test scenario team lead (responsi-ble for end-user acceptance testing and making sure requirementsare testable and veriﬁable).3.2.2. Project BetaThis project had around 35–40 people in the team, whose func-tion was to complement the existing development team on theclient’s side, leading to a total of about 150 people. The team was notengaged in a speciﬁc project, but was in place in order to enhancethe client’s existing development effort. At the time of the inter-view, this engagement had been in operation for three years withAgile as the adopted development methodology. Various productswere under active development, and these products were dividedinto ‘releases’; each release consisted of a number of sprints ofeither two or four weeks. The requirements here were in a con-stant ﬂux, with the mind-set to accommodate requests from thebusiness, whenever possible. But, following good practice, require-ments changes were taken up in between sprints, not during asprint.3.2.3. Project GammaIn this setting, the client was internal, but not co-located. Unlikethe other two projects which had external clients, this projectdeveloped a product for an internal client, who then used the prod-uct to develop solutions for an external customer. For the purposesof this paper, we will refer to the system development team as the‘development team’ and the internal client’s team as ‘the client’ (asthere was little to no direct interaction between the ﬁrst develop-ment team and the external client). The project consisted of 85–90people, with 35–40 people on the developer’s side and 50 on theclient’s side (again, we refer here to the internal client). The prod-uct was a model-driven development environment. In contrast toprojects Alpha and Beta, the Gamma development team actuallyowned the product, and used its interaction with the client as away to expand the product with the aim to make it widely appli-cable in a broad range of settings. As the client used the tool fortheir own development, they actively discovered bugs or limita-tions and sent the change requests to the development team. Thedevelopment team then tried to accommodate these requests asquickly as possible so as not to slow down the client’s develop-ment effort. In contrast to Alpha and Beta, the requirements for theproducts in Gamma were not only determined through feedbackfrom the client, but were also inﬂuenced by the fact that the devel-opment team had its own long-term plans for the tool and workedtowards those plans. Another factor inﬂuencing requirements wasa separate process of internal proof-of-concept development forshowcasing the tool’s capabilities. As the tool’s development waspart of a broader research initiative, the research team also played arole in designing the project. Although the model-driven develop-ment environment project had been underway for at least 10 years,the development team had switched to Agile only four monthsbefore the interviews were conducted. This transition was trig-gered by the advantages that the client team had achieved throughtheir own transition to Agile earlier. Individual sprints were fourweeks in duration at the start of the transition, but were laterextended to six weeks to allow for more time for testing and con-solidation. Between the sprints, a period of one or two weekswas used for planning the next sprint (in the other two projects,this happened concurrently). As with project Beta, changing M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 13531339requirements were accommodated whenever possible, but intra-iteration re-prioritization was kept to a minimum.3.3. The data analysis processThe interviews were tape-recorded and then transcribed by oneresearcher (van der Veen). The analysis was supposed to be donein collaboration, but one was located in Asia (van der Veen) andthe other researcher (Daneva) was in Europe, thus the researcherresponsible for data collection (van der Veen) took special care ofthe transcribed information. For example, he added notes aboutthe non-verbal language of his interviewees, and clearly indicatedwhenever an interviewee paused and expressed doubts regardingthe completeness of the information provided. This turned out tobe critical information for the other researcher who was engagedin the coding. Once the transcripts were ready, the data analy-sis guidelines of the GT approach (Charmaz, 2007) were applied.Essentially, GT analysis includes ‘coding’ and ‘constant compari-son’ of the interview data. Coding is a way of learning to know thedata. It is the process of conceptualizing the data by reading thedata line-by-line and marking a segment of data with a descriptiveword. Constant comparison is a process by means of which oneconstantly compares instances of data that are given a speciﬁc cat-egory name, with other instances of data, to see if these categoriesﬁt and are workable. This process helps in grouping the data intocategories. The resulting codes and categories guide the writing-up of the results and aid in improving the accuracy of the claims(Charmaz, 2007).GT methodologists recommend iterative coding and constantcomparison. Two researchers (van der Veen and Daneva) codedthe interview text independently, at different locations and withlittle communication between them. This was done to ensure codevalidity. However, the results of the coding and interpretation ofthe data were discussed and peer-reviewed iteratively with twoother researchers (Amrit and Sikkel), to establish consistency andcategorization of the emerging clusters. Our analysis proceeded asfollows: two researchers ﬁrst read the interview texts and attacheda coding word to a portion of the text – a phrase or a paragraph. Thecoding words were selected to reﬂect the relevance of the respec-tive portion of the interview text to a speciﬁc part of the studiedphenomenon. This could be a concept (e.g. ‘requirements depen-dency’, ‘technical debt’), or an activity (e.g. ‘development effortestimation’). Some of the codes were a logical continuation of thecomposition of the interviews, as standard aspects of the processwere discussed, e.g. ‘size of the team’ or ‘decision-maker’. In thecase of speciﬁc incidents, we asked the interviewee what conceptor activity the interviewee had been talking about, which was dulynoted. We then clustered all pieces of text that related to the samecode, in order to analyse it in a consistent and systematic way. Thenthe codes were compared to each other for the purpose of search-ing for similarities and differences between them. This inter-codecomparison enabled us to identify underlying and emerging unifor-mities in the meanings of the codes (i.e. the concepts or activities)and with this we produced categories. Other categories, and thusunanticipated codes, emerged during the coding process. Theseprimarily concerned concepts and aspects of the process we hadexplicitly not addressed in the questionnaire, for example, ‘deliverystories that describe the non-functional requirements and architec-ture’, ‘domain owners’, or ‘risk. . .’. An illustration of our coding ispresented in Appendix B (Table 6). This example uses transcribedtext from the project Beta, where the code corresponds to the ital-icized interview text. The full list of codes is given in AppendixD.The emerging categories were analysed in relation to ourresearch questions. The categories were clustered into headlinethemes (as described in Section 4), i.e. similar categories wereaggregated into a headline theme. Each headline theme addressedone of our four research questions. The results of the data analysisare presented in Section 4. The discussion of these results is in Sec-tion 5. As is customary in qualitative case studies, when describingthe categories, sample quotes are provided to vividly illustrate thepoints that the interview participants raised or shared (Charmaz,2007).4. Results4.1. The roles of the clients and developersRQ1: Who are the decision-makers in the prioritization process?What are their roles and what are they responsible for?From the vendor’s perspective, our ﬁndings indicate that peo-ple who are assigned one of ﬁve roles, namely Business Analyst,Tech Lead, Domain Owner, Delivery Team Head and Test ScenarioTeam Lead, collaboratively make requirements decisions at inter-iteration time. The decision to sign-off is made by the client’sProduct Owner. We note that, unlike the product owner’s roledescribed in agile books (e.g. Larman and Vodde, 2010), the productowner in our case study is a person at the client organization. TheProject Owner is responsible for overseeing the project and for mak-ing sure that the right changes are communicated to the vendorin a timely manner (e.g. before the vendor’s team starts imple-menting the requirements that would be subjected to changes). Theproduct owner is advised regarding business decisions by SubjectMatter Experts who are also representatives of the client’s organi-zation. These are senior managers responsible for various parts ofthe business. For example, in insurance, this would be setting upinsurance policies, managing client complaints or deﬁning long-term care beneﬁts. Thus the ﬁve mentioned roles of the vendor’sorganization can be described further as: (i) Business Analysts whodocument the business process and data requirements in the formof user stories, (ii) Tech Leads who are functional managers of soft-ware development staff (e.g. design, testing), (iii) Domain Owners,who are responsible for accumulating knowledge concerning theclient’s business domain, sharing it among team members, andpackaging it in a form that is reusable in future projects, (iv) DeliveryTeam Heads who are ultimately responsible for ensuring that theirteams of domain experts deliver all the desired functionality alongwith the architects responsible for designing a system architecturethat meets all the non-functional requirements, namely maintain-ability, changeability and usability, and (v) Test Scenario Team Leadswho are responsible for ensuring technology dependencies and anyconstraints are considered as early as possible in the agile reprior-itization process. Below are some examples of our interview dataused to support and illustrate the above ﬁndings.“It is product owners [who are responsible for decisions onpriorities]. Then [our] delivery story team, we have businessanalysts. And then tech leads are also involved in that to say‘this is the sequence and this is the way we can implement itbased on the design perspective’. So these are the three peoplewho are involved. And then in some of the teams we have thescrum masters also. They’re also part of that” (Alpha, P3)This statement by P3 (from project Alpha) illustrates the impor-tant roles played by the Product Owners, the Business Analysts andTech Leads.Furthermore, P1 in project Beta said the following about theroles in the project’s prioritization process.“Business analyst will have interaction with the business cus-tomer, and later with the IS analysts, you go on with thedeveloper who does the architect work also. Ok? So the devel-oper and the tester are here, ok? Once it is all done, you go for 1340M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 1353the business sign-off. So it has been this, where the business cus-tomers were on the client side. Business analysts were both. . .on-site and off-shore, and the IS analysts were from the clientside. Ah. . . see, I‘m just specifying this from the client side tosay that they take the ownership, but we will be included in allthe. . .” (Beta, P1)Here, with the term IS Analyst, P1 is referring to the ProjectOwners described in the paragraph above. This highlights theimportance of the Business Analysts and Project Owners in the devel-opment process. P2, from the same project Beta commented onroles and prioritization as follows:“[. . .] and the task will be. . . like actually, the scrum masterwill come up with the high-level information about what heis about to do. [. . .]. Based on the developer input, analysisand analyst explanation, we will go for the high-level estima-tion, the tasks will be allocated and we will go with the task”(Beta, P2)Here we need to equate the Scrum Master role described by P2to the role played by the Tech Lead, as described in our ﬁndingsabove. The statement above expands on the crucial role played bythe Tech Lead in prioritizing the requirements whereby prioriti-zation is taken up by the Delivery Team Heads (developers), TestScenario Team Leads (testers) and Domain Owners (managers).We note that the Domain Owner and the Delivery Team (andthe Delivery Team Head) roles were sensitized to the new conceptsthat were introduced due to the use of agile RE practices in the com-pany. Regarding the Domain Owner role, our interviewees deemedthat the complementary use of this role (in addition to the well-known roles of business analyst and product owner), increasedthe accuracy of development estimates and improved the collab-oration between the development team and the client’s productmanagement. For example:“There would have deﬁnitely instances of ah. . . developmentteam now knowing speciﬁcs of that [. . .] in all the domain actu-ally they have domain owners sitting here; SMEs or domainowners. So that issue didn’t actually persist for long. So it’s a. . .as and when we didn’t know something we went and askedthem (domain owner) and it was just on the spot we clariﬁedthat and they provided that knowledge.” (Alpha, P4)The above quote from participant P4 (project Alpha), describeshow the client’s Domain Owner role improves and facilitates thevendor team’s interaction with the client. Development efﬁciencywas also increased by eliminating efforts formerly spent on detail-ing requirements up front that were no longer relevant at the timeof implementation. Furthermore, a designated delivery team com-prising of senior architects considered the pragmatic approach toinclude non-functional requirements early in the agile RE cycles,trace those to concrete architecture design choices, and analysethe impact of changed requirements on the architecture.4.2. Requirements prioritization criteriaRQ2: What prioritization criteria do large project teams use to makevalue driven decisions at inter-iteration time in an outsourced mode?All our interviewees indicated that the concept of business value(which is native to agile, according to agile book authors, e.g.Eckstein, 2004) is more related to the realm of the client. Accordingto them, the business value in a particular project is explained in theproject’s business case. The client’s product owner makes sure thatthe business requirements that go into the user stories are indeedof value to their business. The vendor assumes that the client hasprofound knowledge of the business value used to represent theirorganization and that the client would communicate proactivelyany changes that could affect the business value of the productfeatures being delivered (e.g. changes necessitated by revised ornew legislation or regulatory rules speciﬁc to the insurance indus-try as a whole). The responsibility of the vendor is: (1) to capturethe requirements in user stories and each one (according to ourparticipants) should include scope, non-functional requirements,business rules, and acceptance criteria and (2) to transform the userstories (written, and updated by the vendor’s business analysts onbehalf of the client) in architecture design and in working code. Thistransformation is supported by the so-called Delivery Stories. Theseare translated user stories, into designs and test scenarios. A deliv-ery story (i) can be estimated in terms of size of the functionalityto be created, and also person/hours to ‘deliver’ it, and (ii) has anassociated risk (from the perspective of the vendor’s team), if it issubjected to later changes. We explain the concept of Delivery Storyin more detail in Section 4.3.3. Hence, the risk in project Alpha wasrelated to anything that endangered the project delivery, accord-ing to the ﬁxed-price/ﬁxed-schedule contractual agreement. (Wewill expand later in this section that risk is as important a priori-tization criterion as business value). However, though less critical,projects Beta and Gamma, with ﬂexible price/schedule agreements,had associated risk with repetitive project delays and additionalcosts.All participants deemed the delivery stories as the pillars inthe requirements reprioritization processes, because the calculatedestimates were based on them. The delivery stories are createdby a special delivery team responsible for the project. Softwarearchitects play an active role in this team, as they ensure thatthe architecture design choices that are made during requirementsreprioritization are compatible with the earlier made choices.Most interviewees in projects Alpha and Beta indicated thatRequirements Dependencies, Volatility, Risk, Effort, and Technical Debtare the prioritization criteria used by the vendor’s organization inthe agile requirements reprioritization process. These criteria arealso used to decide whether to escalate requirements issues to theclient’s product owner.All interviewees in project Alpha put forward the concept ofrequirements dependency. For example P2 (project Alpha) said:“[. . .] if at all, the dependencies have been identiﬁed veryclearly, we can go ahead, otherwise we have to look into thedependencies ﬁrst, and then decide, maybe not the entire seriesmaybe we’ll pick the initial, [. . .]. Those are, mainly, thesere-prioritization is mainly triggered by the changing require-ments, and not getting the signed-off requirements on timealso. [. . .] For each user story I should know this user storydepends on all these, ok? So, inside the design, inside the storywe deﬁnitely have one explicit placeholder for marking thedependencies, but the same thing we want to track it in thebacklog itself.” (Alpha, P2)Hence, P2 describes the prioritization difﬁculties faced due tothe volatility (from the technical perspective, as we shall explainlater), dependence between requirements and speciﬁcally due todependent user stories.P2 from project Beta had the following to say about require-ments dependencies and prioritization:“[. . .] Ah. . . but when, when we go for the long run, say, whenwe are trying to pick up our. . . pick up the task in backlog, obvi-ously they’ll pull out the dependency items or the user storiestogether. [. . .]. So. . .. yes, when we do the re-prioritization, orthe planning, they will bring the user stories which are depen-dent on each other.” (Beta, P2)However, requirements dependencies played a lesser role inproject Gamma in the prioritization of requirements. The reasonfor this was the design architecture for the Gamma project was M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 13531341more modular and had fewer dependencies (and these were wellknown) compared to the architecture of the Alpha and Beta project(Table 2). This is expounded by the following statement by P0 (fromproject Gamma):“Yeah, they will have ah. . .from their perspective yes, deﬁnitelythey will have to do that analysis. Here, more or less, the featuresare atomic, and the dependencies are very well known. So. . .it’s. . .by deﬁnition only, they come out easily.” (Gamma, P0)The case study participants pointed out six types of RequirementsDependencies:(i) Inter-domain dependencies that are concerned with require-ments cross-cutting multiple business areas (e.g. client’s policyset-up and client’s complaint management).As P5 from the Alpha project said:“And. . . and the interactions here are not silo-ed. It is actuallyacross domains. Ah. . . what happened was; as we went throughthe user stories, we would actually come across. . .we would seethat there were many dependencies between each of these, youknow, processes, entities.” (Alpha, P5)(ii) Intra-domain dependencies which refer to sequencingrequirements that build upon each other within a speciﬁc businessprocess (for example, before closure of a client insurance ﬁle, cer-tain activities must happen beforehand). For example, InterviewQuote 9 (from (i) above) also described the intra-domain depen-dencies – dependencies between processes and entities.(iii) Dependencies due to downstream activities, i.e. sequencingrequirements in a way that maximizes the use of the availablehuman resources (e.g. testers, designers, architects). For example,P1 from project Alpha had the following to say:“So. . .and sometimes we pick up stories parallelly because Icannot put the stories on hold, there is a lot of downstreamdependency, so we work on parallelly, agreeing with domainowner.” (Alpha, P1)(iv) Team-based dependencies concerned with avoiding multi-ple teams having to work on the same or on dependent artefacts.For example, P1 from project Alpha indicated:“[. . .] And having more scrum teams also would not helpbecause of dependencies and components. . . the application isso. . .it is a single mono-source component application, so thatgives a lot of challenges in terms of having more resources also,because at times four people have to work on the same compo-nent. Which might be easy, but still. . . merging at the end of thesprint, it’s a nightmare.” (Alpha, P1)(v) Dependencies among user stories; these are imposed by theorder of activities in a speciﬁc business process (e.g. client’s identitydata needs to be entered before client’s ﬁle is altered).“We went through the user stories, we would actually comeacross. . .we would see that there were many dependenciesbetween each of these, you know, processes, entities.” (Alpha,P5)(vi) Dependencies among delivery stories; these are depen-dencies between non-functional requirements (e.g. usability,maintainability) and architecture choices; for example, the ﬁrstquote in this section (Alpha, P2) refers to such a dependency.Furthermore, Volatility is a feature of group of requirementswhich the client anticipates to change. Our interviewees indicatedtwo types of changes were permissible in the project: (i) changesfrom a business perspective, which means changes because ofnew/updated legislation and regulation rules, organizational pri-orities (e.g. mergers and acquisitions happening in the clientorganization), new/updated business rules and (ii) changes froma technical perspective, which refers to the cases when the ven-dor’s tech leads ﬁnd delivery stories too expensive or too inﬂexible(e.g. severely limit the architecture) or when team/downstreamdependencies cause changes necessitating reprioritization of therequirements, so that the project gets ﬁnished on time and withinbudget. For example, as shared by participant P0 in project Alpha:“We completed the delivery story we were supposed to start,and then we came to know that those stories were not correctanymore because of the changes to the legislations.” (Alpha, P0)This statement by P0 clearly illustrates volatility due to changesin the business perspective. This is in line with the ﬁrst quote in thissection (Alpha, P2), also illustrating a typical example of volatilityfrom the technical perspective.Next, Risk is considered by our interviewees as anything thatquestions the project’s ability to deliver the system according tothe planned deadline. Risk might refer to any changes that call fora severe redesign of the architecture, or any changes that impactsome essential non-functional requirements, e.g. maintainability.Since the vendor will be responsible for maintaining the systemlater on, the vendor’s team is committed to a high level of maintain-ability. Hence, they treat any delivery story that is not compliantwith the objective of making a system highly maintainable, as arisk. Apart from risk, Effort has to be taken into account. It impliesthe estimated amount of person hours to complete a delivery story.The vendor’s organization uses empirical data about the productiv-ity of their teams to provide accurate estimates (if feasible) as aninput to the requirements reprioritization process.Lastly, Technical Debt implies the amount of architecture-redesign related work that accumulates over a period of time,due to the short-term perspective on architecture. Newly arriv-ing requirements may be technically un-implementable becauseof limitations in the current architecture. The need to accommo-date these requirements would mean having to invest a signiﬁcantamount of effort to redesign the architecture. Technical debt refersto those situations where it is considered safe to start on the devel-opment without having to focus much on architecture design. Ifagile projects are in such a situation, technical debt becomes a pri-oritization criterion. Table 6 (Appendix B) presents an explanationof this concept by a participant in project Beta.According to our interviewees, the concepts Risk and Effort seemto be closely related, from the vendor’s perspective. Our case studyparticipants emphasized the fact that risks as perceived by clientsand risks as perceived by vendors are different. They pointed outthat in a ﬁxed price/ﬁxed schedule project, additional effort (e.g.adding new project staff, billing) pertains solely to the vendor.But the vendor would then have to ‘spend’ (elsewhere) employ-able people at no extra cost. The vendor would try to minimizethis, if an effort-intensive user story is deemed high-priority. Theyexplained that if a project is not ﬁxed-price, it becomes a risk forthe client and there would be intense deliberations as to whetherthe effort being proposed by the vendor is really justiﬁed. At thispoint, according to our interview data, the importance of trust and‘relationship’ between vendor and client comes into play. The inter-viewees agreed that these aspects could well be subjective to someextent. However, they thought that if we explicated the domainknowledge being used to make the effort estimates and to assessrisk – based on a systematic process – it might be less subjective.This relation between Risk and Effort can be seen in the followingquote by P3 from project Alpha.“Today morning we had one discussion where we were saying‘if you implement it somewhere else, it will save our effort, andit will be a right thing’. But the way the business team, theyexplain, they said no, this is a scenario. But then we found thereare other gaps also. So, what we say, we will implement this, 1342M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 1353Table 3The results (of RQ1 and RQ2) of the different projects in our embedded case study.Outsourcing project Project Alpha Project Beta Project GammaRoles (RQ1) The 5 mentioned roles The 5 mentioned roles 2 Roles (Business Analyst and Tech Lead)Importance of Prioritization Criteria (RQ2)DependenciesHigh
 High LowVolatility High Medium LowRisk High Medium LowEffort High Medium LowTechnical debt High Medium Lowor we can keep a reason for this, once a change request comesfor this, we will implement this portion. So it helps us to putthe right thing instead in future we would again do a rework. Soyou give me additional requirements and I’ll plug it. Instead ofI’ll rework something now I will take out the things now, and infuture I will implement your solution”. (Alpha, P3)4.3. Characteristics of the project’s settings that inﬂuence theprioritization processRQ3: What is the relationship between project settings and require-ments prioritization?We found that the requirements prioritization processes wereconsistent throughout project Alpha regarding: (i) the sharedunderstanding of the client’s business value as the key driver,(ii) the way risk was treated and the attention that was paid toit, (iii) the use of delivery stories for effort estimation purposes,(iv) the change impact analysis procedures being used, and (v)the communication and escalation procedures that were followedto interact with the client’s product owner. The perceptions onhow the reprioritization process was carried out varied from par-ticipant to participant. Different actions were taken by differentparticipants as a response to effort estimation information. Eachparticipant represented a speciﬁc role and the variations are trace-able to these roles. This implies that though the interview dataprovided by business analysts did not diverge, the experiences ofthe business analysts, scrum master, portfolio manager, as well asthat of the testing scenario lead varied. For example, the testing leadwas more concerned with requirements dependencies in terms ofdownstream activities and escalated them on a regular basis, whilethe business analysts were mostly focused on inter-domain andintra-domain dependencies. On the other hand, our interview datarevealed that in projects Beta and Gamma the answers to our RQ1,RQ2 and as a consequence RQ3 were different, as shown in Table 3.Looking at RQ1, although project Beta had the same number ofroles, project Gamma had signiﬁcantly less. Also, most of the crite-ria we mentioned as important for project Alpha were reduced or ofno importance for projects Beta and Gamma. We think the reasonbehind this could be the different degrees of outsourcing (Table 4)in projects Beta and Gamma, as compared to the more traditionaloutsourcing scenario in project Alpha.In what follows, we discuss some context factors held to beresponsible for the consistency of the requirements reprioritizationprocess (and the types of variations we observed), as suggested byTable 4Types of outsourcing arrangements applied to the embedded case studies afterDibbern et al. (2004).Degree of outsourcing OwnershipInternal Partial ExternalTotalProject
 Gamma Project AlphaSelective Project BetaNoneour interview data. These are: maturity of the organization, the waydomain knowledge was shared, and the use of delivery stories asan artefact in the agile requirements prioritization process.4.3.1. Maturity of the organizationOur data analysis indicates maturity of the organization is a ven-dor’s quality that the interviewees deemed instrumental to thescaling up of agile practices, so that pieces of enterprise systemfunctionality of high business value for the product owner canbe delivered quickly and visibly. Being mature (e.g. CMM level 5)means that a vendor has a robust infrastructure for software pro-cess improvement. If such a vendor chooses the agile paradigmas their improvement strategy, the vendor can leverage the pro-cess improvement infrastructure and design working proposalson how to implement the agile principles and practices in theirorganizational environment, so that an agile process for systemdelivery is repeatable and predictably successful. An example of‘leveraging process improvement infrastructure’ is the use of theenterprise modelling tool ARIS (Scheer, 2000) for mapping the busi-ness requirements onto the architecture design of the system to bedelivered. (ARIS has been the leader in the tool market for the last 20years of large enterprise systems projects). We note here, that ourinterviewees were not referring to organizations that just strive toobtain CMM level certiﬁcations (for the sake of being certiﬁed), butcompanies that create an environment in which teams and employ-ees are genuinely committed to actual efforts in selecting relevant,applicable and feasible agile practices as well as ‘customizing’ theseagile practices to suit different kinds of project execution scenarios(e.g. offshore or outsourced). We think it is realistic to assume thatnot all mature (e.g. CMM level 5) companies have this special focus.For this reason, although it is intuitive to believe that the maturity ofCMM 5 organizations can help the performance of an agile project,we think the maturity level is not the only aspect determining thesuccess of agile practices. Instead, we think the special focus onprocess excellence and the organization’s urge for adopting andadapting agile values and practices inﬂuences the agile prioritiza-tion process, as described in this case study. In our case study site,all professionals were briefed on why and how agile approacheswould be used in the organization and in the project. The plans forthe use of agile approaches were elaborated in detail (by the ven-dor’s program management ofﬁce and process excellence team)and written down to make sure all processes were deﬁned and fol-lowed. For the policy to be effective, it came with basic informationand everyone working on the project had to know it.4.3.2. Domain knowledge sharing and the complementary use ofrolesOur data analysis indicated that domain knowledge sharing(which was broadly encouraged in the vendor’s organization, seeOshri et al., 2007) seemed to be an important context characteris-tic affecting the way in which agile requirements prioritization wasimplemented. A feature of the agile RE process in our case studieswas the complementary use of the Domain Owner role. This putan emphasis on the accumulation and sharing of knowledge and, M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 13531343where needed, the transfer of domain knowledge from clients todevelopers. P1 from project Gamma had the following to say aboutthe complementary use of the Domain Owner:“We have a kind of [speciﬁcally responsible for the domainknowledge in the team]. . . business analyst, they understandthe domain. And then there are some set of people who workfor. . .only for development, development activity. So there arebusiness architects, technology architect. . .business architectworks closely with the domain people. And then we have enter-prise architect, they understand both.” (Gamma, P1)In our view, the fact that the vendor proactively considered theneed for sharing knowledge (and in turn organized the agile REprocess by paying a lot of attention to it) is not accidental, becausedomain knowledge sharing is related to the vendor’s maturity andcommitment to adopt/adapt agile practices (Oshri et al., 2007). Asstated in the Agile Manifesto (Beck et al., 2001), the agile values andpractices are primarily oriented to the team and project level andtheir premises rely heavily on the team of professionals immedi-ately involved in a particular project effort. One can easily assumea highly mature vendor will want his/her processes propagatedbroadly and across different locations. A highly mature organiza-tion that has already established both the infrastructure and themechanisms can be expected to preserve knowledge and infor-mation (and methodically apply approaches to making knowledgeexplicit across teams), and it is natural for it to maximize the bene-ﬁts of the infrastructure and use knowledge sharing to strengthenthe agile RE and project delivery.4.3.3. Delivery stories as artefactsGeneral practice in agile methods is the speciﬁcation of require-ments as user stories. One novel concept was discovered withrespect to the implementation of Agile in this setting, that of ‘deliv-ery stories’. This was introduced by the project Alpha team and wasadopted later by project Beta as an internal best practice. Deliverystories are created by taking user stories and extending them witha functional speciﬁcation, high level design and test scenarios. Thisprovides the vendor with an assessment of what needs to be doneto deliver the user story. As one participant remarked:“[. . .] it is not easy to comprehend from the business rules anddirectly develop. There is no proper ﬂow sometimes, so, we hadformulated delivery story idea.” (Alpha, P0)The Project Lead for project Alpha described delivery story asthe following:“[. . .] delivery story is like a pre-development work for theScrum” (Alpha, P1)According to the experiences of our interviewees, the deliverystory concept provides large projects with something more mea-surable and concrete than the concept of user stories. A number ofparticipants from projects Alpha and Beta stressed the importanceof delivery stories. However, though the participants in projectGamma did not explicitly use the delivery story concept, they didhave an intermediate translation model between the user stories(the output of gathering requirements) and the ﬁnal architecturaldesign speciﬁcation. A consultancy team translated the user storiesinto more concretely deﬁned speciﬁcations for the developers. Thisrepresents an intermediate stage between the purely agile style andthe formalized delivery process of Alpha and Gamma. With the helpof the interviews as well as project documents made available tous, we have pieced together the steps that go into the ‘user story –delivery story speciﬁcation process’. Below we describe how deliv-ery stories are created (according to the data collected from theinterviews).First, the vendor’s business analysts acquire the user storiesfrom the client. This user story is then assigned an owner, usuallythe responsible person on the client’s side. Individual user sto-ries are placed in context (based on common features) with eachother in a process map, which is a way to explicate dependencyand functional sequence. At the start of development iteration, theuser stories are taken up from the project backlog and turned intodelivery stories. Groups of user stories are associated with a generic‘feature’. The complexity of each feature is then estimated by meansof a metric (high, medium, or low). The interviews indicate thatthis complexity metric is based on the experience and gut feelingof the business analyst, rather than on formal criteria. Participantsdid suggest they would adopt a more formal approach if one wasavailable. Features are then mapped into sub-processes, which thenevolve into the eventual delivery stories as they become furtherspeciﬁed. For each of these sub-processes, the client deﬁnes busi-ness rules, together with the acceptance criteria for each businessrule. The vendor’s business analysts then take up these businessrules and acceptance criteria, and translate them into functionalspeciﬁcations. At this point, the design team takes over and cre-ates design speciﬁcations from the functional speciﬁcations, whilethe testing team uses them to create test scenarios. This process issummarized in Fig. 1.It should be noted that all the different elements depicted inFig. 1 are mapped onto one another through a traceability systemthat lets project team members navigate from the speciﬁc userstory, to business rule and functional speciﬁcations. This enablesproject management to maintain a high-level overview.At the end of this process, the following properties are associatedwith each delivery story:•number of use cases•required time for use case implementation in person days•number of GUI Screens•required time for GUI Screen implementation in person days•business rules and validations– number of business rules– number of validations– number of ﬁeld validations•number of test scenarios•required time for test case preparation in person days•required time for data models in person days•total time required for sub-process implementationThe interview data suggests that the delivery stories are createdin close collaboration with the client’s representatives. Once thisprocess is over, requirements are concrete enough and they canbe handed over to the actual development team while minimizinguncertainty. Our case study participants agreed, formalizing andconcretizing user stories in this way helps bridge any gaps in under-standing that may exist between clients and developers. While thisprocess makes requirements more explicit, clariﬁcation requestscan still be raised.4.4. Balancing value creation for both the vendor and the clientRQ4: How does the vendor’s team combine value creation for theirown organization with value creation for their client?Based on the interview data, we distilled ten practices whichthe case study participants considered ‘to work well’ in a large agileproject, but there was a clear need to balance value for the vendorand value for the client. The participants perceived the vendor’s andthe client’s perspectives as ‘opposing sources’ and indicated thatthey made a conscious effort towards ‘combining value-creationfor the vendor with value creation for the client’. Each intervieweewas asked what he/she did personally with respect to this, hence we 1344M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 1353BusinessrulesFunctionalspecificationsAcceptancecriteriaUser storyDesignspecifiationsTestscenariosDesignteamTestingteamClientrepresentativesBusinessanalystsDelivery StoryFig. 1. The user story – delivery story translation process.were able to distil clusters of actions belonging to an overarchingtheme. This in turn led us to formulate practices in an actionableformat as follows:1. Maintain traceability between user stories and delivery storiesat all times. This allowed everyone on board to see how a high-level business process ‘translates’ into smaller chunks, namelyuser stories and the respective delivery stories.2. Establish a dedicated Delivery Story Team. These are peopledirectly responsible for the ‘translation’ of the functionality, asrequested by the client for the architectural design.3.Run
 series of workshops (user story workshops and deliverystory workshops). This is the particular manner whereby thelarge vendor team created rapport and built trust with theclients. (The modus operandi of the workshops was: some ini-tial face-to-face meetings followed by video-conferencing andteleconferencing, at regular intervals.)4.Establish
 the role of Domain Owner. This role was deemed crit-ical for acquiring knowledge about the core business processesand operational procedures speciﬁc to the insurance industry.The expected pay-off was that at the time of system mainte-nance, the domain owners would be instrumental in runningthe maintenance and operation processes effectively and efﬁ-ciently.5. Understand requirements dependencies before carrying outthe design. This was critical to avoid the unnecessary imple-mentation of complex functionality (only to subject it tochanges a few days later).6. Set up the Product Owner role at the client’s site. Unlike the rec-ommendations in agile books which refer to a product owneras someone on the vendor’s site who ‘represents’ the client, inour case study project the client installed the Product Ownerrole.7. Use the requirements change impact analysis process set upat the vendor’s side to communicate with clients. The vendor’steam had clearly deﬁned policies about which requirementschanges were permissible and which were not. They consis-tently used the change impact process whenever they foundelevated risks associated with speciﬁc delivery stories.8. Ask the Product Owner to conﬁrm any changes directly andresist the temptation to second-guess the client.9. Use status (every three weeks) to signal transparency. The casestudy participants deemed this to be instrumental in buildinga trustful interaction with the client.10. Be prepared for the training on the domain to be gradual. Inour case study, training activities were all supported by theclient organization. For example, the client in Alpha prepared a100-page book on how the core business processes work. Ourinterviewees deemed the training ‘extensive’. In their view, thetraining meant investing resources (that were probably saveddue to the adoption of agile practices!). They emphasized thatthe training was a worthwhile investment, as its returns wouldbe realized in the next project with the same client organiza-tion.We noted that the practices were derived directly from the inter-view responses to 14 Questions in the interview guide (AppendixC). We refer interested readers to Appendix C, questions Q.1-5–Q.1-9, Q.2-2, Q.2-7, Q.2-10, Q.2-11, Q.3-6–Q.3-8, Q.4-4 and Q.4-5). Wealso noted that not all practices were mentioned by all partici-pants. However, because we wanted to describe the diversity ofexperiences of what made agile work, we included all the themesmentioned without counting the frequency of their occurrence.5. DiscussionOur exploratory case studies were embedded in a CMM level5 organization and covered different types of outsourcing engage-ments (see Table 2). Dibbern et al. (2004, p. 12), in their extensivereview of outsourcing literature, provide a typology of outsourcingarrangements. In the typology they mention the degree of outsourc-ing (total, selective and none) as well as the amount of ownership(internal, partial and external). Furthermore, Dibbern et al. (2004)deﬁne total outsourcing as the transfer of IS assets, leases, staff,and management responsibility for the delivery of IS products andservices from an internal IS function to a single third party vendorwhich represents more than 80% of the IS budget. Selective out-sourcing refers to “the decision to source selected IS functions fromexternal provider(s) while still providing between 20% and 80% ofthe IS budget internally”. “None” implies keeping the managementand provisioning of more than 80% of the IS budget internally.As shown in Table 4, our embedded case studies cover the spec-trum of outsourced project ownership. This gives us the uniqueposition to also determine the impact of the different types ofoutsourcing arrangements on agile requirement prioritization. Weobserved that certain roles as well as prioritization criteria weregiven more importance as we moved from a typical Outsourc-ing scenario (project Alpha) to a more internal sourcing scenario(project Gamma) (Table 2). We also noticed that certain practiceslike the use of Delivery Stories that we observed in projects Alphaand to a lesser extent in project Beta were not so important inproject Gamma. This was of course also due to the size of Gamma(Table 2).The case studies yielded a few ﬁndings regarding the essentialaspects of requirements (re)prioritization in large agile projects,which deviated from what agile literature says about these aspects. M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 13531345Overall, these ﬁndings revised parts of our understanding of thefollowing:a) the roles on the client’s and vendor’s sides, such as the signiﬁ-cance and utility of the Domain Owner role;b) artefacts, like the Delivery Story, that helped in understandingand prioritizing the requirements;c) the prioritization criteria used, and the implementation of agilepractices were different based on the contexts of the embeddedcase study projects.We conjecture that the introduction of both speciﬁc roles (e.g.Domain Owner) and speciﬁc artefacts (documentation) were dueto (1) the high maturity of the organization the case studies wereembedded in and (2) the organization’s effort to leverage domainknowledge. We will now discuss some ﬁndings in more detail andwill add some general observations.First, an important role was played by the Program ManagementOfﬁce (PMO) and the Process Excellence (PE) team in the vendor’sorganization. Their involvement in scrutinizing scenarios of howto implement agile practices in a project was critical. In each ofour different embedded case studies, we noticed the PMO and thePE teams let the project team try out a proposal for agile practiceimplementation and learn from it, and only then decide (based onreﬂections from learning) whether to continue using the practiceas implemented, or to modify it in the next iteration. This led tolessons emerging as the project progressed, and also ensured thatthe new lessons were gradually incorporated into the company’sways of getting things done.Second, this set up, allowing lessons learned to be incorporated,led to a new concept that merits further attention: the DeliveryStory. According to our interviewees, although user stories describesystem functionalities in terms of the client’s business, they donot really describe the speciﬁc implementation details. In a smallproject, this is not problematic, as one gets to understand thedesign speciﬁcations, dependencies and functional requirementsquite quickly in the short development iteration. However, in alarge project, involving a lot of functionality, the requirements needto be more detailed and speciﬁc on the implementation detailsin order to facilitate better effort estimation. Delivery stories cap-ture the same functionality as User Stories, yet they also add thosedetails that are needed to plan their implementation. These detailsinclude functional requirements, design speciﬁcations (where appro-priate), security requirements (if applicable). Delivery stories arecreated from user stories by turning them into functional speci-ﬁcations, high-level designs and test scenarios; see Section 4.3.3.Delivery stories do play an important role in (re)prioritization,because they have an associated effort and risk. Also, ﬂeshing outthe design details helps in understanding the requirements bet-ter. Hence, the information in the delivery stories helps in makingsure that the business requirements are technically implementable.Lastly, delivery stories are a vehicle of communication between thevendor’s teams and the client.Third, vendor’s value, volatility and effort are deemed key priori-tization criteria, besides client’s value. The concept of requirement’sdependencies plays a critical role in balancing the vendor’s andthe client’s value generation when making a decision on require-ments priorities. Focusing on dependencies as early as possiblein the project was deemed beneﬁcial, because of its potentialto save rework and redesign. Our interviewees pointed out thatif uncovered late, complex inter-dependencies on other systemcomponents and environments could hamper productivity, as asmall change in one system can lead to a cascade of reworkin numerous different places. However, requirement dependen-cies only play a signiﬁcant role if the architectural design is notvery modular and/or if the dependencies are not universally wellknown to the development team members. As seen in projectGamma (Table 3), dependencies did not play such a signiﬁcantrole in managing risk as the project was very modular (Table 2)and the few dependencies were common knowledge to the teammembers.Fourth, an interesting observation in our study is that agile REwas not treated as a tool-based approach that should be rolled-outacross the project organization. Rather, it was considered a client’svalue-based approach. As a matter of fact, according to our inter-viewees, no special tool was used for agile RE. The vendor’s teammembers were, however, well aware of the business needs of theircompany to make agile philosophy work in large projects and werehighly committed to making it succeed. This observation convergeswith the observation of McDowell and Dourambeis (2007) at BritishTelecom, whereby in order to be successfully agile in large projects,“team members have to want to do it”.Fifth, a unique context factor in our case study organization wasthe determination to leverage domain knowledge. Domain knowl-edge is a reusable asset in follow-up projects (Oshri et al., 2007). Infact, delivery stories are a way to document knowledge. The rea-soning being: in a small development team, such knowledge canbe pooled between the team members; in a larger setting, this isimpossible, and the knowledge ﬂow needs to be organized. Theessence of delivery stories is that requirements are immediatelylinked with essential pieces of implementation knowledge in asingle artefact. Otherwise, these may get stored and known in dif-ferent places. This information comprises functional speciﬁcations,related business rules, design speciﬁcations and test scenarios. Thesuccessful application in the case study projects shows the feasi-bility of this approach. We also observed that the commitment toleverage domain knowledge brought up the role of Domain Owner.This role is an expensive investment, as it requires extensive train-ing. However, it is expected to pay off in any follow-up projectswith the same client. We note that, indeed, the vendor’s organi-zation has taken up several initiatives to build reusable domainknowledge assets based on the lessons learned by delivery teamsand domain owners when implementing large projects. There isevidence from other ﬁelds that the pay-offs and the value of thedomain owner’s roles are fully justiﬁed. For example in the ﬁeld ofRE for enterprise systems (e.g. ERP) similar roles have been docu-mented. Earlier publications (Daneva, 2003) revealed that if RE isto succeed in enterprise system projects, the team must have threetypes of expertise: (1) in common business processes in the client’sbusiness sector, (2) in speciﬁc business processes of the client orga-nization, and (3) in requirements models which deﬁne how theclient’s business processes will be supported by the system. In ourcase study project, the role of Domain Owner was supported bymeans of tool-and-standards-based processes. For example, pro-cess modelling was accomplished by means of the ARIS toolset(Scheer, 2000) (a leading product in the market of tools support-ing model-driven enterprise system implementations). User storiesand delivery stories were linked to the activities and events in theARIS event-driven process chains (Scheer, 2000). In turn, this notonly ensured traceability between requirements documents at dif-ferent levels of detail (e.g. business processes in ARIS, user stories,and delivery stories), but also accumulated, packaged, and sharedbusiness process knowledge. The role of the Domain Owner andthe environment settings that help it succeed and make an impacton the project, are under-researched in the agile RE literature.We think that one can expect agile projects to beneﬁt in certainways if experienced domain owners are on board. However, fur-ther research is needed to collect and analyse evidence to conﬁrmor reject this hypothesis. The vendor’s organization has taken upseveral initiatives to build reusable domain knowledge assets basedon the lessons learned by delivery teams and domain owners whileimplementing large projects. 1346M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 13536. Evaluation of the validity threaths to the resultsWe evaluated the possible threats to the validity of the observa-tions and conclusions in a case study (Yin, 2008). For this purpose,we used the checklist for case study researchers as recommendedby Runeson and Höst (2009). When the exploratory qualitativeresearch was planned and executed, the key question addressedwhen evaluating the validity of its results was (Yin, 2008): to whatextent can the practitioners’ experiences and the observed require-ments prioritization mechanisms, be considered representative ofa broader range of companies?As mentioned in Section 3.2, our projects were not completelyagile in nature. They incorporated a mix of agile and structuredapproaches to developing software because the vendor organiza-tion was CMM-5 certiﬁed and hence needed to follow structuredpractices (Banerjee et al., 2011). However, we think that the conclu-sions we draw will hold for other companies with similar contextsto our case study organization (company size, project size, presenceof process excellence units, maturity level and ﬁxed-price contrac-tual agreement). In higher maturity companies, it is intuitive toassume there are teams (similar to our case study organization’sProgram Management and Process Excellence Team) who scru-tinize the application of agile practices and assess the ﬁt to theestablished systems delivery framework. We also think that thereare many companies (especially in Europe and North America)which may not be CMM-certiﬁed, and yet may have established aneffectively functioning project management ofﬁce. The formationof these teams is, by and large, market-driven as (1) many clientsincreasingly prefer vendors to use agile practices and (2) vendorsare expected to possess and demonstrate competence in “agile”.While clients are well-versed in agile practices and the beneﬁtsthereof, they might not necessarily be involved ﬁrst-hand in adapt-ing the original Agile Manifesto (Beck et al., 2001) guidelines tolarge distributed (and possibly multicultural) project settings. Moreoften than not, they expect the vendors to take care of these issues,while insisting the system should be delivered using agile prac-tices. In light of this market development, we assume organizationswhich have already formed internal program management/processexcellence units are most likely to ﬁnd our conclusions relevant anduseful.We also acknowledge the inherent weakness of the interviewtechniques, as they were driven by the researcher, meaning there isalways a residual threat to the accuracy of what interviewees say.An interviewee may have not understood a question, or was nothonest in his/her answer. However, we think that in our study, thisthreat was reduced, because the interviewer (van der Veen) usedfollow-up questions, and asked questions about the same topic ina number of different ways. Also, we accounted for the possibilitythat the researcher might instil his/her bias in the data collectionprocess. Moreover, each interview conversation was completelytranscribed and every transcript was available for reference pur-poses, which reduced the threat of misunderstanding the data onthe researchers’ sides.A further validity concern in interview-based studies is that theresearcher inﬂuences the interviewee. To counter this threat, spe-cial attention was paid to conducting the interview in such a waythat the interviewee felt comfortable when answering the questionand did not avoid the question. This created a safer environmentand increased the chances of getting a truthful answer rather thanone aimed to please the interviewer.To minimize the potential bias of the researcher, we also consid-ered the construct validity of our study. We followed Yin’s (2008)recommendations by establishing a chain of evidence. First, weincluded participants with diverse roles in the same project, andthis allowed the same phenomenon to be evaluated from diverseperspectives (data triangulation, Patton, 1999). Second, the draftcase study report was reviewed by researchers from the companywhich hosted our case study. These researchers read and re-readmultiple versions of the case study results.The choice of the projects in the study could represent a threat tothe validity of the results as the authors relied on their professionaland personal network to establish contacts with the project mem-bers. Although the projects were suitable for the study, they are notrepresentative of all the possible ways in which prioritization is per-formed in large agile organizations. We, however, consider that ourﬁndings could be observed in companies and projects with similarcontexts to those in our study, i.e. mature Asian companies engagedin outsourcing, with large distributed projects, and embracing agileas their systems delivery model. Seddon and Scheepers (2011) sug-gested “if the forces within an organization that drove observedbehaviour are likely to exist in other organizations, it is likely thatthose other organizations, too, will exhibit similar behaviour” (p.12). We acknowledge further research is needed to produce evi-dence to evaluate the extent to which our ﬁndings are observablein other organizations.7. Implications for practice and researchThis section presents our reﬂection on the empirical studyregarding its implications for practicing agile SE professionals andfor researchers engaged in empirical studies in agile SE and RE.7.1. Practical implicationsOur results have the following implications for agile practition-ers: First, a key implication for agile project managers is the need tomatch the mode of project scope negotiation between the outsourc-ing partners, to the contextual needs of the project. We found thatsimply providing product owners and business analysts with theprocesses to develop user stories was not enough. Managers shouldmatch delivery stories with user stories. We found this allowedthe case study organizations to strike a balance between the scopecontrol efforts, the disciplined management of requirements inter-dependencies, and the changes in the environment faced by thedevelopment team and the client.Second, delivery stories as artefacts can play a major role inlarge-scale agile software engineering. This role is threefold: deliv-ery stories serve as (i) synchronization artefacts (that is, betweenthe business analysts facing the client’s representatives and thedevelopment team), (ii) an approach to manage scale, (iii) a controlmechanism – it helps to tighten the scope as much as is feasi-ble, thus mitigating the effect of changing requirements. In therole of a control mechanism, the delivery stories restrict the setof available solution options. As a result, this reduces the choicesthe vendor needs to make, which leads to fewer requirements foron-going feedback. Because of their multi-faceted role, delivery sto-ries should be described more precisely and ﬁnd their way intohandbooks and textbooks.Third, agile in a large, distributed and outsourcing contextrequires a carefully managed approach. Our ﬁndings agree withthe results of Sarker and Sarker (2009) who found that agilemethods need suitable adaptation for effective use in distributedsoftware development projects. A managed approach means usingcontrols as an important tool to respond to changing require-ments. Organizational maturity provides advantages in effectivelyinstilling control, while absorbing the advantage of the agile prac-tices in dealing with the client (for example, using short iterationcycles, delivering business value and working functionality in eachiteration, writing user stories instead of large upfront businessrequirements speciﬁcations). This is in line with Cohen et al. (2004)who acknowledge the goal of agile project management is “to M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 13531347communicate effectively and documentation should be the lastoption” (p. 33).Fourth, our study suggests the role of domain knowledge sharingmight be more important to the success of agile practices than thatsuggested by agile literature. While the role of domain owner doesnot come cheaply, it is expected to pay off in the next large projectfor the same client organization or for other client companies in thesame business sector. However, this raises an issue of scalability.How to manage and share an accumulating body of knowledge?Some kind of knowledge repository could be used, and the mannerof approach could be an interesting topic for further research.We consider these four implications important for practice aswe assume more and more large organizations will embrace agile inthe future. This assumption is grounded on a recent study (Amblerand Lines, 2012) indicating that 88% of companies with over 10,000employees are evaluating or using agile practices on their projects.Assuming many of these companies would work with large ven-dors, we think that understanding the vendors’ realities and themechanics of agile RE, would help adopters gain insights and formrealistic expectations based on their trust in the vendor’s abil-ity to leverage agile, while being in a mature CMM-compliantsetting.7.2. Implications for future researchOur study has several implications for future research in empir-ical RE and SE:First, our study yields a rich analysis that explicates how agileRE works on the part of the vendor. Unlike other empirical reportswhich concentrated on the challenges, we present workable solu-tions for the vendor. We also explicate why these solutions worked.Our analysis went deeply into ‘the salient attributes of phenom-ena’ (as Gregor (2006) calls it). This is of particular beneﬁt to otherresearchers in cases where very little knowledge is available aboutthe phenomena (Gregor, 2006, p. 623). In line with Gregor’s reason-ing, despite the fact that we do not and cannot provide a deﬁnitivedescription of how vendors cope with agile RE in distributed andoutsourcing contexts, we made an important ﬁrst step towardsmaking knowledge in this area explicit. This knowledge could behelpful in the future to work out which replication studies are desir-able as well as to discover new and relevant research questions.We elaborate on this in Section 8 where we suggest lines for futureresearch.Second, when comparing the results of this research with thosefrom empirical studies (Racheva et al., 2010) that focused on smalland medium-size projects, we found that (1) large projects aremuch more concerned about balancing ‘the opposed forces’ of theclient’s and vendor’s value and (2) small projects do not have anydetailed requirements (architecturally signiﬁcant requirementsthat are like the delivery stories in our case study), nor a dedi-cated team of delivery staff members who are employed full-timeon a project. Both ﬁndings (1) and (2) conﬁrm the observationof Ambler and Lines (2012) who posit that balancing client’s andvendor’s value generation ensures the congruence of the deliveryprocess activities with the goals of the vendor and of the project.We identiﬁed 10 characteristic practices of large projects (Section4.4). Although we do not claim these are the only practices that willwork, we do consider them as a good starting point to base futureresearch on the effectiveness and the efﬁciency of these practicesand how they impact important project outcomes in contract-based software development.Third, our study conﬁrmed the intuitive assumption that largescale agile RE demands new roles (like Domain Owners). How-ever there is no reason to assume that all roles are suitable in allorganizations. Uncovering which role ﬁts better in what contextcould be potentially helpful when implementing agile, with morepredictable outcomes and higher chances of success.8. Conclusions and future researchThis paper presents an empirical study in which a number ofagile RE practices are introduced in the outsourced project develop-ment department of a large organization, in the context of real-lifeprojects in different outsourcing arrangements. The contribution isa rich analysis of the studied cases, showing how the vendor imple-mented the agile principles and then adjusted the practices in orderto ﬁt the context of large projects. The key ﬁndings of our study arethe following:•The software vendor organization employed an original type ofartefact, so-called Delivery Stories. These complement user storieswith architectural design implications, test scenarios, effort esti-mation, and associated risk, which makes them pivotal objectsfor (re)prioritization. Using delivery stories emerged as a feasibleway to lift agile practices to larger project contexts. To the bestof our knowledge, delivery stories have not been documentedbefore in the SE literature.•The software vendor organization in which the case studieswere conducted puts a lot of emphasis on domain knowledge.Knowledge transfer from the client is sought proactively, and thedelivery model has been extended with the role of Domain Owner.This adds to the vendor’s costs for projects in new domains, butit is believed that in the end it is a proﬁtable investment as itcaptures business knowledge as well as architecture patterns ofa domain.There is no evidence from the data about how the applicationdomain (e.g. the insurance application domain which is highly reg-ulated) inﬂuences the prioritization process. We assume that a deepunderstanding of the domain helps to build trust with the clientand to improve the quality of prioritization decisions, ultimatelyleading to better service and a longer engagement with the client.Other ﬁndings about how prioritization takes place include: (i)depending on the modularity and knowledge of the architecture, anunderstanding of the requirement’s dependencies is of paramountimportance for the successful deployment of agile approaches inlarge projects and (ii) other than business value, the most impor-tant prioritization criterion in the setting of outsourced large agileprojects is risk.The cross (embedded) case comparison (Table 4) also demon-strates the impact of the outsourcing arrangement on theimportance of certain roles, the criteria for prioritization (Table 3)as well as the importance of the use of artefacts such as deliverystories in the requirement prioritization process.Reﬂecting on our experiences in this case study, we suggest thefollowing lines for future research:First, we consider it important to carry out a replication ofthe study in other organizations that have large, distributed andoutsourcing projects. For example, we consider it worthwhileapproaching other project organizations in different business unitswithin the same company.Second, we ﬁnd it interesting to investigate the relationshipbetween agile in the large and organization maturity (Cohen et al.,2004). Treating agile as a set of values, we have no reason to assumethat a very mature organization would incorporate a new set ofvalues from one day to the next. However, we found it can set upprocesses that make the interaction with the client almost perfectlyagile. Explicating the organizational mechanisms responsible forthis to happen will advance our knowledge and could potentially 1348M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 1353help other organizations instantiate agile processes with more con-ﬁdence and predictable outcomes.Third, we acknowledge that the type of contract has a largeimpact: if it is ﬁxed-price, there is a natural tendency on the ven-dor’s side to reduce project-speciﬁc risk. We also acknowledge thatthe theme of risk which crystallized in our analysis, delves intohow requirements prioritization took place, and relates closely toall those concepts that describe the balancing process of generatinga client’s and vendors’ business value simultaneously. However, lit-tle is known about the types of project-speciﬁc risks on the vendor’sside in agile at the large, in which way these risks are signiﬁcantbased on the pricing arrangement in the contract, what impor-tance is associated with each of them, and what remedies exist tocope with them. We therefore think it is interesting to investigaterisk as part of agile RE in large, distributed and outsourcing con-texts, by conducting further case study research. This could include,for example, the use of existing risk analysis frameworks (Hossainet al., 2009) as the lenses to guide the collection and analysis of casestudy data in future research.AcknowledgementsWe thank the interviewees for participating in our research. Wethank Ms. Zornitza Bakalova for serving as a reviewer of the ques-tionnaire for our interviews. We also gratefully acknowledge theconstructive and actionable feedback of the editors and the review-ers.Appendix A.Table 5.Appendix B.Table 6.Appendix C. Interview Guide“First, let me introduce myself; my name is Egbert van der Veen, andI am a Masters student of the University of Twente, the Netherlands.As part of my graduation project I’m conducting research at [the ven-dor’s] Research Centre. There, we are trying to better understand agilerequirements prioritization from the client’s perspective. This inter-view is part of a research project towards this goal.”<Offer consent form>“The questionnaire consists of some factual information up-front,followed by a semi-structured part. The whole interview should takeno longer than 60 minutes. Please rest assured that all ﬁndings will bethoroughly anonymized, and no personal or conﬁdential informationwill be used in any way. If you feel uncomfortable answering any ofthe questions, you can always choose not to answer. If you have anyquestions at any time, please feel free to ask.”IntroductionThis case study represents an effort in discovering the way inwhich the agile requirements prioritization process produces valueto the clients/product owners. We will study how requirementsprioritization and decision-making on priorities happens, what thefactors are that play a role in it, and how domain knowledge cansupport the process. The long-term goal is to improve the agilerequirements prioritization process so that both clients and devel-opers organizations proﬁt: by ensuring a better understanding forthe rationale behind the decisions and including the considerationof value-creation throughout the project.In this study under re-prioritization we understand a re-arrangement of the initially prioritized Project Backlog (PB) duringthe project. This can happen after some of the following occurs:adding a new item on the PB; removing an item; changing thepriority of an item; change in the scope of the project, change inthe external conditions, new information during the project thatrequire a change in the scope/schedule, etc.“Let’s discuss a concrete project where you had to (re)prioritizerequirements on multiple occasions. Do you have any questions at thisstage?”“We will ﬁrst discuss some general characteristics of the project”Main characteristics and context of the project•How long was the project?•What was the type of contract? (e.g. ﬁxed-price, per hour, etc.?)•How many iterations/sprints did you perform?•What was the nature of the distribution of the project?– How many sites were involved?– What was the distribution of people among these sites?– How was the work distributed between them?– How was the collaboration organized?– Which, if any, Agile distribution practices were implemented?•Who were the different parties involved?– What were the different layers of corporate hierarchy that wereinvolved?– Did the different parties represent different business unitswithin the same organization?•How did the communication with the client take place?– Modality– Frequency– Level of communication w.r.t. corporate hierarchy– Were there domain experts involved?•What type of product was developed?•How critical was the application?•What was the size of the developing team?– How many other people were involved?•What development method was used?•What was the experience in all organizations with the method-ologies that were applied? (i.e. project methodology (agiledevelopment))
– Was there an existing preferred methodology?•In what form were the requirements captured? (e.g. story cards,use cases, traditional requirements documents, etc.)– Was a speciﬁc method or template used?– Were the requirements written by the client, or by a represen-tative of the developer’s organization?– Is the business value of each requirement made explicit?The following sections of the interview will proceed in a semi-structured fashion. The questions should be seen more as means toget a conversation started, and the line of questioning should notbe considered to be too rigid. First we will talk about Section 1.Section 1. Prioritization and re-prioritization process. (con-crete case)Q1-1. How often did re-Prioritization happen?– Between each iteration/sprint?– Triggered by outside change?Q1-2. Can you remember concrete cases of (re)prioritization inthe project?Q1-3. Do you know what triggered them? How did you proceedin these cases?Q1-4. Which factors played a role during the decision making? M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 13531349Table 5Case study participants.Project Participant Role Years of experience ModeAlpha 0 Business analyst 5 Face-to-faceAlpha1Delivery
 head15Face-to-face
Alpha2
 Portfolio manager 10 Face-to-faceAlpha 3 Scrum master 10 Face-to-faceAlpha4
 Business analyst lead 10 Face-to-faceAlpha 5 Business analyst lead (2×) 3, 10 Face-to-faceAlpha 6 Test scenario team lead 10 Face-to-faceBeta 0 Business analyst 2 VideoconBeta1Project
 lead10Face-to-face
Beta 2 Tech lead 10 Face-to-faceBeta3
 Project lead 15 Face-to-faceBeta 4 Project manager 15 VideoconBeta 5 Lead developer 10 VideoconGamma 0 Project lead 20 Face-to-faceGamma1
 Architect 15 Face-to-faceGamma2
 Consultancy lead 15 Face-to-faceQ1-5. Are there any reprioritization decisions that were hard tomake, or took a lot of discussion?– Why were they difﬁcult?– What were the pros and cons?– What tipped the balance?– Who, in the end, made the decisions? (client or vendor?)– Does it always work like that?– Was this an exceptional case; does it usually works differently?Q1-6. Were there any issues arising speciﬁcally from the dis-tributed nature of the project? Such as Language barrier, time zonedifference, culture clash?Q1-7. Are there any reprioritization decisions that, in retrospect,you would have made differently?Q1-8. And some that you feel particularly good about? (i.e.where increased insight or serendipity made you change the direc-tion of the project for the better?)Q1-9. Where did changing requirements initiate from? Werethey initiated by the client or by the developers?“In Section 2 will talk about the Agile requirements process in gen-eral, so not in any speciﬁc, concrete case”Section 2. Prioritization process (general observations)Q2-1: Who is responsible for the decisions on priorities within oneproject and for every iteration?Q2-2: Are any processes used to help prioritize and select require-ments for an iteration? For example, the Planning Game?Q2-3: Are any software tools used to help prioritize and selectrequirements for an iteration?Q2-4: Which methodologies/techniques are informally used toselect and prioritize requirements, if any?Q2-5: Do you use explicit criteria for the prioritization? If yes,which? Do these criteria change from project to project or in dif-ferent products? If yes, why? For example; if in one product theclient is more important than in another, or if one project is morebeneﬁcial to your organization than other.Q2-6: Do you use any formal way to calculate the worth of arequirement, e.g. cost-beneﬁt analysis, a value estimation formula,an effort estimation technique?Q2-7: Are you happy with the way requirements are currentlyprioritized at iteration time? What do you like in the existingapproach?
Q2-8: Do you have cases when a client imposes his preferred wayof prioritizing the requirements and then you adopted this in theprioritization process for the project? And this let the team changethe way you prioritize, which might be different from what youtypically do in other projects? If so, which parts of the approachdo you adapt? Why?Q2-9: Do you prioritize all the necessary work like refactoring,testing, etc., together with the client’s requirements? Do you needto explain to the client why this is necessary?Q2-10: Do you consider dependencies between the requirements?If yes, how do you handle them at prioritization time? How did youkeep track of these dependencies?“Now we’ll talk about some of your own past experiences for amoment. . .Q2-12: In the past, have you experienced cases where. . .– 2-12.1 . . . you had to educate the client’s representatives whyprioritization is needed?– 2-12.2 . . . the decision-makers did not have the necessary infor-mation to perform prioritization?– 2-12.3 . . . the decision-makers did not know why and/or howto prioritize? If yes, please explain why, in your opinion, thishappened.– 2-12.4 . . . the stakeholders were not satisﬁed with the priorities,and this had a negative effect on clients or your organization?– 2-12.5 . . . where the client requested changes in the backlog, doyou know why did it happen?– 2-12.6 . . . the prioritization decision had impacted the system ina signiﬁcant way (signiﬁcant refactoring or rework needed).– 2-12.7 . . . the clients representative did not always represent thedesires of all the clients stakeholders?– 2-12.8 . . . the client’s representative was not authorized to makecrucial decisions, stalling/delaying the project?“Next is the topic of value creation, speciﬁcally”Section 3. Value creationQ3-1. What does business value of a requirement mean for you?Q3-2: At your meetings with your clients/product owners, dothey explicitly discuss the business value of the requirements, sothat everyone at the meeting understands why some requirementsare of higher priority than others?Q3-3: Is value connected to the business goals which the clientswant to achieve by deploying the software system? If so, in whichway does value connect to client’s business goals?Q3-4: When judging the value of the requirements, do clientsalso consider any other factors (e.g. cost, size, risk)?Q3-5: Has the desired value been quantiﬁed? If yes, how?Q3-6: In which way, in your experience, does the agile processadd value to the client? Can you give a speciﬁc example from yourpractice? 1350M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 1353Table 6An example of coding with explanation.Interview textCodeExplanation
Interviewer: ‘Ok. So, re-prioritization, is that ever triggered by outside change, or. . .? What triggers re-prioritization, generally?Participant P5: ‘Ah. . .most important thing is. . .ah. . .what I have seen from my experience here is, one is the managementdecisions and the other one is the end-user requirements. The. . . quite a lot of mechanisms built into agile which deﬁne howprioritization takes place. For example, we have these show and tell sessions, which we try and give to the business in anyparticular iteration as and when we complete certain things. Then the show and tell might actually trigger a thought process amongthe end users, probably they might think that instead of a combo-box they might as well go for something else, because after the showand tell they do feel that it is easier to use the keyboard rather than to use the mouse, so. . . so, that is something that triggers, that’s fromthe end-users, from the aspect of how they’re going to use it. The next one is the management decisions. A couple of managementdecisions re-prioritizing at the program level might trigger a change in what objectives you have for that iteration. So, I‘ve. . .I‘ve seenboth of them.’Types of changes Participant P5 discussed howreprioritization happened in hisexperiences in project Beta.Types of changesClient-triggered-
changeParticipant P5 explains a particularmechanism of how reprioritization istriggered, namely by means of‘show-and-tell sessions’.Management-decision-
type-of-changeParticipant P5 explains anothermechanism of how reprioritization istriggered.Interviewer: ‘Ok. So can you remember concrete cases of re-prioritization in the project that you can maybe elaborate a littlebit on?’Prioritization criteriaParticipant P5: ‘Ah. . .Ok, something from the end-user. . .couple of simple changes like what message you need to get, coupleof warning message that pops out of your application that was ah. . .agreed at the beginning of the iteration. But as and whenwe were carrying out and we were carrying out and we were showing the show-and-tell and all that, probably they wanted tochange in that phase, because they felt that a different message would mean more understanding for the end-user. So thosekind of simple changes, that’s from the user, and probably a couple of things like how to ﬁt that information in a grid, a coupleof more options that they can use based on the estimates, so. . . it really depends on how we take in the changes. . . the drivingforce is basically the estimate, and the impact of that change on the iteration objectives. So based on these two, we take a call andsay that “if you do this, you have to risk re-testing everything. You have to put an effort and re-test everything, regression andeverything. So based on a combined decision, we make sure that only those changes that are really required are taken in.’Interviewer: ‘Ok. So ah. . . yeah, you’ve already mentioned some of this, I guess. So which factors played a role in thedecision-making? When deciding on priorities?’Effort-as-Prioritization-Criterion
Risk-as-Prioritization-
CriterionParticipant P5: ‘Ah. . . well it’s basically we know it’s cost and time that it takes, because time to market is always very important.So time to market. . .the other thing we try to accommodate is what we call as the technical debt.We term it as technical debt. In a typical agile project what happens is; you start developing something and you deliver something atthe end of the ﬁrst iteration which typically is a short period of time, its one month or something. So when you’re trying to do that,obviously your design concepts have a short-term focus. You only design for the immediate requirement. So you keep doing that overa period of year. You. . . come out with something called technical debt. Design focuses only on the short-term focus; probably youwouldn’t have planned for 500 users when you have to deliver something for the ﬁrst month. Technically, no? So that keeps buildingup. So as and when it keeps building up, after the end of one year, whenever you try to invite any changes, to make the change, itbecomes a bit complex, because your design is not so good, it is not an open design that you plan. . .. you’ve not foreseen a lot ofthings, so. . . the cost to incorporate a change over a period of time becomes high. So you also have to plan for a technical debt cost,which means you have to spend an iteration trying to remodel things and make it in the right way. The design has to look[perfect?], so. . .So that also plays a part.Effort-as-Prioritization-Criterion
Technical-Debt-as-
Prioritization-CriterionParticipant P5 elaborates on effortrelated to cost and time.Participant P5 explains what the term‘technical debt’ and how it is used inreprioritizing requirements. M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 13531351Q3-7: You, as part of the developing side do you consider thevalue for your own organization, or is what the client wants moreimportant?Q3-8. Do you share knowledge about business value creationwithin the organization?“Back to a concrete scenario. This section revolves around the ques-tion; have there been situations where a better understanding of theclient’s business domain would have helped requirements prioritiza-tion?”Section 4: Domain knowledge assistanceQ4-1: Were you personally familiar with the client’s businessdomain at the start of the project?Q4-2: Did your company have previous experience with thisdomain?Q4-3: Were there recurring issues that originated fromunknown aspects of the clients business domain?Q4-4: In your opinion; have there been situations where abetter understanding of the client’s business domain would haveimproved the requirements prioritization process?– Customers business goals made explicitQ4-5: Was there a conscious effort, at any phase of the project,to learn more about the client’s business domain? If so:– At what stage of the project did this effort take place?– Was there any methodology or tool used?– Who was responsible?– How was the customer involved?Q4-6: Were the customers policies formalized in a structuredway and made available to you, or were they hidden in the pro-cesses, from which they had to be reverse engineered?Conclude interview; thank participant for his/her time, ask ifthere are any questions/remarks.Appendix D. List of codesAll unique codes applied to the interview texts in the dataanalysis phase. Codes are nested, represented as ‘superconcept>subconcept’.1. business value2. business value >business goals3. business value >client vs developer4.business
 value >decision hierarchy5. business value >deﬁnition6. business value >discussion7. context8. context >aims9. context >aims >automation10. context >aims >integration11. context >aims >reusability12. context >background13. context >contract14.context
 >contract >ﬁxed price15. context >contract >ﬁxed price >consequence >ﬁne16. context >contract >ﬁxed schedule17. context >contract >per hour18. context >criticality19. context >issues >existing product20. context >organizational structure21.context
 >scope22.distribution

23. distribution >challenges24. distribution >challenges >solutions25. distribution >communication26. distribution >communication >hierarchy27. distribution >facilitation28. knowledge management >customer involvement29. knowledge management >domain knowledge30. knowledge management >domain knowledge >acquisition31. knowledge management >domain knowledge >QA32. knowledge management >knowledge sharing33. knowledge management >lack of knowledge34. knowledge management >learning process35. knowledge management >tacit vs explicit36. methodology >agile37. methodology >agile >challenges38. methodology >agile >collections39.methodology
 >agile >collections >sprints40.methodology
 >agile >feedback41.methodology
 >agile >hybrid42. methodology >agile >hybrid >streams43.methodology
 >agile >perceived beneﬁts44. methodology >agile >products >releases >sprints45.methodology
 >agile >reasons46. methodology >agile >scrum47.methodology
 >agile >scrum >teams48. methodology >agile >surrogate customer49. methodology >agile >test driven development50. methodology >agile >transparency51. methodology >concurrent development52. methodology >experience53. project management54. project management >change process55. project management >induction process56. project management >metrics57. project management >QA58. project management >ramping up complexity59. project management >refactoring60. project management >testing61. requirements >capturing method62. requirements >capturing method >delivery story63. requirements >capturing method >user story64. requirements >change process65. requirements >constraints66. requirements >dependency67. requirements >dependency >cross domain68. requirements >dependency >difﬁculties69. requirements >dependency >solutions70. requirements >dependency >tracking71. requirements >prioritization72. requirements >prioritization >criteria73. requirements >prioritization >discussion74. requirements >prioritization >initial75. requirements >prioritization >methodology76. requirements >prioritization >methodology >tool support77. requirements >reprioritization78. requirements >reprioritization >decision process79. requirements >reprioritization >external trigger80. requirements >reprioritization >impact81. requirements >reprioritization >internal trigger82. requirements >reprioritization >inter-iteration83. requirements >reprioritization >triggersReferencesBeck, K., et al., 2001. Agile Manifesto. http://agilemanifesto.org/ (last accessed5.5.12). 1352M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 1353Alenjung, B., Persson, A., 2008. Portraying the practice of decision-making in require-ments engineering: a case of large scale bespoke development. RequirementsEngineering Journal 13 (4), 257–279.Ambler, S., 2008. Agile and Large Teams. Dr Dobb’s, June 17, 2008.Ambler, S., Lines, M., 2012. Disciplined Agile Delivery. IBM Press, Boston, MA.Auvinen, J., Back, R., Heidenberg, J., Hirkman, P., Milovanov, L., 2006. Software pro-cess improvement with agile practices in a large telecom company. In: PROFES,pp. 79–93.Banerjee, U., Narasimhan, E., Kanakalata, N., 2011. Experience of executing ﬁxedprice off-shored agile project. In: Indian Software Engineering Conference 2011,pp. 69–75.Barlow, J., Giboney, J.S., Keith, M.J., Wilson, D.W., Schutzler, R.M., 2011. Overviewand guidance on agile development in large organizations. Communications ofthe Association for Information Systems 29 (1), 25–44.Baskerville, R., Pries-Heje, J., Madsen, J., 2011. Post-agility: what follows a decade ofagility? Information and Software Technology 53, 543–555.Batra, D., 2009. Modiﬁed agile practices for outsourced software projects. Commu-nications of the ACM 52 (9), 143–147.Bosch, J., Bosch-Sijtsema, P.M., 2011. Introducing agile customer-centric develop-ment in a legacy software product line. Software –Practice
 and Experience 41,871–882.Bryant, A.K., Charmaz, K., 2007. The Sage Handbook of Grounded Theory. Sage, Lon-don.Charmaz, K., 2007. Constructing Grounded Theory: a Practical Guide through Qual-itative Research. Sage, Thousand Oaks, CA.Cheng, B.H.C., Atlee, J.M., 2007. Research directions in requirements engineering.In: Briand, L.C., Wolf, A.L. (Eds.), International Conference on Software Engineer-ing/Workshop on the Future of Software Engineering. IEEE CS Press, Washington,DC, USA, pp. 285–303.Christou, I.T., Ponis, S.T., Palaiologou, E., 2010. Using the agile uniﬁed process inbanking. IEEE Software, 72–79.Cohen, D., Lindvall, M., Costa, P., 2004. An introduction to agile methods. In:Zelkovitz, M. (Ed.), Advances in Computers. Elsevier, Amsterdam.Coleman, G., O’Connor, R., 2008. Investigating software process in practice:a grounded theory perspective. Journal of Systems and Software 81 (5),772–784.Daneva, M., 2003. Lessons from ﬁve years of experience in ERP requirements engi-neering. In: RE 2003, Toronto, Ont., Canada. IEEE CS, pp. 45–54.Dibbern, J., Goles, T., Hirschheim, R., Jayatilaka, B., 2004. Information systems out-sourcing: a survey and analysis of the literature. ACM SIGMIS Database 35 (4),6–102.Eckstein, J., 2004. Agile Software Development in the Large: Diving into the Deep.Dorset House Publishing Company, New York, USA.Elshamy, A., Elssamadisy, A., 2007. Applying agile to large projects: new agile soft-ware development practices for large projects. In: XP 2007, pp. 46–53.Gary, K., Enquobahrie, A., Ibanez, L., Cheng, P., Yaniv, Z., Cleary, K., Kokoori, S., Mufﬁh,B., Heidenreich, J., 2011. Agile methods for open source safety-critical software.Software: Practice and Experience 41, 945–962.Gat, I., 2006. How BMC is scaling agile development. In: AGILE’06, pp. 315–320.Gregor, S., 2006. The nature of theory in information systems. MIS Quarterly 30 (3),611–642.Grewal, H., Maurer, F., 2007. Scaling agile methodologies for developing a productionaccounting systems for the oil and gas industry. In: AGILE 2007, Washington, DC.IEEE CS Press, pp. 309–315.Hajjdiab, H., Taleb, A.S., Ali, J., 2012. An industrial case study for Scrum adoption.Journal of Software 7 (1), 237–242.Hanssen, G.K., Smite, D., Moe, N.B., 2011. Signs of agile trends in global softwareengineering research: a tertiary study. In: Proc. of 2011 6th Int. Conference onGlobal Software Engineering Workshops, pp. 17–23.Herrmann, A., Daneva, M., 2008. Requirements prioritization based on beneﬁt andcost prediction: an agenda for future research. In: RE 2008, pp. 125–134.Hong, N., Yoo, J., Cha, S., 2010. Customization of scrum methodology for outsourcedE-commerce projects. In: Proc. of the 2010 Asia Paciﬁc Software EngineeringConference (APSEC), Sydney, NSW. IEEE CS Press, pp. 310–315.Hossain, E., Ali Babar, M., Paik, H.-Y., Verner, J., 2009. Risk identiﬁcation and mitiga-tion processes for using Scrum in global software development: a conceptualframework. In: 16th IEEE Asia-Paciﬁc Software Engineering Conference, pp.457–464.Jalali, S., Wohlin, C., 2010. Agile practices in global software engineering – A sys-tematic map. In: IEEE International Conference on Global Software Engineering(ICGSE 2010).Kendall, R.P., Mark, A., Squires, S., Halverson, C., 2010. A case study of a large-scale,physics-based code development project. Computing in Science & Engineering,22–27.King, N., Horrock, C., 2010. Interviews in Qualitative Research. Sage, Thousands Oaks,CA.Koehnemann, H., Coats, M., 2009. Experiences applying agile practices to large sys-tems. In: AGILE, pp. 295–300.Larman, C., Vodde, B., 2010. Practices for Scaling Lean & Agile Development: Large,Multisite, and Offshore Product Development with Large-Scale Scrum. Addison-Wesley Professional, NY.McDowell, S., Dourambeis, N., 2007. British Telecom experience report: agile inter-vention – BT’s joining the dots events for organizational change. In: XP 2007,Agile Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme Programming, pp. 17–23.Maiden, N., Jones, S., 2010. Agile requirements: can we have our cake and eat it too?IEEE Software 27 (3), 87–88.Martin, A., Biddle, R., James, N., 2009. XP customer practices: a grounded theory. In:AGILE 2009, pp. 33–40.Martin, J.L., Clark, D.J., Morgan, S., Crowe, J.A., Murphy, E., 2012. A user-centredapproach to requirements elicitation in medical device development: a casestudy from an industry perspective. Applied Ergonomics 43 (1), 184–190.Matavire, R., Brown, I., 2011. Proﬁling grounded theory in information systemsresearch. European Journal of Information Systems, 1–11.Oshri, I., Kotlarsky, J., Willcocks, L.P., 2007. Managing dispersed expertise in IToffshore outsourcing: lessons from Tata Consultancy Services. MIS QuarterlyExecutive 6, 53–65.Patton, M.Q., 1999. Enhancing the quality and credibility of qualitative analysis.Health Services Research 34 (5 Pt 2), 1189.Pﬂeeger, S.L., 2001. Software Engineering: Theory and Practice. Prentice Hall, Lon-don, UK.Prikladnicki, R., Audy, J.L., 2010. Process models in the practice of distributed soft-ware development: a systematic review of literature. Information and SoftwareTechnology 52, 779–791.Racheva, Z., Daneva, M., Herrmann, A., Sikkel, K., Wieringa, R.J., 2010. Do we knowenough about requirements prioritization in agile projects: insights from a casestudy. In: RE 2010, pp. 147–156.Racheva, Z., Daneva, M., Sikkel, K., 2009. Value creation by agile projects:methodology or mystery? In: PROFES 2009: 10th International Conference onProduct-Focused Software Process Improvement, pp. 141–155.Ramesh, B., Cao, L., Baskerville, R., 2010. Agile requirements engineering practicesand challenges: an empirical study. Information Systems Journal 20, 449–480.Rose, J., Pedersen, K., Hosbond, J.H., Kræmmergaard, P., 2007. Management com-petences, not tools and techniques: a grounded examination of softwareproject management at WM-data. Information and Software Technology 49 (6),605–624.Runeson, P., Höst, M., 2009. Guidelines for conducting and reporting case studyresearch in software engineering. Empirical Software Engineering 14 (2),131–164.Sarker, S., Sarker, S., 2009. Exploring agility in distributed information systemsdevelopment teams: an interpretive study in an offshoring context. InformationSystems Research 20 (3), 440–461.Scheer, A.W., 2000. ARIS Business Process Modelling. Springer, Berlin.Scholz, R.W., Tietje, O., 2002. Embedded Case Study Methods: Integrating Quantita-tive and Qualitative Knowledge. Sage, Thousands Oaks, CA.Seddon, P., Scheepers, P., 2011. Towards the improved treatment of generalizationof knowledge claims in IS research: drawing general conclusions from samples.European Journal of Information Systems, 1–16.Shatil, A., Hazzan, O., Dubinsky, Y., 2010. Agility in a large-scale system engineeringproject: a case study of an advanced communication system project. In: IEEE Int.Conference on Software Science, Technology & Engineering, Herzlia, Israel. IEEECS Press, pp. 47–54.Sjøberg, D.I.K., Dybå, T., Jørgensen, M., 2007. The future of empirical methods insoftware engineering research. In: Briand, L.C., Wolf, A.L. (Eds.), Int. Conf. onSoftware Engineering/Workshop on the Future of Software Engineering. Min-neapolis, MN. IEEE CS Press, pp. 358–378.Sulfaro, M., Marchesi, M., Pinna, S., 2007. Agile practices in a large organization: theexperience of poste italiane. In: XP 2007, pp. 219–221.Sutherland, J., Viktorov, A., Blount, J., Puntikov, N., 2007. Distributed Scrum: agileproject management with outsourced development teams. In: 40th AnnualHawaii International Conference on System Sciences HICSS, p. 274a.Urquhart, C., 1997. Exploring analyst–client communication: using grounded theorytechniques to investigate interaction in informal requirements gathering. In:Lee, A.S., Liebenau, J., DeGross, J.I. (Eds.), Information Systems and QualitativeResearch. Chapman and Hall, London, pp. 149–181.Valade, R., 2008. The Big projects always fail: taking enterprise agile. In: AGILE 2008,pp. 148–153.Yin, R.K., 2008. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Sage, Thousands Oaks,CA.Maya Daneva, PhD, is Assistant Professor in the Information Systems and Soft-ware Engineering group at the University of Twente, the Netherlands. Her keyresearch interests are requirements engineering for large systems, requirements-based project estimation, and qualitative research methods, such as groundedtheory and focus groups. Maya has a strong international exposure having spenttwo years of her career in Germany at the University of Saarbruecken and in theIDS Scheer, and 9 years as a business process analyst at TELUS Corporation, Canada’ssecond largest telecommunication company. She has been a leading member of sev-eral industry-university research projects and serves as the liaison to the industrymembers of the Dutch Software Measurement Association (NESMA).Egbert van der Veen is Information Analyst and application designer for Topi-cus, a mid-size software company in the Netherlands. His main areas of interestinclude software development methodologies, distributed development and knowl-edge management. He holds a MSc. in Business & IT From the University of Twente,and a BS degree in IT Administration from the Saxion school of applied sciencesin Enschede, the Netherlands. For his Master’s graduation project, he conductedresearch at the Tata Research Development and Design Centre (TRDDC) in Pune,India in the area of large scale, distributed Agile software development.Chintan Amrit is Assistant Professor at the department of IEBIS department,University of Twente. He has completed his PhD from the same department inthe area of Coordination in Software Development. He holds a master’s degreein Computer Science from Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore. In the past he M. Daneva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 1333– 13531353has worked as a software engineer for a software company in Germany. He is atrack co-chair at ECIS 2013 and is a guest editor for a special issue on “HumanFactors in Software Development” in the Information and Software Technologyjournal.Smita Ghaisas is a Principal Scientist at TCS’s Innovation lab- Tata Research, Devel-opment and Design Center (TRDDC). She leads the Requirements Engineeringresearch group in the Software Engineering Lab of TCS. Her current research inter-ests include applying knowledge engineering to enable requirements knowledgereuse and using empirical research techniques to discover conceptual models invarious RE practices. She has authored and patented a requirements method thathelps identify unobvious requirements. In the last ten years, she has conceptualized,and developed collaborative knowledge-assisted method and toolset and deployedthose successfully in large-scale projects in TCS.Klaas Sikkel is assistant professor in the Information Systems and Software Engi-neering groupat the University of Twente. He has a M.Sc. in Software Engineeringfrom the Free University in Amsterdam and a Ph. D. in Theoretical Computer Sci-ence from the University of Twente. He has worked in groupware implementationat the GMD Research Center for Applied Information Technology in Birlinghoven(Germany). His current research interests include Requirements Engineering andqualitative research methods in Software Engineering.Ramesh Kumar is currently the Head of Delivery & Solutions, Insurance & Health-care, Emerging Markets for TATA Consultancy Services. He started his career asMainframes developer and has performed the roles of Designer, PM, Architect, Deliv-ery & Client Relationship Manager and IT Strategy Consultant during his careeracross the business domains of Insurance, Financial Services, Semiconductor, Chem-ical & Manufacturing. He is the creator of the Arva methodology for large agiledelivery of business transformation programs that is based on principles of Theoryof Constraints, Scrum development and large program management. This method-ology has successfully delivery program over 250 MUSD and 600 person/years. TheBusiness Solutions team lead by Ramesh won some of the large and strategic dealswithin Insurance unit.Nirav Ajmeri is a PhD student and a Graduate Research Assistant at the Depart-ment of Computer Science, North Carolina State University (NCSU). He receivedhis B.E. in Computer Engineering from Gujarat University in 2007. Prior to joiningNCSU, he worked as a Researcher with the Requirements Engineering Group at TataResearch Development and Design Centre (TRDDC). His primary research interestsare knowledge engineering, requirements engineering, natural language processing,argumentation and multi-agent systems.Uday Ramteerthkar is heading the MasterCraftAppMaker Suite under the Compo-nent Engineering Group in Tata Consultancy Services Ltd. This product suite is ModelDriven Framework which is aimed to provide higher productivity, better softwarecode quality. He has experience in development, deployment of tools, different soft-ware development methodologies & architectures. In his prior roles, he was involvedin the implementation of Core Banking Solution for one of public sector banks. He hasled Data Services portfolio for a for a large bank holding company, which involveddatabase administration, data warehousing, modeling and data migration. He hasdone his Master of Technology from Indian Institute of Technology, Mumbai and isa certiﬁed TOGAF architect.Roel Wieringa is Chair of Information and Software Systems Engineering at theUniversity of Twente, the Netherlands. His research interests include modelling anddesign of e-business networks, requirements engineering, and research methodol-ogy for software engineering and the design sciences. He has written two books,Requirements Engineering: Frameworks for Understanding (Wiley, 1996) and DesignMethods for Reactive Systems: Yourdon, Statemate and the UML (Morgan Kaufmann,2003, and is currently preparing a book on Design Science Methodology. He has beenAssociate Editor in Chief of IEEE Software for the area of requirements engineeringfrom 2004 to 2007. He serves on the board of editors of the Requirements EngineeringJournal and of the Journal of Software and Systems Modeling.