 The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 1254Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u rn al hom epage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssObstacles to decision making in Agile software development teamsMeghann Drurya,,Kieran
 Conboyb,Ken
 PowercaFordham University, The Gabelli School of Business & The Graduate School of Business Administration, 1790 Broadway, Suite 1108, New York, NY 10019, USAbSchool of Information Systems, Technology and Management, Australian School of Business, The University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, AustraliacCisco Systems, Inc., Ard Oran, Oranmore Business Park, Oranmore, Galway, Irelanda r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 1 September 2011Received in revised form 27 January 2012Accepted 31 January 2012Available online 9 February 2012Keywords:
Agile decision makingAgile project managementAgile software developmentCase studyDecision makingDecision obstaclesFocus groupIteration decisionsIteration PlanningIteration ReviewRetrospective
Scrum
Software engineeringTeam decisionsa b s t r a c tThe obstacles facing decision making in Agile development are critical yet poorly understood. Thisresearch examines decisions made across four stages of the iteration cycle: Iteration Planning, Itera-tion Execution, Iteration Review and Iteration Retrospective. A mixed method approach was employed,whereby a focus group was initially conducted with 43 Agile developers and managers to determinedecisions made at different points of the iteration cycle. Subsequently, six illustrative mini cases werepurposefully conducted as examples of the six obstacles identiﬁed in these focus groups. This includedinterviews with 18 individuals in Agile projects from ﬁve different organizations: a global consultingorganization, a multinational communications company, two multinational software development com-panies, and a large museum organization. This research contributes to Agile software developmentliterature by analyzing decisions made during the iteration cycle and identifying six key obstacles tothese decisions. Results indicate the six decision obstacles are unwillingness to commit to decisions;conﬂicting priorities; unstable resource availability; and lack of: implementation; ownership; empower-ment. These six decision obstacles are mapped to descriptive decision making principles to demonstratewhere the obstacles affect the decision process. The effects of these obstacles include a lack of longer-term, strategic focus for decisions, an ever-growing backlog of delayed work from previous iterations,and a lack of team engagement.© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionResearch has concluded that teams, in general, have the poten-tial to make more effective decisions than individuals becauseteams can pool knowledge and information, which helps themto make a good decision (Russo and Schoemaker, 1989; Schmidtet al., 2001; Wheeler and Valacich, 1996). However, teams facemany obstacles when trying to make decisions, for example: lack ofinformation (e.g. difﬁculty obtaining information); lack of partici-pation and interaction of team members (e.g. due to the pressureto conform, pressure to present themselves in a favourable way,reliance of junior members on more senior members, dominationof an individual, shyness and poor team spirit); assigning the wrongperson to a task; inability to distinguish between fact and opinion;a pre-disposition for a particular solution; numerous and lengthymeetings (e.g. which may not be productive); miscommunication;Corresponding author. Tel.: +1 847 219 6423.E-mail addresses: mdrury@fordham.edu (M. Drury), k.conboy@unsw.edu.au(K. Conboy), ken.power@gmail.com (K. Power).insufﬁcient time exploring ideas and generating alternatives (Shenet al., 2004; Wheeler and Valacich, 1996; Whyte, 1993).Some of these obstacles can cause problems for teams. For exam-ple, individuals required to attend what they consider an excessivenumber of meetings may make a personal decision not to attend(Kraemer and King, 1988). Poor decisions may also be made by indi-viduals who have a personal interest in a project (Bazerman et al.,1984; Whyte, 1993). This can be detrimental, particularly if theseindividuals dominate or have a large inﬂuence on the team (Whyte,1993).Agile software development (ASD) teams are involved in crit-ical decisions that underpin ultimate project success or failure(Conboy, 2009). Because ASD teams exhibit characteristics thataffect the nature of their team’s decision making compared to tra-ditional methods of software development (Conboy et al., 2009), itseems likely that these characteristics would cause other decisionobstacles aside from those typically faced by teams using more tra-ditional approaches. For example, ASD teams work under extremetime pressure to deliver working software in short iterations(Fitzgerald et al., 2006; Fowler and Highsmith, 2001) with frequent,short-term decisions, using minimal documentation (Fowler andHighsmith, 2001). The project manager’s role as a decision-maker0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.jss.2012.01.058 1240M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 1254is greatly reduced (Alleman, 2002; Lindstrom and Jeffries, 2004),developer’s roles interchange and blend to such a degree that devel-opers may make decisions outside of their traditional skill areas,and the customer or Product Owner plays a continuous and embed-ded role, intrinsically involved in many decisions (Beck, 2000).These issues require an analysis of decision making and obstaclesin an ASD context as opposed to traditional software developmentwhere there is an accountable project manager, clearly deﬁned andspeciﬁc roles for team members, and documentation used to drivedecisions.However, little is known about the decision obstacles that anASD team faces. Some research has found that effective decisionmaking depends on the level of ASD team cohesion and empow-erment in decision making: ineffective decisions result from teammembers not expressing views they believe are contrary to otherteam members’ views (McAvoy and Butler, 2009). ASD team mem-bers also rely on their experience to determine whether a designdecision is necessary (Zannier and Maurer, 2006) and then com-pare options when making design decisions (Zannier and Maurer,2007). Related research has found that ASD teams face a number ofnegative factors preventing them from following a linear decisionprocess (Drury and McHugh, 2011) and that experience is a drivingforce in ASD project management decisions (Drury et al., 2011). Yetthere is no clarity regarding the speciﬁc decisions ASD teams make,including both business and software decisions and whether ASDteam autonomy means teams are making both strategic and tacti-cal decisions. It is also unclear when decisions are made and whatobstacles ASD teams face when making such decisions.Customers are a major inﬂuencer of decisions in Agile teams,as well as being decision makers in their own right (Beck, 2000).However, the scope of this research is speciﬁc to the teams andorganizations developing products. In particular, customers are notdirectly included in the data collection. This is intentional. Theresearchers wanted to explore decision making from the perspec-tive of the teams developing the product, and these teams did notalways include a customer or customer proxy.We adopt descriptive decision making (DDM) as the theoreticallens for this study given its emphasis on “how real people think andbehave” (Bell et al., 1988). This is highly suitable for exploring theﬂexible ASD context because it calls for the researchers to describethe actual decision situations, including what decisions are madewhen and what decision obstacles ASD teams face. The researchobjectives of this study are to:1) Develop an understanding of the tactical and strategic decisionsmade in ASD teams.2) Identify the obstacles to these types of decisions in ASD teams.2. Descriptive decision makingDecision making was traditionally viewed as a rational process:people followed clearly deﬁned, sequential steps to make opti-mal decisions by weighing options. This process assumed decisionmakers were fully informed and rational, and problems were well-deﬁned with a variety of informed, alternative solutions (Simon,1978, 1979). This rational decision making (RDM) method is a nor-mative theory: it describes how decision makers should think andshould act based on coherence and rationality. Normative deci-sion theory views decision makers as idealized, rational, extremelyintelligent beings who overcome their inner turmoil, shifting val-ues, anxieties, post-decision regrets, fear of ambiguity, inability toperform intricate calculations and limited attention span to makerational, optimum choices (Bell et al., 1988). RDM looked at opti-mal ways of making decisions between choices of alternatives inwell-structured settings (Klein, 2008).Table 1Summary of descriptive decision making principles.1. Uncertainty affects decision maker2. Information is not collected rationally3. Behaviors are adapted4. Complexity of problem and/or internal conﬂict affect decision making5. Contextual differences affect decision makingHowever, researchers admitted that when making decisions inreal-life situations, they were not generating multiple options andcomparing them on a set of evaluative criteria; they did not gen-erate probability estimates for different options; and when theydid compare options, they were not doing so in a systematic way(Lipshitz et al., 2001). As a result, there was an effort to understanddecision making in real-world situations because researchers real-ized that actual choice can differ from prescribed choice (Barron,1974). Whereas normative decision theory prescribes the choicesa rational person should make in a given situation, DDM focuses onthe actual choices made in a given situation, on how and why realpeople think and act in the way they do in given situations (Barron,1974). DDM is concerned with how people perceive uncertainties,collect information or evidence, learn and adapt behaviors and per-ceptions, and deal with internal conﬂicts and complex problems. Itdoes not look for mathematical axioms or ways people should makedecisions (see Table 1 for summary of DDM Principles). Rather,DDM looks to explain how people make decisions in a given context(Bell et al., 1988).Therefore, to understand the decisions of ASD teams, we believethat it is important to study the actual decisions ASD teams makeusing DDM principles because they focus on deﬁning the actualchoices made in a given situation and how and why decision mak-ers make them (Barron, 1974). As team members’ roles interchangeand they are often involved in decisions outside of their traditionalskill areas (Beck, 2000), we will deﬁne both the tactical and strate-gic decisions they make. Tactical decisions are deﬁned as those thatrefer to the day-to-day activities that maintain efﬁcient and smoothoperations (Chandler, 1997) of developing and testing softwarefunctionality. Strategic decisions refer to those decisions concernedwith the long-term health of the organization (Chandler, 1997).Typically, software development teams would be involved in tac-tical decisions, and it is unclear whether ASD teams also makestrategic decisions, in addition to tactical ones, as these teamsinvolve their members in all decisions (Alleman, 2002; Lindstromand Jeffries, 2004).2.1. Periods of an iteration in which decisions occurDecision making in any project incorporates a broad range ofissues and occurs during many different activities and events. Tobound this research, DDM principles in Table 1 are used to deter-mine the actual decisions made during a typical iteration. Althoughwe recognize that decisions may be made outside of the iteration,this study focused only on those decisions made in the iteration. Thestudy participants discuss not only what decisions they make dur-ing an iteration, but when and how they make them, particularlywhen they face new and unclear functionality to develop, whichare times of uncertainty. We also try to understand the obstaclesduring the iteration by using the DDM principles about how behav-iors, complexity and context affect decision making in the contextof ASD. An iteration is a time-boxed period of ﬁxed length. In Scrum,for example, an iteration is called a Sprint (Schwaber and Beedle,2002; Svalvay, 2007). For the purposes of this research, we use themore generic term ‘iteration’ since this research applies equally toany Agile team regardless of which speciﬁc method or frameworkthey are using. M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 12541241Fig. 1. Decision making periods in a typical iteration.An iteration starts with an Iteration Planning Meeting and endswith an Iteration Review and Retrospective Meeting (Schwaber andBeedle, 2002). In between the Iteration Planning Meeting and theIteration Review is the Iteration Execution where the team workson delivering software that meets the iteration goal. For the pur-poses of analyzing the decisions made in an iteration, we considerthese four periods and associated activities described below andvisualized in Fig. 1.Iteration Planning: Iteration Planning is the meeting thatmarks the start of each development iteration. It consists of a set ofactivities that will plan the work for the ASD team in the upcomingiteration (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002).Iteration Execution: Iteration Execution is the period of timebetween the end of the Iteration Planning meeting and the startof the Iteration Review. Iteration Execution is the time when theteam works on developing the actual product to meet the iterationgoal. The software, i.e. product, is developed and tested here (Cohn,2009).Iteration Review: The Iteration Review is typically a meetingthat involves the team plus any invited stakeholders and otherinterested parties. The Iteration Review focuses on the work theteam has completed during the iteration, comparing the commit-ment at the start of the iteration to the actual delivery at the end ofthe iteration. An Iteration Review will generally include a demoof the running, tested software that has been developed in theiteration (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002).Iteration Retrospective: End-of-iteration retrospectives are anopportunity for the team to reﬂect on how it is working togetherand actively seek out areas to improve. The Iteration Retrospectiveis a facilitated session at the end of the iteration (Derby and Larsen,2006).3. Research designTo identify the decisions that ASD teams make during a typicaliteration, along with the obstacles that impede these decisions, aqualitative approach was employed where the unit of analysis wasa focus group comprised of 43 practitioners from 36 different com-panies, followed by six case studies, one for each of the decisionobstacles identiﬁed in the focus group.3.1. Phase 1: focus groupFocus group research emerged from work performed by PaulLazarsfeld, Robert Merton and colleagues at Columbia Universityin the early 1940s. It is deﬁned as a “research technique that col-lects data through group interaction on a topic determined by theresearcher” (Morgan, 1997) and involves a group of participantsand one or more moderators. The core theoretical elements of focusgroups include topical focus, group interactions, in-depth data anda “humanistic” character (Stewart et al., 2007). The focus derivesfrom participants of the group having a “particular concrete situa-tion” in common (Merton and Kendall, 1946), providing a basis foreffective communication that is also affected by the moderators’direction of the group’s discussions. The researchers guide discus-sions with suggested topics and probing, open-ended questions.However, the ‘hallmark’ of focus groups is the group interactionthrough which insights and less accessible data can emerge whichmay not otherwise come to the surface. Researchers (Kidd andParshall, 2000; Kitzinger, 1997) draw attention to the importanceof this differentiator of focus groups from other forms of collectiveor focused interviews, that is, group interaction and discussion. Thisgroup interaction aspect is especially true where participants maynot know much about the research topic or require a group dis-cussion to stimulate them to make a contribution (Morgan, 1997).Merton and Kendall (1946) refer to this as “introspective retrospec-tion” while Bloor et al. (2001) refer to the ability of participants to“articulate those normally unarticulated normative assumptions.”In drawing out such contributions, Kitzinger (1997) goes so far asto suggest shared tasks and games to encourage group interactionand advocates the analysis of differences and agreements withinthe group as very valuable. Therefore, in some ways focus groupscould be considered to lie between dyadic interviews and directobservation: while allowing the researcher to direct attention tospeciﬁc topics as allowed by interviews, they also facilitate groupdiscussion as per observation.As well as the richness of data collected, another signiﬁcantbeneﬁt of focus groups is the ability to obtain much data from agroup in a short amount of time (Morgan, 1997; Stewart et al.,2007). It allows participants to probe other participants’ reasonsfor their viewpoints, even challenging others’ viewpoints, allowingissues to surface that the researcher might not have asked (Bryman,2008), which makes them appropriate for exploratory researchsuch as this study. This focus group provided the researchers withan opportunity to explore the varying viewpoints of practitionerswho worked on different ASD teams.The focus group consisted of a group of 43 software industryAgile practitioners. This is a relatively large focus group, but as sug-gested by Morgan (1997), larger focus groups are recommended fortopics where researchers want to collect multiple brief commentsand suggestions, whereas smaller focus groups are recommendedwhen researchers want to collect more detailed commentary ordiscuss complex or controversial topics. As this research was atthe early stages of understanding decision making on ASD teams,a larger group was preferred to obtain multiple brief descriptionsof the decisions rather than detailed discussion on the complexi-ties. Participants in the focus group were attendees at a professionalsoftware development conference with 1400+ attendees. They self-selected to attend this focus group with a choice of 20 other sessionsoffered at the same time. While this is a limitation of the focusgroup, it does provide a focus group with participants focused onimproving their decision making and thereby a viable group todiscuss current ASD decisions and obstacles. As can be seen fromTable 2, the participants have a range of experience as some werebeginners with Agile methods while others have been working withAgile for up to 10 years. They have diverse backgrounds with vary-ing industry sector experience with Agile development. The focusgroup was hosted in the USA, but attendees came from the USA,Canada, Sweden, Denmark, Germany and the UK. The focus groupparticipants, because of the nature of the conference, were Agilepractitioners, and did not include customers. There were some par-ticipants who played the role of Product Owner or customer proxy,but the researchers did not ask the participants to differentiatethemselves based on role, or organize by role.The structure of the focus group was an exercise and opendiscussion on decisions made during particular periods of an itera-tion. The discussion loosely followed the DDM principles (e.g. howthey make decisions in uncertainty, how they use information,what behaviors affect decision making in the context of ASD, and 1242M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 1254Table 2Proﬁle of focus group attendees.CriteriaNumber of participants 43Mean experience with Agiledevelopmenta2.90 yearsStandard deviation of experiencewith Agile developmenta2.14Least experience with Agiledevelopment4 monthsMost experience with Agiledevelopment10 yearsIndustry segments Communications, Consulting,Entertainment, Finance, Government,Manufacturing, Media, & SoftwareProduct DevelopmentaThe data for experience with Agile distribution is normally distributed with aminimum of 4 months and maximum of 10 years.how complexity affects decision making) because at this point, theresearchers were focused on allowing participants to reveal deci-sions and obstacles. Speciﬁcally, the following topics were covered:•How decisions are made in the context of ASD teams3•Decisions participants make in the four Agile periods•Participant perceptions of decision making obstacles to decisionmaking during the four periods of the iteration cycle•Issues and complexities related to decision making (to ﬂesh outany other obstacles)After a brief presentation on the importance of decision makingfor Agile teams, the participants divided into ten teams to conductthe decision making activity in an Agile manner. The goal was foreach team to produce a set of decisions that they make at each of thefour periods in an iteration cycle discussed earlier. The researchershad previously prepared four blank posters on the wall, one foreach iteration period discussed. For an Iteration Planning meeting,for example, participants from each team wrote decisions on Post-ItTMnotes that arise during Iteration Planning. They organized thesedecisions to fall into one of each of the four iteration periods. Theythen had to place their Post-ItTMnotes with decisions on the correctiteration period poster (see Figs. 2 and 3).After the participants had completed this activity, theresearchers facilitated the focus group discussion on the decisionsmade in each period and the participants’ perceptions of the obsta-cles for Agile team decision making. Although it was a large group,this resulted in a very lively and engaging discussion. Issues relatedto decision making were also brieﬂy discussed during this focusgroup session to discern any other obstacles not already discussed.The questions during this focus group were largely open-ended,allowing respondents freedom to convey their experiences andviews (Oppenheim, 1992; Yin, 2003), and expression of the sociallycomplex contexts that typically underpin software development.The focus group was conducted in a responsive (Rubin and Rubin,2005; Wengraf, 2001), reﬂexive (Trauth and O’Connor, 1991) man-ner, allowing the researchers to follow up on insights uncoveredmid-session, and adjust the content and schedule of the focusgroup accordingly. Where participants suggested potential obsta-cles, they were asked to provide supporting evidence or examplesto supplement their point, thus allowing the researchers in the3Note here that the deﬁnition of ‘team’ incorporates the customer. However,some teams of the participants in this study differed in terms of customer. In somecases this was an actual person, in some cases a proxy, and in some cases no customerrole existed.analysis of the data to distinguish between opinions and feelingsversus actual practice.To improve the reliability and repeatability of the research, atraceable ‘audit trail’ of the research process, from data collectionthrough to the drawing of conclusions, was sought. A focus groupprotocol was prepared based on the four iteration periods, specif-ically Iteration Planning, Iteration Execution, Iteration Review andIteration Retrospective. These provided a list of “intellectual bins”or “seed categories” (Miles and Huberman, 1999) to structure thedata collection and the open coding stage of data analysis. Whileone researcher facilitated the session, another listened, observedand took notes. The researchers then switched roles to account forany variance between their note-taking and questioning. In anycases of ambiguity, clariﬁcation was sought from the attendee dur-ing the focus group.In order to aid analysis, the focus group was recorded and tran-scribed, generating a total of 12 pages of data that were thenproof-read, annotated and coded by the researchers using Nvivosoftware. The data (i.e. decisions and obstacles) were also emailedto all participants for feedback and validation. No participants sentedits or changes to the data, except to comment on the usefulnessof having the data for their work at their own organizations. Sub-sequently, vetting was used, whereby results and interpretationsare discussed with professional colleagues to avoid the problemof what Kaplan and Duchon (1988) call multiple realities. In termsof the analysis, the focus group questions and subsequent analysiswere based on DDM principles to understand the actual decisionsmade in a given situation (Lipshitz et al., 2001) and the subsequentobstacles.3.2. Phase 2: case studiesTo provide further illustration of the six obstacles identiﬁed inthe focus group, and to demonstrate the impact these obstaclesmay cause, we then conducted six mini case studies, one for eachof the obstacles that resulted from the focus group discussion. Thesevignettes were purposefully drawn from a pool of Agile teams froma range of organizations with which the research team were work-ing with at this time. Each was selected as it was known in advancethat it was having signiﬁcant issues with the obstacle being stud-ied. This case approach was a technique suited for this exploratoryresearch in that it allowed expansive discussions, illuminating fac-tors of importance (Yin, 2003), thereby supporting the focus groupdiscussions in a more focused manner.The obstacles identiﬁed by the focus groups were explored inmore detail by conducting face-to-face interviews (Oppenheim,1992). The questions were largely open-ended, allowing respon-dents the freedom to convey their experiences and views, andexpression of the socially complex contexts (Oppenheim, 1992;Yin, 2003) that underpin ASD decision making. The interviewswere conducted in a responsive manner (Rubin and Rubin, 2005;Wengraf, 2001), allowing the researcher to follow up on insightsuncovered mid-interview.Once the obstacles were identiﬁed and coded as such fromthe focus groups, the case studies asked interviewees open-endedquestions around the particular obstacle for that case study. Theseparticipants were separate to the focus group attendees, and thepurpose was to elaborate on the focus group ﬁndings and improvethe validity of those ﬁndings with new research participants. Thecase studies used the last two DDM principles: how the complexityof a problem and/or internal conﬂict affect decision making andhow contextual differences affect decision making, to guide theunderstanding of decision obstacles.Primary data was collected through interviews with 18 individ-ual team members and managers across a range of roles (Table 3).Companies were based in Ireland and the USA. Interviews varied M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 12541243Fig. 2. Determining the decisions made in each of the four periods in an iteration.Fig. 3. Resulting posters of decisions made in each of the four periods in an iteration.Table 3Proﬁle of case study participants.Case Industry sector Roles interviewedLargeSys Software andHardware
DevelopmentProject Managers (2)ABC Consulting Professional Services Project Managers (2)MediumSys Software Development Developers (2)Quality Assurance (QA)Tester (1)Business Analyst (1)Scrum Master (1)Museum X Arts and Entertainment IT DepartmentManager (1)Project Manager (1)SoftDev A Software Development Developers (2)QA Tester (1)Scrum Master (1)SoftDev B Software Development Developers (1)Scrum Master (1)Manager (1)between 60 and 120 min4and focused on the obstacles to deci-sion making in the four stages of an iteration. Each interview wasaudio-recorded and later transcribed. Observation and ﬁeld noteswere also documented during the interviews and clariﬁcation wassought after the interviews when required. The data from eachcase was analysed using standard coding techniques (Miles andHuberman, 1999) according to the obstacle being studied, undercodes such ‘description of obstacle’, ‘examples of impact’, ‘lengthof impact’, and ‘range of impact across project tasks’.4It must be noted that these interviews were for multiple purposes across otherpieces of research, and so in some cases the component of the interviews related todecision making obstacles was less than the total interview time.4. Results4.1. Decisions made in each iteration periodThis section states and explains the decisions that participantsin the Phase 1 focus groups reported were made at each periodin their iteration cycle. This data describes some of the contextualaffects on decision making (ﬁfth DDM principle) in an ASD team.It also discusses the ﬁrst and third DDM principles: how uncer-tainty affects decision making and how behaviors are adapted. TheIteration Planning Meeting decisions are usually made with highuncertainty, but as the results show, teams acknowledge this uncer-tainty diminishes during the Iteration Execution because as theydevelop functionality, their knowledge increases and decisions aremore accurate. Thus, the context of the iteration period plays animportant role in how decisions are made and impacted by uncer-tainty. We categorize the decisions they make during the iterationperiods as either tactical or strategic decisions to show where theseASD teams focus their decision efforts. Table 4 provides a summaryof the decisions that were discussed for each period in the iterationcycle.4.1.1. Iteration PlanningParticipants reported that decisions made during IterationPlanning are forward-looking, though they are made with littleinformation and many unknowns. One participant observed, “We’remaking bigger guesses now than we will when we start working. Whenwe estimate a story, there’s a lot of unknowns. As we start to work on astory, we learn more and more about it”. This is not surprising as thismeeting determines the activities to take place in the subsequentiteration. Therefore, participants quoted such decisions during thisperiod as “Determine iteration goals”, “Decide who is the owner ofthe story”, “Decide who will work on what”, and “Determine if userstories require more discovery work”. These quotes indicate tactical 1244M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 1254Table 4Decisions made in Iteration Planning, Execution, Review and Retrospective periods in the iteration cycle.Decisions made Tactical StrategicIteration PlanningDecide iteration goals and scope (user stories and tasks)X
Decide priorities within the iterationXDecide which people will be available XDecide capacity for team membersXDecide who is the owner of a story XDecide who will work on what XDecide task estimates XDecide if user stories require more discovery workXDecide deﬁnition of when a story is ‘done’ (i.e. completed, when to accept/reject story) XDecide to split or combine user storiesXDecide the approach to delivering the story XIteration ExecutionDecide whether iteration scope should be changed (i.e. reprioritize tasks, accept new tasks) XDecide deﬁnition of when a feature is ‘done’ (i.e. completed, when to accept/reject feature)X
Decide who will pair together for paired programmingX
Decide the interface design XDecide how to implement functionalityXDecide when to commit code XDecide what tests to createXDecide whether to add/remove/change acceptance criteria XDecide on the architecture/design for functionality XIteration ReviewDecide if delivered product meets customer expectations XDecide whether story estimates need to be modiﬁedXDecide whether to continue with the project XDecide whether to accept the iteration contentXDecide what stories and defects be scheduled for next iteration, particularly if not completed XIteration RetrospectiveDecide what to improve during the next iterationXDecide what went well to continue during next iteration XDecide what new things team will try in next iterationX
Decide root cause if team did not meet its iteration goal XDecide priorities for things to address in future iterationsXDecide issues that will most inﬂuence team success XDecide whether and how to measure team metrics Xtypes of decisions to plan what work will be completed during thesubsequent iteration and who will do it. The only strategic decisioncoded during Iteration Planning related to priorities of the iteration(e.g. “Determine priorities for iteration”) as this decision affects theiteration delivery for this and future iterations, which affects thelong-term ability of the organization to deliver to its customers.Participants also noted that many of the decisions are groupdecisions, meaning they make them together rather than asindividuals. This group decision making requires discussion andagreement from all team members. It seems to be used most fordeciding the approach for development. Examples of these groupdecisions included, “Decide the approach to delivering the story” and“Decide to split or combine user stories”.However, while participants could list decisions made duringIteration Planning meetings that focused on tasks, task owners andestimations, there was less clarity on the timing of planning deci-sions for design as to whether they should be planned during theIteration Planning or allowed to emerge during Iteration Execu-tion: “Where does the design decision come in? Because we ﬁnd wetake a lot of technical decisions during Iteration Execution and to methat’s a little dangerous . . . and I know Agile says design is emer-gent . . .So how do you get conﬁdent because you say “Well, ok, teamwe’ve got 2 weeks so let’s do this” and then 2 weeks later it’s like‘Oops’ . . . How do you get past that?” There is uncertainty as todesign decisions, and while the Agile philosophy is for emergentdesign, certain team members saw value in planning out some tasksrelated to design to account for team members’ time spent on thisactivity.4.1.2. Iteration ExecutionParticipants asserted that Iteration Execution is the tacticalperiod of development and testing compared to Iteration Plan-ning, which plans the activities for the iteration. Participants stated,“Execution is more about adjustments” and “Execution is more tacti-cal”. Thus, decisions during Iteration Execution focus on the actualdevelopment of functionality and how to do it as teams: “Determinehow to implement functionality”, “Decide on the architecture/designfor functionality”, “Deﬁne when a feature is ‘done”’, “Decide the inter-face design”, and “Decide what tests to create”. These decisions allfocus on the practicality of how to develop and test the function-ality that teams have planned in Iteration Planning to complete forthis iteration.Decisions made in this period are also generally closest to whenthose decisions will actually be implemented, so uncertainty isreduced and participants can make more accurate judgments. Asdiscussed during the Iteration Planning, team members make big-ger guesses during the planning meeting because they have lessinformation and more uncertainty since they haven’t started todevelop a piece of functionality yet. But, during Iteration Execu-tion, “We start to work on a story, we learn more and more about it”.Therefore, some decisions during Iteration Execution are strategicbecause they address changes to scope as team members gain moreinformation by developing functionality compared to when theywere planning the iteration. Examples of these decisions include,“Decide whether the iteration scope should be changed (i.e. repriori-tize tasks, accept new tasks)”, and “Decide whether to add/remove/orchange acceptance criteria”. M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 125412454.1.3. Iteration ReviewDuring the Iteration Review meeting, stakeholders have anopportunity to review progress and determine whether it is worthproceeding. Based on customer feedback, the ASD team decideswhether the functionality meets customer expectations, whetherestimates need to be modiﬁed, what stories should be prioritizedfor the next iteration or whether to stop development. A numberof participants reported having worked on projects that were can-celled after 2–4 iterations because it became clear the project couldnot achieve its goals. This was seen as a positive outcome becausethe business avoided investing further in an area that was not goingto be proﬁtable. Participants said the decision to stop developmentoccurs during Iteration Reviews: “It [the Iteration Review] shows vis-ibility on the problems we had and the decisions we made. It didn’tmake sense going forward with more iterations”. Other participantsstated, “It [stopping development] happened twice. . .it was in theearly stages–in the 3rd or 4th iteration” and “It happened once in anearly iteration where we were trying to ﬁgure out how much it wouldcost us”. The decisions to “continue the project” and “what stories anddefects should be scheduled for next iteration” are strategic becausethey affect what the overall organization can deliver to customers.However, it seems not all decisions to stop development occurin the Iteration Review meeting, and some do occur during IterationExecution when teams gain more information about functionalityas they begin to develop as another participant counter-argued:“We had a little different situation and it wasn’t as clean as just beingin an Iteration Review meeting. But we were maybe 75% of the waythrough the project and saw that we couldn’t deliver the majority ofthe value and saw that remaining stories wouldn’t really deliver thatmuch for the business so we decided to go to market [with what wehad]”. This team recognized that the cost for developing additionalstories wasn’t worth it because the stories would not add that muchmore value to the customer, so they made the decision to go withwhat they had at that time.4.1.4. Iteration RetrospectiveFeedback for the Iteration Retrospective conﬁrmed that teamsuse this activity to make tactical decisions about process, speciﬁ-cally around short-term improvements. One participant describedthe Iteration Retrospective as “Another opportunity at the retrospec-tive to say ‘where do we want to improve?”’. Examples of speciﬁctactical decisions include, “Decide what to improve during the nextiteration” and “Decide what went well to continue during next iter-ation”. Yet it is also the iteration period where more strategicdecisions are made compared to any other period as team mem-bers decide and prioritize improvements for future iterations thatcould impact the overall organization and its customer relation-ships. Strategic decisions focus on future priorities and trackingteam success. They include: “Decide priorities for things to addressin future iterations”, “Decide issues that will most inﬂuence teamsuccess”, and “Decide whether and how to measure team metrics”.Regardless of being tactical or strategic, all of these decisions indi-cate the team uses the Retrospective to decide how to better theirteam’s Agile process in future iterations. They even consider thepriority of some improvements.Yet while some participants view the Iteration Retrospective asan opportunity to discuss lessons learned and to improve futureperformance, not all participants shared a similarly positive expe-rience. Another participant had a less positive experience withretrospectives in their team: “In my experience it seems to be justa free-for-all of just throwing positives and negatives on a wall andgrouping those, you know, if two people say the same thing we talkabout it. There’s not really a lot of decisions to be made other than, say-ing, ‘alright here’s one. . .”’. Therefore, it seems there is a danger thatteams just vent frustrations during the Retrospective rather thanmake decisions and implement those actions for improvements infuture iterations, of which teams should be wary.4.2. Obstacles to decision making in Agile teamsThe focus group participants also discussed a number of obsta-cles from their experiences across all four periods of the iterationcycle. These obstacles were then explored in greater detail by indi-vidual case studies, one for each obstacle. Based on the focus groupinsights and case studies, each obstacle was mapped to a DDM prin-ciple so that the results show which DDM principle to which theobstacle relates (see Table 5 for a summary).4.2.1. Agile team members are unwilling to commit to a decisionand rely on the Scrum Master for decisionsLack of commitment to a decision was an issue raised by many.In some teams nobody was willing to make a decision and res-olution was left to the Scrum Master, coach, or managers whothen faced a decision point–either make decisions on behalf of theteam, or stand back and allow the team’s conﬁdence to emerge. Ofthe decision list in Table 4, architectural decisions and measure-ment decisions were often cited as these types of decisions. Lackof commitment regarding the former was typically due to a lackof sufﬁcient expertise, while commitment regarding the latter wasdue to the diverse metrics that could be applied and the signif-icance of choosing one metric over another, e.g. one metric maybe better but have a negative impact on perceived developer orteam performance. Evidence of a lack of commitment was varied;in some cases delayed decisions were a clear signal. In one humor-ous instance developers were often seen to be moving index cardshalf way between columns on the whiteboard, showing that a storywas somewhat complete but that the developers were unwilling totake the decision to declare a story fully complete.This lack of commitment decision obstacle relates to the 1stDDM principle: uncertainty affects the decision maker, and the 4th:complexity of problem or internal conﬂict affect decision making.Regarding architectural decisions, a lack of architectural expertiseis an example of uncertainty and knowledge, particularly for com-plex functionality, and resulted in team members not committingto decisions because they weren’t sure what to do. Likewise, CaseStudy 1 illustrates not only how uncertainty relates to an unwilling-ness to commit to a decision, but also how the complexity (4th DDMprinciple) of immediately implementing a major decision leads tounwillingness to commit to a decision.At LargeSys, the uncertainty ﬁve teams faced due to so manyrequirements changes led to a decision to immediately makerequirements changes visible to all teams. The complexity resultedbecause the transition was sudden and team members were notaccustomed to looking for changes so quickly so they did not lookfor them. In 2 days there were 22 new user stories which had alsoalready changed again in those 2 days. The team was not commit-ted to this decision to make requirements immediately visible. Asa result, a staged adoption was implemented to increase commit-ment to the decision.4.2.2. Agile teams face conﬂicting priorities for decisionsWhen faced with multiple customers with multiple, often-competing requirements and priorities, it can be tough to make anydecisions on scope, content and priorities. From the Phase 1 focusgroup, this was felt to be particularly relevant to Agile. As one par-ticipant stated, “With more plan-driven approaches, everybody hasa clear role and a clear line of command and so people whose priori-ties conﬂict are somewhat separated horizontally or vertically”. In anAgile context, the team hierarchy is ﬂat “and so all people and alltheir conﬂicts are clustered together”, including the customer, whichcan strain client relationships. This affects the strategic goals as it 1246M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 1254Table 5Summary of DDM principles to which the decision obstacles relate.2. Information is
  not collected 
rationally
1. Uncerta
 inty 
 affects 
 decision make
 r3.Behaviorsare
  adapte
 d4. Complexity
  of  problem or internal
  conflict 
 affec t decision making
5.  Contextual
  diff
 erences affect
  decision making
4.2.2. Ag
ile  teams face 
 conflicting 
priorities  for 
 decision
 s4.2.1. Ag
ile  team
  members are unwilli
 ng to
  commit
 to  a decision 
 and rely
  on the 
scrum master for decision
s4.2.5. Ag
ile  team
  members are not
  taking
  ownership of
 decisions despite ASD 
team  autonomy
  4.2.6. Co
llabo
 rative group decision making 
on ASD teams prevents
 experts from
  making decision
 s4.2.3. De
cisions
  are bas
 ed on un stable sta
 ff 
availabili ty during an agile iteratio
 n4.2.4. Ag
ile  team
  members are not
  implementing decisions
  and are 
relying on others for decisions
Descriptive 
 decis ion makin
 g principles
Related to
 : Decision making
  obstacle
 sbecomes unclear as to which priority takes priority, and that comesdown to the overall organization’s goals.This obstacle exempliﬁes the 4th DDM principle where internalconﬂict affects decision making: the conﬂicting internal prioritiesthat result from the ASD team nature to ﬂatten a team structurelead to confusion as to which decisions should be made and whenfor which goals. It becomes more difﬁcult to make prioritized deci-sions. Case Study 2 further exhibits conﬂicting priorities betweenhaving experienced customer staff on site versus their cost to thebudget.As seen in this case study, decisions were affected due to theconﬂicting priorities that arose from having customers on site. Thesoftware quality improved, but the “invasive” customer presencehurt the client relationship and increased project costs. It is unclearwhether the software improvements were worth the sacriﬁce of therelationship.4.2.3. Decisions are based on unstable staff availability during anAgile iterationDuring an iteration, people can be pulled onto other projectswith little or no notice during Iteration Execution. This can happenfor a variety of reasons, but the common reason in the focus groupwas developers being pulled to deal with customer support issues.This was seen as particularly problematic in an Agile context wherethe scope of the iteration was decided based on team members’task estimations with no allowance for slack. Many noted that theexternal tasks often take priority over the prioritized list of projectrequirements: “When the CTO rings, you cannot tell him or her to waitfor the next prioritization to book a developers time” (participant stat-ing he was a Project Manager). Consequently, when a participant ispulled to external tasks, the iteration cannot be completed on time.This obstacle relates to the 5th DDM principle: contextual dif-ferences affect decision making and 3rd principle: behaviors areadapted. When the availability of resources changes during the iter-ation, this changes the context of the situation. Scope decisions aretherefore impacted because the planned work cannot be completedfor the iteration when resources are reduced. Ideally, team mem-ber behaviors would adapt to complete these tasks, but estimationsare decided so that there is no wiggle room to complete the tasksleft behind by team members who have been pulled from the teammid-iteration, which is further illustrated in Case Study 3.In Case Study 3, the team context often changes mid-iterationwhen resources are pulled. Behaviors do not adapt to make deci-sions because the estimates provided during the planning meetingdo not leave any spare time. When team members are pulled, thereis no additional time left for someone else to cover their workso team member behavior is not able to be modiﬁed due to timeconstraints.4.2.4. Agile team members are not implementing decisions andare relying on others for decisionsAn environment where decisions do not result in implementa-tion can create an atmosphere where people stop making decisions.As one focus group participant noted “I’m just going to let someoneelse make the decision for me because whatever I decide to do justdidn’t go anywhere anyway”. While decisions regarding user storiesand their estimates were not typically associated with this, somepointed to Agile as the cause of many decisions “petering out”. Asone developer noted “we make decisions in the planning meeting butthen at the end of the iteration, you ﬁnd out that somebody rubbedout or changed that item on the whiteboard, based on some chat thatwe weren’t involved in”. There was a sense from quite a few par-ticipants that while some decisions in an Agile environment areclearly documented and tracked, the informal, co-located, socialnature of Agile can result in subtle changes in decisions, and whilethis is sometimes positive, some staff take follow-on actions basedon decisions that they were unaware had changed.This characterizes the 2nd DDM principle, information is not col-lected rationally and 3rd principle, behaviors are adapted. Whileinformation is not collected rationally by decision makers, thereneeds to be a rational, formal way to disseminate information aboutdecision changes so that members’ behaviors are adapted to change M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 12541247Case Study 1: LargeSys—people
 are unwilling
 to com-mit to a decisionLargeSys
 hired Agile method consultants to assist in a tran-sition from an in-house plan-driven
 method to a new methodwhich
 closely resembled an XP/Scrum
 hybrid.
 One of the key
recommendations from the consulting agency was
 that, due toan unusually high level of requirement changes,
 all ﬁve teamsshould allow a change
 to be instantaneously reﬂected in any
relevant user stories, and the new and updated user storiesshould replace old or obsolete ones during the current
 iter-
ation. This advice was
 followed, and although two projectsexperienced “a smooth and enjoyable transition” (Manager,
Project
 4), it subsequently “caused havoc
” (Manager,
 Project
1), “fear” (Manager,
 Project
 2), “panic and resentment” (Man-ager,
 Project
 3) on three projects within 2 days of it beingintroduced. The common theme across all three managers
 was
that on their project, the transition was
 too fast. “We wentfrom a scenario where requirements lists were updated onceevery six months, and didn’t
 impact developers
 for a further
three, to a scenario where a requirement you started
 writingcode for at 9:00am,
 had changed
 or even disappeared com-pletely by 9:15am
” (Manager,
 Project
 3). The teams seemedto cope with minor adjustments to a couple of requirementspeciﬁcations, but severe problems occurred
 as, after
 2 daysfor example, Project
 2 had 22 new user stories, each
 of which
had changed
 at least twice. This initiative
 was
 abandoned anda staged adoption was
 introduced over
 a 7 month period:Stage 1 (1 month): Any
 requirement changes
 logged but only usedfor discussion purposes.Stage 2 (1 month):All
 new requirement changes
 logged andupdated user stories introduced into live
development after
 the next monthly release.Stage 3 (2 months): All new requirement changes
 logged andupdated user stories introduced into live
development after
 the next fortnightly
 iteration.Stage 4 (3 months): All new requirement changes
 logged andupdated user stories introduced into live
development via the product backlog
 and onlybrought into current
 iteration if all planned userstories for that iteration are complete.Stage 5: All new requirement changes
 logged andupdated user stories introduced into live
development the morning after
 they arediscovered.
Now all 5 teams have completed the transition and, in a formalreview,
 all stakeholders
 (project manager,
 developers,
 cus-tomers)
 voted
 to retain this practice.tasks accordingly to align with the desired ﬁnished product. Addi-tionally, some decisions are not implemented because neither theynor the changes to the decision are tracked so no one follows up.Case Study 4 highlights an example of a team that decided to haveteam members anonymously annotate any team document ratherthan use a rational process to encourage more constructive feed-back. As seen in Case Study 4, one team ended up not adaptingits behaviors to implement the anonymous annotations process.However, this team did implement a different non-rational datacollection process by using a creativity grade ranking that wasbased on their subjective opinion rather than a rational formula.This adapted behavior resulted in creating business value.4.2.5. Agile team members are not taking ownership of decisionsdespite ASD team autonomyParticipants reported cases where the team makes a decisionbut nobody really took ownership of seeing it through. A few focusgroup participants in particular spoke of teams with a signiﬁcantnumber of “weaker” developers, where decisions were very easyto reach, but the implementation of those decisions left a lot to bedesired. Interface and implementation decisions were consideredCase Study 2: ABC Consulting—conﬂicting prioritiesexist
 for
 decisionsFollowing
 expert
 advice and Agile method literature, onebusiness unit in ABC Consulting decided to adopt XP andimplemented ten of the 12 XP practices across all 8 of theirprojects. One of these practices was
 the “on-site customer”,
which
 they implemented rigidly as described by Beck
 (2000)
.According to the project managers
 across the 8 projects, theon-site customer practice contributed to creation of change
(creative
 brainstorming sessions were held with businessfunction experts
 in focus groups), pro-action (the on-site cus-tomer pre-empted user story errors
 and inconsistencies at thesource), and learning (the on-site customer took part
 in allstand-up meetings and retrospectives
 and paired with some ofthe programmers
 to increase his/her technical
 knowledge andto disseminate business knowledge). The quality of the soft-
ware
 was
 also considered higher due to the continuous inputof domain-speciﬁc knowledge from the customers.
 While theon-site customer practice clearly contributed to many
 aspectsof agility,
 the impact on economy
 was
 “detrimental” accordingto the lead partner
 on the eight projects: “We were operatingon very tight margins and the cost of paying eight customers
to be on-site full-time was
 highly prohibitive
”. Early in the ini-tiative,
 the on-site customers
 were relatively
 junior and had“extensive
 knowledge of their own day-to-day
 job but not ofthe wider organization
” (Project
 4 Manager). Therefore someof these were replaced with highly experienced (>5 years)
 staff
who were much
 more beneﬁcial but on average 350% moreexpensive.
 Also, the customer staff
 often
 worked
 on shift
 rotaswhich
 were inconsistent with the hours
 worked
 by the consul-tants: “Often
 we were paying a full day’s
 wages
 for a customerto sit with us for two hours
” (Project
 6 Manager). Accordingto the partner,
 costs were not purely ﬁnancial. Prior
 to a full-time customer being appointed, “we had a good relationshipwith the client organization,
 but because of the invasive
 natureof the new working system, that relationship became frayedpretty
 quickly
”.particularly susceptible to this, as one participant stated, “Wewouldn’t have made that decision if we knew it was going to be exe-cuted poorly and nobody was going to stand accountable”.This obstacle relates to the 1st DDM principle, uncertaintyaffects the decision maker, because less experienced team mem-bers naturally have less certainty about their decisions and this canlead to a lack of ownership and accountability for their decisions.Agile teams have a mix of experience in members, and their ﬂexi-bility should encourage team members to learn new functionalityand take on various tasks. But this can cause uncertainty and there-fore lack of decision accountability while members are learningnew tasks. Case Study 5 shows how the lack of ownership relatesto the DDM principle of uncertainty affecting decision making.In this case, the uncertainty did not result from a lack of experi-ence but rather from a lack of clear accountability. When decisionswere made at Iteration Retrospectives, they were not given clearactions or owners, so no one followed up on them and membersfocused on their assigned tasks. Eventually the team realized thisand addressed this issue by making actions and owners clearer,which has started to reduce the lack of ownership for retrospectivedecisions.4.2.6. Collaborative group decision making on ASD teamsprevents experts from making decisionsThis obstacle refers to a lack of empowerment to make decisionsand to follow through on executing against those decisions. Ulti-mately, people like to be involved in the decision making process.Empowerment and involvement in decision making are often seenas core strengths of Agile. However, some focus group participants 1248M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 1254Case Study 3: MediumSys—decisions
 are based onunstable resourcesHow to address reduced resources occurring
 mid-iteration was
a major decision at MediumSys
 where team members
 wereregularly pulled from the team mid-iteration to address bugﬁxes for the client. The team had provided
 the estimates fortasks during the planning meeting based on who would dothe work and how many
 people in total were working on thecurrent
 iteration. When someone was
 pulled from the teammid-iteration, it could happen with less than a day’s
 noticewhich
 throws the entire planning askew
 because the change
can be “indeﬁnite”, causing the team to “lag behind too much
”(QA Tester
 1) and making “information no longer available”(Scrum
 Master) to the team from that member.
 The team planstasks based on the resources at the beginning of the iterationso when a resource is suddenly removed
 from the team, it“throws your plan out the window” and requires the team to“re-evaluate at that point” (Senior
 Developer 2) to decide whatfunctionality will not be delivered.
 Unfortunately,
 this team hadno solution to this obstacle. Regularly,
 teams were not dedi-cated entirely to iterations and often
 were dismantled halfway
through projects. Team
 members
 felt this was
 a direct resultof poor quality in the past that now affects
 the critical releasesto various clients. New development is halted as resources are“dragged” (Business Analyst) to address issues with releasesrather than continue with new development. Therefore, newfunctionality is slow to come to customers
 and the backlog
 ofdelayed work is continuously increasing and hindering futureiterations.felt that decisions they traditionally had control over disappearedwith the transition to Agile: “While I got advice, I was always theperson with the ﬁnal call on anything architecture related. Now withthis democratic environment, I am only one voice among many, andmany of those know very little regarding architecture”. Thus, in ASD,people can be involved in decisions that fall outside their remit,thereby potentially lessening the voice of the knowledgeable andexpert team members in that particular area.DDM principle 5 relates to this obstacle. Contextual differencesaffect decision making and when decision accountability becomesshared by many, the experienced voices can be diminished whichcan lead to inaccurate or inappropriate decisions made. In this ASDcontext, the ﬂexible team structure can hinder decisions. However,Case Study 6 shows how a complete lack of empowerment canhinder a team. The experienced members did not empower juniormembers to select tasks or propose alternative ways to developfunctionality. They did not learn new functionality due to time con-straints. While this did maintain experts on the team in particularareas, it also prevented the team from self-organizing and work-ing as a team. This becomes an even bigger problem when teammembers leave the team. Unfortunately, the team in Case Study6 still maintained a traditional command-and-control style so thebeneﬁts of Agile were not seen.5. Discussion and conclusionTo better understand the actual decisions made in the real-life situation (Barron, 1974) of an Agile environment, this researchexamined the different decisions made across four periods in aniteration cycle and summarizes them here for each period: IterationPlanning, Iteration Execution, Iteration Review and Iteration Ret-rospective. Not surprisingly, the results indicate that Agile teamsdo focus more on tactical rather than strategic decisions. A likelyexplanation is that working in time-boxed iterations gives the teama short-term focus, usually of 2–4 weeks in duration. Because ofthis, teams can lose sight of the organization’s goals for customerCase Study 4: Museum X—decisions are not imple-mented
During an initiative
 to implement Agile methods on two main-stream projects, the Museum X IT department
 placed particular
emphasis on enabling creativity
 in their ISD projects, in linewith the obvious overall
 philosophy
 of the organization.
 Many
practices were suggested by management; 15%
 of develop-ment time was
 set aside for ‘spikes’,
 which
 are time boxed
periods for research
 and development of concepts and simpleprototypes; resources were allocated to allow multiple stake-
holders
 to spend time on-site to discuss new ideas; higherdeveloper autonomy
 was
 facilitated; and team allocation poli-cies ensured that every team had the option of increasingdiversity
 in terms of skills, personality,
 seniority and back-
ground disciplines. A system was
 established whereby alldocuments, code, Post-It
TMor any
 other project artefact
 couldbe anonymously
 annotated by any
 team member or stake-
holder,
 with the rationale that constructive
 feedback
 would bemore forthcoming
 without fear of adverse
 reaction. Accord-ing to the IT department
 manager,
 one team embraced all ofthese initiatives
 and used them persistently
 for the duration ofthe project, while the other used none. “No matter
 what wedid that team just did not change
 anything
 from the way
 theydid things before- they didn’t
 build in any
 spikes,
 they did chat
to other stakeholders
 but didn’t
 really listen, the manager con-trolled just as tightly as before, and the composition of the teamdidn’t
 change
 so diversity
 wasn’t
 increased” (IT Department
Manager,
 Museum X). The interesting point in this case is thatthe latter
 team produced much
 more innovative
 software
 thanthe former and outperformed them on every creativity
 metricused. “We allocated a crude but effective
 ‘creativity
 grade’
 toevery piece of code, ranking it as either low,
 medium or high.The rogue team’s
 sheet was
 full of medium and high grades,and it wasn’t
 just creativity
 for the sake
 of it. Most of these ideascreated signiﬁcant additional business value” (IT Department
Manager,
 Museum X).delivery and how their decisions ﬁt into these goals, i.e. strategicdecisions, focusing instead on decisions to complete their daily taskload, i.e. tactical decisions, which is not surprising. Iteration Plan-ning includes decisions about planning the work for the subsequentiteration. Iteration Execution includes tactical implementation anddevelopment decisions, including adjustments needed to the scopeof the iteration as teams acquire additional information while theyare developing functionality. Iteration Review includes decisionsabout whether the product satisﬁes the customer and whetherfuture iterations should continue. However, the data indicate thatsometimes the decision to stop development also occurs duringIteration Execution when the value of developed functionality isascertained. Finally, the Iteration Retrospective includes decisionsfor improving the team’s process in future iterations, although thedata also indicate that not all teams implement identiﬁed improve-ment opportunities. To some, the Iteration Retrospective appearsa waste of time because people just talk about issues but no onetakes them on board to make changes in the process in futureiterations, which conﬁrms prior research stating that Iteration Ret-rospectives do not lead to any real changes for the ASD team (Kwakand Stoddard, 2004).The goal of DDM is to understand actual choices and why theyare made in a given context (Bell et al., 1988), and this researchindicates that people make decisions in the context of these fourAgile periods based on the goal of each period. Iteration Plan-ning plans the work of the iteration (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002),the development, testing and other work of creating the prod-uct happens during Iteration Execution (Cohn, 2009), IterationReview gives a product demonstration and discusses customer sat-isfaction (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002), and the end-of-iteration M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 12541249Case Study 5: SoftDev—lack
 of ownership
 of decisionsexists

SoftDev
 has a product team that creates enterprise productsfor global customers.
 At the early stages of forming the prod-uct team, when they were still learning how to apply Agileprinciples and practices, they made many
 decisions at theirRetrospectives.
 These decisions included removing
 obstacles,e.g. doing something about the number of meetings impact-ing the team’s
 time. The decisions would also include newthings to try,
 e.g. improve
 the results of code coverage
 metricsin a particular
 component for the next iteration. The team feltgood about identifying these areas for improvement.
 However,
as one team member noted, “The same issues kept
 com-ing up iteration after
 iteration. The problems were not goingaway.
 We made a bunch
 of decisions at the end of the itera-tion but nobody followed through”. At a future iteration theteam decided to address that particular
 problem, i.e. decisionswere made but nobody followed through on them. Every-
body agreed there were many
 problems to ﬁx, but nobody feltthey owned the decision. After
 the retrospective
 everyone justfocused on delivering
 the committed
 content. The Scum
 Mas-ter on the team was
 not a full-time Scrum
 Master; the Scrum
Master was
 also a team member.
 So part
 of the reason fornot following up on decisions made during the retrospective
was
 that the Scrum
 Master just did not have time to do so.The person’s
 work as a contributing team member was
 takingprecedence over
 his work as Scrum
 Master.
 There was
 nobodyto own the decisions made by the team. As the Scrum
 Mastersaid, “I just didn’t
 have time to think about it. I felt under pres-sure to deliver
 on our user stories and didn’t
 have time to goback
 and look at what we talked
 about during the Retrospec-
tive.
 Of course,
 I felt bad when the same things came up afew Retrospectives
 in a row.
 We realized
 we were feeling goodabout identifying obstacles and making decisions as a team.But part
 of the problem was
 we weren’t
 identifying actions andowners
 for those decisions”. As a result, problems and obsta-cles were not addressed. The team was
 not learning from theinsights gained
 at the Retrospective,
 and was
 missing out onthe opportunity
 to make
 real improvements
 to how they wereworking. The team decided to make
 actions and owners
 clearin the future. This has started
 to reduce a lack
 of ownership
 fordecisions made during Retrospective
 meetings.Retrospective identiﬁes potential improvements for future itera-tions (Derby and Larsen, 2006). Throughout the iteration cycle,decisions therefore move from planning the iteration, to tacticalimplementation, to customer and stakeholder satisfaction, to pro-cess improvements. This is not surprising as a project generallyrequires decisions for planning, tactical work and review of work.However, what is important to understand is how the six iden-tiﬁed decision obstacles can affect Agile development. As Table 5shows, each of the DDM obstacles faces challenges in Agile develop-ment. DDM states that problem complexity affects decision making,and on these Agile teams, the complexity and conﬂicting prioritiesmake it difﬁcult for Agile teams to focus on decisions for planningthe 2 week iteration, which is a short period of time particularlyfor juggling multiple priorities. The short-term focus of iterationsputs less emphasis on long-term strategic decisions and more focuson the short-term tactical decisions measured in weeks. As CaseStudy 2 highlighted, on-site customers not only create conﬂictingpriorities but also increase the cost of the project and can harmclient relationships. Also, planning the work requires estimationfor tasks for each team member during the iteration. When thereis unstable staff availability during an Agile iteration, this planningfalls apart and the basis of the iteration disappears, which supportsthe DDM principles that behaviors must be adapted as contextualdifferences affect the decision making. As Case Study 3 showed,Case Study 6: SoftDev—lack
 of empowerment
 to make
decisions exists
For
 one of the teams at SoftDev
 that made a decision to adoptScrum
 as their Agile development process, the team members’
scope of decision making was
 very limited. Despite the move
to Scrum,
 some managers
 were still behaving in a command-and-control style. Team
 members
 were not empowered tomake
 decisions on certain
 Agile practices, such
 as collective
code ownership
 and volunteering
 for tasks at Iteration Plan-ning. For
 example, at Iteration Planning meetings, managers
were deciding the features and areas of code that develop-ers
 would work on and team members
 were not self-selectingtasks. Each
 developer owned his or her own set of user sto-ries, and the team members
 were not working together as ateam on individual
 user stories to get them completed. Thisseemed to stem from a reluctance to let go of the old ways
 ofdoing things. One of the developers
 commented, “My man-ager tells me what I’m supposed to be working on. I knowwe’re
 supposed to be doing Scrum
 properly,
 but I still report
to my manager”. A development manager noted, “I need toknow what the people on my team are working on, and wealso still need experts
 in different
 areas. It takes
 too long tohave people ramp up on other areas [of the code base]”. Theteam members
 were not encouraged to propose alternative
ways
 of addressing these concerns from management. Therewas
 a direct impact to the team’s
 ability to self-organize
 andto operate effectively
 as a team. A developer described a con-sequence of the problem: “We’re
 not really coming togetheras a team the way
 we should be. We’re
 really more a groupof people than a team. We’re
 too dependent on managers
 tomake
 decisions for us”.while teams may believe they can recover in future iterations as theincomplete work was just from a 2 week period, these unﬁnishedtasks can build quickly and steadily over time as team membersare continuously pulled from Agile teams, thereby delaying futureiterations.The obstacles make Iteration Execution and Iteration Reviewdifﬁcult as well. One of the purposes of an Agile process is toinvolve team members in all facets of development (Beck, 2000),but when people are unwilling to commit to a decision, they oftenrely on the Scrum Master, or other leadership ﬁgure, to make deci-sions on their behalf. Thus, as DDM states, the decision maker isaffected by his or her uncertainty and the problem complexity,and therefore does not make the decision. The decision makerallows another person, namely the scrum master, to make thedecision instead. This reduces the autonomy of the team ratherthan engaging all members. As Case Study 1 showed, the impactof not committing to the decision to regularly update require-ments changes led one team to face 22 new user stories in just2 days which had also already changed again. When decisions arenot implemented as Agile team members rely on others for deci-sions, as DDM claims, their lack of information prevents themfrom empowering their own decision making. They adapt theirbehaviors as DDM suggests, thereby relying on others to makethe decisions. Additionally, there is a lack of ownership despiteASD autonomy, so people are making decisions at times but arenot following through with quality work. Case Study 4 showeda team not implementing an annotation decision, although thisteam did implement another annotation method and ended upincreasing their creativity and business value as a result. However,Case Study 5 showed that a lack of ownership when clear actionsand owners are not given to decisions causes decisions to fallthrough the cracks and issues to repeat, which exempliﬁes DDM’sprinciple that uncertainty affects decision making. Additionally,in Case Study 6, collaborative ASD group decision making prevents 1250M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 1254experts from making decisions, thus hindering the team from self-organizing and providing insight to development. As DDM states,contextual differences affect the decision making, and here, thefunctional delivery at the end of the iteration suffers and cus-tomer satisfaction may be reduced during the Iteration Review asa result.There are implications of this research for theory. First, wecan see the DDM principles at work on these Agile teams. Prin-ciple 1, uncertainty affecting the decision maker, is exempliﬁed onthese Agile teams when team members are unwilling to committo decisions and a lack of ownership for decisions exists despiteASD team autonomy. The team members’ uncertainty about taskshinders their decision making. Principle 2, information is not col-lected rationally, is true for Agile teams who rely on others to makedecisions because they lack information. ASD teams exhibit Princi-ple 3, adapting behaviors, when they lose resources mid-iteration,requiring a reshufﬂing of the work, and when team members arenot making decisions and others have to step in to decide. Prin-ciple 4, problem complexity affects the decision making, is seenon ASD teams when team members rely on the scrum master fordecisions because they do not know how to develop complex func-tionality and when conﬂicting priorities prevent an ASD team frommaking decisions. Finally, ASD teams exhibit Principle 5, contex-tual differences affecting decision making, as changing of resourcesmid-iteration requires changes to task owners and decision mak-ers and the collaborative nature of Agile teams prevents expertsfrom making decisions. This contributes to our understanding ofthe decision making process and obstacles ASD teams face duringthis process, thus contributing to the coverage of process and tech-nique in Dingsøyr et al.’s roadmap for Agile research (Dingsøyr et al.,2008).Furthermore, there are many implications of this research forpracticing Agile teams. Agile teams should make a discussion ondecision making an active part of Retrospectives. Iteration Ret-rospectives provide a regular opportunity to assess the impactsof short-term tactical decisions, while also providing an oppor-tunity to assess the bigger picture of how the team is doing inrelation to longer-term strategic decisions. Providing this con-text will, in general, help a team’s overall decision making ability.Explicitly categorizing decisions into tactical and strategic bucketsalso helps teams make those links. Understanding the bound-aries of decision making in teams is also valuable. Developing thisunderstanding helps to remove confusion about decision makingauthority, remove confusion over who is responsible for imple-menting decisions, and provide a better context for teams to exerttheir autonomy. Things as simple as having owners for decisions,taking actions and making the decisions visible, as highlighted inCase Study 5, can help avoid situations where decisions are notacted upon, or at least provide visibility when these situationsoccur.This study examined ASD professionals with various experi-ences as well as in-depth case studies of the identiﬁed six decisionobstacles to provide detailed descriptions of them. Whereas thisfocus group did provide insight by asking team members todescribe the decisions and obstacles on their Agile teams and thecase study participants provided vivid descriptions of the obstacles,future research should include analysis of solutions to the obsta-cles to understand how teams are and should go about addressingthem. Also, a limitation of this study is that, while running the focusgroup event at an Agile method conference elicited attendance froma group of experienced, well informed participants, one must beaware that such events are often accompanied by an atmosphereof enthusiasm. The follow up case studies were not limited by anysuch potential bias but future research should still seek to deter-mine whether the opinions of this group are replicated across more‘neutral’ environments.Also, further in-depth case studies of these obstacles and theirimpact could be conducted in future research. The main focus ofthis paper was the identiﬁcation of the obstacles and so we feltthat, given word limit constraints, priority should be given to thatphase of the research. The level of detail given to the mini caseswas lower as their purpose in this research was simply to illustratethe obstacles and to provide an example of each. Also, while thesecases provided illustrative examples of the obstacles ‘in action’,other factors such as recent adoption, lack of training, and a lackof experience with Agile methods may all play a role. Other formsof data collection such as observation should be included to identifythe presence of obstacles, their impact and how ASD teams addressdecision obstacles to fully conform to the application of DDM byobserving people in their actual decision environment. For exam-ple, members of this focus group focused on their tactical decisionswith little mention of strategic decisions. Observation of ASD teamscould reveal whether ASD teams are involved in making strategicdecisions or whether these teams remain focused on the day-to-day activities to deliver working functionality each iteration likethe focus group stated.Nevertheless, this study has contributed to the ASD literature byidentifying decisions made and obstacles to decision making duringfour periods of an iteration cycle using DDM principles. It was anexploratory step to determine when ASD teams make decisionsand what obstacles prevent team members from making decisions.Looking at how decisions and solutions to obstacles can improveproject performance would help ASD teams improve their iterationdelivery which can be explored in the future for impact on projectand team performance.AcknowledgementsThis research is supported by the Irish Social Sciences Platform(ISSP), funded under the Programme for Research in Third LevelInstitutions, administered by the HEA and co-funded under theEuropean Regional Development Fund (ERDF).Additionally, part of this paper was presented as an earlier draftat the annual conference of the Agile Alliance (Agile 2011) in SaltLake City, UT. That paper, entitled, Decision making in Agile develop-ment: a focus group study of decisions and obstacles, did not containall data included in this paper. Speciﬁcally, it did not include themini case studies. It was authored by Meghann Drury, Ken Powerand Kieran Conboy and received the Agile 2011 “Best ResearchPaper” award sponsored by IEEE Software. M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 12541251Appendix A. Interview guideCompany Interview Guide 
Start recording.
Read and record instructions
: The purpose of this interview is to unde
 rstand what grou
 p de
 cisions are made
  on ag
 ile teams
  and the obstacles facing thisde
 cision
  process
 . Thinking
  abou
 t the ag
 ile tea
 m on
  which you
  curren
 tly work and your current 
role, 
 please an
 swer 
 the  following 
 questions. 
 First, 
 there 
 are 
 a  few  demog
 raphics
   questions 
 to an
 swer, 
 and 
 once 
 you
 ™ve 
completed
  tha
 t, we wil
 l begin the
  interview. 
 All of your information wil
 l remain confiden
 tial at all
  times.
1. In wha
 t i ndustry does you
 r compan
 y ope
 rate?_
 ___
 ___
 _______
 ____
 _______
 ___
 ____
 _______
 ___
 ____
 ___
 ___
2. Wha
 t is you
 r curr
 ent role on your 
 agile tea
 m? Please tick
  all tha
 t apply and circle you
 r main role.
Customer                       
                          
Customer P
 roxy                           
                             
                             
Prod uct Owne
 r                           
                          
                          
Busine
 ss / S
 ystems Analyst   
Sen ior D
 eveloper 
                        
                       
                      
Junior D
 evelope
 rTester                        
                           
                          
Datab ase A
 rchitect
Techn
 ical A
 rchitect
Project Manage
 r Scrum Master
Manage
 rOther_____
 ___
 ___
 ________
 _3. Rathe r than
  during the iteration, do
 es you
 r team make most de
 cision
 s during Iteration P
 lan
 ning
  Mee
 tings?
Yes
No       Sometimes
a. Is there a preparatory mee
 ting or one-on-one
  session
  prior to the
  Iteration P
 lan
 ning
  Mee
 ting
 whe
 re decisions are also made
 ? Yes
No       Sometimes
b. If the re is a prepa
 ratory mee
 ting, can you
  describe the purpo
 se of this mee
 ting
  and
  the
  pu
 rpo
 se of the
  Iteration P
 lan
 ning Mee
 ting?_
 _____
 ___
 ____
 ___
 ___
 ____
 _______
 ___
 ___
 ____
 ____
 ___
 _______
 ___
 ____
 _________
 ____
 ___
 ___
 ____
 ______
 ____
 ____
 ___
 ____
 ___
 _______
 ___
 ____
 ___
 ___
 ____
 _______
 ___
 ____
 _________
 ____
 ___
 ___
 ____
 ______
 ____
 ____
 ___
 ____
 ___
 _______
 ___
 ____
 ___
 ___
 ____
 _______
 ___
 ____
 _________
 ____
 ___
 ___
 ____
 ______
 ____
 ___
 ____
 ___
 ____
 _______
 ___
 ____
 ___
 ____
 ___
 _______
 ___
 ____
 __ 1252M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 1254Now we
  wi
 ll  move 
 to  the  actua
 l  interview.
   We wi
 ll be
 gin wi
 th  a  few ge neral 
 questions be
 fore  moving
   to  the 
 more 
 spe
 cific 
questions on how you
 r tea
 m makes decisions.
Genera
 l O verview
Q1.
Can you  desc
 ribe
  wha
 t happe
 ns in your 
 Iteration P
 lan
 ning
  Mee
 tings (
 IPM),
  Iteration E
 xecution
 , Iteration
  Review Mee
 ting
 s and
  Iteration R
 etr ospe
 ctive Mee
 ting
 s, each in a few short
  sen
 tences?
Q2.
Who
  is involved
  in each of these four 
 phases of an
  iteration cycle?
Q3.
 In a few short
  sen
 tences, can you
  explain how your 
 agile team makes decisions?
RQ1: 
Wha
 t decision
 s are made 
during eac h of the periods of the Iteration Cycle
 ?Types of Dec
 isionsQ1:
 Wha
 t decision
 s do you make during
  an
  IPM ? Includ
 e specific examples of each. (What decisions can
 /do
  you
  make?
 Whi
 ch of these are tactical and str
 ategic?) 
a. Who
  makes each of these types of decisions?
Q2:
 Wha
 t types of decisions do you make during the iteration (
 i.e. the Iteration E
 xecution
  period
 , the interim 
between
  IPMs)?
 Include
  specific examples of each.
 (What decisions can
 /do you
  make?
  Whi
 ch of these 
are tactical and
  str
 ategic?)
a. Wha
 t are the informal decisions you
  make (
 i.e. at coffee
 , the water 
 coo
 ler, not du
 ring
  a formal 
mee ting)?
b. Who makes each of these types of decisions?
Q3:
 Wha
 t types of decisions do you make during a S
 tory E
 laboration
  Mee
 ting (SEM)? Include spe
 cific 
examples of each.
 (What decisions can
 /do
  you
  make?
  Whi
 ch of these are tactical and
  str
 ategic?)
a. Who
  makes each of
 these types of decisions?
Q4:
 Wha
 t decision
 s do you make during
  a S
 print Re
 view Mee
 ting?
  Include spe
 cific examples of ea
 ch. 
 (What 
decision
 s can/do you make? Whi
 ch of these are tactical and str
 ategic?)
a. Who
  makes each of these types of decisions?
Q5:
 Wha
 t decision
 s do you make during
  a S
 print Re
 trospective Mee
 ting?
  Include
  specific examples of each. 
(What decision
 s can/do you
  make? Whi
 ch of these are tactical and strategic?)
a. Who
  makes each of these types of decisions?
RQ2: 
Wha
 t obstac
 les t
 o dec
 isio
 ns do  ASD teams face?
Q1:
 Wha
 t factors or issues preven
 t your 
 team from making
  de
 cision
 s du ring any of the fou
 r period
 s of an 
iteration
 ?Q2:
 Wha
 t obstacles preven
 t you
 r tea
 m from making decisions during
  IPMs and
  ho
 w do you
  overcome 
them?
Q3:
 Wha
 t obstacles preven
 t you
 r tea
 m from making decisions during
  the
  Iteration E
 xecution and how do you
  overcome them?
Q4:
 Wha
 t obstacles preven
 t you
 r tea
 m from making decisions during
  the
  Iteration R
 eview and
  how do you
  overcome them?
Q5:
 Wha
 t obstacles preven
 t you
 r tea
 m from making decisions during
  the
  Iteration R
 etrospective and
  how do 
you
  overcome the
 m?Anyth
 ing E lseQ1:Ar
 e the re any othe
 r mee tings whe
 re decisions are mad
 e? Wha
 t mee
 tings?
Q2:Ar
 e the re any other 
 decision
 s mad
 e informall
 y?Q3:
 Is there anything we haven
 Õt covered
  that you
  fee
 l is import
 ant to kno
 w abo
 ut ho
 w your 
 team makes 
decision
 s or 
 wha
 t obstacles they face in making
  decisions?
Plea se 
 do not 
 discuss 
 the  details 
 of  the
 se 
 questions 
 with 
 others on
   you
 r  team. 
 We do not  wan
 t  to  bias
 their 
responses when
  they answer 
 in their 
 interview.
Appendix B. Agenda for the focus group meetingRead and record instructions: In an Agile environment, thedevelopment team is empowered to make most decisions, creatinga “pluralist decision making environment” due to diverse back-grounds, attitudes, and goals of the team members. Team membersare faced with decision tasks on a daily basis in a dynamic envi-ronment with rapidly changing requirements, expectations andunderlying data.Therefore, this focus group and its participants will discuss thekey decisions an Agile team has to make, share best practices fordecision strategies to support high quality decision making in Agileinformation system projects, and discuss obstacles preventing highquality decisions.Participants should be those currently working on Agile teams,or who will be working on an Agile development team in the nearfuture.Session Outline (90 min)•Introduce the topic of decision making strategies and decisionobstacles, including why decision making and team behavior isimportant for Agile teams (10 min) M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 12541253•Facilitate activity where participants list the key decisions andcorresponding data used to make those decisions on Agile teams(30 min) On the Post-ItTMpads provided, take 5 min to write down thedecisions you make in your planning meetings and during theiteration (a separate Post-ItTMfor each decision) Once you have written your decisions, post them on the white-board at the front of the room under the correct group:– Iteration Planning Meeting– Iteration Execution– Iteration Review Meeting– Iteration Retrospective•Present key decision strategies that have helped other Agile teamsmake high quality decisions (10 min)•Facilitate discussion on problems or obstacles that negativelyimpact decision making on Agile teams (35 min)What obstacles to decision making do your Agile team(s) faceduring the four iteration cycle periods?– Iteration Planning Meeting–Iteration
 Execution– Iteration Review Meeting–Iteration
 Retrospective How do your Agile teams overcome those obstacles?•Provide conclusions and contact details for participants whowould like more detail on how to improve their team’s decisionmaking (5 min)ReferencesAlleman, G., 2002. Agile Project Management Methods for IT Projects, The Storyof Managing Projects: A Global, Cross-Disciplinary Collection of Perspectives.Greenwood Press, Berkeley, CA.Barron, F.H., 1974. Behavioral decision theory: a topical bibliography for manage-ment scientists. Interfaces 5, 56–62.Bazerman, M.H., Giuliano, T., Appelman, A., 1984. Escalation of commitment inindividual and group decision-making. Organizational Behavior and HumanPerformance 33, 141–152.Beck, K., 2000. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change. Addison-Wesley,Reading, Mass.Bell, D.E., Raiffa, H., Tversky, K., 1988. Descriptive, normative, and prescriptive inter-actions in decision making. In: Bell, D.E., Raiffa, H., Tversky, K. (Eds.), DecisionMaking: Descriptive, Normative, and Prescriptive Interactions. Cambridge Uni-versity Press, Cambridge, pp. 9–30.Bloor, M.B., Frankland, J.L., Thomas, M.T., Robson, K., 2001. Focus Groups in SocialResearch: Introducing Qualitative Methods. Sage, London.Bryman, A., 2008. Focus Groups, Social Research Methods, 3rd ed. Oxford UniversityPress, Oxford, UK, pp. 472–491.Chandler, A.D., 1997. Strategy and structure. In: Foss, N.J. (Ed.), Resources, Firms,and Strategies: A Reader in the Resource-Based Perspective. Oxford UniversityPress, Oxford, pp. 40–51.Cohn, M., 2009. Succeeding with Agile: Software Development Using Scrum.Addison-Wesley Professional.Conboy, K., 2009. Agility from ﬁrst principles: reconstructing the concept of agility ininformation systems development. Information Systems Research 20, 329–354.Conboy, K., Acton, T., Halonen, R., 2009. Presenting data for team-based decision-making in Agile information systems projects. In: The 17th European Conferenceon Information Systems, Verona, Italy.Derby, E., Larsen, D., 2006. Agile Retrospectives: Making Good Teams Great. Prag-matic Bookshelf.Dingsøyr, T., Dybå, T., Abrahamsson, P., 2008. A preliminary roadmap for empiricalresearch on Agile software development. In: Agile 2008 Conference, Toronto,Ontario, Canada.Drury, M., Acton, T., Conboy, K., Golden, W., 2011. The role of experience in Agilesoftware development decision making. In: The 6th International ResearchWorkshop on IT Project Management, a pre-conference workshop for the 2011International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS), hosted by the SpecialInterest Group for IT Project Management (SIGITProjMgmt) in the Associationfor Information Systems (AIS), Shanghai, China.Drury, M., McHugh, O., 2011. Factors that inﬂuence the decision-making process inAgile project teams using scrum practices. In: The 6th International ResearchWorkshop on IT Project Management, a pre-conference workshop for the 2011International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS), hosted by the Spe-cial Interest Group for IT Project Management (SIGITProjMgmt), Association forInformation Systems (AIS) Proceedings, Shanghai, China.Fitzgerald, B., Hartnett, G., Conboy, K., 2006. Customising Agile methods to softwarepractices. European Journal of Information Systems 15, 197–210.Fowler, M., Highsmith, J., 2001. The Agile Manifesto. Software Development 9, 28–32.Kaplan, B., Duchon, D., 1988. Combining qualitative and quantitative methods in ISresearch: a case study. MIS Quarterly 12, 571–587.Kidd, P.S., Parshall, M.B., 2000. Getting the focus and the group: enhancing analyticalrigor in focus group research. Qualitative Health Research 10, 293–308.Kitzinger, J., 1997. The methodology of Focus Groups: the importance of interactionbetween research participants. Sociology of Health and Illness 16, 103–121.Klein, G., 2008. Naturalistic decision making. Human Factors 50, 456–460.Kraemer, K.L., King, J.L., 1988. Computer-based systems for cooperative work andgroup decision making. Communications of the ACM 20, 115–146.Kwak, Y.H., Stoddard, J., 2004. Project risk management: lessons learned from soft-ware development environment. Technovation 24, 915–920.Lindstrom, L., Jeffries, R., 2004. Extreme programming and Agile software develop-ment methodologies. Information Systems Management 21, 41–52.Lipshitz, R., Klein, G., Orasanu, J., Salas, E., 2001. Taking stock of naturalistic decisionmaking. Journal of Behavioral Decision Making 14, 331–352.McAvoy, J., Butler, T., 2009. The role of project management in ineffective deci-sion making within Agile software development projects. European Journal ofInformation Systems 18, 372–383.Merton, R.K., Kendall, P.L., 1946. The focused interview. The American Journal ofSociology 51, 541–557.Miles, M., Huberman, A., 1999. Qualitative Data Analysis. Sage, London.Morgan, D., 1997. Focus Groups as Qualitative Research. Sage, London.Oppenheim, A., 1992. Questionnaire Design, Interviewing and Attitude Measure-ment. Continuum, New York.Rubin, H., Rubin, I., 2005. Qualitative Interviewing: The Art of Hearing Data. Sage,Thousand Oaks, CA.Russo, J.E., Schoemaker, P., 1989. Decision Traps: The Ten Barriers to BrilliantDecision-Making and How to Overcome Them. Simon & Schuster, NY, USA.Schmidt, J.B., Montoya-Weiss, M.M., Massey, A.P., 2001. New product developmentdecision-making effectiveness: comparing individuals, face-to-face teams, andvirtual teams. Decision Sciences 3232, 575–600.Schwaber, K., Beedle, M., 2002. Agile Software Development with Scrum. PrenticeHall, NJ, USA.Shen, Q., Chung, J.K.H., Li, H., Shen, L., 2004. A Group Support System for improv-ing value management studies in construction. Automation in Construction 13,209–224.Simon, H.A., 1978. Rationality as process and as product of thought. American Eco-nomic Association 68, 1–16.Simon, H.A., 1979. Rational decision making in business organizations. The AmericanEconomic Review 69, 493–514.Stewart, D.W., Shamdasani, P.N., Rook, D.W., 2007. Focus Groups: Theory and Prac-tice. Sage, London, UK.Svalvay, V., 2007. Deﬁnition of a Sprint (Online).Trauth, E., O’Connor, B., 1991. A study of the interaction between information, tech-nology and society. In: Nissen, H., Klein, H., Hirschheim, R. (Eds.), InformationSystems Research: Contemporary Approaches and Emergent Traditions. Else-vier, North Holland, pp. 131–144.Wengraf, T., 2001. Qualitative Research Interviewing. Sage, London.Wheeler, B.C., Valacich, J.S., 1996. Facilitation, GSS, and training as sources of processrestrictiveness and guidance for structured group decision making: an empiricalassessment. Information Systems Research 7, 429–450.Whyte, G., 1993. Escalating commitment in individual and group decision mak-ing: a prospect theory approach. Organizational Behavior and Human DecisionProcesses 54, 430–455.Yin, R., 2003. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. SAGE Publications, Thou-sand Oaks, CA.Zannier, C., Maurer, F., 2006. Foundations of Agile decision making from Agilementors and developers. In: Abrahamsson, P., Marchesi, M., Succi, G. (Eds.),Extreme Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering. Springer,Berlin/Heidelberg, pp. 11–20.Zannier, C., Maurer, F., 2007. Comparing decision making in Agile and non-Agilesoftware organizations. In: Concas, G., Damiani, E., Scotto, M., Succi, G. (Eds.),Agile Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme Programming. Springer,Berlin/Heidelberg, pp. 1–8.Meghann L. Drury, Ph.D., M.A., H. Dip. B.S., is an Assistant Professor of Communi-cation and Media Management in The Gabelli School of Business and The GraduateSchool of Business Administration at Fordham University. Her Ph.D. is from North-western University. Her research interests include decision making, decision quality,change management, and organizational communication. She has received numer-ous academic and industry awards, recently earning the Agile 2011 “Best ResearchPaper” award sponsored by IEEE Software and SIG IT Project Management “Best PaperAward” in 2011. She reviews for prestigious outlets such as the European Journal ofInformation Systems, Journal of Applied Communication Research, the InternationalConference in Information Systems (ICIS) and the European Conference in Informa-tion Systems (ECIS). Prior to Fordham, she managed a research project on Agileteam decision making at the Centre for Innovation and Structural Change at theNational University of Ireland, Galway, and worked for Deloitte Consulting LLP asan organization and change management consultant.Kieran Conboy, Ph.D., is an associate professor at the University of New South Walesand Lero research centre in Ireland. His research focuses on Agile systems devel-opment approaches as well as agility across other disciplines, and he is currentlyinvolved in numerous national and international projects in this area. His researchhas been published in leading journals and conferences such as Information Sys-tems Research, the European Journal of Information Systems, Information & Software 1254M. Drury et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1239– 1254Technology, the International Conference in Information Systems (ICIS), and the Euro-pean Conference in Information Systems (ECIS). He is also associate editor of theEuropean Journal of Information Systems, and has been a guest editor on special issuesof top journals on the topics such as qualitative IS research and agility.Ken Power is an internal Agile-lean coach/consultant and co-founder of the AgileOfﬁce at Cisco Systems’ Uniﬁed Communications Business Unit. He works withglobal product teams and the organization’s leadership, navigating a path throughtheir Agile journey. Working with Agile methods since the late 1990s, he haswide experience introducing and applying Agile development at all levels in orga-nizations, and across a variety of industries and domains. His interests includearchitecture, Agile processes, lean development, patterns, systems design, testdriven development, and design of organizations to support productive and effectiveteams.