 The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u rn al hom epage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssPerpetual development: A model of the Linux kernel life cycleDror G. FeitelsonSchool of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University, 91904 Jerusalem, Israela r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 3 January 2011Received in revised form 25 October 2011Accepted 26 October 2011Available online 9 November 2011Keywords:
Software evolutionSoftware releaseMaintenance
Linux kernela b s t r a c tSoftware evolution is widely recognized as an important and common phenomenon, whereby the systemfollows an ever-extending development trajectory with intermittent releases. Nevertheless there havebeen only few lifecycle models that attempt to portray such evolution. We use the evolution of the Linuxkernel as the basis for the formulation of such a model, integrating the progress in time with growthof the codebase, and differentiating between development of new functionality and maintenance ofproduction versions. A unique element of the model is the sequence of activities involved in releasingnew production versions, and how this has changed with the growth of Linux. In particular, the releasefollow-up phase before the forking of a new development version, which was prominent in early releasesof production versions, has been eliminated in favor of a concurrent merge window in the release of 2.6.xversions. We also show that a piecewise linear model with increasing slopes provides the best descriptionof the growth of Linux. The perpetual development model is used as a framework in which commonlyrecognized beneﬁts of incremental and evolutionary development may be demonstrated, and to commenton issues such as architecture, conservation of familiarity, and failed projects. We suggest that this modeland variants thereof may apply to many other projects in addition to Linux.© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.“Linux is evolution, not intelligent design.”Linus Torvalds1. IntroductionClassical software lifecycle models typically partition the soft-ware’s life into two periods: development and maintenance. Themodels focus on the development, further partitioning it intophases and articulating its iterative nature. Maintenance is typi-cally not discussed in much detail, despite the wide agreement thatit is vital and consumes considerable resources. It is simply statedthat the same principles and techniques used in development con-tinue to apply, and that actually all of development is done so as tofacilitate maintainability.The implication of such models is that the full system size isexpected to be achieved at the end of development. Only then isthe system delivered to the customer and installed in the ﬁeld. Thisapplies even for very large and complex systems. The customer isexpected to have participated in the requirements engineering andin the testing, but is not expected to have actually used the sys-tem for real. Once the system is installed, maintenance involvesboth correction of faults (corrective maintenance) and updates andTel.: +972 2 658 4115; fax: +972 2 658 5261.E-mail address: feit@cs.huji.ac.ilimprovements (adaptive and perfective maintenance) – but is notexpected to involve any major additional development. As the term“maintenance” implies, the goal is essentially to extend the usabil-ity of the system, not to enlarge it.Comparing this approach with those underlying other ﬁelds, weﬁnd a strong match with the construction of large physical systems.For example, an ocean liner, a shopping mall, a new airport, or acathedral are designed and built with inputs from the customerwho initiated them, but they cannot be used before completed.Once completed, they are used and maintained for an extendedperiod. The construction and maintenance are clearly distinct peri-ods with different characteristics.But there are other large systems that are built in a completelydifferent manner, both in the physical world and in cyberspace.These are not created from scratch in one fell swoop, but ratherevolve from humble origins over a long period of time. In partic-ular, evolution is often seen in new technologies, even when welike to think of the changes they spawn as revolutionary. Considerautomobiles as an example. The ﬁrst step in producing automo-biles was to replace a horse with a motor, while maintaining theoverall structure. Gear boxes and improved suspension came later.So did batteries for starting the motor and accessories such as aradio receiver. Thus while each individual car was developed andthen maintained, the overall dynamics were of evolution from oneyear to the next. Each step improved the usability of the new cars,and enabled a larger following to emerge. This happened in parallel0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.jss.2011.10.050 860D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875with the development of an infrastructure for gasoline distributionand an improved and incrementally growing road system – neithergas stations, roads, nor cars would be justiﬁed without the others.A similar process may underlie the evolution of dynamic socialsystems – a university, a multinational corporation, the stockexchange, or a bazaar, for example. Such systems are the productof a long process of give and take that reﬁned their details, so theirevolution is guided by continuous interactions between the sys-tem and its environment. This interaction is extremely important,as it is the impetus for further developments and guides the waytowards developments that will actually be useful in practice. Thusthe system is never “designed” in the normal meaning of the word,and its requirements are not and cannot be speciﬁed in advance.Nevertheless, this is the easier and safer path to follow, as havingto design everything in advance can be a lot of work and may leadto great risks if something is not done right.Large software systems also often evolve in this manner, possi-bly in parallel to the evolution of the social or business systems thatuse them. For example, the software systems underlying the opera-tions of Amazon.com, Ebay, and Facebook are much more complexand feature rich now then they were when these companies werefounded. But this was not designed in advance, and the speciﬁcfeatures that would emerge could not be anticipated. Instead, thesoftware evolved and grew together with the company, an epitomeof Lehman’s “E-type” systems (Lehman, 1980a). A similar processcan also happen with software that has a general user communityrather than being used by a speciﬁc company. In this paper we focuson modeling the evolution of one such system, namely the Linuxkernel.Evolutionary development has been recognized as an importantparadigm at least since the seminal works of Lehman (1980b) andGilb (1988). In fact, is can be argued that today most of the softwareindustry follows evolutionary principles at least to some degree.This is especially marked in software product lines, where succes-sive software products explicitly follow and extend each other. It isalso the underlying basis of the agile software movement. However,evolution can in principle take many forms. For example, Lehman’sﬁrst law of software evolution was that evolving systems changecontinuously. This implies that while new features are added, oldones should be removed at a similar rate. His sixth law, formu-lated nearly a decade later, was that evolving systems continuouslygrow. This implies that change is actually the result of many moreadditions than deletions. In retrospect this appears to be the morecommon approach, and indeed this is what we observe in Linux(Merlo et al., 2002; Wermelinger and Yu, 2008).In software engineering terms the process of evolutionary devel-opment can be viewed as extending the notions of iteration andincrementation, with actual production use by real users as an inte-gral part of the loop. The novelty of our model is that each cycle isnot viewed independently, but rather the continuation from onecycle to the next is emphasized. One of the byproducts of thispoint of view is the deprecation of the terms “delivery” and “main-tenance”. Instead, the software continues to evolve and grow ina process of perpetual development, with regular releases of newproduction versions replacing the singular delivery of the ﬁnishedproduct. This is indeed what we ﬁnd for the Linux kernel, and alsoin many other (mainly open source) projects. Another byproduct isexposing the relationship between parallel versions of the projectthat exist at the same time. In particular, maintenance is applied toproduction versions that exist in parallel to the main developmentversion.Our main goal in this paper is to articulate the perpetual devel-opment model, using the Linux kernel as a motivating example.Using the Linux data, we demonstrate the central role of the growthof the system over time, the continuous nature of development andrelease activities, and how they differ from maintenance activities.Table 1Linux versions and their designations. Only full versions are counted, ignoringpatches that were used especially in the early years.DesignationNumberVersions
Production 159 1.0, 1.2, 2.0, 2.2, 2.4Development397
 1.1, 1.3, 2.1, 2.3, 2.5Pre-release 56 Pre2.0, 2.2.0-pre,2.3.99-pre, 2.4.0-test,2.6.0-test2.6 production 463 2.6.*2.6 release candidates2472.6.*-rc
Total1322
By providing a detailed analysis of Linux development, we attemptto uncover development patterns that are potentially widely used,but have not been articulated and studied in the literature. Wethen brieﬂy speculate on the implications of these developmentpatterns.The choice of Linux is not accidental. Linux is perhaps the best-known and most successful open-source project in the world, tothe point of becoming the poster-child of the whole open sourcemovement. The source code of its full development history isfreely available from http://www.kernel.org and numerous mirrorsworldwide – at present totaling 1322 versions (Tables 1 and 8).Importantly, Linux’s development deﬁes common managementtheory (Raymond, 2000). At the same time, it does not ﬁt intoany common software lifecycle model. This motivates us to sug-gest the perpetual development model. This model is descriptiverather than prescriptive. Its goal is to create a framework for dis-cussing what is actually being done in the ﬁeld and why, ratherthan attempting to dictate ideals. In particular, we note that Linuxdevelopment is a dynamic process in constant ﬂux, and adapts toovercome problems that occur as the system grows. Thus differentvariants of the model apply to different parts of Linux’s evolution.The rest of this paper is organized as follows. In the next sectionwe review related work on modeling the development of long-livedevolving projects. The perpetual development model is then pre-sented in Section 3. Section 4 elaborates on releases, which are ofcentral importance in the model. This is followed by a detailed dis-cussion of Linux’s growth in Section 5. Finally, we present somepossible implications of the model in Section 6 and conclude inSection 7.2. Lifecycle models for long-lived software projectsClassical software lifecycle models typically cover the develop-ment from a concept to a delivered software product. A recurringfeature in early models such as the waterfall model and the Vmodel was the quest for stability. First, one needs to get all therequirements right. This is then used to formalize comprehensivespeciﬁcations. Given the speciﬁcations, we can create a design thatsatisﬁes them, and so on. But this scenario is often simply irrelevantin real life, because the clients can’t articulate all their requirementsin advance, so speciﬁcations are never complete, leading to designsthat will have to change when more requirements are discovered(McCracken and Jackson, 1982).The alternative is to consider development as a learning pro-cess, where requirements and speciﬁcations grow together as moreexperience is gained and risks are understood. This is incorporatedinto models by employing an iterative and incremental process(Larman and Basili, 2003). In principle, this can continue beyondthe initial delivery of a working system to its users. Indeed, Boehmmentions the applicability of the spiral model – complete with riskassessment at each stage – to proposed enhancements that may beapplied to systems already in operational use (Boehm, 1988). Like-wise, Kruchten suggests the application of additional “generations” D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875861of the uniﬁed process to handle system evolution (Kruchten, 1996).But their main focus remains the basic initial development.As a result of focusing on the initial development, up to productdelivery, common lifecycle models do not apply to the full life-spanof long-lived software products. In particular, they do not describethe relationship between successive releases of the product. Thishas prompted the development of specialized lifecycle models toﬁll this gap.One such model is the evolution-tree model of Tomer andSchach (2000). The levels of this tree represent stages of devel-opment: requirements, analysis, design, and implementation. Theevolution of a software product is then described as successivebranches of the tree, where each new version backtracks and thenbranches out from some level in the previous branch. Thus if onlythe implementation is modiﬁed relative to the previous version,the new branch will start at the third level, but if there are newrequirements the new branch will start directly from the root. Atthe same time, development artifacts such as design documentsmay be reused across corresponding levels in successive branches.Another model is the staged model of Rajlich and Bennett(2000). This model creates a framework for describing the evolutionof a software product, with each version passing through the stagesof evolution, servicing, phaseout, and ﬁnally closedown. Notably,the “versioned” variant of the model allows for multiple servicedversions branching off from the main sequence of evolved versions.A system that cannot continue to evolve, but is still serviced, turnsinto a legacy system. This model provides two important featuresthat are lacking in the Tomer and Schach model. First, it places amuch stronger emphasis on the continuity of the whole process,as new versions always start from a previous one without back-tracking. Second, it allows for the parallel existence of multipleversions, and in particular, for new development that is done inparallel with the maintenance of an existing production version.Thus it decouples evolution from maintenance, and avoids the rat-hole of arguments whether these terms are synonymous (Godfreyand German, 2008). A related model is the split and re-integratemodel of Nakakoji et al. (2002). This may be viewed as a reﬁne-ment of the Rajlich and Bennett model, where developments donein one branch are propagated to another branch that is developed inparallel. Capiluppi et al. (2007b) have observed that in open-sourceprojects a legacy system may be picked up and revived by a newset of developers, thus returning it to the evolution phase.Our model is also a reﬁnement of this approach, which addsanother dimension: how the product grows during its evolu-tion. In addition, we emphasize the implications of continueddevelopment and parallel branches, as opposed to the manage-rial aspects as emphasized by Rajlich and Bennett. Thus we donot deal with issues like stafﬁng, choice of language, change oftechnology, etc. The model can also be viewed in relation toRaymond’s works on open-source development (also inspired byLinux) (Raymond, 2000), where we try to formulate a lifecy-cle model to his technical observations and description of socialprocesses.Indeed, Linux evolution has been studied by several authors.Several authors have studied Linux growth, especially in con-nection with Lehman’s Laws of software evolution (Godfrey andTu, 2000; Robles et al., 2005; Herraiz et al., 2006; Izurieta andBieman, 2006; Israeli and Feitelson, 2010). This is also related tothe potential increase in complexity, and the ensuing consequencesregarding maintainability (Schach et al., 2002, 2007; Thomas et al.,2009; Israeli and Feitelson, 2010). Others consider mechanisms ofevolution, and especially the use of cloning (Godfrey et al., 2000;Merlo et al., 2002; Antoniol et al., 2002; Padioleau et al., 2006;Livieri et al., 2007). Perhaps the closest to our work is the paper byGodfrey and Tu (2000). In particular, our rendition of Linux growthand parallel versions in Fig. 2 extends graphs drawn by them, asfeedbackand fixesrequestsfeedbackand fixesrequestsfeedbackand fixesrequestsreleasereleasereleasedevelopmentinitialcontinued          developmentproduction use and maintenanceproduction use and maintenanceproduction use and maintenancesizetimeusersupgradeusersupgradeFig. 1. Basic version of the perpetual development model.does the discussion of individual subsystems in Section 5.3. But allthese works typically do not formulate an explicit lifecycle model.3. The perpetual development modelConventionally, lifecycle models describe the sequence ofactions that need to be taken and the transitions between them.The perpetual development model is more about continuous activ-ities, and in particular, activities that happen in parallel. However,it also includes singular decision points where activities change orbranch off from each other.3.1. Modeling growth and parallel activitiesPractically all lifecycle models use 2D pictures for illustration.The waterfall is typically drawn as a diagonal sequence of blocks,possibly with some other elements, where the direction from top-left to bottom-right correlates with some notion of progress andtime. The spiral model, as its name suggests, is drawn as a spi-ral, where the angle reﬂects the sequence of activities within eachcycle, and the radius reﬂects the cycle number. In the models ofTomer and Schach and Rajlich and Bennett both dimensions corre-late with time, one depicting progress within a version and theother progress from one version to the next. However, neitherdimension explicitly reﬂects time with a linear scale.The perpetual development model explicitly uses the twodimensions to portray time (on the X axis) and size (on the Y axis).“Size” can be interpreted literally, or alternatively it can be inter-preted as the feature set provided by the software. As quantifyingfeatures may be harder to deﬁne, we limit the discussion to physicalsize.Given these axes, the model consists of a continually grow-ing development backbone, from which stable production versionsbranch out at intermittent release points (Fig. 1). Thus several ver-sions of the product may exist simultaneously. In this framework,the following activities occur:1. Users of production versions provide feedback and new require-ments to developers, and bug alerts to maintainers.2. Maintainers maintain the current production versions. This mayalso involve interactions with developers working on the nextversion.3. Developers, at the same time, continue to develop the system.In doing so they use the input from the users and maintainers ofthe current versions.4. The development activity is punctuated by releases of newversions. Developers therefore alternate between two types of 862D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875Linux kernel distributions949596979899000102030405060708091011lines of code [10^6]0123456789101.22.02.22.42.6.162.6.271.11.32.12.32.52.6Fig. 2. Perpetual development of Linux from 1994 to 2011. Up to 2003, versionswith odd major number (1.3, 2.1, etc.) were development versions, and those witheven numbers (1.2, 2.0) were stable production versions. In version 2.6 only produc-tion versions are released, while new development work is reﬂected only in releasecandidates.activity: implementing new features and performing a release.We expand on this issue in Section 4.5. When new production versions are released, users may upgradeto the new version. This may be a slow process, and not all usersnecessarily upgrade.It is important to be precise regarding the meaning of the term“release”. In the model we use this term exclusively to mean therelease of a new production version of the system –an
 event some-times referred to as a “major” release. We distinguish this from the“minor” releases that occur when a new instance of an existing ver-sion is made available. In production versions such new instancestypically reﬂect some maintenance work that has been done, e.g.the correction of a bug or the application of a security patch; indevelopment versions, they may reﬂect additional progress in thedevelopment. To avoid ambiguity, we shall refer to such minorreleases as “updates”. And when we refer to a Linux kernel ver-sion, such as 2.4, we are actually referring to a series of such minorversions, of the form 2.4.x.The model and the list of parallel activities are based on observa-tion of the development of the Linux kernel from its initial release in1994 to mid 2011, as depicted in Fig. 2 (Israeli and Feitelson, 2010).For size we use lines of code; this and other possible size metrics arediscussed below in Section 5.1. The growth of the backbone neednot necessarily be strictly linear as in Fig. 1, and indeed the Linuxdata exhibits some ﬂuctuations and a generally increasing growthrate (Godfrey and Tu, 2000). This is discussed in Section 5.2. Theproduction offshoots remain relatively stable as may be expected(the initial growth of 2.2 and 2.4 is discussed below).An important feature of the model is to demote the status ofproduct delivery (as was also done in the long-term lifecycle mod-els cited above in Section 2). Delivery is no longer a focal point of theprocess, dividing the product lifetime into development and main-tenance. Rather, it becomes one of the many similar points along thecontinuous process of development, where new production ver-sions are released. When such new releases are made, users startto upgrade to the new production version at their own pace, butsome may choose not to upgrade at all. Production versions there-fore generally need to be maintained well beyond the release of thenext version. For example, Linux kernel version 2.4, which was ﬁrstreleased in January 2001, was still being maintained in late 2010.More recently, versions 2.6.16, 2.6.27, and 2.6.32 were each main-tained for several years. In fact such behavior is not unique to Linux.A notable example is the release of Windows Vista, where manyusers elected not to upgrade but rather to keep using Windows XP.Another important feature of the model is to delimit the scope ofmaintenance activities. Maintenance implies an effort to preserveand sustain the usability of the system, possibly with peripheralmodiﬁcations, but it does not involve continuing to build the coreof the system. This distinction between maintenance and contin-ued development, which is central to our model, is missing frommany discussions of maintenance, which implicitly assume thereis only one version of the product (e.g. Kitchenham et al., 1999).It also relieves the forced inclusion of continued development in“perfective maintenance” (Lientz et al., 1978), which is necessaryif one insists on using the “maintenance” label for everything thathappens beyond the ﬁrst delivery. Thus, while maintenance doesin fact apply to versions of the product that are in production use,it is not the main activity but rather done in parallel to contin-ued development of the backbone. And from a terminology aspect,maintenance is not a synonym for evolution.An interesting question that arises from the distinction betweencontinued development and maintenance is who performs theseactivities. In the context of open-source projects, maintainers anddevelopers may be the same people, as developers may have own-ership or at least a feeling of responsibility for their code, andwill therefore maintain it in parallel to performing other devel-opment activities. Thus one may expect maintenance activities tobe strongly correlated with a subset of development activities thathappen at roughly the same time. For example, bugs found duringcontinued development may point to similar bugs in parallel pro-duction versions, and vice versa. Moreover, users may also be thesame people, as the community of kernel hackers largely developsand maintains Linux for their own use. One may also extend thisto the “real” end users, which are mainly Linux distribution com-panies like Red Hat, Debian, and Novell/SUSE, who neverthelesscontribute signiﬁcantly back to the community.1The graphical representation of perpetual development alsoprovides a framework for demonstrating the known beneﬁts ofiterative and incremental development with evolutionary delivery,such as (Gilb, 1988)•The lead time to the ﬁrst working software is short. Thereafter, aworking version always exists for the beneﬁt of users. Thus thereis little danger of the project coming to nothing.•Real users doing real work are effectively brought into the devel-opment loop. Their work acts as a test of system functionality,and helps in uncovering problems (Raymond, 2000).•Having actual users work with the system also uncovers newrequirements that were not anticipated in advance, and allowsfor prioritization of different requirements that have not beenimplemented yet. The user requirements and the system thatsolves them co-evolve together (Lehman, 1980a; Maher andPoon, 1996).•The relatively short time between releases implies focus and lim-ited scope. This is the evolutionary alternative to progress in the“cone of uncertainty” (Boehm, 2008): rather than starting withwide uncertainty and working to reduce it, maintain a muchsmaller scope (and hence smaller uncertainty) throughout.•The relatively short time between releases also implies that pri-oritization and bounding becomes crucial: at each step, one needsto decide what to do and what not to do, based on user input or onthe effect on the bottom line (Denne and Cleland-Huang, 2004).1Canonical, the company behind Ubuntu, seems to focus more on desktop soft-ware than on the operating system kernel. D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875863evolutionarydevelop−maintaindevelopmentperpetualall software projectsagileFig. 3. Relationship between evolutionary software development, perpetual devel-opment, and agile development.In addition, it highlights issues that are often not noticed, such as•The danger of releasing an unstable version is reduced, becauseusers upgrade to the new version only gradually, and they havethe previous version as a fallback.•The continued growth of the system implies that new codeis generated all the time. This calls into question the notionthat eventually incremental change and refactoring will becomethe dominant activities rather than “clean” development fromscratch (Rajlich, 2006).•The long time scale and recurrent nature of the project impliesthat new technology may be incorporated in the developmentprocess as it becomes available, as opposed to freezing everythingat the outset.The novelty of the perpetual development model is mainly inarticulating the continuous and parallel aspects of software devel-opment that are often left implicit or beyond the scope of thelifecycle model. The difference from common models based on iter-ation and incrementation is that the process is not expected to endwith a “ﬁnal” release (Boehm, 2008) – it just goes on and on as longas it is useful. Of course it will most probably end eventually, butthe mindset is one of perpetuation. We allege that this mindset isnot unique to Linux, and is often present in open-source projects(Raymond, 2000) and in agile development (Beck, 1999).3.2. Relationship with agile developmentThe perpetual development model may seem to be redundantdue to its similarity with evolutionary development in general(Gilb, 1988), or agile development in particular (Beck, 1999). How-ever, these terms actually denote different things.As described in the introduction, we ﬁrst make the distinctionbetween projects which undergo evolutionary development andprojects which are developed and then maintained (Fig. 3). Thisdistinction relates to the nature of the project. Evolutionarydevelopment is suitable in situations where the rate of change ishigh, and the project requirements cannot be deﬁned in advance.A develop-maintain style is suitable for those situations where onemust deﬁne the full project in advance. In such cases, the learningprocess inherent in the evolutionary approach must be replacedby careful planning and modeling. Indeed, this was the impetusfor the development of tools like statecharts (Harel, 2009). Thesewere developed as part of an effort to nail down the requirementsfor the software controlling a new ﬁghter plane, a good exampleof a situation where essentially all the software is needed for anoperational system, the system does not change much after initialdelivery (except for new versions for new models of the plane,similar to a product line), and it is practically impossible to carveout a small initial chunk that would be useful in itself.Perpetual development is one approach to accomplish evolu-tion, namely evolution by continuing to develop the product. Thisimplies continued growth, as reﬂected by Lehman’s 6th law. Note,however, that growth is not necessarily implied by the term “evolu-tion” by itself. In the animal kingdom, for example, there are somecases where evolution involved growth in size (think dinosaurs,giraffes, and whales), but many where it did not (e.g. bacteria andother single-cell organisms). For software it is also possible to envi-sion evolution by changing and adapting the codebase, rather thanby adding to it. However, it seems that in practice perpetual devel-opment is a common approach to software evolution, and perhapsthe dominant one.The dictionary deﬁnition of “agile” is something that is light andquick. In software development, this term has come to mean aniterative process with little if any long-term planning.2Still, manyagile projects are terminal projects, where the agile approach isfollowed for the duration, but it is expected to end either when allthe desired features are done or when the allotted time (and pos-sibly budget) is exhausted. At the same time, there is an emphasis(made explicit as one of the core practices of Extreme Programming,for example) on maintaining a “sustainable pace” of developmentthat can continue indeﬁnitely. Perpetual development focuses onthis aspect, and highlights the continuous nature of the work as anenabler of all the other features. This is in contrast to most interpre-tations of agile development, which emphasize the contrast with“death march” projects and overtime, and the importance of tech-nical elements such as the lack of formal detailed planning and theuse of pair programming.Furthermore, a major difference is that perpetual developmentis a lifecycle model, whereas agile development is a methodol-ogy. Thus instantiations of agile development, such as ExtremeProgramming or SCRUM, each promote speciﬁc procedures andpractices. Examples include maintaining a backlog of features, con-ducting daily standup meetings, and adhering to a strict releaseschedule. Our case study of Linux is a good example of this distinc-tion: Linux is deﬁnitely an instance of perpetual development, butit does not subscribe to any speciﬁc agile methodology. Thus, whileit currently adheres to a regular release schedule with a cycle of2–3 months, this was not always the case, and it is not part of thedeﬁnition of the model.3.3. Variants in the Linux case studyThe Linux data shown in Fig. 2 is similar to the model introducedin Fig. 1, but not identical to it. Indeed, the model attempts to glossover differences, and present the most salient concepts in a cleanmanner. Reality is often more complex.It is easy to identify three phases in the Linux kernel’s devel-opment (as reﬂected in Fig. 2), which can be viewed as variationson the more abstract and general model. The ﬁrst is the version 1kernels, from 1994 to 1996. During this period most of the activ-ity was in development, and only few maintenance updates weremade to production versions. The second phase, from 1996 to2004, is characterized by the release of three long-lived productionversions (2.0, 2.2, and 2.4) that were maintained in parallel. Signif-icant developments were performed between these versions. Thisled to big differences between them and long intervals betweentheir release dates which were extended even further by the pro-tracted release process itself. Such long intervals contradict thedesired rapid release cycle of open source software (Raymond,2See The Agile Manifesto, available at http://www.agilemanifesto.org/, for guid-ing principles. 864D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875Release of Linux kernel 1.211/941/953/955/957/959/95lines of code [10^3]1501752002252502753001.21.11.3Release of Linux kernel 2.01/963/965/967/969/9611/961/97lines of code [10^3]3004005006007002.01.3pre2.02.1Release of Linux kernel 2.29/9811/981/993/995/997/999/9911/991/00lines of code [10^6]11.21.41.62.22.12.2−pre2.3Release of Linux kernel 2.41/007/001/017/011/027/021/03lines of code [10^6]1.522.533.542.42.32.3.99−pre2.4.0−test2.5Fig. 4. Releases of Linux kernel versions 1.2, 2.0, 2.2, and 2.4.2000). Indeed, in the third phase (kernel version 2.6 since 2004)production kernels are released regularly every 2–3 months. Toreduce the maintenance effort most of these are not maintainedmuch beyond the release of the next production version.An especially troubling aspect of the Linux data is the signif-icant growth observed in the initial periods of the 2.2 and 2.4production versions. This contradicts the assumed role of theseversions, where production versions are only maintained and notexpanded with new developments. The explanation is that newdevelopments were indeed originally injected into the develop-ment versions (speciﬁcally 2.3 and 2.5). However, due to the longdelay expected until the release of the next production version,many new developments were then propagated into the existingproduction versions (Godfrey and Tu, 2000). The switch to the morerapid release cycle of 2.6 is perhaps a reaction to this state of affairs,and an attempt to institutionalize a more orderly process for thequick dissemination of new developments.In summary, the Linux data exposes two main variants of theperpetual development model. In one the production releases arefar between, and contemporaneous development and productionversions are coupled together. In the other production releasesare frequent, and production versions are largely decoupled fromdevelopment. This distinction is related to the distinction betweenreleases based on features and releases based on schedule. In thenext section, we show that the mechanics of the releases them-selves are also different.4. Releases and decision pointsAs noted above, the focal points of the perpetual develop-ment model are the major release points where new productionversions are released. These deﬁne the structure of the system’sdevelopment and the relationship between its branches. It is there-fore of interest to investigate the process of performing such arelease in some detail. In Linux, this refers to the releases ofthe major production versions (1.2, 2.0, 2.2, and 2.4), and to the“third digit” releases of the 2.6 versions starting with 2.6.11. Aswe show, these two sets of releases are rather different from eachother.Note that we do not refer to updates (or “minor releases”) ofexisting versions – the third-digit releases before version 2.6.11,and the fourth-digit releases of 2.6.11 and later. In Linux, suchupdates are made when “enough” content accumulates or whenthere is a new security patch that needs to be disseminated quickly.This is a subjective decision made by whoever is responsible for theversion in question.4.1. Idealized release modelBased on the Linux case study we can take a more detailed lookat the activities surrounding releases of new production versions.We initially focus on the four major production versions: 1.2, 2.0,2.2, and 2.4. A zoom into the update activity surrounding each ofthese releases is shown in Fig. 4. This indicates that a release is nota point, but a whole sequence of activities in itself.While not identical, these four releases exhibit the same generalstructure. Using the release of kernel version 2.0 as an example, thelast update of version 1.3, which was 1.3.100, took place on 10 May1996. On 12 May 1996 version pre2.0.1 was released, indicatingthe beginning of work towards the release of the 2.0 version. Therewere a total of 14 updates in the pre2.0 series, ending with pre2.0.14on 6 June 1996. Three days later, on 9 June 1996, version 2.0 was D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875865releaseforkdecide to releaseprior developmentproduction useand maintenancefollowupcontinued developmentteststabilize andsizetimeFig. 5. Idealized model of the anatomy of a release.released. The fork of a new development version took place on 30September 1996, with the release of kernel version 2.1.0. By thattime, 21 updates of version 2.0 had taken place.The differences between the four releases are also instructive,and seem to indicate that the release process was reﬁned withtime. Thus release 1.2 did not have a separate pre-release seriesof updates leading up to the release itself. At the other extreme,release 2.4 had two separate series: one of preparing the new ver-sion, and another of testing (and presumably correcting) it.Based on the above, we can generalize an idealized release pro-cess that includes the following set of decision points and activitiesbetween them (Fig. 5):1. Decide to release. The decision at this point in time is to stopdeveloping new functionality, and prepare to release what hasaccumulated so far. Except for version 1.2, this is reﬂected by anew pre-release series of kernel updates. The following activity isone of stabilizing and improving the code, based on internal test-ing by the developers. Additional development is done mainly toﬁll holes in existing functionality, not to add new functionality,so the rate of growth is expected to be reduced.2. Perform the release. This is the actual point of the release itself,where the new production kernel is released and the series of itsupdates is started. The initial updates reﬂect a period of sup-port and followup, in which developers continue to stabilizeand improve the code, but now this is based on feedback andbug-reports from actual users. Again, this may include someadditional development.3. Fork a new development version. This decision signiﬁes that thereleased version is considered stable and usable. It is reﬂectedin the data by the forking of a new development version, whichwill be pursued in parallel to the maintenance of the productionversion that has just been released.In addition, there is a ﬁnal decision point related to productionversions:4. Discontinue maintenance. The decision to stop supporting aproduction version is usually taken only after the subsequentproduction version is well established. It does not mean that thisversion will immediately cease to be used – only that it will notbe further maintained, so no additional updates will be made.In Linux the decision to cease maintenance is not necessarilythe ﬁnal word, as distributors (such as Red Hat or Debian) maycontinue to maintain a version that is important to them evenwhen it is no longer “ofﬁcially” maintained. For example, RedTable 2Stabilization work leading up to the release of production versions in Linux. Durationis in days.ResultDurationUpdatesSeries2.02814pre2.02.2.02892.2.0-pre2.3.99-pre2.4.0-test9132271225296test12.4.0Hat guarantees support for its Enterprise Linux versions for 10years from their release date.In a business setting, there may be additional phases due to ﬁnancialor legal considerations (Rajlich and Bennett, 2000). This seems tobe largely irrelevant for open-source systems such as Linux.This model of a release is different from the common softwarerelease life cycle (Wikipedia, 2010). In the common model, the pre-alpha phase denotes development, and the alpha phase is testing.This distinction is irrelevant for Linux, as testing, to the degree thatit is done, is a continuous activity (similar to the testing work-ﬂow in the Uniﬁed Process). The “decide to release” point aboveis essentially equivalent to the decision to perform a beta releasein the more conventional software release life cycle. Indeed, Linuxalso uses the terminology of “release candidate” for such versions.The main differences come with the release itself. The release deci-sion point is semantically equivalent to the common “release tomanufacturing” (RTM), meaning that the software is passed fromthe development unit to the manufacturing unit and reproduced;this subsequently leads to “general availability”. In Linux and otheropen-source software distributed on the Internet there is no man-ufacturing step, and released software is immediately available.But more importantly, support by the development team contin-ues after release. This followup phase, which continues until thedecision to fork a new development version, is missing from thecommon model.Data regarding all four major releases is provided inTables 2 and 3. All show the basic structure described above, albeitwith some occasionally major variations. Table 2 shows that thestabilization phase is typically relatively short. Preparing for ver-sions 2.0 and 2.2 took less than a month. In the case of the version1.2 release there was even no explicit switch to work on stabiliza-tion. On the other hand, the work towards version 2.4 was muchlonger, and took nearly 10 months. This was divided into a bit morethan 2 months of preparation, followed by more than 7 months oftesting.Table 3 shows that in all four releases the followup phasewas rather long: more than 3 months for versions 1.2, 2.0,and 2.2, and nearly 11 months for 2.4. The ﬁrst new devel-opment version was either essentially identical to the previousproduction update, or else it already reﬂected some new devel-opments. As shown in Fig. 4, in both 2.2 and 2.4 there is somegrowth in the stabilization and followup phases, and continuedgrowth of the production version even after forking the newdevelopment version. This indicates that in these versions theTable 3Forking of development versions from production versions in Linux. Delay denotesthe time from the release of the production version in days.Version Forked from Delay Relationship1.3.0 1.2.10 97 Modiﬁed2.1.0 2.0.21 113 Modiﬁed2.3.0 2.2.8 106 Identical2.5.0 2.4.15 322 Identical 866D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875Release of Linux kernel 2.02/96 4/96 6/96 8/9610/9612/962/974/97days from prev update051015202530354045502.01.3pre2.02.1Fig. 6. Update rate around the release of Linux kernel version 2.0.distinction between production and development may not be ascrisp.Beyond the structure of these releases, one should notice theirprotracted nature. The process of preparing a release, testing it, andperforming the required followup always took more than 4 months;for 2.4 it took no less than 20 months. Similar problems have beenobserved in other systems as well (Michlmayr et al., 2007). In Linuxthe solution was to switch to a tightly regulated schedule-basedrelease process, as described below.Returning to the structure of the release, it is also instructiveto observe the rate of work in the different phases, as reﬂectedin their update rate. This is shown in Fig. 6 for the 2.0 release (theother three releases exhibit qualitatively similar behavior). The lastmonths of version 1.3, and the month of version pre2.0, were char-acterized by a typical rate of a new update every 2–3 days. The ﬁrstfour months of 2.0, and the continued development of 2.1, exhibita more moderate average rate of releasing a new update approx-imately every 5 days, with isolated instances of 20 days or more.But once 2.1 was forked, the intervals between updates of 2.0 goup ﬁrst to around 10–13 days, and then to durations that are bet-ter measured in months rather than days. Thus we can see that theinitial followup part of a new production release is indeed moresimilar to development work than to the subsequent maintenancework.Related to the above is the growth rates exhibited in the differ-ent segments. The model in Fig. 5 implies a reduced growth rate inthe preparation and followup phases, relative to the developmentversions. This is indeed the case as shown in Fig. 7 (where growthrate is expressed in lines per day, averaged over the full duration ofLinux series growth ratesgrowth rate [lines/day]0250500750100012501500175020001.1 1.3 2.1 2.3 2.52.0 2.4developmentpreparationfollowupproduction1.2 2.2pre2.02.2.0−pretill 2.2.18all2.3.99−pre2.4.0−testtill 2.4.25allFig. 7. Growth rates of the different series and their main segments.each phase). For each major release, we see some reduction fromthe preceding development growth rate, and an increase in the fol-lowing development growth rate. Thus the sustained work rate (asreﬂected in updates) is indeed at least partially diverted to activ-ity other than development of new functionality. Even the initial(growing) phases in 2.2 and 2.4 adhere to this pattern. However,except for 1.2 and to some degree 2.0, the growth rate merely dropsand does not become very small, and it is higher for later versions.The alternations between development and release activity echoearly models of large system development. In these models, itwas suggested that successive releases emphasize either “progres-sive” or “anti-regressive” work (Lehman, 1978; Woodside, 1980).Progressive work was the development of new features, while anti-regressive work included work to improve the structural designof the software and updating documentation. Interestingly, it wasshown (based on a high-level assumed mathematical model) thatthe best progress would be achieved by alternating these activi-ties, rather than trying to carry them out concurrently (Woodside,1980). Such alternations also occur in the simulations of Cook et al.(2005), due to the assumption that activities such as refactoringabsorb developer resources that would otherwise be devoted toproducing new features. In our model, this alternation appearsaround each release of a new production version, rather than at suc-cessive releases. In principle, it can also occur multiple times withina release cycle. For example, evidence from Microsoft mentionscode stabilization efforts that are performed every few months(Cusumano and Selby, 1997).4.2. Compressed release modelThe idealized release model discussed above hinges upon thedecision to release. In the major Linux production versions thesedecisions were related to the development of a major feature, suchas multi-platform support and SMP support. However, such devel-opments took an order of two years to complete, causing majordelays in the release of other lesser features. With version 2.6 itwas therefore decided to switch to a periodic scheme with a newrelease around every 2–3 months. This also reduced the pressureon developers, because if one release is missed the next one is notfar off.A faster release cycle was problematic with the idealized releasemodel, as an underlying notion in that model is that the same peo-ple alternate between development and release activities. With thegrowth of Linux this became increasingly untrue. Core develop-ers became more involved with administrating the kernel versions,while other developers more commonly contributed complete sub-systems that had been developed externally. At the same time,a “stable team” was formed to take care of updates to previousproduction versions. This enabled a three-way parallelization ofactivities:•Development of new functionality. This is done independentlyby many developers in their own environment (importantly, thisis explicitly supported by the git model of distributed versioncontrol, where each developer has his own private copy of thecodebase). Such development may take a long time, and is notreﬂected in any way in the Linux kernel releases and updatesuntil it is merged during a convenient merge window.•Stabilization and testing. This is orchestrated by the core devel-opers, notably Linus Torvalds, in cooperation with the developerswho made contributions in the most recent merge window. It isreﬂected as updates to the current rc version.•Maintenance and updates of the previously released version,reﬂected in updates to that version. D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875867releaseend of mergemerge windowmerge windowstabilize andtestfollowup and maintenancesizetimeFig. 8. Model of the anatomy of a compressed release.This parallelization allows the release cycle to be compressedand completed within about 10 weeks. The compressed releasecycle is shown in Fig. 8. The life of a new version starts with amerge window. This is a relatively short period (around two weeks)where developers are invited to submit their new developments.3When the merge window ends, a stabilization period (of aroundtwo months) takes place. The updates of this not-yet-released newversion are called “release candidates” and designated by an “rc”sufﬁx. When the new version is considered stable, it is released. Inparallel, a new merge window is opened for the next version. Thereleased version is handed over to the stable team, which performsmaintenance updates (bug ﬁxes and security patches) as needed.Data from several recent Linux 2.6 releases is shown in Fig. 9.Note that there is no “development version”, and there are noupdates during the merge window. All development work is doneexternally by the developers in their own environment, in par-allel to the release of previous versions. In few cases the ﬁrst rcupdate serves to extend the merge window, but in most cases therc updates do not contain any signiﬁcant growth.Given that the main changes in the compressed release modelresult from merging new functionality during a merge window, onemay expect that the rate of growth will increase and that no codewill ever be removed. This is not the case. Data collected by GregKroah-Hartman from the git repositories of versions 2.6.11 through2.6.354shows that thousands of lines are removed in each newversion. However, additions outnumber deletions by an averagefactor of 2.12.Importantly, the 2.6 releases are time-driven rather than beingcontent-driven. Merge windows are relatively short, and the timeto stabilize is also limited. If stabilization is not achieved, mergedfunctionality may be removed and delayed to the next version. Thisleads to rapid dissemination of innovations and developments, butalso means that stable versions have a very short lifetime. As aresult, some versions are singled out for “longterm” maintenance,and updated in parallel to subsequent releases.3These new features are expected to have been reviewed and signed off by sub-system maintainers, and incorporated in the Linux “next” version, but this is notreﬂected in any ofﬁcial releases.4Available at http://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/people/gregkh/kernelhistory/kernel stats.ods.Releases of Linux kernel 2.69/0811/081/093/095/097/099/09 11/09lines of code [10^6]66.256.56.7577.257.57.7582.6.28−rc2.6.29−rc2.6.30−rc2.6.31−rc2.6.282.6.292.6.302.6.31Fig. 9. Compressed releases in the Linux 2.6 series.5. The growth of LinuxThe Linux data indicates that the kernel distribution grew by afactor of 78.6 over 17(1/4) years – an average annual compoundedgrowth rate of 28.8% (as measured by LoC). Portrayal of how asoftware system grows is a central component of the perpetualdevelopment model. “Continued growth” is also Lehman’s 6th lawof software evolution (Lehman and Ramil, 1999). While not oneof the original three laws proposed in 1974, it nevertheless ﬁg-ures prominently in the research literature. This may perhaps beattributed to the fact that it is the easiest to measure directly. Forall these reasons, it is of interest to study the growth of Linux insome detail.5.1. Measuring growthIn Fig. 2 we used lines of code as a metric for the size of theLinux kernel. This is probably the most commonly used size metricin software engineering, and has also been used before to portraythe growth of Linux (Godfrey and Tu, 2000; Schach et al., 2002;Deshpande and Riehle, 2008). However, there are other options.We therefore start the discussion with a comparison of differentmetrics. This shows that they are highly correlated, and thereforewhich metric is used is not very important.The metrics we checked are the following:•Lines of actual code. This excludes blank lines used for format-ting and comment lines most commonly used in block comments.However it does include lines that contain both code and a com-ment.•Total lines. This is a variant that includes all the lines: code, blank,and comments.•The number of ﬁles. This is often used as a proxy for the numberof modules. The number of modules was used by Lehman (e.g.Lehman, 1980a) and others to quantify the size of closed-sourcesoftware, but the precise meaning of “modules” was seldomdeﬁned.•The size of the compressed (with gzip) tar archive containing allthe kernel sources, as downloaded from http://www.kernel.org.This metric was also used by Godfrey and Tu (2000).The ﬁrst three metrics were calculated using cloc (available fromcloc.sourceforge.net
). This was used with all default settings, includ-ing the check for duplicate ﬁles and avoiding double-counting whenthis happens (surprisingly, it does). Notably, cloc counts the lines ofall programming languages it can identify. In Linux this is mostly C( .c and .h ﬁles), assembly, and make, but there are also a few ﬁles in 868D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875Table 4Results of counting lines of kernel version 2.6.39.1 using cloc.Language Files Blank Comment CodeC 16,087 1,501,193 1,531,754 7,742,940C/C++header13,589314,821
 536,253 1,632,046Assembly1217
 39,850 49,723 247,005XML 139 3119 948 40,974make 1390 6015 6374 22,643Perl 41 2973 2462 13,900Bourne shell 61 638 1475 3644yacc54533222987

Python18542
 267 2535C++1
 209 57 1521lex 5 203 237 1317awk 8 90 79 714Bourne again shell 28 74 55 446HTML2580378

NAnt scripts 1 87 0 356Lisp1
 63 0 218ASP 1 33 0 137XSLT6132770

sed 1 0 3 30vim script1
 3 12 27SUM 32,602 1,870,437 2,130,048 9,713,888other languages. To give a notion of the distribution, the output ofcloc on kernel version 2.6.39.1 is shown in Table 4. While one mayclaim that XML and HTML are not really programming languagesand should therefore be excluded, we note that such languages con-tribute less than 1% of the total. We therefore believe that using thedefault settings does not lead to any signiﬁcant errors.We noted the compressed tar archive size and applied cloc toall 1322 available versions of the Linux kernel from version 1.0to version 2.6.39.1 (including 2.6 release candidates). As shownin Fig. 10, the different metrics are obviously very closely related.Similar-looking graphs are also obtained for other size metrics,such as the Halstead Volume or the number of functions (Israeliand Feitelson, 2010). The correspondence between the metrics isdemonstrated quantitatively by calculating their correlation coef-ﬁcients. The results, shown in Table 5, are all extremely close to 1.Growth as measured by ﬁles and LoC was also compared by Herraizet al. (2006) with similar results to ours. In the sequel we thereforeuse LoC.5.2. Modeling growthThe subject of the rate of growth of large-scale projects hasaroused some interest in the literature. Depending on the systemstudied and the methodology used, researchers have concludedthat growth may be sub-linear, linear, or super-linear.Lehman and Turski, in their analysis of closed-source projects,hypothesize that the rate of growth should decrease as a result ofthe increasing complexity of the project (Lehman, 1978; Lehmanet al., 1997; Eick et al., 2001). In particular, Turski argues that if thesize of version i is si, and the size of version i + 1 is si+1, then theexpected relationship is (Turski, 1996)si+1= si+Es2iTable 5Correlation coefﬁcients between the different size metrics shown in Fig. 10.Tot. linesFiles
 Tar sizeCode lines0.99998
 0.99833 0.99940Total lines 0.99828 0.99951Files0.99823
where E is the average effort invested in each release (Lehman’sfourth law states that the rate at which effort is expended is con-stant, so with regularly spaced releases the effort per release shouldbe constant as well). The inverse square increments are justiﬁed bythe notion that the number of possible interactions between simod-ules is s2i, and the effort is spent considering all these interactions.This model leads to sublinear growth, and speciﬁcally to (Robleset al., 2005)si3iIndeed, some of Lehman’s data seems to ﬁt such a sub-linear modelbetter than a linear model (Turski, 1996; Lehman and Parr, 1976;Lehman, 1996; Lehman et al., 1997). However, other data ﬁts a lin-ear model quite well (Lehman et al., 1998), and a linear model wasalso proposed by Capiluppi (2003) and Capiluppi et al. (2004) forseveral open-source projects. This leads to the conclusion that bothmodels may be appropriate in certain conditions. To further com-plicate the issue, one of Lehman’s data sets exhibited two phasesof declining growth, but a signiﬁcant jump in size between them.An important consideration when studying growth rates is theindependent variable. Lehman consistently used the serial numbersof successive releases, regardless of the calendarial time that passedbetween them (Lehman et al., 1997). This may be problematic whenminor releases of different versions are interleaved, e.g. because aminor release of an old version (say release 2E) is made after theinitial release of the next version (say version 3). In addition, therelease rate may be highly variable, again leading to inconsistencieswhen using serial numbers (Thomas et al., 2009). Most researchersnowadays therefore prefer to use calendar time (Godfrey and Tu,2000; Paulson et al., 2004).When using calendar time the observed growth rates also dif-fer. Paulson et al. claim that linear growth provides a good model(Paulson et al., 2004), but this could be partly the result of usingrelatively short observation intervals of up to about a year and ahalf. Izurieta and Bieman (2006) also claim a linear growth rate forboth FreeBSD and Linux.Interestingly, several researchers have also observed super-linear growth rates – especially in the context of open-sourceprojects, and speciﬁcally, Linux. Perhaps the ﬁrst were Godfrey andTu (2000), who suggested a quadratic model as providing the bestﬁt for Linux development versions. Robles et al. (2005) conﬁrm thisﬁve years later, but contend that a linear model is sufﬁcient for BSDand 18 other projects. Mens et al. (2008) studied several differentmetrics for the size of Eclipse, and found that four of them grewlinearly, and another two quadratically. Herraiz et al. (2006) com-pared the use of LoC with number of ﬁles, and showed that they leadto the same conclusions – including superlinear growth for manyprojects (but linear or even sub-linear for others). Koch extendedthe scope by studying thousands of projects hosted on SourceForge,and concludes that a quadratic model tends to provide better ﬁtsfor most projects, especially large ones (Koch, 2007). Thus we cansay that the quadratic model seems to provide a good descriptionof growth in some cases, despite having no theory regarding whygrowth should be quadratic.Given that several years have passed since these previous stud-ies were conducted, we now have much more data at our disposal.Our data in Fig. 2 clearly shows that Linux’s growth rate now is evenhigher than what it was before. While this growth has some irregu-larities, it is interesting to check whether the quadratic model stillprovides the best ﬁt.However, one needs to be careful about using all the data. Inparticular, we suggest that the most representative results willbe obtained using a carefully chosen subset. The problem is thatcurve-ﬁtting techniques take all the data points into considera-tion, and typically try to minimize the (squared) deviation between D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875869Linux kernel distributions949596979899000102030405060708091011lines of code [10^6]0123456789101.22.02.22.42.6.162.6.271.11.32.12.32.52.6Linux kernel distributions949596979899000102030405060708091011total lines [10^6]024681012141.22.02.22.42.6.162.6.271.11.32.12.32.52.6Linux kernel distributions949596979899000102030405060708091011number of files [10^3]051015202530351.22.02.22.42.6.162.6.271.11.32.12.32.52.6Linux kernel distributions949596979899000102030405060708091011tarball size [MB]01020304050607080901001.22.02.22.42.6.162.6.271.11.32.12.32.52.6Fig. 10. Growth of Linux as reﬂected by different size metrics.the points and the model. If many points are concentrated at somelocation (in our case, due to an abnormally high rate of updates),this tends to force the model to pass through that location. But weare more interested in the general trend over time. We thereforechose to sample the data at monthly granularity. Thus we use theﬁrst development update in each month, or, in those cases where adevelopment version does not exist, the ﬁrst production update. Inthe 2.6 series we use the ﬁrst release of each new version, and theﬁrst rc update in intervening months. This leads to using a total of205 data points.The results of ﬁtting various models to this data are shown inFig. 11. In the linear models we imposed a lower bound of 0 incases where the model suggested a negative size. Obviously thelinear model is not a very good ﬁt, because the Linux growth rateis increasing with time. We nevertheless note that the correlationcoefﬁcient of the linear model with the data is pretty high, at 0.978.The quadratic model is better, and provides a reasonable ﬁt up toabout 2005. However, it is less satisfying after that. We also checkeda cubic model and an exponential model, but they were inferior tothe quadratic model.When looking at the data, it is appealing to consider it as beingcomposed of two phases: from the beginning to the two largejumps in version 2.5 towards the end of 2002, and from 2003 tothe end. Trying to ﬁt each of these phases independently leadsto a good ﬁt with a quadratic model for the ﬁrst phase (therebyreconﬁrming the previous results of Godfrey and Tu and others),and a reasonable ﬁt for an exponential model for the second phase.This two-phase model achieves much lower error than the previousmodels (Table 6).An even better ﬁt is obtained by a simple three-segment piece-wise linear model. This model dissects the timeline of Linuxdevelopment into three phases: from the initial release to the 2.2version in May 1999, from the beginning of 2.3 to 2.6.26 in July2008, and since 2.6.27rc in August 2008 to the end in mid 2011. Inthese segments the linear ﬁts imply average growth rates of 660lines per day, 1385 lines per day, and 3541 lines per day respec-tively. The three segments exhibit correlation coefﬁcients of 0.987,0.996, and 0.993, and the combined model achieves a signiﬁcantlylower error than any of the other models checked (this could pos-sibly be improved further using a fourth initial segment, as version1.1 hardly showed any growth). In any case, the three-phase linearmodel provides the best description of the growth of Linux so far,and reconciles the linear growth models with the increasing growthrate. However, it does not make predictions about how long phaseswill be and in general what may happen in the future.Regardless of the exact growth rate model, it is obvious thatLinux is now growing faster than ever. An interesting question ishow such an increasing growth rate is sustained. Capiluppi et al.(2007a) found that a reduced growth rate of an agile project wascorrelated with a restructuring of the company and a big reduc-tion in the size of the programming team. In the case of Linux itis not unreasonable to assume that the opposite is happening: asTable 6Errors of models of Linux growth, in lines of code. Note that the scale is 10 million,so an average error of 100,000 is only 1%. Also, the growth in 2.6 has a step shape,leading to unavoidable error by any smooth model.Model Total error Average errorLinear 81,116,099 395,688Quadratic 42,017,782 204,965Cubic64,497,025
 314,619Exponential75,262,951
 367,136Quadratic–exponential 27,265,871 133,004Piecewise linear17,271,571
 84,252 870D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875linear model949698000204060810lines of code [10^6]012345678910quadratic model949698000204060810lines of code [10^6]012345678910piecewise linear model949698000204060810lines of code [10^6]012345678910Fig. 11. Models of the Linux growth rate.Linux developers and code changeactive developers300 500 70090011001300lines affected [10^6]00.511.52CC=0.691CC=0.800net gainhandledFig. 12. Correlation between number of developers and change in code size. Databy Greg Kroah-Hartman for kernels 2.6.11 through 2.6.35.more developers join the ranks (Corbet et al., 2011), the total rateof growth increases. Fig. 12 shows supportive evidence. This is datacollected by Greg Kroah-Hartman from the Linux git repository,and speciﬁcally versions 2.6.11 through 2.6.35.5The data collectedincludes the number of developers that perform commits on eachversion, as well as the number of lines added, deleted, and modi-ﬁed. We use this to calculate the net gain of lines in each version(by subtracting the deleted line count from the added line count)and the total lines handled in each version (the sum of the threecounts). As the ﬁgure shows, there is a good correlation betweenthe number of active developers and the net gain, and an even bettercorrelation with the number of handled lines. Similar results (withan even higher correlation) were found by Koch and Schneider forthe GNOME project (Koch and Schneider, 2000).Based on the above observation, we may speculate that theincreased growth rate of Linux and other open-source softwareprojects is a manifestation of a positive feedback effect. This isthe combination of two mutually reinforcing processes. The ﬁrstis that a successful and useful project attracts more highly moti-vated and capable developers (Capiluppi and Michlmayr, 2007).The second is that the aggregation of such developers propels theproject to ever greater heights. This is expected to be possible inopen-source projects but not in closed-source projects, because ofthe much more ﬂexible and budget-free stafﬁng of open-source5Available at http://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/people/gregkh/kernelhistory/kernel stats.ods.projects. We contend that this positive feedback generates super-linear growth, and that this dominates the possible detrimentaleffects of increased complexity.An interesting related observation is that the superlinear growthand concurrent growth in number of developers seem to contradictBrooks’s Law (Brooks, 1975): instead of making progress slower, theadded developers actually make it faster. The implication is thatthe required communications between developers do not grow asmuch as was suggested by Brooks. This phenomenon, which hasbeen observed before (Adams et al., 2009), may be attributed to themodular structure of the system and to efﬁcient mechanisms fordisseminating and recording design information such as the Linuxkernel mailing list. In addition, it may be that the new developersare experts rather than novices, and do not need training.5.3. Growth of subsystemsThe Linux kernel is actually composed of many largely indepen-dent subsystems. For example, even within the core of the kernel,features like ﬁle systems, memory management, and communica-tions are implemented as distinct subsystems. Then there are themultitude of drivers, and interfaces to many different architectures.It is therefore interesting to check how each such subsystem grows,and whether they all contribute equally to the overall growth ofLinux.Results of measuring the subsystems (as reﬂected by top-leveldirectories) are shown in Fig. 13. In general most subsystems growsimilarly to the whole system, implying that they all grow atroughly the same rate relative to their respective sizes. To quan-tify this, we calculate the correlation coefﬁcients of the subsystemsizes with the total system size. For each subsystem, this is doneover the range of versions where this subsystem exists, using onlydevelopment (and rc) versions. The results are shown in Table 7,and indicate a very strong correlation in most cases.To augment this data, we also calculate the percent of the totalLinux code that belongs to each subsystem. Using this metric,proportional growth of all subsystems should lead to perfectly hor-izontal lines (Godfrey and Tu, 2000). The actual results are shownin Fig. 14, indicating some ﬂuctuations and discrete jumps. Calcu-lating the linear regression of these percentages leads to very smallslopes (Table 7, given in percentage points change per year). How-ever, the R2values indicate that linear models are in some casesinappropriate for this data.The largest subsystem by far, and thus also the one that isgrowing at the fastest rate, is drivers
. The second largest is arch(architecture support). These have been recognized as the largestmany times in the past, and together represent about 70% of thekernel (Godfrey and Tu, 2000; Israeli and Feitelson, 2010). Due to D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875871Linux subsystems949698000204060810lines of code [10^6]012345driversarchLinux subsystems (zoom in)949698000204060810lines of code [10^6]00.10.20.30.40.50.60.7fssoundnetincludekernelmmFig. 13. Growth of Linux subsystems (top-level directories). The unmarked small ones are (in order of ﬁnal size) crypto, security, lib, block, ipc, virt, init, ﬁrmware, and usr.Linux subsystems949698000204060810% of code lines010203040506070driversarchLinux subsystems (zoom in)949698000204060810% of code lines02.557.51012.515fssoundnetincludekernelmmFig. 14. Relative sizes of Linux subsystems as a percentage of the total code size.their dominance, it is not surprising that these two subsystems havethe highest correlations with the total system size. The two smallestand most recent subsystems, ﬁrmware
 and usr, exhibit relatively lowcorrelations, but due to their small size this is not very meaningful.According to Fig. 14 the drivers
 subsystem is actually growingrelative to all others. However, it suffered a large drop in relativesize in version 2.5.5 on 20 February 2002. This was the result ofTable 7Correlations of subsystem sizes with the full system size (CC), and linear regressionof the percentage of each subsystem from the total system size.Subsystem CC with total Lin. reg. of %Slope R2drivers 0.99564 8.85E−6 1.7E−6arch 0.99669 0.00328 0.262fs 0.99021 −0.00282 0.259sound 0.95417 −0.00343 0.866net0.99148
 −0.00234 0.717include 0.71278 −0.00329 0.489kernel 0.94324 −0.00026 0.054mm 0.98060 −0.00047 0.438crypto 0.96780 0.00037 0.814security0.94663
 0.00037 0.579lib 0.98402 4.41E−5 0.094block 0.96162 −3.38E−5 0.274ipc 0.94322 −0.00035 0.539virt 0.97420 5.14E−5 0.687init0.90513
 −0.00011 0.652ﬁrmware 0.68636 −3.21E−5 0.847usr 0.75877 1.40E−6 0.032moving the subdirectory drivers/sound/
 to the top level and creatingthe soundsubsystem. This move affected over 230,000 lines of code.The arch subsystem, in contradistinction, exhibits a moderatereduction of relative size with time. However, it exhibits severaldiscrete upwards jumps that counteract this downwards trend.The most signiﬁcant of these occur in version 1.1.78 on 9 January1995 and in version 1.3.94 on 22 April 1996. The ﬁrst is largelydue to adding math emulation support in the Intel i386 architec-ture. The second is largely due to added support for the Motorola68000 architecture. A similar gradual reduction of relative size withoccasional upwards jumps is also observed for subsystems fs andnet.Another subsystem that exhibits an interesting pattern isinclude, which had a huge drop in size in mid 2008 (as maybe expected, this abnormal behavior leads to a relatively lowcorrelation with the total system size). This actually took placeover a couple of months, in successive updates of version 2.6.27-rc. The changes are apparently moving several subdirectories ofassembler-related .h ﬁles (e.g. include/asm-alpha/) to the arch sub-system (e.g. /arch/alpha/include/asm/). And indeed, a correspondingincrease in arch can be seen in Figs. 13 and 14.The conclusion from the above observations is that evolution isnot always a smooth process. In many cases it is punctuated by rela-tively large changes in a short period of time (as has been observedpreviously by Godfrey and Tu (2000) and by Cook et al. (2005)).These can be the addition of a large body of code, possibly devel-oped externally, or a reorganization where code is moved from oneplace to another. However, when the complete system is composed 872D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875of many subsystems, the overall effect may appear smoother andmore consistent than the dynamics of each individual subsystem.6. Possible implications of the modelThe continuous nature of perpetual development has manyimplications regarding how software is developed. Here we spec-ulate about some of them, and the applicability beyond the Linuxcase study. Note that most of this discussion is not yet supportedby data, and should therefore be regarded as proposing promisingavenues for further research.6.1. The question of architectureA major vulnerability of many software development processesis the deﬁnition of the system’s architecture at a relatively earlystage. This is a crucial and singular point – the analysis and designare geared towards the deﬁnition of the architecture, and the archi-tecture is the basis for the whole implementation. The problembecomes much more acute under perpetual development, as it isexplicitly acknowledged that the initial design will need to accom-modate unforeseen additions for many years to come.A possible way to alleviate the problem is to use an architecturethat is inherently open and ﬂexible (Gilb, 1988). In particular, archi-tectures that support continuing change include the following:•A “kernel-based” two-tier system, with a stable core and adynamic set of libraries where things can change quickly andrelatively independently. Examples include emacs with its basiccore and many user-developed Lisp modules, and matlab with itsextensive functional libraries (Raymond, 2000).•A multi-tier service-oriented architecture, e.g. the agglomera-tion of Internet services used in large e-commerce sites such ashttp://amazon.com. This is essentially an open system architec-ture based on independent components, with small well-deﬁnedinterfaces (Cuadrado et al., 2008). At any given time new compo-nents can be introduced, or existing components may be redoneor extended, with little effect on the others.•An explicit component-based architecture, where the desiredfunctionality is obtained by agglomerating multiple independentcomponents. An example is the Eclipse integrated developmentenvironment with its many plugins (Wermelinger and Yu, 2008).In Linux such compartmentalization is used to a certain degree. Forexample, ﬁle systems are largely independent of memory manage-ment, and drivers (which constitute a large fraction of the code)are all essentially independent of each other. Thus components caneach be modiﬁed independently with little if any effect on othercomponents.The parallel development that is inherent in the perpetual devel-opment model may also help to cope with radical changes tothe architecture. A project may branch off an exploratory archi-tecture development branch, that is developed in parallel andindependently from the main development backbone. If the newarchitecture succeeds it will eventually be adopted, and other mod-ules will be ported to adhere to it. This is analogous to redundancyin biological systems, which allows many mutations with no dele-terious effects on the organism, at the same time immediatelybeneﬁting from advantageous mutations.6.2. The problem of conservation of familiarityOne of Lehman’s laws of software evolution is the conservationof familiarity –that
 the rate of evolution is constrained by whatusers and developers can absorb (Lehman, 1980b). Perpetualdevelopment thus requires tools and approaches that facilitateconservation of familiarity.A new developer that enters an existing project suffers an inher-ent disadvantage: he or she sees the product of a potentially longevolutionary process, that does not reﬂect a clean and coher-ent design because there never was one. There is no distinctionbetween original basic functions and later add-ons to ﬁx or sup-port emerging issues. Thus understanding an existing project all atonce is much harder than following its progression as it is beingdone.A possible solution for getting up to speed with existing code isa code browser which depicts the edit history. For example, “his-tory ﬂows” enable one to see when each part of the code originated,and who added it (Viégas et al., 2004). Such a view could be syn-chronized with a code viewer that uses a version control system toreconstruct the code as it was at select earlier times. This enablesthe exclusion of all subsequent additions and modiﬁcations, andallows a new developer to easily recreate and follow the processthat led to the code as it now exists. Synchronizing across multi-ple ﬁles (e.g. code and header ﬁles) will enable to highlight all thecode that was committed within a speciﬁed time period, and thusrepresents the addition of a certain set of features.A similar problem happens for users: early adopters have aninherent advantage, as they initially learn to use the very basic fea-tures that are implemented ﬁrst, and then get to learn the moreadvanced and involved features at a slow pace as they are imple-mented. New users, on the other hand, have to assimilate the wholecaboodle in one big lump. A possible way to help them out is to pre-deﬁne several views with increasing sophistication. In particular, itis important to have a “novice” version with limited features to getstarted and learn to use the system, that stays consistent across newreleases. In Linux, the importance of conservation of familiarity iswitnessed by the fact that users may refrain from adopting newerversions of the system, thereby necessitating the continued main-tenance of older versions. But support for backward compatibilitymay be a better alternative, as users will be able to beneﬁt fromimproved internal implementations, and it may reduce the burdenof maintaining previous versions separately.6.3. Maintaining institutional knowledgeRelated to the above two points is the issue of maintainingknowledge. Classical software development processes, such as awaterfall model, are document-heavy (Royce, 1970). Documentsserve as milestones, and as evidence that a phase has been com-pleted successfully and the next phase should start. Parnas andClements (1986) have suggested that even in evolutionary scenar-ios, where documentation cannot be completed in advance, it isworthwhile to “fake it” and maintain documentation that is in syncwith the software. For example, this records important design deci-sions and enables new developers to better understand the project.However, in projects like Linux it seems that detailed documen-tation is not maintained, which raises the question of how theymanage to continue to grow and ﬂourish. This question is particu-larly poignant when one takes into account the growth of Linuxand the constant addition of new developers – a situation thatmight lead to problems of learning and communication as sug-gested by Brooks’s Law (Brooks, 1975). The answer seems to bethat alternative mechanisms have been created to store collectiveknowledge about the project (Gasser et al., 2003). These are mainlybug repositories and mailing lists –in
 the case of Linux, the Linuxkernel mailing list, where practically all technical discussions occurin real time. In addition, large amounts of knowledge may actu-ally be stored only in the heads of lead developers. This may beless risky than it seems, as lead open-source developers typically D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875873maintain close long-term relationships with their projects, irre-spective of their current employment status.6.4. The curse of successful maintenanceThe ﬁeld of software engineering grew from the perception thatthe practice of software development is in crisis. Too many projectsare late, over budget, or do not provide the expected functionality.This is especially problematic with large-scale systems, where hun-dreds of millions of dollars may be wasted on failed efforts. Manysuch failures may be rooted in a failure to recognize and use per-petual development as described above (Gilb, 1988; Woodward,1999; Denning et al., 2008). Basically, projects that attempt to dotoo much at once will most probably fail in one way or another(Hoare, 1981). An ironic outcome of this is that the burst of the hi-tech bubble in 2001 led to an improvement in project success rates,because the reduced budgets led to smaller, more focused projects(Hayes, 2004). This underscores the importance of the incremen-tal approach to project development: using increments reduces thescope being considered at each step, which makes it realizable.An important class of oversized projects is those that aim toreplace a previous system that has become outdated. Famousexamples of this type are the FAA air trafﬁc control system automa-tion project of 1984–1994 (Perry, 1997), and the more recent FBIvirtual case ﬁle (Goldstein, 2005). The problem in these cases isthat the old system was used successfully for a long time. Placingthe focus on maintaining it rather than on continued development– and, ironically, being successful in such maintenance – led to anever-growing gap between the system capabilities and what wasreally needed. Then, when an upgrade was attempted, it was toolate: the gap was too large to bridge, and trying to do so in one fellswoop failed.Some projects are naturally perpetual, e.g. operating systems.The question of stopping doesn’t come up at all – it is clear thatdevelopment of new versions will continue ceaselessly. The prob-lem is that projects like the FAA air trafﬁc control system and the FBIvirtual case ﬁle look like one-shot affairs, that should be designed,implemented, and installed in a single phase. But this is not neces-sarily so. Applying the principles of perpetual development, andseeking constant improvements to the system in terms of boththe implementation and the hardware base, may save them fromsubsequent failure (Denning et al., 2008).6.5. Towards programming as a serviceFinally, the notion of perpetual development has an importantimpact on how software development is funded and contracted. Inparticular, an important consideration for organizations contract-ing software systems is the need to include evolution and longevityin the contract framework (Lott, 1997). Support for evolution meansthe contractor will continue to develop and adapt the software asneeded. This may be achieved by dissecting the project into smallincrements, and extending the contract incrementally to followthe progress. Support for longevity means that if the contractor isunable or unwilling to continue work on the project, he will allowothers to do so, e.g. by providing access to source code. Much of theproblems with maintenance of legacy systems stem from lack ofsuch facilities (although lack of documentation, rigid architectures,and so on should not be underestimated as well).Conventional software contracting includes an inception phasewhere the feasibility of the project is veriﬁed, and an elaborationphase where the details are ﬂeshed out, leading to the signing of acontract. Such a contractual framework becomes increasingly lessrelevant as the length of the project is extended and the featuresthat were identiﬁed at the outset become a smaller fractionof the whole effort. In fact, additional development – and notmaintenance – is the service that should be contracted throughoutthe lifetime of the project. An interesting future research questionis how to deﬁne and quantify the effort and outcomes of a softwaredevelopment effort, in a way that can be used in lieu of a contractthat speciﬁes the anticipated developed product.7. Conclusions and future workThe notion of perpetual development is not new. It has beenused naturally and successfully by many large-scale projects, espe-cially but not exclusively in the open-source community. However,it seems to be badly underrepresented in the professional literatureand especially in software engineering textbooks, which focus onisolated instances of development rather than on the continuationbetween many successive developments. It is also not prominentin the literature about open-source and agile development, whichtends to focus on managerial and process issues (rapid releases,incremental setting of targets, pair programming, etc.).The perpetual development model helps elucidate severalaspects of large-scale evolutionary system development. To sum-marize, the main contributions of this model are the following.•Identifying growth (as in Lehman’s 6th law) as the central ele-ment in software evolution, at least for software systems likeLinux that correspond to this model. The continued growth ispossibly enabled by positive feedback between the system and agrowing developer base.•Stipulating that multiple versions co-exist at the same time (aswas also speciﬁed in the model of Rajlich and Bennett (2000)).This separates evolution, which happens in the main develop-ment branch, from maintenance, which happens in productionbranches.•Recognizing release points as the points where new branches areforked, and formulating the release process with its stabilizationand followup phases and possible variants.At the same time, the model points out directions that wouldbeneﬁt from additional research. These include•Linux is a single system. An important goal for additional workis therefore to check the degree to which the model developedhere applies to other large systems. Initial supportive evidencecan be collected from software distribution sites. For example,the Eclipse site indicates that each new version is preceded bya series of “milestone” releases (equivalent to our developmentupdates), followed by a series of release candidates, and that allthis happens in parallel to the (typically very few) maintenanceupdates of the previous version. A ﬁgure similar to our Fig. 2 por-traying the evolution of BIND (a DNS server project) is given byXie et al. (2009). Indeed, even some of Lehman’s early data showsoverlap between development and maintenance versions, wheregrowth is observed mainly in new releases (the FW dataset inLehman et al. (1997)).•Evolution by perpetual development leads to continue the addi-tion of functionality rather than change of functionality. Aninteresting future research question is to contrast these twoaspects of evolution. In particular, is there evolution that man-ifests itself as change without growth (e.g. in the context ofsoftware product lines)? Alternatively, does the growth actuallyreﬂect a shift in focus, where part of the codebase falls out of usebut is not removed?•In perpetual development evolution and maintenance both hap-pen after delivery, but in different contexts. We also saw thatthey may be interdependent, e.g. in the initial years of Linux ver-sions 2.2 and 2.4. An interesting future research question is the 874D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875Table 8Location of Linux versions at http://www.kernel.org.Series Location CommentsInitial Historic/linux
-0.01 Pre 1.0 versions not used inour studyHistoric/old
-versions/linux
-0.* Numbering is erraticHistoric/v0.99/linux
-0.99.*1.0 v1.0/linux
-1.0 Only one version1.1 v1.1/v1.1.0
v1.1/linux
-1.1.* Many serials missing1.2v1.2/linux
-1.2.*1.3v1.3/linux
-1.3.*1.3.1 is missingv1.3/linux
-pre2.0.*2.0 v2.0/linux
-2.0.*2.1 v2.1/linux
-2.1.*v2.1/linux
-2.2.0-pre*2.2v2.2/linux
-2.2.*2.3 v2.3/linux
-2.3.*v2.3/linux
-2.3.99-pre*v2.4/old-test-kernels/linux
-2.4.0-* Note location under v2.42.4v2.4/linux
-2.4.*2.4.11 is marked “dontuse”but we use it2.5v2.5/linux
-2.5.*v2.6/pre-releases/linux
-2.6.0-test* Note location under v2.62.6 v2.6/linux
-2.6.*v2.6/testing/v2.6.*/linux
-2.6.*-rc* Release candidatesv2.6/longterm/v2.6.
*/linux
-2.6.* Additional longterm versionscharacterization and analysis of such interactions, including thedegree that new developments are propagated into current pro-duction versions, and how does maintenance of existing versionsinﬂuence the development of subsequent versions.•The Linux case study shows that considerable work is expendedon preparing code for release, as reﬂected by a sequence of releasecandidates. Does this have measurable effects on properties of thecode? And what are the inputs that lead to the decision that thenew release is indeed stable enough for release?•Finally, perpetuity in software development deﬁes intuition. Itseems incredible that a system can grow and grow withoutbounds. But Linux has been growing at a superlinear rate for17 years, and does not show signs of slowing down despite itslarge current size. While a large part of this is due to driversand architecture support, the numbers are still very impressiveeven if these are excluded. An important challenge is thereforeto understand whether this is due to misconceptions about thedetrimental effects of growth, or to active work (and if so, whatprecisely) to counter such effects.AcknowledgementThis work was supported by a grant from The Wolfson Fund.Appendix A. Linux versionsThe location of the main Linux versions is self evident onhttp://www.kernel.org. However, this is not always the case forversions that are part of the release process, including pre-release versions, testing versions, and release candidates. Table 8lists where these can be found. Note that all kernel versionsare stored under /pub/linux/kernel/
, so a location of “v1.0/linux
-1.0”actually means the URL http://www.kernel.org/pub/linux/kernel/v1.0/linux-1.0.tar.gz.ReferencesAdams, P.J., Capiluppi, A., Boldyreff, C., 2009. Coordination and productivity issuesin free software: the role of Brooks’ law. In: Intl. Conf. Softw. Maintenance,September, pp. 319–328.Antoniol, G., Yillano, U., Merlo, E., Di Penta, M., 2002. Analyzing cloning evolution inthe Linux kernel. Inf. Softw. Technol. 44 (October (13)), 755–765.Beck, K., 1999. Embracing change with extreme programming. Computer 32(October (10)), 70–77.Boehm, B., 2008. Making a difference in the software century. Computer 41 (March(3)), 32–38.Boehm, B.W., 1988. A spiral model of software development and enhancement.Computer 21 (May (5)), 61–72.Brooks Jr., F.P., 1975. The Mythical Man-Month: Essays on Software Engineering.Addison-Wesley.Capiluppi, A., 2003. Models for the evolution of OS projects. In: Intl. Conf. Softw.Maintenance, September, pp. 65–74.Capiluppi, A., Fernandez-Ramil, J., Higman, J., Sharp, H.C., Smith, N., 2007a. An empir-ical study of the evolution of an agile-developed software system. In: 29th Intl.Conf. Softw. Eng, pp. 511–518.Capiluppi, A., González-Barahona, J.M., Herraiz, I., Robles, G., 2007b. Adapting the“staged model of software evolution” to free/libre/open source software. In: 9thIntl. Workshop Principles of Softw. Evolution, pp. 79–82.Capiluppi, A., Michlmayr, M., 2007. From the cathedral to the bazaar: an empir-ical study of the lifecycle of volunteer community projects. In: Open SourceDevelopment, Adoption, and Innovation, IFIP, vol. 234, June, pp. 31–44.Capiluppi, A., Morisio, M., Ramil, J.F., 2004. Structural evolution of an open sourcesystem: a case study. In: 12th IEEE Intl. Workshop Program Comprehension,June, pp. 172–182.Cook, S., Harrison, R., Wernick, P., 2005. A simulation model of self-organisingevolvability in software systems. In: IEEE Intl. Workshop Software Evolvability,September, pp. 17–22.Corbet, J., Kroah-Hartman, G., McPherson, A., 2010. Linux kernel development:how fast it is going, who is doing it, what they are doing, and who issponsoring it. Available from: http://www.linuxfoundation.org/docs/lf linuxkernel development 2010.pdf (downloaded 09.06.11).Cuadrado, F., García, B., Due˜nas, J.C., Parada, H.A., 2008. A case study on softwareevolution towards service-oriented architecture. In: 22nd Intl. Conf. AdvancedInf. Netw. & App. –Workshops,
 March, pp. 1399–1404.Cusumano, M.A., Selby, R.W., 1997. How microsoft builds software. Commun. ACM40 (June (6)), 53–61.Denne, M., Cleland-Huang, J., 2004. The incremental funding method: data-drivensoftware development. IEEE Softw. 21 (May/June (3)), 39–47.Denning, P.J., Gunderson, C., Hayes-Roth, R., 2008. Evolutionary system develop-ment. Commun. ACM 51 (December (12)), 29–31.Deshpande, A., Riehle, D., 2008. The total growth of open source. In: 4th Conf. OpenSource systems, September.Eick, S.G., Graves, T.L., Karr, A.F., Marron, J.S., Mockus, A., 2001. Does code decay?Assessing the evidence from change management data. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng.27 (January (1)), 1–12.Gasser, L., Scacchi, W., Ripoche, G., Penne, B., 2003. Understanding continuous designin F/OSS projects. In: 16th Intl. Conf. Softw. & Syst. Eng. & Apps., December.Gilb, T., 1988. Principles of Software Engineering Management. Addison-Wesley.Godfrey, M.W., German, D.M., 2008. The past, present, and future of software evo-lution. In: 24th Intl. Conf. Softw. Maintenance, Special track on Frontiers ofSoftware Maintenance, September, pp. 129–138.Godfrey, M.W., Svetinovic, D., Tu, Q. Evolution, growth, and cloning in Linux:a case study. In: CASCON Workshop on Detecting Duplicated and NearDuplicated Structures in Large Software Systems: Methods and Applica-tions, 2000. Presentation available from: http://www.plg.uwaterloo.ca/migod/papers/2000/cascon00-linuxcloning.pdf.Godfrey, M.W., Tu, Q., 2000. Evolution in open source software: a case study. In: 16thIntl. Conf. Softw. Maintenance, October, pp. 131–142.Goldstein, H., 2005. Who killed the virtual case ﬁle? IEEE Spectrum 42 (September(9INT)), 18–29.Harel, D., 2009. Statecharts in the making: a personal account. Commun. ACM 52(March (3)), 67–75.Hayes, F., 2004. Chaos is back. Computerworld. Available from: http://www.computerworld.com/s/article/97283/Chaos Is Back.Herraiz, I., Robles, G., González-Barahona, J.M., Capiluppi, A., Ramil, J.F., 2006.Comparison between SLOCs and number of ﬁles as size metrics for softwareevolution analysis. In: 10th Conf. Softw. Maintenance & Reengineering, March,pp. 206–213.Hoare, C.A.R., 1981. The emperor’s old clothes. Commun. ACM 24 (February (2)),75–83.Israeli, A., Feitelson, D.G., 2010. The Linux kernel as a case study in software evolu-tion. J. Syst. Softw. 83 (March (3)), 485–501.Izurieta, C., Bieman, J., 2006. The evolution of FreeBSD and Linux. In: 5th Intl. Symp.Empirical Softw. Eng., September, pp. 204–211.Kitchenham, B.A., Travassos, G.H., von Mayrhauser, A., Niessink, F., Schnei-dewind, N.F., Singer, J., Takada, S., Vehvilainen, R., Yang, H., 1999. Towardsan ontology of software maintenance. J. Softw. Maintenance Res. Pract. 11(November/December (6)), 365–389.Koch, S., 2007. Software evolution in open source projects—a large-scale investi-gation. J. Softw. Maintenance Evol. Res. Pract. 19 (November/December (6)),361–382.Koch, S., Schneider, G., 2000. Results from software engineering research into opensource development projects using public data. In: Hansen, H.R., Janko, W.H.(Eds.), Diskussionspapiere zum Tätigkeitsfeld Informationsverarbeitung undInformationswirtschaft. Wirtschaftsuniversität, Wien.Kruchten, P., 1996. A rational development process. Crosstalk 9 (July (7)), 11–16.Larman, C., Basili, V.R., 2003. Iterative and incremental development: a brief history.Computer 36 (June (6)), 47–56. D.G. Feitelson / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 859– 875875Lehman, M.M., 1978. Programs, cities, students—limits to growth. In: Gries, D. (Ed.),Programming Methodology. Springer Verlag.Lehman, M.M., 1980a. Programs, life cycles, and laws of software evolution. Proc.IEEE 68 (September (9)), 1060–1076.Lehman, M.M., 1980b. On understanding laws, evolution, and conservation in thelarge-program life cycle. J. Syst. Softw. 1, 213–221.Lehman, M.M., 1996. Laws of software evolution revisited. In: 5th European Work-shop on Software Process Technology, Lect. Notes Comput. Sci., vol. 1149,October. Springer Verlag, pp. 108–124.Lehman, M.M., Parr, F.N., 1976. Program evolution and its impact on software engi-neering. In: 2nd Intl. Conf. Softw. Eng., October, pp. 350–357.Lehman, M.M., Perry, D.E., Ramil, J.F., 1998. Implications of evolution metrics onsoftware maintenance. In: 14th Intl. Conf. Softw. Maintenance, November, pp.208–217.Lehman, M.M., Ramil, J.F., 1999. The impact of feedback in the global software pro-cess. J. Syst. Softw. 46 (April (2–3)), 123–134.Lehman, M.M., Ramil, J.F., Wernick, P.D., Perry, D.E., Turski, W.M., 1997. Metrics andlaws of software evolution—the nineties view. In: 4th Intl. Software MetricsSymp., November, pp. 20–32.Lientz, B.P., Swanson, E.B., Tompkins, G.E., 1978. Characteristics of application soft-ware maintenance. Commun. ACM 21 (June (6)), 466–471.Livieri, S., Higo, Y., Matsushita, M., Inoue, K., 2007. Analysis of the Linux kernelevolution using code clone coverage. In: 4th Intl. Workshop Mining Softw.Repositories, May.Lott, C.M., 1997. Breathing new life into the waterfall model. IEEE Softw. 14(September/October (5)), 103–105.Maher, M.L., Poon, J., 1996. Modelling design exploration as co-evolution. Micro-comput. Civil Eng. 11 (3), 195–209.McCracken, D.D., Jackson, M.A., 1982. Life cycle concept considered harmful. Softw.Eng. Notes 7 (April (2)), 29–32.Mens, T., Fernández-Ramil, J., Degrandsart, S., 2008. The evolution of Eclipse. In: Intl.Conf. Softw. Maintenance, September, pp. 386–395.Merlo, E., Dagenais, M., Bachand, P., Sormani, J.S., Gradara, S., Antoniol, G., 2002.Investigating large software system evolution: the Linux kernel. In: 26th Com-put. Softw. & Apps. Conf., August, pp. 421–426.Michlmayr, M., Hunt, F., Probert, D., 2007. Release management in free softwareprojects: practices and problems. In: Open Source Development, Adoption, andInnovation, IFIP, vol. 234, June, pp. 295–300.Nakakoji, K., Yamamoto, Y., Nishinaka, Y., Kishida, K., Ye, Y., 2002. Evolution pat-terns of open-source software systems and communities. In: 5th Intl. WorkshopPrinciples of Softw. Evolution, May, pp. 76–85.Padioleau, Y., Lawall, J.L., Muller, G., 2006. Understanding collateral evolution inLinux device drivers. In: EuroSys, April, pp. 59–71.Parnas, D.L., Clements, P.C., 1986. A rational design process: how and why to fake it.IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. SE-12 (February (2)), 251–257.Paulson, J.W., Succi, G., Eberlein, A., 2004. An empirical study of open-source andclosed-source software products. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 30 (April (4)), 246–256.Perry, T.S., 1997. In search of the future of air trafﬁc control. IEEE Spectrum 34 (August(8)), 18–35.Rajlich, V., 2006. Changing the paradigm of software engineering. Commun. ACM 49(August (8)), 67–70.Rajlich, V.T., Bennett, K.H., 2000. A staged model for the software life cycle. Computer33 (July (7)), 66–71.Raymond, E.S., 2000. The cathedral and the bazaar. Available from:http://www.catb.org/ esr/writings/cathedral-bazaar/cathedral-bazaar.Robles, G., Amor, J.J., Gonzalez-Barahona, J.M., Herraiz, I., 2005. Evolution and growthin large libre software projects. In: 8th Intl. Workshop Principles of Softw. Evo-lution, September, pp. 165–174.Royce, W.W., 1970. Managing the development of large software systems. In: Proc.IEEE WESCON, August, pp. 1–9 (reprinted in 9th Intl. Conf. Softw. Eng., 1987, pp.328–338).Schach, S.R., Adeshiyan, T.O.S., Balasubramanian, D., Madl, G., Osses, E.P., Singh, S.,Suwanmongkol, K., Xie, M., Feitelson, D.G., 2007. Common coupling and pointervariables, with application to a Linux case study. Softw. Quality J. 15 (March (1)),99–113.Schach, S.R., Jin, B., Wright, D.R., Heller, G.Z., Offutt, A.J., 2002. Maintainability of theLinux kernel. IEE Proc. Softw. 149 (2), 18–23.Thomas, L.G., Schach, S.R., Heller, Z.G., Offutt, J., 2009. Impact of release intervals onempirical research into software evolution, with application to the maintain-ability of Linux. IET Softw. 3 (February (1)), 58–66.Tomer, A., Schach, S.R., 2000. The evolution tree: a maintenance-oriented softwaredevelopment model. In: 4th European Conf. Softw. Maintenance & Reengineer-ing, March, pp. 209–214.Turski, W.M., 1996. Reference model for smooth growth of software systems. IEEETrans. Softw. Eng. 22 (August (8)), 599–600.Viégas, F.B., Wattenberg, M., Dave, K., 2004. Studying cooperation and conﬂictbetween authors with history ﬂow visualizations. In: Conf. Human Factors inComput. Syst., April, pp. 575–582.Wermelinger, M., Yu, Y., 2008. Analyzing the evolution of Eclipse plugins. In: 5thIntl. Workshop Mining Softw. Repositories, May, pp. 133–136.Wikipedia, Software release life cycle. Available from: http://www.en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Software release life cycle (visited 25.12.10).Woodside, C.M., 1980. A mathematical model for the evolution of software. J. Syst.Softw. 1 (4), 337–345.Woodward, S., 1999. Evolutionary project management. Computer 32 (October(10)), 49–57.Xie, G., chen, J., Neamtiu, I., 2009. Towards a better understanding of softwareevolution: an empirical study on open source software. In: Intl. Conf. Softw.Maintenance, September, pp. 51–60.Dror G. Feitelson is an Associate Professor of Computer Science at the School ofEngineering and Computer Science of the Hebrew University of Jerusalem. His workemphasizes the use of real-world data as a basis for the understanding and designof large-scale computer systems. His research interests include workload model-ing, especially user-based generative models that capture the interaction betweena system and its users, and forces affecting the evolution of open-source softwaresystems.