 The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 2260Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u rn al hom epage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssIdentiﬁcation and application of Extract Class refactorings in object-orientedsystemsMarios Fokaefsa,, Nikolaos Tsantalisa, Eleni Strouliaa, Alexander ChatzigeorgioubaDepartment of Computing Science, University of Alberta, Edmonton, CanadabDepartment of Applied Informatics, University of Macedonia, Thessaloniki, Greecea r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 12 December 2010Received in revised form 17 March 2012Accepted 8 April 2012Available online 25 April 2012MSC:
10
10.040
10.060
10.070Keywords:Refactoring
Software reengineeringObject-oriented programmingClusteringa b s t r a c tRefactoring is recognized as an essential practice in the context of evolutionary and agile software devel-opment. Recognizing the importance of the practice, modern IDEs provide some support for low-levelrefactorings. A notable exception in the list of supported refactorings is the “Extract Class” refactoring,which is conceived to simplify large, complex, unwieldy and less cohesive classes.In this work, we describe a method and a tool, implemented as an Eclipse plugin, designed to fulﬁllexactly this need. Our method involves three steps: (a) recognition of Extract Class opportunities, (b)ranking of the identiﬁed opportunities in terms of the improvement each one is anticipated to bring aboutto the system design, and (c) fully automated application of the refactoring chosen by the developer. Theﬁrst step relies on an agglomerative clustering algorithm, which identiﬁes cohesive sets of class memberswithin the system classes. The second step relies on the Entity Placement metric as a measure of designquality. Through a set of experiments we have shown that the tool is able to identify and extract newclasses that developers recognize as “coherent concepts” and improve the design quality of the underlyingsystem.© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionEvolutionary software development is the most broadly adoptedlifecycle process today. Software evolves throughout its lifecy-cle, even past its release, and, as a result, the as-is design of thesystem usually ends up deviating from its original rationale andviolating design principles. Such violations manifest themselvesas “bad smells” (Fowler et al., 1999) and refactoring becomesnecessary to eliminate them (Opdyke, 1992). Refactoring is theprocess of introducing behavior preserving restructurings to thecode, in order to improve its design and enable it to support furtherdevelopment.This work is motivated by a speciﬁc bad smell called “God Class”(Fowler et al., 1999). In principle, a class should implement only oneconcept (Martin, 2003) and should only change when the conceptit encapsulates evolves. The violation of this principle results inlarge, complex, unwieldy, inelegant, less cohesive and difﬁcult tounderstand and maintain “God Classes”. Generally, there are twoCorresponding author. Tel.: +1 780 886 6893.E-mail addresses: fokaefs@ualberta.ca (M. Fokaefs), tsantalis@ualberta.ca(N. Tsantalis), stroulia@ualberta.ca (E. Stroulia), achat@uom.gr (A. Chatzigeorgiou).types of such classes: some hold a lot of the system’s data in termsof number of attributes (“Data God Classes” or “Lazy Classes”) andothers implement a great portion of the system’s functionality interms of many and frequently complex methods (“Behavioral GodClasses”). In the ﬁrst case, developers can redistribute the attributesof the “God Class” or move functionality (i.e. methods) from otherclasses closer to the data. In the second case, they can either movefunctionality from the “God Class” closer to the data of other classesor simplify the class by extracting a cohesive and independent pieceof functionality (Fowler et al., 1999; Demeyer et al., 2002). The latteris a refactoring called “Extract Class”.Our work is not trying to identify “God Classes”, but ratherExtract Class refactoring opportunities in order to decompose largeclasses. The proposed method recognizes coherent packages of dataand behaviors which if extracted into a new class would resultin improving the overall system design and, at the request of thedeveloper, automatically applies the “Extract Class” refactoring. Toidentify Extract Class opportunities, our method employs a clus-tering algorithm, as clustering has long been used for softwareremodularization (Tzerpos and Holt, 1998; Wiggerts, 1997). Morespeciﬁcally, the intuition behind using clustering in this problemis that clusters may represent cohesive groups of class members(methods and attributes) that have a distinct functionality and0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2012.04.013 2242M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 2260can be extracted as separate classes (Tan et al., 2005). In orderto apply a clustering algorithm, we need to deﬁne a distancemetric, which for our methodology is based on structural depen-dencies (i.e. ﬁeld accesses and method invocations) between classmembers.Semantic metrics have also been used to identify conceptu-ally correlated software components (Maletic and Marcus, 2001;Marcus and Poshyvanyk, 2005; De Lucia et al., 2008). However, inorder for these metrics to be reliable in the identiﬁcation process,speciﬁc code conventions must be followed by the project devel-opers. For instance, the developers must choose appropriate names(i.e. naming conventions) for variables and methods that reﬂectthe concepts and the functionality that they represent. Moreover,good documentation practices (in-code and documentation com-ments) must be followed namely English language must be usedin order to match the code language, spelling errors should beavoided since they can break the matching between comments andcode elements. Furthermore, due to the dynamic nature of soft-ware projects (e.g. changes in the development processes and/orteam members), these conventions may not be consistent through-out the project’s lifecycle. In the evaluation of our work, we didinvestigate the accuracy of our approach using structural, seman-tic and a combination of structural and semantic measures as thedistance metric for the clustering algorithm and discuss our ﬁnd-ings.To assess the potential design improvement that a candidateclass extraction will bring about to the system, our method usesthe Entity Placement metric (Tsantalis and Chatzigeorgiou, 2009), aratio of the overall system cohesion over its coupling. Finally, themanual application of the Extract Class refactoring is not trivial,because of the difﬁculties arising from the human-driven analysisof both inter- and intra-dependencies of the extracted class mem-bers. For this reason, we have developed tooling within the EclipseJDeodorant plugin (Fokaefs et al., 2011) to automatically apply suchrefactorings once the developer has agreed to do so.This paper makes three novel contributions to the state of theart in supporting object-oriented design evolution.1. Identiﬁcation of new concepts. In the context of this work, wedeﬁne a concept as a distinct entity or abstraction for whicha single class provides a description and/or a set of attributesand methods that contribute together to the same task. Ourmethod uses a clustering algorithm to identify conceptuallyrelated groups of entities (i.e. attributes and methods) withina single “God Class”. The identiﬁed concepts (i.e. entity clusters)are considered as candidates for extraction.2. Ranking of the candidate refactorings based on their anticipatedimpact on the design quality, as measured by the Entity Placementmetric (Tsantalis and Chatzigeorgiou, 2009), a combined metricthat captures both coupling and cohesion.3. Automatic application of a selected refactoring, so that it pre-serves the syntactic correctness of the system and its observablebehavior. The refactoring application process checks a list of pre-conditions before proceeding with the actual refactoring andensures that all the appropriate transformations are applied inboth the original and the new class.The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presentsa review of the related literature. Section 3 describes the iden-tiﬁcation of refactoring opportunities and the mechanics of theapplication of the suggested refactorings in detail. Section 4presents the results of the evaluation process. Section 5 concludesthis work, summarizing its main points and the results of the eval-uation process as well as discussing our future plans.2. Related workThis section reviews the related literature in three differentareas. The ﬁrst group of related papers focuses on general meth-ods about code smell detection. The second group focuses onresearch around methods for software remodularization, architec-ture recovery or migration of legacy systems, including severalrelying on clustering. The third group focuses on the identiﬁca-tion of problematic classes with low cohesion or key classes thathave a big portion of the system’s functionality and are intensivelymaintained. Finally, the third group involves earlier research onidentifying Extract Class opportunities and suggesting extractionsolutions.2.1. Code smell detection methodsMoha et al. (2010) introduced DECOR, a method for the spec-iﬁcation and detection of code and design smells and DETEX,an instantiation of this method. First, a taxonomy and classiﬁca-tion of smells is deﬁned based on the key concepts in order tohighlight the similarities and differences among smells. The spec-iﬁcation of smells is performed using a domain-speciﬁc language(DSL) in the form of rules using the previous taxonomy. The rulesdescribe the properties that a class must have to be considered asmell. The DSL allows the deﬁnition of properties for the detec-tion of smells, including structural properties, naming propertiesand internal properties using metrics. The detection algorithms areautomatically generated by parsing the rules deﬁned in the speci-ﬁcation process and they are applied on a model representation ofthe examined system produced by forward engineering or reverseengineering its source code.Marinescu (2004) proposed the concept of detection strategiesas a means to detect instances of a structural anomaly. A detec-tion strategy is actually a composition of various metric rules (i.e.metrics that should comply with proper threshold values) com-bined with AND/OR operators into a single rule that expressesa design heuristic. The threshold values used in the metric ruleswere deﬁned based on statistical data collected from more than60 Java and 50 C++projects. The identiﬁed design problems can beeliminated based on corresponding restructuring strategies whichinformally describe (i.e. in textual form) the required actions thatshould be taken for the elimination procedure.Munro (2005) attempted to address the issue of identifying thecharacteristics of a bad smell through the use of a set of softwaremetrics. By using a predeﬁned set of metric interpretation rules thesoftware engineer can be provided with signiﬁcant guidance forlocating existing bad smells. Munro uses exactly the same detec-tion approach as Marinescu (2004), i.e. a composition of metricsthat should comply with proper threshold values combined withAND/OR operators into a single rule. His approach was evaluated ontwo case studies, a small sized hotel booking system and a mediumsized Graph Tool system written in Java and for two code smells,namely Lazy Class and Temporary Field.Van Emden and Moonen (2002) proposed an approach for theautomatic detection and visualization of instanceof and typecastcode smells. The “instance” of code smell appears as a sequenceof conditional statements that test an object for its type, while thetypecast code smell appears when an object is explicitly convertedfrom one class type into another. To this end, they developed a pro-totype code smell browser, named jCOSMO, which visualizes thedetected code smells in the form of a graph. In this graph, the codesmells are represented as additional nodes connected to the codeentities that they appear in. In this way it is possible to discriminatewhich parts of the system have the largest number of code smellsand would beneﬁt the most from restructuring. M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 226022432.2. Software remodularizationThe problem of software remodularization has been discussed inthe context of all types of software systems. Mancoridis et al. (1998)proposed a method for remodularizing a software system, in termsof “good” clusters with high cohesion (within the clusters) and lowcoupling (between the clusters). The method produces the Mod-ule Dependency Graph based on the source code and then appliesclustering on the resulting graph, using the Modularization Qual-ity measure to evaluate the produced clusters. This measure favorsintra-module connectivity and penalizes inter-connectivity. Afterﬁnding a suboptimal partition using a combination of hill climbingand genetic algorithms, the method builds a hierarchy of clustersusing a hierarchical clustering algorithm.Doval et al. (1999) consider the problem of identifying a goodpartitioning as an optimization problem. They propose a geneticalgorithm as a means of partitioning large software systems usingas an objective function the modularization quality measures(Mancoridis et al., 1998). In a similar work, Shokoufandeh et al.(2005) apply a spectral clustering algorithm in order to remodular-ize a system, adopting the same measure as the objective function.Sartipi and Kontogiannis (2001) propose a semisupervised clus-tering framework for software architecture recovery. The processstarts by analyzing the source code to compute component similar-ity. They employ the maximal association property (i.e. maximumnumber of shared features) to introduce two new similarity mea-sures, namely association between entities and mutual associationbetween components. Using these metrics, sufﬁciently similarcomponents are clustered together and, ﬁnally, the user manuallyassigns the remaining components to clusters or reallocates themodules among the clusters. During the clustering phase the usermay select among a set of main seeds, around which the new clusterwill be built, or manually create a cluster.van Deursen and Kuipers (1999) use clustering and con-cept analysis for the purpose of migrating legacy systems toobject-oriented technologies. They identify two shortcomings ofclustering: an element can exist only in one cluster, and an elementmay arbitrarily be assigned to different clusters in different runs ofthe clustering algorithm. Neither of these problems are relevantto the task of extracting classes. In this context, elements “should”be in only one cluster because attributes and methods should bedeclared only in one class, and if an element is equally close to twoclusters these clusters will eventually be merged, resulting into amore complex class to be extracted. Another difference betweencluster and concept analysis is that the latter method can identifyall possible partitions. Up to a degree this problem is overcome inour work by presenting all the clusters identiﬁed by the algorithmand merging the results accordingly.The aforementioned methods focus on remodularization of soft-ware, around larger modules, like, for example, packages, while ourmethod focuses on software remodularization at the class level.The criteria appropriate for these two types of remodularizationare different. Classes may be organized into packages according totheir release plan (classes in a single package should evolve andbe released together), or according to the inheritance hierarchy inwhich they belong (a package may contain the hierarchy tree of asingle class). On the other hand, the requirement for reorganizingattributes and methods into new classes is to better express andcommunicate the conceptual model of the application domain.2.3. Identiﬁcation of “God Classes”There is substantial earlier research around the problem ofidentifying “God Classes”, or problematic complex modules moregenerally.Trifu and Marinescu (2005) deﬁne “God Classes” as “large, non-cohesive classes that have access to many foreign data” and usea formula based on complexity, cohesion and coupling metrics todetermine whether a class belongs in that category or not. Thefundamental shortcoming of this method is that it requires thresh-olds for the considered metrics, which have to be empirically orstatistically determined for any given system.Tahvildari and Kontogiannis (2003) propose two quality designheuristics and use a diagnosis algorithm based on complexity, cohe-sion and coupling metrics to identify design ﬂaws. In this case, thethresholds are less tight and vaguely deﬁned (high/low) and mayrequire user-deﬁned input.DuBois et al. (2004) propose a set of “guidelines” based on con-ceptual and macroscopic criteria for improving the system design.Their guideline for simplifying “God Classes” advises to “separatethe responsibilities. Extract those groups of methods and attributesthat neither use nor are used by other methods or attributes”. Thismethod offers no automation whatsoever and the guidelines arenot formalized in a way that would allow a degree of automation.Finally, Demeyer et al. (2002) suggest some conceptual crite-ria for identifying “God Classes”. They are usually incohesive andmemory consuming classes. They usually have abstract names like“Controller”, “Manager”, “Driver” or “System”. Any change to thesystem may cause changes to these classes. They are often calledthe “heart of the system” and, in most of the cases, they are hard tomaintain.All of the above methods are likely able to identify problematicclasses and improve system design metrics, but they do not producespeciﬁc design improvement suggestions which are meaningful tothe designer.Chatzigeorgiou (2003) and Chatzigeorgiou et al. (2004) applythe Hyperlink Induced Topic Search (HITS) algorithm in order toevaluate the quality of object-oriented design models. The algo-rithm is extended in order to account for the number of discretemessages exchanged between classes. The principal eigenvectors ofmatrices, derived from the adjacency matrix containing the num-ber of exchanges messages between classes, are used to identify andquantify “God Classes” that deviate from the principle of distributedresponsibilities. Furthermore, the non-principal eigenvectors arealso employed in order to identify dense communities of classesin a system that are well-separated from one another and possiblyconstitute reusable components.Xanthos (2006) employ a technique from algebraic graph the-ory known as spectral graph partitioning. In this approach anobject-oriented system is represented as a graph where nodesstand for the classes and the edges stand for the discrete messagesexchanged between the classes. The resulting graph is recursivelybi-partitioned until one of the produced subgraphs is less cohe-sive than its parent graph. This is determined by examining if thenumber of internal edges of each subgraph (i.e. intra-exchangedmessages) exceeds the number of external edges (inter-exchangedmessages). If the external edges are more than the internal thealgorithm stops.Zaidman and Demeyer (2008) propose a method that employsHITS to identify key classes in object oriented systems based oncoupling. This algorithm has the ability to incorporate the indi-rect coupling between classes in the calculation of the overallsystem coupling. This is achieved by calculating the transitiveclosure of the class relationships. Their ultimate objective isto improve the understandability of the code and help newdevelopers become familiar with a system by exploring the keyclasses.Khomh et al. (2009) propose an approach based on BayesianBelief Networks (BBNs) to specify design smells and detect themin programs. Within the context of design smell detection, a BBNis a directed acyclic graph, where nodes correspond to either 2244M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 2260an input (e.g. a metric value for a given class) if there are noincoming edges, to a decision step if there are incoming edges (e.g.is a class part of a smell given the values of its parent nodes?), orto an output node if there are no outgoing edges. A directed edgebetween two nodes indicates a probabilistic dependency betweenthe starting and the ending nodes. Eventually, the output of a BBNis a probability that a class is part of a design smell. In this way, itis possible to sort the candidate classes for a given design smelland prioritize the inspection of classes with higher probability.Their approach is evaluated for the detection of the Blob antipat-tern by building a BBN model on two open-source projects, namelyXerces and GanttProject. The estimation of precision and recall isperformed by comparing the results of the model with manuallylocated smells. An apparent disadvantage of probabilistic models,like Bayesian networks, is that the required probabilities resultbased on a training set, which within the context of design smelldetection corresponds to metric values for classes which have beenalready determined as valid instances. Obviously, the training setaffects the classiﬁcation results of the model on the actual dataset.Vaucher et al. (2009) perform an exploratory analysis of the “lifecycle” of God Classes on two open-source projects, namely Xercesand Eclipse JDT. They use the same Bayesian approach as Khomhet al. (2009) for detecting the presence of God Classes in systemsand ranking them. Furthermore, they study the evolution of thedetected God Classes in the examined systems. More speciﬁcally,they study the way that God Classes are introduced in and removedfrom the systems and how they evolve over time. Finally, they havebuilt a prediction model on Xerces project that predicts the like-lihood of creating a God Class given a speciﬁc code change. Theprediction model can be used to prevent the introduction of GodClasses in future versions of the systems.As far as these works are concerned, we should point out thatthe goal of our method is not to distinguish between “God Classes”and other classes. Every class of the system is equally inspected toassess whether it might potentially beneﬁt from an extraction ofsome of its members. If a suggested extraction improves the over-all quality of the system in terms of its cohesion and coupling, ascombined in the Entity Placement metric, it is presented as a refac-toring opportunity to the developer. This way, a good opportunitycan be identiﬁed even in a class, which may not seem problematicby means of traditional cohesion metrics.2.4. Identiﬁcation of Extract Class opportunitiesSimon et al. (2001) propose visualization based techniques foridentifying Extract Class opportunities. This methodology deﬁnesdependency sets for each type of class members (attributes andmethods) in order to calculate the Jaccard distance between classmembers. Using mapping techniques, the entities are visually pre-sented and then it is upon the designer to decide whether thereis an opportunity to extract a class or not. The fundamental short-coming of visualization based approaches is that there is no goodspatial metaphor for laying out the classes and they do not scale up.In our work, new candidate classes are identiﬁed as cohesive clus-ters of entities and they are ranked according to their anticipatedimpact on the design of the whole system.Joshi and Joshi (2009) consider the problem of classes with lowcohesion as a graph partitioning problem. They focus on improv-ing class cohesion by examining lattices based on the dependenciesbetween attributes and methods. A shortcoming of this method, aspointed out by the authors, is that, for large systems, the lattices canbecome very complex and thus it is more difﬁcult for the designerto visually inspect the lattice and identify problematic cases. More-over, while this method focuses on improving the cohesion ofa class, it neglects to consider the conceptual coherence of thesuggested extracted classes, which can only contain methods.Finally, this method does not guarantee that the suggested refac-torings will not affect the behavior of the program.De Lucia et al. (2008) propose a methodology that takes intoaccount both structural and conceptual criteria. Their methodbuilds a weighted graph of the class methods based on structuraland semantic cohesion metrics, which then is split using a Max-ﬂow Min-cut algorithm to produce more cohesive classes. Thesemantic cohesion metric is based on the names of classes and enti-ties, which, in poor designs, can be arbitrary and thus the resultshighly depend on the naming conventions used by the developersof a project. Furthermore, by bipartitioning the graph it is possi-ble to miss potential clusters. For example, a class might consist ofmore than two cohesive subclasses which could not be identiﬁedby splitting the class. Moreover, the attributes are not consideredduring the calculation of the graph, but they are moved to theextracted class. This might have undesirable effects on the cou-pling of the system. Finally, the weights of the different metrics arestatistically determined based on the speciﬁc characteristics of theexamined system and there no systematic way of deﬁning defaultthresholds is provided. The work by Bavota et al. (2011) providedan extended experimental evaluation where the ﬁndings of theapproach on an open-source project were evaluated by graduatestudents.In a similar work, Bavota et al. (2010) propose a simpledecomposition technique to identify Extract Class refactoringopportunities. They use the same set of metrics as in the workby Bavota et al. (2011) to calculate the cohesion between meth-ods. Then based on the calls between methods they ﬁnd chains ofmethods by calculating the transitive closure of their dependen-cies. The chains that are above a minimum cohesion and are ofa minimum length are suggested as possible extractions. The useof chains allows the technique to possibly identify more than twoextractions. This work suffers from some of the limitations foundin its predecessors, such as the need for threshold deﬁnition andthe exclusion of attributes from the partitioning process which canlead to non-optimal solutions.Bavota et al. (2010) propose a game-theory approach for iden-tifying Extract Class opportunities. In this approach, the twocandidate classes, in which a candidate God Class may be decom-posed, “compete” against each other over the methods of theoriginal source class. At each round, each “player” is trying toobtain a method that will increase its cohesion and not increaseits coupling based on structural and semantic similarity measures.This method suffers from several shortcomings. First, it assumesthat the source class should be divided in two new classes, whereour method allows for the decomposition of a God Class in anynumber of smaller classes. Furthermore, the game is deﬁned as a2-player general-sum game and it is known that ﬁnding particularNash equilibria in general-sum games is a hard problem (PPAD-complete) (Daskalakis et al., 2009). And although it is proven thatthere exists a Nash equilibrium for every game, this equilibrium isnot guaranteed to be a pure Nash equilibrium. In the Extract Classproblem the two players cannot mix over their actions because theyhave to take a single method at each turn. Thus, it is not guaran-teed that at each iteration there will be a pair of actions for the twoplayers to select.In our previous work (Fokaefs et al., 2009), we have alreadypresented the identiﬁcation of Extract Class opportunities usinga clustering algorithm. The differences compared to our previouswork are:•improvement in the application of the hierarchical agglomerativealgorithm so that it does not require user-deﬁned inputs;•additional preconditions; M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 22602245•detailed mechanics for the application of the Extract Class refac-toring;•investigation of the suitability of Entity Placement as a rankingcriterion; and•enhancement of our evaluation process.More speciﬁcally, with respect to the enhancement of the eval-uation process we included two additional types of experiments. Inthe ﬁrst type, the evaluators were asked to manually identify con-cepts without neither having knowledge of our methodology norhaving the assistance of our tool. Next, we compared their ﬁndingswith the tool’s suggestions in order to extract the precision andrecall of our approach. In the second type, we provided the eval-uator, who is a professional in software quality assessment, witha set of already applied refactorings on a well-known open-sourcesystem (JHotDraw) and asked him to provide his expert opinionon whether the newly created classes constituted meaningful andvalid concepts and if the applied refactorings improved the under-standability of the code.More generally, there are two differences between this bodyof work and our method. First, they stop at the identiﬁcation ofthe problems and do not suggest speciﬁc solutions, whereas ourmethod offers a complete solution to the problem, from identify-ing the opportunities to suggesting proper refactorings and ﬁnallyapplying these refactorings in an automatic manner. Second, theyattempt to identify a single “optimal” solution, which the designershould accept or reject in its entirety. On the contrary, our method isessentially a stepwise approach, that extracts a set of ordered refac-toring suggestions. This offers the advantage of gradual change ofa system, allowing the developer to assess the conceptual integrityof the refactoring suggestions at each step.3. MethodologyOur Extract Class refactoring method consists of three steps: (a)the identiﬁcation of the refactoring opportunities, (b) their rankingbased on the improvement they are anticipated to bring about tothe system, and (c) the actual automated application of the refac-toring chosen by the developer.3.1. Identiﬁcation of Extract Class opportunitiesThe process of identifying Extract Class opportunities consistsof two steps. First, each class is analyzed in order to extract depen-dency information among the class members, so that we cancalculate distances between them. This information is then used bya clustering algorithm, which identiﬁes cohesive groups of entitiesthat can be extracted as separate classes. Second, the classes iden-tiﬁed as candidates to be extracted are ﬁltered by applying a set ofrules that evaluate whether these classes have sufﬁcient function-ality and whether the suggested refactorings would preserve thebehavior of the original program.Note that the identiﬁcation method is applied to every class ofa system regardless of its cohesion. In this way, there is no need fordeﬁning thresholds according to which a class will be examined ornot. After all, a single threshold might not be sufﬁcient to identifyall problematic classes.3.1.1. Clustering algorithm and distance metricOur objective in designing a clustering algorithm for the identiﬁ-cation of candidate classes for extraction was to require minimuminput by the developers and minimum a priori knowledge aboutthe system under examination.We ﬁrst considered a partitioning algorithm, like k-means. Thisfamily of algorithms requires as input the number of desired clus-ters and assumes that each object is placed in a feature space, wherethe space dimensions correspond to the object attributes. None ofthese knowledge assumptions are realistic in our case. First, it isimpossible to know how many, if any at all, concepts might be inter-twined within a single class implementation. And if one were to runthe algorithm for every single possible value of k, the performanceof the process would dramatically deteriorate. Second, it is unclearin terms of what attributes one might describe the class membersin order to place them within a multi-dimensional space. Partition-ing algorithms are also not robust to noise, i.e. entities that are toofar from the others and cannot be included in any cluster. As it turnsout object-oriented classes usually produce rather sparse similar-ity matrices (i.e. a lot of zero values), because not everything isconnected to everything, a fact that corresponds to a large amountof noise. By nature, partitioning algorithms will cluster all entitiesin spite of how far some of them might be. Furthermore, thesealgorithms require an initial partitioning and then the clusteringis updated until it reaches an optimal level of ﬁtness. However, theresulting clustering is highly affected by this initial conﬁguration.First, different initial partitions might produce different clusterings.Second, because of the initial partitioning the algorithm might fallin a local minimum and never converge to the preset optimal ﬁt-ness level. For this reason, another stop condition is needed whichis the number of iterations. However, it is not easy to deﬁne thisnumber because it depends on many factors including the natureof the examined dataset.Next, we considered a density-based algorithm, since they aremore robust to noise and require no knowledge about the struc-ture of the dataset. The aim here is to identify dense areas ofentities in the dataset. However, these algorithms also require apriori knowledge of several parameters. A density based algorithm,like DBSCAN (Ester et al., 1996), needs two parameters: (a) -neighborhood, which deﬁnes a radius around a point, within whicha dense subgroup (not a cluster) can be deﬁned, and (b) MinPts,which corresponds to the minimum number of points for each sub-group. In this particular software remodularization problem, it isnot clear what the minimum number of entities in a neighborhoodmay represent and thus, it is difﬁcult to deﬁne one. Furthermore,it is not easy to deﬁne an  value and if we try different values,we will have to run the clustering algorithm for each of thesevalues.Finally, we considered graph partitioning algorithms, whichcan be either spectral methods such as Algebraic Connectivity(Holzrichter and Oliveira, 1999) and Principal Component Anal-ysis (Jolliffe, 1986) or ﬂow-based such as the Max-ﬂow Min-cut(Cormen et al., 2001) algorithms. In these algorithms, we assumethe existence of a weighted graph on which we perform recursivebipartitioning in order to identify the corresponding clusters. Theproblem with recursion is that we need to deﬁne a stop criterionbased on an objective function. This transforms the problem intoan optimization one, as it is being addressed by Shokoufandeh et al.(2005). In our case, we do not want to view the problem as an opti-mization one, since our method aims to suggest a set of possiblerefactorings rather than a single optimal one.Eventually, we decided to adopt a hierarchical agglomerativealgorithm. This algorithm starts by assigning each class member toa single cluster. In each iteration it merges the two closest clusters.Finally, the algorithm terminates when all entities are containedin a single cluster, which forms the root of a hierarchy of clusters.The actual clusters can be determined at the merging points. Thehierarchy of the clusters is usually represented by a dendrogram(an example is shown in Fig. 3). The leaves of the tree represent theentities, the root is the ﬁnal cluster and the intermediate nodes arethe actual clusters. The height of the tree represents the differentlevels of the distance in which two clusters were merged.From the examined algorithms, the hierarchical agglomerativealgorithm is the only one that satisﬁes all of the following criteria: 2246M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 22601. It is deterministic as it requires no random initializations (unlikek-means) and it always produces the same results.2. It is ﬁnite as it does not require user-deﬁned stop conditions(unlike recursive graph bi-partitioning and k-means) and it pro-duces a ﬁnal output in ﬁnite time.3. It is fully automatic as it does not require user-deﬁned input(unlike k-means and DBSCAN).An important aspect of the hierarchical agglomerative cluster-ing algorithm is the distance merging criterion according to whichthe algorithm selects which clusters to merge. There are severalmethods for determining the two closest clusters, such as (a) themaximum distance between the members of two clusters (com-plete linkage), (b) the average distance (average linkage), or (c)the minimum distance (single linkage). According to Anquetil andLethbridge (1999) complete linkage favors more cohesive clusters;single linkage favors less coupled clusters; and average linkage issomewhere in-between. As this method is based on class memberdependencies, the cohesion of the newly created classes is expectedto be of a fair or very good level. In other words, as all entities will beconnected, the algorithm is guaranteed to produce fairly cohesiveclasses. In contrast with cohesion, coupling is an uncontrolled vari-able. Thus, we chose to adopt the single linkage method, in orderto lessen the coupling between the newly created class and theoriginal one.The distance metric used by our algorithm is the Jaccard distance,which according to Anquetil and Lethbridge (1999) produces goodresults in software remodularization. To deﬁne the Jaccard distancebetween two class members the notion of entity sets is employed,borrowed by Tsantalis and Chatzigeorgiou (2009).The entity set of an attribute a contains:•the attribute a itself;•the methods directly accessing a that belong to the same classwith a;•the methods accessing a through public accessors (getter andsetter methods).The entity set of a method m contains:•the method m itself;•the attributes accessed by m;•the methods accessed by m.The reason that the entity itself is included in its entity set isso that the condition dij= 0 if i = j where dijis the Jaccard distancebetween entities i and j is preserved. Without this extension, thetwo different entities that access or were accessed by the sameother entities (i.e. their entity sets were equal) would have a zerodistance. In this way, we ensure that the “identity of indiscernibles”condition, which should hold for a proper metric (Pontryagin andArkhangel’skii, 1990), is satisﬁed.Attributes which are references to other classes are consideredas entities and are also included in the entity set of a method. Areference is essentially a pipeline through which foreign entities areaccessed. Since the goal of the methodology is to examine a class asa closed environment references are considered as local attributes.Static attributes and methods are considered as entities and theyare added to entity sets, because, although they are not instancemembers, they can still be accessed by instance methods. Hence,they contribute to a concept or to a distinct piece of functionality.Constructors are neither considered as entities nor are addedin entity sets, since they are special purpose methods used to cre-ate objects of the class they belong to and as such they cannot beremoved from this class. Getter and setter methods are also nei-ther considered as entities nor added to entity sets, because theFig. 1. A synthetic example.attributes that they provide access to are already added to theentity set (i.e. we do not include both the attribute and its publicaccessors). Delegate methods are neither considered nor added toentity sets, because the methods to which they delegate are alreadyadded to the entity set (i.e. we do not include both the delegatorand the delegatee methods). Finally, access to attributes or meth-ods of classes outside the system boundary (e.g. library classes) isnot taken into account, because we want to preserve the similar-ity between entities with respect to the context of the examinedsystem.Based on the deﬁnition of the entity sets, the Jaccard distancebetween two entities ˛ and ˇ with entity sets A and B respectivelyis calculated as follows:d˛,ˇ= 1 −|A  B||A  B|(1)3.1.2. An illustrative exampleTo better understand the methodology, we will illustrate itsapplication on a simple synthetic example, of a class with fourattributes and three methods, shown in Fig. 1.Table 1 shows the distance matrix for this example and Fig. 2shows a graphical representation of the class. In this graph, thesquares represent attributes, the circles represent methods and theedges indicate that a dependency exists between two entities. Fur-thermore, the length of the edges is proportional to the distancesbetween the class members. Applying the hierarchical clusteringalgorithm on this class we obtained the dendrogram shown in Fig. 3.It is easy to see that there are 5 merging points (whose height levelis shown with vertical lines) that produced an equal number ofclusters. These clusters are:•C1= {name, job} at the merging point with height 0.4;•C2= {modifyName(), changeJob()} at the merging point withheight 0.5; M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 22602247Table 1Distance matrix for the class of Fig. 1.name job ofﬁceAreaCode ofﬁceNumber changeJob() modifyName()job 0.4ofﬁceAreaCode0.8 0.8ofﬁceNumber0.8 0.8 0.67changeJob() 0.6 0.6 1 1modifyName() 0.6 0.6 1 1 0.5getTelephoneNumber() 0.71 0.71 0.6 0.6 0.67 0.67Fig. 2. Graph corresponding to the class of Fig. 1.•C3= {name, job, modifyName(), changeJob()} at the merging pointwith height 0.6;•C4= {ofﬁceAreaCode, getTelephoneNumber()} at the merging pointwith height 0.6;•C5= {ofﬁceAreaCode, ofﬁceNumber, getTelephoneNumber()} at themerging point with height 0.67.Clusters C1and C2were later rejected for different reasons thatare going to be discussed in the following sections.Fig. 3. Dendrogram resulting from the application of hierarchical algorithm for theclass of Fig. 1.3.1.3. Detection of extractable conceptsAs we have already mentioned, the goal of our methodologyis to identify conceptually similar and meaningful groups of classmembers that can be extracted into separate classes. Our approachfor detecting the extractable concepts consists of three main steps:1. Apply the hierarchical agglomerative clustering algorithm toget the dendrogram which demonstrates how the clusters wereformed.2.Get
 the clusters before the last merging point. The reason forselecting this particular merging point is that these clustershave the highest merge distance between them in the den-drogram. This means that the class members included in theseﬁnal clusters access very few common members or none at all.We call these clusters general concepts, because they constitutehigh-level discernible concepts that will eventually be used toorganize the refactoring suggestions. In the dendrogram of theillustrative example (Section 3.1.2) shown in Fig. 3, the generalconcepts are clusters C3and C5. Our method can split a class inmore than two sub-classes, since there can be more than twogeneral concepts.3. For each general concept, examine the corresponding subtree toidentify the extractable concepts, which are the actual refactor-ing opportunities. The reason for further analyzing the generalconcepts, rather than suggesting them as the ﬁnal refactor-ing opportunities, is primarily for the purpose of completeness.To achieve completeness we aim to capture not only the gen-eral concepts, but also subconcepts that might constitute betterdesign solutions. Subconcept is a cluster that has been formed atan earlier stage than the general, describes a meaningful conceptby itself and has more than one element. The subconcepts can beobtained by iteratively visiting the merging points starting fromthe leaf nodes of the subtree up to the root node (representingthe general concept). At each merging point being traversed, wedistinguish two cases:(a) If at least one of the child clusters forming the parent cluster(at the merging point) consists of a single class member, thenboth child clusters are rejected as not being extractable con-cepts. The reason we reject the non-single-element clusteris because, while it fulﬁlls one of the conditions to qualify asa subconcept (i.e. it has more than one elements), it fails tofulﬁll the other condition; it does not constitute a complete 2248M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 2260concept, because a single other class member is sufﬁcientlyrelated to this cluster, so that it is merged with it in the verynext step.(b) If each of the merged child clusters consists of two or moreclass members, then they are both accepted as extractableconcepts.Eventually, the extractable concepts include the general con-cepts and their subconcepts that were identiﬁed by theaforementioned iterative process. In the illustrative exampleshown in Fig. 3 (Section 3.1.2), the extractable concepts are thegeneral concepts represented by clusters C3and C5and clustersC1and C2as subconcepts of cluster C3.3.1.4. Eliminating illegal candidate classesRefactoring is conceived as a code restructuring that does notaffect its external behavior (Fowler et al., 1999). To this end, ourmethod inspects the classes identiﬁed by the clustering as candi-dates to be extracted to assess (a) whether they have a sufﬁcientsubstantive functionality and (b) whether the suggested refactor-ings would indeed preserve the behavior of the program.The rules imposed to ensure a certain degree of functionality areas follows:•The class to be extracted should contain more than one entity. Asingle member cannot describe a concept sufﬁciently enough.•The class to be extracted should contain at least one method.Data (i.e. attributes) might be sufﬁcient to identify a concept, butfunctionality (i.e. methods) is essential for the deﬁnition of a class.The preconditions1required for behavior preservation are asfollows:•Abstract methods should not be extracted for two reasons. First, itcan break polymorphic method invocations. Second, the extrac-tion of an abstract method would force the extracted class to bedeclared as abstract. As a result, the ﬁeld holding a reference tothe extracted class could not be initialized with an object havingthe type of the extracted class.•Fields that have a visibility higher than private and are used bya class other than the source should not be extracted. Since pub-lic and protected ﬁelds can be directly accessed by third classes,their extraction would require the modiﬁcation of these classes.This would violate the local nature of the Extract Class refactoring(i.e. changes should affect only the original class). Alternatively,a more complex solution would be to create public accessors inthe original class that delegate to the corresponding accessors inthe extracted class.•Methods that override an abstract or a concrete method of thesuper class of the original class should not be extracted. Extractinga method that overrides an abstract method would cause com-pilation errors since the original class would no longer providean implementation for the abstract method. Similarly, extract-ing a method that overrides a concrete method would affect thebehavior of the original class and the classes that were usingthe extracted method since the source class would inherit thebehavior of the method deﬁned in its super class.•The class to be extracted should not contain a method that makesany super method invocations.•Methods that are synchronized or contain a synchronized blockshould not be extracted since according to Schäfer et al. (2010)extracting “a synchronized method [. . .] can result in the methodacquiring a different lock when executed”. In the same work, the1A formal deﬁnition of these preconditions following Opdyke’s notation (Opdyke,1992) can be found in the work by Tsantalis and Chatzigeorgiou (2009).authors propose to transform the synchronized method with amethod containing a synchronized block that explicitly refers tothe appropriate lock. This solution deteriorates the understand-ability of the code.Violation of the behavior preservation preconditions mightintroduce compilation errors to the code or alter the externalbehavior of the program. In the example of Section 3.1.2, the ﬁrstcluster C1was rejected because it only contained attributes.3.2. Ranking and presentation of refactoring opportunities basedon their impact on design qualityOnce a set of candidate refactorings has been identiﬁed throughthe aforementioned clustering and ﬁltering process, they areranked according to their potential impact on the system’s designquality. The ranking of the proposed solutions is important, espe-cially in the cases of systems presenting a large number ofrefactoring opportunities, since it allows the developers to focuson parts of the software that their design would beneﬁt more frompreventive maintenance activities.To estimate the anticipated design improvement for each sug-gested refactoring, we use the Entity Placement (Tsantalis andChatzigeorgiou, 2009) metric. The Entity Placement metric com-bines the notions of coupling and cohesion. It calculates thedistances of the entities belonging to a class from the class itself(cohesion of the class) divided by the distances of the entities notbelonging to the class from the class itself (the coupling of theclass). The reason we chose the Entity Placement metric over tra-ditional cohesion and coupling metrics is exactly its compositionalnature. When performing an Extract Class refactoring it is antici-pated that the cohesion of the system will increase (since a groupof strongly related entities is extracted) and its coupling will dete-riorate (because a new class with dependencies to other classes isintroduced). A candidate refactoring is a good design solution if theimprovement of cohesion is signiﬁcantly greater than the deterio-ration of coupling. Therefore, it is less probable that well-designedclasses are proposed for decomposition. The Entity Placement met-ric can measure this relative change as it evaluates the overalldesign quality of the system in terms of both coupling and cohesion.The deﬁnition of the entity sets used in the calculation of theEntity Placement and the deﬁnition of the entity sets used in thecalculation of the distance metric employed in the clustering algo-rithm are signiﬁcantly different. For the Entity Placement we usedthe entity sets exactly as deﬁned by Tsantalis and Chatzigeorgiou(2009), while for the calculation of the distance metric we used theentity sets as deﬁned in Section 3.1.1. Furthermore, the distancebetween an entity and a class is only employed in the calculationof Entity Placement and not for the purpose of clustering.The Entity Placement value for a class C (EPC) is the ratio ofits average distance from the entities that belong to class C to itsaverage distance from the entities that do not belong to the class.EPC=eiCdistance(ei, C)/|entities  C|ei/Cdistance(ei, C)/|entities / C|(2)The Entity Placement value for a system (EPSystem) is theweighted average of the Entity Placement values of the classesbelonging to the system.EPSystem=Ci|entities Ci||all entities|EPCi(3)where e is the entity set of a class member, C is the entity set of aclass and distance(e, C) is the Jaccard distance between entity e andclass C, exactly as deﬁned by Tsantalis and Chatzigeorgiou (2009). M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 22602249Fig. 4. Presentation of identiﬁed refactoring opportunities.To calculate the Entity Placement value without having to actu-ally apply the refactoring on the source code, our method adopts avirtual application procedure.1.First,
 an empty class entity set is created.2.For
 each extracted entity, its origin class is changed from thesource class to the new class.3. The entity sets of all the entities that access or are accessed bythe extracted entities are updated.4. The extracted entities are inserted in the entity set of the newclass.5. The extracted entities are removed from the entity set of thesource class.Once this procedure is completed, the new Entity Placement valuefor the system that would result from the application of the speciﬁcrefactoring is computed. It should be noted that the lower the EntityPlacement value, the better the resulting design is anticipated to be.Our methodology may produce multiple suggestions per classaccording to the number of extractable concepts identiﬁed by thealgorithm. As already mentioned, at a ﬁrst level, the candidates thatviolate preconditions are eliminated. Second, candidates that dete-riorate the design quality of the system in terms of Entity Placementare excluded. In the example of Section 3.1.2, the second cluster C2was excluded because it produced a worst Entity Placement valuefor the system.Regarding the presentation of the identiﬁed refactoring oppor-tunities, we use three levels as shown in Fig. 4. The ﬁrst level showsthe classes that were suggested to be refactored, the second levelshows the general concepts identiﬁed for each class and the thirdlevel shows all the extractable concepts identiﬁed for each gen-eral concept. The labeling of the general and extractable conceptsis based on term frequency. We tokenize the names of the extractedentities and we calculate their frequency. Then, we ﬁnd the termswith the maximum frequency and concatenate them using the plus(+) symbol. The label for an extractable concept is produced fromthe entities that are speciﬁc to this concept, while the label for ageneral concept is calculated from the collection of the terms of allthe extractable concepts it contains.The extractable concepts are sorted in ascending order accord-ing to their Entity Placement value relatively to their siblingconcepts within the same general concept. Then, the elements ineach preceding level are assigned the minimum Entity Placementvalue of the elements they contain, for example, the general con-cept is assigned the minimum value of its extractable conceptsand the class is assigned the minimum value of its general con-cepts. Finally, all elements of the table are sorted in ascending orderrelatively to the elements of the same level.3.3. Application of the Extract Class refactoringWe used Eclipse’s Java Development Toolkit (JDT) for the appli-cation of the refactoring. JDT offers the ability to deconstruct thecode into the corresponding abstract syntax tree (AST). Then it iseasy to manipulate the tree by adding, deleting or changing nodes.ASTRewrite, a special JDT class, helps monitor the changes, storesthem in a queue and then performs them directly on the sourcecode. We used the Preview Wizard in Eclipse Language Toolkit(LTK) to preview the changes. The mechanics of the refactoring aresummarized in Algorithm 1.Algorithm 1. Extract Class mechanics1:Remove
 extracted entities from the source class.2: Create the new class.3: Add the required import declarations.4: for all the extracted ﬁelds do5:Add
 the extracted ﬁeld in the new class.6:Create
 public accessors (getters and setters) for the extractedﬁelds in the new class.7: end for8: Sort the extracted methods according to Algorithm 2.9: for all the extracted methods do10: if there exists an assignment of a ﬁeld of the source class or aninvocation of a method of the source class then11: Add a parameter of source class type to the extracted class.12:Replace
 ﬁeld assignments with setters.13:Modify
 the method invocations to source class so that they areinvoked through the introduced parameter.14:Replace
 “this” with the parameter.15: end if16: if there exists a source class ﬁeld access then17: Add a parameter of the same type as the ﬁeld.18: end if19:Modify
 invocations of any other extracted method, if necessary.20: Add the method in the new class.21: if the method is invoked (normal or super method invocation)by a class other than the source then22: Leave a delegate of the method in the source class.23:end if24: end for25: Add a reference of the new class in the source class.26: Modify the accesses of any member of the new class in the sourceclass.27: Provide public accessors for the attributes of the source class andchange the modiﬁers of the methods of the source class ifnecessary.Algorithm 2. Examination order of extracted methods1: Set of extracted methods and their invocations to other extractedmethods.2: for each method that does not invoke any extracted method do3: Assign a level equal to 0.4: end for5:for each method that invokes other extracted methods do6: Assign a level equal to −1.7: end for8:while there exists at least one extracted method having a levelequal to −1 do9: for each extracted method m having a level equal to −1 do10: if all the methods invoked by m have a level −1 then11: Assign to m a level equal to the maximum level of theinvoked methods +1.12: end if13: end for14: end while15: Sort the extracted methods according to their level in ascendingorder.In the ﬁrst steps, the algorithm removes the extracted entitiesfrom the source class (line 1) and adds the new class in the samepackage as the source class (line 2). Next, the bodies of the extractedmethods and the types of the extracted ﬁelds are inspected and thealgorithm adds the required import declarations in the new class(line 3). The extracted ﬁelds are then added in the new class asprivate attributes (line 5) with public accessors (line 6), in order topreserve the encapsulation principle.Before adding the extracted methods to the new class, a fewsteps must be taken (lines 8–24). First, the order according to whichthe extracted methods will be examined is signiﬁcant, since theexistence of call dependencies between extracted methods maycause additional alterations in their signatures (e.g. if an extractedmethod a invokes another extracted method b, it may be required 2250M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 2260Fig. 5. Invocation dependencies among the extracted methods in class Iconkit.to introduce additional parameters in the signature of a in orderto pass them as arguments to the invocation of b). As a result, theextracted methods should be examined in the appropriate orderto ensure that the arguments of the extracted method invocationswill match the ﬁnal parameter list of the corresponding methods.Algorithm 2 describes the algorithm used for determining the cor-rect examination order of the extracted methods. The algorithmemploys the notion of level to represent the dependency level ofa given method in a chain of invocations. Level values are actuallyused to determine the examination order of the extracted methods,in the sense that a method should be examined only if all methodshaving a lower level have been already examined.For the sake of simplicity, this algorithm presupposes that theredo not exist cyclic invocation dependencies among the extractedmethods. The existence of cyclic dependencies would cause thealgorithm to fall into inﬁnite recursion. To overcome this prob-lem, we ﬁrst identify all strongly connected components (Tarjan,1972) (i.e. cycles) in the directed graph representing the depen-dencies among the methods. In the case an examined edge (i.e.method invocation) connects two nodes (i.e. methods) belongingto the same strongly connected component, we compute the aver-age level of the methods that they depend on and have alreadyobtained a level value, and promote the method corresponding tothe minimum average.The application of the algorithm will be demonstrated on a realexample taken from open-source project JHotDraw 5.3. Fig. 5 illus-trates the invocation dependencies among methods extracted fromclass Iconkit. As it can be observed from this ﬁgure, the level ofeach method is equal to the maximum level of the methods thatit invokes plus one. The methods that do not invoke any of theextracted methods have a level equal to zero. The extracted meth-ods should be examined according to their level in ascending orderto ensure that the arguments of the extracted method invocationswill match the ﬁnal parameter list of the corresponding methods.After the extracted methods are sorted, we will examine whatmembers they access from the source class. If an extracted methodassigns a variable or invokes a method of the source class, it is likelythat it may change the state of the source class instances. Therefore,the source class must be passed as a parameter to the new methodwhen it is added to the newly extracted class, so that the samechange is feasible in the new system (line 11). On the other hand,if an attribute of the source class is only read, it sufﬁces to add aparameter of the type of the accessed attribute in the new method(line 17); in this way, the method does not unnecessarily increasethe coupling between the source and the extracted class. Becausethese changes may alter the method’s signature, the algorithm hasto modify the invocations of this method in the rest of the extractedmethods (line 19). As the ﬁnal step, the newly modiﬁed methodsare added in the newly extracted class (line 20).Having dealt with the changes in the new class, it is now timeto change the source class as well. First, the algorithm checks if theextracted methods are also invoked by a third class (other than thesource class or the newly extracted class). If this is true, the orig-inal source method is turned into a method that delegates to theextracted one, so that its public interface does not change (line 22).Then, a ﬁeld having the type of the newly created class is added inthe source class (line 25)and it is initialized by invoking the defaultconstructor. If the extracted ﬁelds are initialized in the source class,then they should be initialized in the extracted class as well. Thereare two cases where the ﬁelds can be initialized: if they are initial-ized where they are declared, then the initialization expression isextracted along with the declaration to the extracted class; if theyare initialized in the source class constructor, then the assignmentstatement is replaced by a setter invocation. The accesses of anymembers of the new class are appropriately modiﬁed in the sourceclass, so that they can be accessed by the newly added reference ofthe extracted class (line 26). For example, if a method’s signature ischanged, its invocations in the source class need to be modiﬁed aswell. Finally, if a member of the source class needs to be accessedby the extracted class, public accessors (in case of attributes) mightneed to be added and modiﬁers might need to change (in case ofmethods) (line 27).Let us now revisit our example in Section 3.1.2 and apply thechosen refactoring.1. The attributes ofﬁceAreaCode and ofﬁceNumber and the methodgetTelephoneNumber() are removed from class Person.2. The class TelephoneNumber is created.3. The extracted attributes are added to the new class and publicaccessors are created for them.4. The method getTelephoneNumber() is added to the new class.5. A parameter of type Person is added to the extracted method,because it accesses the attributes name and job from class Per-son.6. The assignments of attributes name and job are replaced bysetter invocations in the extracted method.7. In the source class, a reference to the new class is added and itis initialized.8. The extracted attribute accesses are changed appropriately(assignments are replaced with setter invocations and ﬁeldaccesses with getter invocations).9. A delegate of the extracted method is left in the source class.10.Public
 accessors are added in the source class for the attributesname and job because the extracted method accesses them.Fig. 6 shows some of these changes in the source class via thePreview Wizard. Fig. 7 shows the code for the extracted class.As of version 3.6, Eclipse allows the user to perform “ExtractClass” refactorings, however, in multiple levels. First, the user mustextract the ﬁelds in a new class and then perform a series of “MoveMethod” refactorings. This adds to the required human effort toapply the refactoring. Therefore, we propose our own applicationalgorithm so that the refactoring can be applied in a single step. Fur-thermore, Eclipse does not have the ability to automatically identifyExtract Class refactoring opportunities. As a result the proposedapproach provides a more adequate support for all the steps of theExtract Class refactoring process (identiﬁcation, behavior preserva-tion, assessment of impact to the quality, application) This makesthe proposed tool and methodology a more efﬁcient way to performsuch a refactoring.4. EvaluationIn this section, we present the results of our evaluation for theproposed technique. We performed three types of evaluations:1. For the ﬁrst type, we asked the designers of three systems tomanually identify extractable concepts and used their ﬁndings asthe ground truth. We then extracted the precision and the recallof our approach (based only on structural measures as the dis-tance metric for the clustering) and two alternative approaches(based only on semantic measures and on a combination of M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 22602251Fig. 6. Changes introduced in class Person.Fig. 7. The code of class TelephoneNumber.semantic and structural measures). In this experiment, we hadtwo objectives. The ﬁrst one was to see if our methodology canactually identify new concepts which were improperly embed-ded in another class. The second was to investigate the effect ofsemantic metrics on the results of the identiﬁcation process ofour methodology.2. In the second type, we applied a series of Extract Class refac-torings as suggested by our tool to a well-known open-sourceproject and consulted with an expert quality assessor. In thisexperiment, we were interested to know if the suggested refac-torings would actually be applied by the developer and toconﬁrm that they have a positive impact on the understandabil-ity of the code and the design quality of the system once they areapplied.3. In the third type, we compared the progression of the EntityPlacement metric, after the sequential application of the refac-torings in the second experiment, with the progression oftraditional cohesion and coupling metrics. In this experiment,we wanted to evaluate the ability of the Entity Placement met-ric to quantify the impact of the performed refactorings on thedesign quality of the system.4.1. Evaluation of precision and recallFor the ﬁrst part of the evaluation, we asked from independentevaluators to manually identify concepts on software systems thatwere developed by each one of them individually. Each evaluatorhad knowledge only of her or his own system and was unaware ofour methodology. The concepts identiﬁed by the independent eval-uators were considered as a set of True Occurrences (TO), allowingthe extraction of the precision and recall of our approach.The three evaluators that participated in this experiment aregraduate students (two MSc students and one PhD candidate). Allthree students’ primary research ﬁeld is Software Engineering andthey have signiﬁcant experience in object-oriented design (rangingfrom 6 to 12 years). The analyzed projects were developed in thecontext of their research conducted in the Service Systems ResearchGroup in the Department of Computing Science at the Universityof Alberta. The students were unaware of the proposed techniquein order to guarantee that there will be no bias in their judgment. 2252M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 2260Table 2Statistical information for examined systems.Project CLRServerPack TPMSim CoverFlowNumber of classes 33 161 103Total number of methods(static)242 (27) 1000 (57) 312 (3)Total number of attributes(static)78 (35) 542 (122) 183 (9)Source lines of code 4652 12,631 3414Number of classessuggested to berefactored6 35 7Average source lines ofcode per class141 78 33Average number ofsuggestions per class5.66 2.74 2.14Running time of the tool(ms)48417631076
The ﬁrst project called CLRServerPack is a an API for a potential col-laborative PDF annotating client (including a client) and it mainlymanages the data storage in and retrieval from a database. It hasbeen developed for 8 months and it is in a mature level. The sec-ond project named TPMSim is a framework for simulating servicesaware software and also contains a simulation engine built on thatframework. It has been developed for 4 years of which the ﬁrst twowere the most active. The third project called TAPorWithCoverFlowis a web-based text analysis environment with integrates some textanalysis web-services. It has been developed for 6 months and isstill under development. Some statistical information for the threesystems is presented in Table 2.The results for this part are presented in three ways:1. Individual calculation of precision and recall for each examinedclass in order to assess the accuracy of the tool for each specialcase (i.e. examined class). For the calculation of precision andrecall, we need the following deﬁnitions:•True Positive (TP): a concept identiﬁed by the independentexpert and also by the proposed technique.•False Positive (FP): a concept identiﬁed by the proposed tech-nique, but not by the independent expert.•False Negative (FN): a concept identiﬁed by the independentexpert, but not by the proposed technique.TP, FP and FN are calculated at a coarse-grained level, mean-ing that the concepts identiﬁed by the proposed technique andby the independent evaluator should exactly match, in terms oftheir methods and attributes.2. We report the ratio of failed cases, calculated by (4), out of thetotal number of examined classes, where a failure is deﬁned asa case where only one of the evaluator or the tool identiﬁedat least one an extractable concept for the examined class, butnot the other. Practically, this means that either the tool or theevaluator identiﬁed a class as being problematic, but not both.Obviously, for this reason, either the precision or the recall can-not be calculated. In the particular cases where the tool identiﬁeda class as being problematic but the developers did not, thedesigners claimed that they were reluctant to decompose theseclasses. According to them, this was because these classes weredesigned to capture real-world objects. This was evident by thenature of the systems as they required to deﬁne network enti-ties (like endpoints and servers in TPMSim) or describe entitiesthat correspond to tables of relational databases (as in the caseof CLRServerPack and CoverFlow).3. As a successful case, we consider the case where the tool was ableto identify a problematic class, a fact that was also conﬁrmed bythe developer. For the successful cases, we calculated the accu-racy of the tool (in terms of precision and recall) in identifyingthe exact problems of the examined class (in terms of extractableconcepts).FailureRate =#failures#total examined classes(4)As it can be observed from Table 2, the ﬁrst and the third projectsare small sized (with respect to lines of code), while the second oneis medium sized. Furthermore, the third project has a large degreeof modularization (33 lines per class) which justiﬁes the low aver-age number of refactoring suggestions per class. On the contrarythe ﬁrst project demonstrates a larger number of suggestions perclass as it is evident by the comparatively smaller degree of modu-larization (141 lines per class). Finally, the second project shows amedium level of modularization, but we identiﬁed a relatively smallnumber of suggestions per class. The selected projects cover a widespectrum of design decisions with respect to modularization, a factfacilitates the generalization of our ﬁndings.The analysis of these projects has been restricted to a selectednumber of classes presenting at least one possible extractable con-cept (according to the ﬁndings of the proposed tool), since theevaluation of the entire project would have been prohibitive withrespect to time and effort by the evaluators.4.1.1. Using structural measures as distance metricThe primary goal of this part of the experiment is to assess theability of the proposed approach to match the concepts identiﬁedby human expertise to a large extent. A secondary goal is to quan-tify the difﬁculty of manually identifying Extract Class refactoringopportunities and applying the appropriate refactoring in termsof consumed time. For each identiﬁed concept the evaluators hadto provide the entities that the concept comprise. The task of theauthors was to record the ﬁndings of the evaluators and the timethat took them to identify all concepts for a speciﬁc class.As it can be observed from Tables 3–5, the tool had a FailureRateof 33.33% for CLRServerPack, 27.8% for TPMSim and 14.29% for Cov-erFlow. For the successful cases, the tool had a precision of 77.1%,Table 3Evaluation results on CLRServerPack with structural measures.Class Concepts Ident. time (m:s) TO #Concepts
by toolTP FN FP Precision (%) Recall (%) Failure1. AnnotationDatabase FindUpdate + delete 2:15 3 3 3 0 0 100 1002. PrivacyManagement.NotiﬁcationsNot found 1:20 0 1 0 0 1 0 N/A3. PersonsManagement Add Authenticate 0:28 2 2 2 0 0 100 1004. DatabaseController Management Add 1:05 2 1 1 1 0 100 505. User Not found 0:57 0 2 0 0 2 0 N/A6. BibTex Title + abstract 0:48 1 12 1 0 11 8.33 100Average 77.1 87.5Failure rate33.3 M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 22602253Table 4Evaluation results on TPMSim with structural measures.Class Concepts Ident. time (m:s) TO #Concepts bytoolTP FN FP Precision (%) Recall (%) Failure1. DocumentRange Range + document + source 1:05 1 1 1 0 0 100 1002. DocumentModiﬁerModiﬁed
 + document Log 1:49 2 2 2 0 0 100 1003. Clock Pause + resume 2:00 1 3 1 0 2 33.33 1004. JobTracker Endpoint + result 2:58 1 2 1 0 1 50 1005. Resource Not found 2:59 0 1 0 0 1 0 N/A6. Dashboard Generate + chart 2:49 1 1 0 1 1 0 07. NetworkedTPMJob
 + server5:21
 12 1 0 1 50 1008. NetworkedEndPointNot
 found 5:11 0 3 0 0 3 0 N/A9. SimPlayer Graph + series Pie + chart 2:41 2 2 2 0 0 100 10010. Network Not found 6:21 0 1 0 0 1 0 N/A11. Data Data + remaining 2:11 1 1 1 0 0 100 10012. NetworkedDepot Not found 2:36 0 1 0 0 1 0 N/A13. DatabaseConnect2:00
 1310233.33
 10014. SimulationBuilder XML + parse Object 3:52 2 8 0 2 8 0 015. TPMSimulatorTable
 + database 3:10 1 2 1 0 1 50 10016. NetworkedCDSM Not found 1:31 0 3 0 0 3 0 N/A17. MetricsListener1:08
 12 1 0 1 50 10018. PlaybackControl Slider 0:38 1 3 1 0 2 33.33 100Average 53.8 84.6Failure rate 27.8Table 5Evaluation results on CoverFlow with structural measures.Class Concepts Ident. time (m:s) TO #Concepts by tool TP FN FP Precision (%) Recall (%) Failure1. File Result 1:04 1 2 1 0 1 50 1002. Result Change Content 0:43 2 5 1 1 4 20 503. DocumentChange0:33
 11 1 0 0 100 1004. AbstractListWordsForm RadioCombo + box 1:13 2 1 1 1 0 100 505. AbstractDateFinderFormDate
 Display 0:41 2 1 1 1 0 100 506. ResultsPanel Catalog 0:58 1 2 1 0 1 50 1007. CatalogController Not found 0:57 0 1 0 0 1 0 N/AAverage 70 75Failure rate14.2953.8% and 70% in average for the three projects, respectively, andan average recall of 87.5%, 84.6% and 75%, respectively.Another interesting observation was that all three evaluatorswere able to identify completely disconnected components fromthe rest of the class. These components are usually the best candi-dates for extraction since they do not bare any dependency fromthe rest of the class. The evaluators identiﬁed such components byusing standard tools from Eclipse like the call hierarchy browserand the reference search feature.Finally, our methodology was able to identify concepts onlyby using dependency information. We observed that the sameconcepts were also identiﬁed by the evaluators based on con-ceptual criteria like similar names. An interesting example ofsuch a case is shown in Fig. A.1, where the extractable con-cept describes functionality about property changes. What is evenmore interesting about this example is that this particular con-cept is used in two more classes of the system, which means thatextracting it in a new class would increase the reusability of thecode.During the examination of the projects we observed a few inter-esting cases where the extraction of speciﬁc concepts not onlyimproved the understandability but also contributed to certainaspects of the design of the system. For example, there was a casethat our approach successfully grouped all the entities which wererelated with the functionality of the Subject role in an Observerpattern instance (Gamma et al., 1995). The grouped entities wereactually a ﬁeld holding the collection of Observers, two methodsplaying the role of attach and detach operations, as well as a methodplaying the role of notify operation (Gamma et al., 1995). This caseis illustrated in Fig. A.2.Another set of interesting examples includes cases where theapproach successfully managed to separate tangled concerns andresponsibilities. In the example shown in Fig. A.3, the evaluatorconﬁrmed that our tool accurately suggested that the concept con-cerning the connection to a database be separated from the oneabout constructing SQL queries. Moreover, in the example of Fig. A.4the tool proposed to separate some graphical components fromtheir controllers. This way we make clear the bounds that separatethe front-end of the application from its back-end.4.1.2. Using semantic measures as distance metricThe goal of this part of the experiment is to investigate the effectof semantic measures, if used only by themselves in the identiﬁ-cation process of our methodology. As the semantic measure, weuse the cosine distance between the term frequency vectors of twoentities (attributes or methods) eiand ejdeﬁned as:dist(ei, ej) = 1 −ei·ejei × ej(5)This measure extends the Conceptual Similarity between Meth-ods (CSM) by Marcus and Poshyvanyk (2005) in two ways. First,apart from methods, we also compare the conceptual similaritybetween attributes, since they also participate in the identiﬁcationprocess and, second, the term vectors also contain the frequency ofterm occurrence in an entity, in order to give additional weight torecurring terms.For an attribute, its term vector contains the term or termsthat comprise its name and words from its javadoc documentation(excluding tags). For a method, its term vector contains its name, 2254M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 2260Table 6Evaluation results on CLRServerPack with semantic measures.Class TO #Concepts by tool TP FN FP Precision (%) Recall (%) Failure1. AnnotationDatabase 3 2 2 1 0 100 66.72. PrivacyManagement. Notiﬁcations0300
 3 0 N/A3. PersonsManagement2
 4 2 0 2 50 1004. DatabaseController 2 6 1 1 5 16.7 505. User0
 6 0 0 6 0 N/A6. BibTex 1 16 1 0 15 6.25 100Average 43.2 79.2Failure rate33.3Table 7Evaluation results on TPMSim with semantic measures.ClassTO#Concepts
 by tool TP FN FP Precision (%) Recall (%) Failure1. DocumentRange 1 1 1 0 0 100 1002. DocumentModiﬁer 2 1 1 1 0 100 503. Clock 1 4 1 0 3 25 1004. JobTracker1
 3 1 0 2 33.3 1005. Resource 0 2 0 0 2 0 N/A6. Dashboard 1 1 1 0 0 100 1007. NetworkedTPM 1 2 1 0 1 50 1008. NetworkedEndPoint 0 4 0 0 4 0 N/A9. SimPlayer2101
 1 0 010. Network 0 4 0 0 4 0 N/A11. Data1
 0 0 1 0 N/A 012. NetworkedDepot 0 2 0 0 2 0 N/A13. Database 1 3 1 0 2 33.33 10014. SimulationBuilder 2 12 0 2 12 0 015. TPMSimulator 1 5 0 1 5 0 016. NetworkedCDSM03
 0 0 3 0 N/A17. Metrics 1 2 1 0 1 50 10018. PlaybackControl 1 1 1 0 0 100 100Average 46.5 62.5Failure rate 33.3Table 8Evaluation results on CoverFlow with semantic measures.ClassTO#Concepts
 by toolTPFN
 FP Precision (%) Recall (%) Failure1. File 1 2 1 0 1 50 1002. Result 2 5 1 1 4 20 503. Document 1 1 1 0 0 100 1004. AbstractListWords2
 0 0 2 0 N/A 05. AbstractDateFinder 2 1 1 1 0 100 506. ResultsPanel 1 0 0 1 0 N/A 07. CatalogController 0 1 0 0 1 0 N/AAverage43.8 75Failure rate 42.9the identiﬁers of its parameters, accessed ﬁelds and declared oraccessed local variables in its body, the names of the invoked meth-ods and words from its javadoc documentation (excluding tags). Incase of complex identiﬁers (i.e. identiﬁers that consist of multiplewords) in the form of camel case strings (e.g. “aLocalVariable”) orwords separated by underscores (e.g. “A STATIC FIELD”), ﬁrst, theyneed to be split in simple terms which are then stemmed. Finally,we exclude from the term vectors stop words, such as prepositionsand articles.As it can be observed from Tables 6–8, our approach usingsemantic measures had a FailureRate of 33.33% for CLRServerPack,33.3% for TPMSim and 42.9% for CoverFlow. For the successful cases,it had a precision of 43.2%, 46.5% and 43.8% in average for the threeprojects, respectively, and an average recall of 79.2%, 62.5% and 75%,respectively.4.1.3. Comparison between structural and semantic measuresTable 9 provides an overview of the accuracy achieved by thetwo considered distance metrics and a combination of them withrespect to precision, recall and failure rate. As it can be seen,structural measures clearly outperform the semantic in all threemeasurements. An interesting observation is that the precision ofthe tool is negatively affected to greater extent than recall andTable 9Comparison between structural and semantic measures.CLRServerPack TPMSim CoverFlowPrecision (%)Structural77.1
 53.9 70.0Semantic 43.2 46.5 43.8Combined 42.7 31.5 43.8Recall (%)Structural 87.5 84.6 75.0Semantic79.2
 62.5 75.0Combined 79.2 50.0 75.0Failure rate (%)Structural33.3
 27.8 14.3Semantic 33.3 33.3 42.9Combined33.3
 33.3 42.9 M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 22602255failure rate, when semantic measures are employed, since theyresult in more extractable concepts. The reason is that the struc-tural measures, as we have deﬁned them, take into account notonly dependencies within the examined class but also dependen-cies with entities from other classes as well. Practically, this meansthat two entities are similar not only if one depends on the other,but also if they depend on the same other entities. On the otherhand, textual similarity can only be calculated between a pair ofentities and is not affected by dependencies to third entities.Within the context of this experiment and the examinedprojects, we can observe that dependency information is sufﬁcientto ﬁnd cooperating entities that contribute to a common task. Onthe other hand, there are some cases that semantic measures grouptogether entities using or having similar identiﬁers, but not con-tributing to the same task. For example, as we can see in Fig. A.5,in class SimPlayer from project TPMSim, the designer identiﬁedtwo concepts: one responsible for drawing graphs and another oneresponsible for drawing charts. However, both methods generate-Charts() and generateGraph() frequently refer to terms such as chart,plot and generate and as a result, the semantic measures merged thetwo concepts into one.Apart from the pure use of structural or semantic measures, wealso tried a combination of them giving both measures equal impor-tance (i.e. 0.5 weight). As it can be seen from the table, the resultswere worse than when the two measures were used individually.As we studied the results, we realized that this is because one dis-tance metric interfered with the results of the other. This producedextractable concepts augmented by unnecessary entities or mergedwith other concepts and as a result they did not match the conceptsidentiﬁed by the evaluators.This part of the evaluation showed that structural measures arenot only necessary to identify extractable concepts but also suf-ﬁcient. This is because naming of identiﬁers is a critical task (asalso discussed by Marcus and Poshyvanyk (2005)). Naming is asubjective manual task and thus prone to errors. The designer ofa system chooses suitable (to his/her best judgment) names forentities at the moment they enter the system. This means that dueto further development and/or software degradation, names mayTable 10Statistical information for JHotDraw 5.3.Number of classes 249Number of methods (static) 2254 (78)Number of attributes (static) 489 (109)Source lines of code14,611
Number of classes suggested to be refactored 32Number of suggestions per class 2.5Running time of the tool (ms) 2824become deprecated and may need to change. On the other hand,dependency information clearly and at all times shows the pur-pose of a group of entities with respect to the system’s functionality(assuming that the system operates as desired).4.2. Expert assessmentThe second part of the evaluation was performed on the JHot-Draw system (version 5.3), which is a very well-known open-sourcesystem with complete and extensive documentation. Some statis-tical information for this system is presented in Table 10. We usedour tool to identify refactoring opportunities for the initial versionof the system. Next, for the class that was ranked as top (basedon the sorting mechanism described in Section 3.2) we examinedall suggested extractable concepts for that particular class andselected the most meaningful one to be refactored. After the appli-cation of each refactoring, this process was repeated on the newresulting version of the system. Eventually, we applied 16 of thesuggested refactorings and contacted a professional in the busi-ness of software quality assessment, to provide his expert opinion.The professional had three years of experience in evaluating thesoftware quality of industrial systems in the context of the ser-vices offered by an organization active in the domain of softwarequality assurance and certiﬁcation (Deursen et al., 2003; Kuipersand Visser, 2004). The evaluator was asked to answer the followingthree questions for each applied refactoring.Table 11Evaluation results on JHotDraw 5.3.No. Name of class Extracted entities Q1 Q2 Q31. util.UndoManager redoStack, pushRedo(), isRedoable(), peekRedo(), getRedoSize(),popRedo()Yes Yes No2. applet.DrawApplet fSimpleUpdate, fUpdateButton, createButton(),setSimpleDisplayUpdate(), setBufferedDisplayUpdate()Yes Yes Yes3. samples.net.NodeFigure fConnectors, connectors(), createConnectors(), ﬁndConnector(),initialize()No No No4. applet.DrawApplet fSleeper, startSleeper(), stopSleeper() No No No5. ﬁgures.TextFigure fWidth, fHeight, fSizeIsDirty, textExtent(), markDirty() Yes Yes Yes6. contrib.DragNDropTool dragSource, fDragGestureRecognizers, createDragGestureRecognizer(),destroyDragGestureRecognizer()Yes No No7. applet.DrawApplet fFrameColor, fFilleColor, fTextColor, fArrowChoice, fFontChoice,createAttributeChoices(), createColorChoice(), setupAttributes(),createFontChoice()Yes Yes Yes8. util.StorableInput fMap, map(), retrieve(), readStorable() Yes No No9. util.FloatingTextField fContainer, createOverlay(), endOverlay() Yes Yes Yes10. util.StorableOutput fMap, mapped(), map() Yes No No11. util.StorableOutput fIndent, incrementIndent(), decrementIndent() Yes Yes Yes12.ﬁgures.InsertImageCommand.
 UndoActivity myAffectedImageFigure, myAffectedImageName, setImageFigure(),getImageFigure()Yes Yes Yes13. standard.StandardDrawingView fBackgrounds, fForegrounds, addBackground(), removeBackground(),addForeground(), removeForeground()Yes No Yes14. util.Iconkit fMap, loadImage(), basicGetImage() Yes Yes Yes15.application.DrawApplication
 createEditMenu(), createColorMenu(), createArrowMenu(),createFontMenu(), createAlignmentMenu(), createFontStyleMenu(),createFontSizeMenu(), createDebugMenu()No Yes Yes16. applet.DrawApplet fDrawing, initDrawing(), loadDrawing(), readFromStorableInput(),readFromObjectInput()No No No 2256M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 2260Fig. 8. The two methods, popRedo (suggested to be extracted) and popUndo, arealmost identical.1 Q1: Does the extracted class describe a new entity?2 Q2: Would you actually perform this refactoring, if a tool sug-gested it?3 Q3: Does it improve the understandability of the code?Table 11 summarizes the expert assessment for the 16 refac-torings applied on JHotDraw 5.3. In 12 of the total 16 cases (75%),the evaluator conﬁrmed that the classes suggested to be extracteddescribe a separate concept or entity. An interesting point here wasthat the expert identiﬁed, on top of the 13 cases, two more classesthat could be used as utility or helper classes (cases 15 and 16).Although, they do not actually describe a new concept they can stillbe extracted as new classes. In 9 of the 16 cases (56.25%), the expertagreed that he would perform the refactoring if it was suggestedby a tool. Interestingly, in 3 cases he claimed that he would nothave been able to identify the refactoring opportunities manually,mainly due to the fact that the dependencies between the extractedclass members were not easy to identify by manual inspection. In9 out of 16 cases, the expert notes that the performed refactoringshave a positive impact on the understandability of the system.During the evaluation, we discovered a few by-productsof the method. In some cases, the code suggested to beextracted was duplicated in the same or other classes. Forexample, the class UndoManager contains “undo” and “redo”functionality. The code for both activities is exactly thesame. Fig. 8 illustrates this example. The tool suggests twoextractable concepts: one for the undo and one for the redoactivity. A better approach would be to extract one of them in a new class and replace both instances of the duplicatedcode with references to the extracted class. This type of dupli-cation detection is outside the scope of this tool at this point,but we are considering it as a potential extension. The proposedchanges can be manipulated further by the user to achieve bet-ter results. In another interesting case, the extracted code wastotally disconnected from the rest of the class and was not usedanywhere else, indicating possibly dead code that needs to beremoved.Interestingly, we noticed that for a speciﬁc class (DrawApplet)there were more than one refactorings accepted by the evaluator.Indeed, this class seems to be a problematic one as it has 42 meth-ods. The expert’s opinion on the three refactorings was: “Overall, thethree refactorings have helped in reducing the complexity and improv-ing the readability of the DrawApplet class. After these refactorings areapplied, it is easier to start improving the code by (for example) alsoremoving the circular dependencies on the DrawingViewHandle class.Fig. 9. Evolution of metrics when applying successive refactorings on JHotDraw 5.3.Although not all refactorings are perfect, they are very valuable in start-ing up the refactoring of the complete class. The remaining work cannow be done by a novice developer, something which was not possiblewith the original DrawApplet class”.4.3. Metrics comparison for JHotDraw 5.3In this part of the evaluation, we measure the impact of the16 performed refactorings on JHotDraw 5.3 in terms of couplingand cohesion using the message-passing coupling (MPC) (Li andHenry, 1993) metric and the Connectivity (Briand et al., 1998) met-ric respectively. The values of these metrics were then comparedto Entity Placement, which is a metric based on Jaccard distancethat captures both cohesion and coupling (as already described inSection 3.2).The MPC for a class C is deﬁned as the number of invocationsof methods not implemented in class C by the methods of class C.Connectivity for a class C is deﬁned as the number of method pairsof class C where one method invokes the other or both access a M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 22602257Table 12Correlation between Entity Placement and MPC and Connectivity.EP-Conn EP-MPC−0.99356 0.88702common attribute of class C, over the total number of method pairsof class C.Although the aforementioned metrics capture the same designquality characteristics as the Entity Placement metric, namely cou-pling and cohesion, they have major differences in their deﬁnitions.Firstly, the MPC metric is based on an absolute count of messagesand it is not normalized over a range of minimum and maximumvalues. On the other hand, Entity Placement is calculated based ondistances which are normalized by deﬁnition and furthermore, itdoes not use absolute counts of dependencies since it is employingthe notion of sets. Secondly, the Connectivity metric has a dis-crete binary nature: it considers two methods as either cohesive ornot cohesive. On the contrary, Entity Placement has a continuous(within a range) nature, since it captures the degree of similar-ity between a method and the class it belongs to. Due to thesedifferences, it is not naturally expected for these metrics to becorrelated.Our motivation behind the selection of the MPC metric is thatit captures coupling at a more ﬁne-grained level (method interac-tions) in contrast to other metrics such as CBO (Coupling BetweenObjects) and Coupling Factor that capture coupling at the class level.Moreover, Connectivity was chosen because it considers two meth-ods as cohesive not only if they access common attributes but alsoif they invoke each other in contrast to traditional cohesion metricssuch as LCOM (Lack of Cohesion Of Methods).Fig. 9 presents the progression of the Entity Placement met-ric, MPC (coupling) and Connectivity (cohesion). The x-axis in eachchart corresponds to the refactored versions of JHotDraw 5.3. Theﬁrst value on each chart represents the value of the respective met-ric on the initial system. All metrics have been calculated at thesystem level. To improve the design quality of a system, the goal isto reduce the coupling and the Entity Placement value and increasethe cohesion of the system.From the charts, it can be seen that all three metrics follow thetrends expected assuming that overall quality of the system wasimproved. However, for coupling, a few unexpected values can beobserved. As far as MPC is concerned, there are two possible sit-uations. First, entities which still bear some dependencies withthe rest of the source class might be suggested for extraction. Inthis case, the coupling is expected to increase (cases 1 and 2). Sec-ond, entities that are completely disconnected from the rest of thesource class may be extracted. In this case, the coupling will stay thesame, but because the number of classes will increase the averagecoupling of the system will decrease.We compared the two metrics with the Entity Placementmetric in terms of correlation (Table 12). A strong negativecorrelation between Entity Placement and connectivity and astrong positive correlation between Entity Placement and MPCwere observed. Thus, it can be argued that the Entity Place-ment metric is sufﬁcient to evaluate the effect of Extract Classrefactorings.4.4. Threats to validity4.4.1. Threats to internal validityA threat to the internal validity of our study is related to theknowledge and expertise of the human evaluators on the exam-ined systems. Inadequate knowledge could lead to limited abilityto distinguish the existing concepts within a class and to assess theimpact of the suggested refactorings on the maintainability andunderstandability of the systems. This threat has been partiallymitigated by selecting evaluators who were the actual develop-ers of the examined systems in the evaluation of precision andrecall (Section 4.1) and by selecting an experienced professionalon software quality assessment to provide his expert opinion ona very well-known and well-documented project (JHotDraw) inSection 4.2.4.4.2. Threats to external validitySince the experiments have been conducted employing a limitednumber of evaluators and a limited number of projects, our studylacks the ability of generalizing its ﬁndings beyond the selectedexperimental setup. This threat was partially alleviated by con-ducting two different types of experiments. In the ﬁrst type, theevaluators were asked to manually identify extractable conceptswithout neither having knowledge of our methodology nor hav-ing the assistance of our tool. Next, we compared their ﬁndingswith the tool’s suggestions in order to extract the precision andrecall of our approach. This allowed us to assess the ability ofour approach to conform with human expertise. In the secondtype, we provided the evaluator, who is a professional in soft-ware quality assessment, with a set of already applied refactoringsand ask him to provide his expert opinion on whether the newlycreated classes constituted meaningful and valid concepts and ifthe applied refactorings improved the understandability of thecode. The purpose of this experiment was to assess the concep-tually integrity of the refactoring suggestions produced by ourapproach.These two different types of experiments covered all essen-tial aspects of the refactoring process, which are adherence tohuman decisions, improvement of design quality and code under-standability, satisfaction of human intuition on what a meaningfulconcept is.5. Conclusions and future workIn this work, we proposed a novel method to improve thedesign quality of an object-oriented system by applying ExtractClass refactorings. To identify the refactoring opportunities, a hier-archical agglomerative clustering algorithm was used based on theJaccard distance between class members, because of the abilityof clustering algorithms to identify conceptually related groups ofentities. The resulted suggestions are ranked according to the EntityPlacement metric. The mechanics of the Extract Class refactoringwas also described so that it preserves the system’s behavior andits syntactical correctness.We implemented our method as an extension for the JDeodorantEclipse plugin. The tool shows the developer the candidate entitiesfor extraction by highlighting them in the Java editor and illustratesthe changes that will be performed using a Preview Wizard. The useof the tool comprises simple steps and the interface design followsthe conventions of Eclipse, which should make it intuitive enoughto most developers. The input required is minimal, which makesthe tool suitable to novice developers as well.We evaluated the proposed methodology on various systemsin terms of precision and recall (using structural, semantic and acombination of these measures as a distance metric), assessmentby an expert and metrics. Through this process, we demonstratedthat our method can produce meaningful and conceptually correctsuggestions and extract classes that developers would recognize asmeaningful concepts. We also showed that structural metrics (suchas dependency between class members) are a necessary and sufﬁ-cient criterion for the identiﬁcation of extractable concepts from a 2258M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 2260class. Furthermore, the expert conﬁrmed that a good percentage ofthe proposed refactorings were good solutions that also improvedthe understandability of the code. Finally, we demonstrated that thesuggested refactorings improve the design of the system in termsof coupling and cohesion and that the Entity Placement is a goodmetric for evaluating the impact of the performed refactorings tothe design of the system.In the future, we would like to explore the possibility of reﬁn-ing our refactoring identiﬁcation method. In some cases, as itwas seen in the evaluation process, the suggestions could havebeen better and more complete if the clustering algorithm wascombined with other methods, like code duplication detectiontechniques. This would enable the method to identify identicalor similar extractable concepts even across classes and suggest aglobal solution to improve the design of more than one class atonce. Finally, we also plan to improve the interface of the tool withvisualizations to increase the awareness of the developer of theproposed change and its impact to the system. At the moment, themethodology is a black box to the user. We would like to changethat by visualizing the classes as graphs where the distances andthe members suggested to be extracted will be shown, so thatthe user can better understand why each extractable concept issuggested.AcknowledgementsThe authors wish to acknowledge the generous support ofNSERC, iCORE and IBM. The authors would also like to thank theSoftware Improvement Group, and more speciﬁcally Eric Bouwersand Yiannis Kanellopoulos, for their participation in the evaluationprocess.Appendix A.Fig. A.1. Extraction of property change concept.Fig. A.2. The Subject role of an Observer pattern as identiﬁed by the tool.Fig. A.3. Separating the database connection task from the query construction taskas identiﬁed by the tool. M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 22602259Fig. A.4. Separating view from control as suggested by the tool.Fig. A.5. Semantic measures erroneously grouping together two different tasks dueto the common use of terms chart, plot and generate.ReferencesAnquetil, N., Lethbridge, T., 1999. Experiments with clustering as a software remod-ularization method. In: 6th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering.Bavota, G., De Lucia, A., Marcus, A., Oliveto, R.,2010. A two-step techniquefor extract class refactoring. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/ACM InternationalConference on Automated Software Engineering. ACM, New York, NY, USA,pp. 151–154.Bavota, G., Oliveto, R., De Lucia, A., Antoniol, G., Guéhéneuc, Y.G., 2010. Playing withrefactoring: identifying extract class opportunities through game theory. In:Early Research Achievement Track of the 26th IEEE International Conferenceon Software Maintenance (ICSM’2010), Timisoara, Romania.Bavota, G., De Lucia, A., Oliveto, R., 2011. Identifying extract class refactoring oppor-tunities using structural and semantic cohesion measures. Journal of Systemsand Software 84, 397–414.Briand, L.C., Daly, J.W., Wüster, J., 1998. A uniﬁed framework for cohesionmeasurement in object-oriented systems. Empirical Software Engineering 3,65–117.Chatzigeorgiou, A., 2003. Mathematical assessment of object-oriented design qual-ity. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 29, 1050–1053.Chatzigeorgiou, A., Xanthos, S., Stephanides, G.,2004. Evaluating object-orienteddesigns with link analysis. In: Proceedings of the 26th International Confer-ence on Software Engineering. IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA,pp. 656–665.Cormen, T.H., Leiserson, C.E., Rivest, R.L., Stein, C., 2001. Introduction to Algorithms.The MIT Press, New York.Daskalakis, C., Goldberg, P.W., Papadimitriou, C.H., 2009. The complexity of comput-ing a Nash equilibrium. Communications of the ACM 52, 89–97.De Lucia, A., Oliveto, R., Vorraro, L., 2008. Using structural and semantic metricsto improve class cohesion. In: 24th IEEE International Conference on SoftwareMaintenance, Beijing, China.Demeyer, S., Ducasse, S., Nierstrasz, O.M., 2002. Object-oriented Reengineering Pat-terns. Morgan Kaufman Publishers.van Deursen, A., Kuipers, T., 1999. Identifying objects using cluster and conceptanalysis. In: 21st International Conference Software Engineering, pp. 246–255.Deursen, A.v., Kuipers, T.,2003. Source-based software risk assessment. In: ICSM’03:Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Maintenance. IEEEComputer Society.Doval, D., Mancoridis, S., Mitchell, B.S., 1999. Automatic clustering of software sys-tems using a genetic algorithm. In: 5th International Conference on SoftwareTools and Engineering Practice, Pittsburgh, PA.DuBois, B., Demeyer, S., Verelst, J.,2004. Refactoring –improving
 coupling and cohe-sion of existing code. In: 11th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering. DelftUniversity of Technology, The Netherlands, pp. 144–151.Ester, M., Kriegel, H.P., Sander, J., Xu, X., 1996. A density-based algorithm for discov-ering clusters in large spatial database with noise. In: International Conferenceon Knowledge Discovery in Databases and Data Mining, Portland, OR.Fokaefs, M., Tsantalis, N., Stroulia, E., Chatzigeorgiou, A., 2009. Decomposing object-oriented class modules using an agglomerative clustering technique. In: 25thIEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance (ICSM’2009), Edmon-ton, AB, Canada.Fokaefs, M., Tsantalis, N., Stroulia, E., Chatzigeorgiou, A., 2011. JDeodorant: identiﬁ-cation and application of extract class refactorings. In: Proceedings of the 33rdInternational Conference on Software Engineering.Fowler, M., Beck, K., Brant, J., Opdyke, W., Roberts, D., 1999. Refactoring Improvingthe Design of Existing Code. Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA.Gamma, E., Helm, R., Johnson, R., Vlissides, J., 1995. Design Patterns: Elements ofReusable Object-oriented Software. Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA.Holzrichter, M., Oliveira, S., 1999. A graph based method for generating the Fiedlervector of irregular problems. In: IPPS/SPDP Workshops.Jolliffe, I., 1986. Principal Component Analysis. Springer Verlag.Joshi, P., Joshi, R.K., 2009. Concept analysis for class cohesion. In: 13th European Con-ference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering, Kaiserslautern, Germany,pp. 237–240.Khomh, F., Vaucher, S., Guéhéneuc, Y.G., Sahraoui, H., 2009. A Bayesian approach forthe detection of code and design smells. In: Proceedings of the 2009 Ninth Inter-national Conference on Quality Software, Washington, DC, USA. IEEE ComputerSociety, pp. 305–314.Kuipers, T., Visser, J.,2004. A tool-based methodology for software portfo-lio monitoring. In: Software Audit and Metrics, Proceedings of the 1stInternational Workshop on Software Audit and Metrics. INSTICC Press,pp. 118–128.Li, W., Henry, S., 1993. Object-oriented metrics that predict maintainability. Journalof Systems and Software 23, 111–122.Maletic, J.I., Marcus, A.,2001. Supporting program comprehension using semanticand structural information. In: Proceedings of the 23rd International Confer-ence on Software Engineering. IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA,pp. 103–112.Mancoridis, S., Mitchell, B.S., Rorres, C., Chen, Y., Gansner, E.R.,1998. Using automaticclustering to produce high-level system organizations of source code. In: 6thInternational Workshop on Program Comprehension. IEEE Computer SocietyPress, pp. 45–52.Marcus, A., Poshyvanyk, D.,2005. The conceptual cohesion of classes. In: Proceed-ings of the 21st IEEE International Conference on Software Maintenance. IEEEComputer Society, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 133–142. 2260M. Fokaefs et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2241– 2260Marinescu, R.,2004. Detection strategies: metrics-based rules for detecting designﬂaws. In: Proceedings of the 20th IEEE International Conference on SoftwareMaintenance. IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 350–359.Martin, R.C., 2003. Agile Software Development: Principles, Patterns and Practices.Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.Moha, N., Gueheneuc, Y.G., Duchien, L., Meur, A.F.L., 2010. Decor: a method forthe speciﬁcation and detection of code and design smells. IEEE Transactionson Software Engineering 36, 20–36.Munro, M.J.,2005. Product metrics for automatic identiﬁcation of “bad smell” designproblems in java source-code. In: Proceedings of the 11th IEEE InternationalSoftware Metrics Symposium. IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA, p.15.Opdyke, W.F., 1992. Refactoring object-oriented frameworks. Ph.D. Dissertation.Pontryagin, L., Arkhangel’skii, A., 1990. General Topology I: Basic Concepts and Con-structions, Dimension Theory. Springer, Heidelberg.Sartipi, K., Kontogiannis, K., 2001. Component clustering based on maximal associ-ation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Working Conference on Reverse Engineering,Stuttgart, Germany.Schäfer, M., Dolby, J., Sridharan, M., Torlak, E., Tip, F.,2010. Correct refactoringof concurrent java code. In: Proceedings of the 24th European Conferenceon Object-oriented Programming. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp.225–249.Shokoufandeh, A., Mancoridis, S., Denton, T., Maycock, M., 2005. Spectral and meta-heuristic algorithms for software clustering. Journal of Systems and Software77, 213–223.Simon, F., Steinbruckner, F., Lewrentz, C., 2001. Metrics based refactoring. In: 5thEuropean Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering, Lisbon,Portugal, pp. 30–38.Tahvildari, L., Kontogiannis, K., 2003. A metric-based approach to enhancedesign quality through meta-pattern transformations. In: 7th EuropeanConference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering, Benevento, Italy,pp. 183–192.Tan, P.N., Steinbach, M., Kumar, V., 2005. Introduction to Data Mining. Addison-Wesley.Tarjan, R.E., 1972. Depth-ﬁrst search and linear graph algorithms. SIAM Journal onComputing, 146–160.Trifu, A., Marinescu, R., 2005. Diagnosing design problems in object oriented systems.In: 12th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering.Tsantalis, N., Chatzigeorgiou, A., 2009. Identiﬁcation of move method refactoringopportunities. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 35, 347–367.Tzerpos, V., Holt, R.C., 1998. Software botryology: automatic clustering of softwaresystems. In: International Workshop on Large-scale Software Composition.Van Emden, E., Moonen, L.,2002. Java quality assurance by detecting codesmells. In: Proceedings of the Ninth Working Conference on ReverseEngineering (WCRE’02). IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA,pp. 97–106.Vaucher, S., Khomh, F., Moha, N., Gueheneuc, Y.G., 2009. Tracking design smells:lessons from a study of god classes. In: Working Conference on Reverse Engi-neering, pp. 145–154.Wiggerts, T.A., 1997. Using clustering algorithms in legacy systems remodulariza-tion. In: 4th Working Conference on Reverse Engineering.Xanthos, S., 2006. Clustering Object-oriented Software Systems using Spectral GraphPartitioning. ACM Student Research Competition.Zaidman, A., Demeyer, S., 2008. Automatic identiﬁcation of key classes in a soft-ware system using webmining techniques. Journal of Software Maintenanceand Evolution: Research and Practice 20, 387–417.Marios Fokaefs is a PhD candidate in the Department of Computing Science at theUniversity of Alberta, Greece. He received his BSc from the Department of AppliedInformatics at the University of Macedonia, Greece in 2008 and his MSc from theDepartment of Computing Science at the University of Alberta, Canada in 2010. Hisresearch interests include object-oriented and service-oriented design and mainte-nance. Hi is a member of the IEEE.Nikolaos Tsantalis received the BS, MS and PhD degrees in applied informatics fromthe University of Macedonia, Greece, in 2004, 2006 and 2010, respectively. He is cur-rently a Postdoctoral Fellow at the Department of Computing Science, University ofAlberta, Canada. His research interests include design pattern detection, identiﬁca-tion of refactoring opportunities, and design evolution analysis. He is a member ofthe IEEE and the IEEE Computer Society.Eleni Stroulia is a Professor and NSERC/iCORE Industrial Research Chair on ServiceSystems Management (w. support from IBM) with the Department of Comput-ing Science at the University of Alberta, Canada. She holds M.Sc. and Ph.D.degrees from Georgia Institute of Technology. Her research addresses industri-ally relevant software-engineering problems with automated methods, based onartiﬁcial-intelligence techniques. She is a member of ACM, and IEEE.Alexander Chatzigeorgiou is an assistant professor of software engineering in theDepartment of Applied Informatics at the University of Macedonia, Thessaloniki,Greece. He received the Diploma in electrical engineering and the PhD degree incomputer science from the Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece, in 1996and 2000, respectively. From 1997 to 1999, he was with Intracom, Greece, asa telecommunications software designer. His research interests include object-oriented design, software maintenance and evolution. He is a member of the IEEE.