 The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 2370Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u r n al homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssMulti-sprint planning and smooth replanning: An optimization modelMatteo Golfarelli,
 Stefano Rizzi, Elisa TurricchiaDEIS – University of Bologna, Viale Risorgimento 2, Bologna, Italya r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 13 June 2012Received in revised form 5 February 2013Accepted 6 April 2013Available online 23 April 2013Keywords:
Agile methodsScrum
Optimization modelsSoftware engineeringLinear programminga b s t r a c tMost agile methods divide a project into sprints (iterations), and include a sprint planning phase thatis critical to ensure the project success. Several factors impact on the optimality of a sprint plan, whichmakes the planning problem difﬁcult. In this paper we formalize the planning problem and propose anoptimization model that, given the estimates made by the project team and a set of development con-straints, produces a multi-sprint optimal plan that maximizes the business value perceived by users. Tocope with the inherent ﬂexibility and uncertainty of agile projects, our approach ensures that a base-line plan can be revised and re-optimized during project execution without disrupting it, which we callsmooth replanning. The planning problem is converted into a generalized assignment problem, given alinear programming formulation, and solved using the IBM ILOG CPLEX Optimizer. Our model is vali-dated on both real and synthetic projects. In particular, a case study on two real projects conﬁrms theeffectiveness of our approach; as to efﬁciency, for medium-sized problems an exact solution is found ina few minutes, while for large problems a heuristic solution that is less than 1% far from the exact one isreturned in a few seconds. Finally, some smooth replanning tests investigate the trade-off between planquality and stability.© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionAs empirical studies suggest, agility seems to be one of the mostpromising directions to overcome the problems of traditional soft-ware engineering approaches (Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2008). The basicprinciples stated in the Agile Manifesto by Beck et al. (2001) arefollowed by several agile methods, such as Scrum and eXtreme Pro-gramming (XP), that have been adopted by an increasing numberof companies aimed at making the software development processfaster and nimbler.The agile philosophy promotes incremental and iterative designand implementation (Larman and Basili, 2003). One of the mostpopular approaches in this direction is to describe the software interms of detailed user functionalities (user stories) and deliver, ateach iteration (sprint in the Scrum terminology), the set of userstories that maximizes the utility for the users and fulﬁlls a setof development constraints (Schwaber, 1995). Typical constraintsinclude limiting the duration of an iteration, respecting correla-tions among user stories (namely, couplings, where two or moreafﬁne stories should be delivered together, and precedences, whereone story should be delivered before another one is developed),and containing the non-delivery risk. Agile methods normally favorCorresponding author. Tel.: +39 051 2093542; fax: +39 051 2093540.E-mail addresses: matteo.golfarelli@unibo.it (M. Golfarelli),stefano.rizzi@unibo.it (S. Rizzi), elisa.turricchia2@unibo.it (E. Turricchia).“soft” constraints (i.e., constraints whose fulﬁllment is encouragedbut not forced) to improve the project ﬂexibility; however, it is rec-ognized that some “hard” forms of constraints must necessarily bepreserved (Cohn, 2004).Clearly, as in other iterative and incremental approaches, thesprint planning phase is critical to ensure the project success(Svahnberg et al., 2010). Based on the team awareness principle,user story prioritization and deﬁnition of sprint boundaries areobtained by sharing and averaging the estimates given by the differ-ent team members about story complexity, utility, and correlations.For example, advancing high-utility stories could lead to an earlysigniﬁcant result for users and encourage the team awareness; sim-ilarly, developing afﬁne user stories within the same sprint canincrease their perceived utility.Devising a baseline (i.e., predictive, produced before the projectstart) sprint plan has a crucial role in locking resources to the projectand committing due dates with customers (Herroelen and Leus,2004). However, an essential premise of agile approaches is that nodesign decision is carved into stone. New requirements may ariseduring the project, and the plan should be ﬂexible enough to accom-modate them. Besides, projects are subject to uncertainty; it maybe impossible for the project team to perfectly stick to the baselineplan for various reasons, such as underestimation of story com-plexity, unavailability of team members, or changing requirements,which may lead some sprints to fail, meaning that their resultscannot be delivered as expected (Beck, 1999). This gives sprintplanning an unstructured and evolutionary ﬂavor that classical0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2013.04.028 2358M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 2370project planning does not have, and requires the adoption of changemanagement policies (Cao and Ramesh, 2008).The effectiveness of a sprint planning phase mainly depends onthe accuracy of estimates, and on the capability of properly tak-ing several variables and interdependencies into account. Whilethe ﬁrst issue is mainly related to the team experience, the secondone can be formulated as an optimization problem whose complex-ity increases with the project size. Clearly, a non-optimal solutionto this problem leads to inefﬁciencies that easily turn into extra-costs and project delays. Though the commercial tools—such asMingle (ThoughtWorks Studios, 2011) and ScrumWorks (Collabnet,2011)—that support agile project management provide no supportto optimal sprint planning, a number of approaches in this directionhave been devised in the literature. A selection of relevant featuresof planning for iterative life-cycles has been proposed by Saliu andRuhe (2005); the slightly different set of features we adopt here isaimed at providing better insight into the planning model. A classi-ﬁcation of the most recent approaches according to these featuresis proposed in Table 1 (a more detailed discussion is included inSection 2).It appears that none of the models provides comprehensive cov-erage of the features. Most noticeably, there is partial support tochange management that has such a crucial role in agile projects.Managing change becomes critical in approaches that produce alook-ahead plan covering multiple iterations, because a signiﬁcantalteration of future iterations may create problems with resourceallocation and frustrate the users’ expectations. The only multi-iteration approach that gives some support to change is the oneby Greer and Ruhe (2004); however, a new plan is produced fromscratch after each iteration without any relationship with the pre-viously produced plan.To ﬁll this gap, in this paper we formalize the multi-sprint plan-ning problem by taking into account all the features of Table 1and propose an optimization model based on linear programming.Given the team estimates and a set of development constraintscommonly adopted in this methodological context, the proposedmodel produces a plan that maximizes the business value perceivedby users, thus relieving the team from the difﬁcult task of quicklyproducing an optimal plan. With reference to Table 1, the key fea-tures of our approach can be summarized as follows:Scope Ours is a multi-iteration approach that supports a singleco-located and cross-functional team during a medium-to long-term planning, in a look-ahead perspective.Hard constraints Precedences, that typically characterize thedevelopment process, are modeled as hard constraints.Besides, a story can be forced to be included into a givensprint.Soft constraints Consistently with the agile philosophy, couplingsare modeled as soft constraints by increasing the businessvalue perceived by users if two or more afﬁne stories aredeveloped in the same sprint.Risk We deal with the risk related to both uncertain and criticalstories: an uncertain story is one whose complexity canhardly be estimated, a critical story is one that has a strongimpact on the quality of the system being developed.Change management We called our way of managing plan evolu-tion in multi-iteration scenarios smooth replanning. Theidea is to allow a baseline plan to be revised and re-optimized, if necessary, during project execution withoutdisrupting it so as to protect the allocation of resourcesand preserve the milestones agreed with users.Planning We provide exact solutions to small and medium prob-lems and sub-optimal solutions (less than 1% worse thanthe optimal one) for more complex problems (e.g., prob-lems with 100 user stories) in a few seconds.We emphasize that the scope of our paper is limited to opti-mize the results of planning given the team estimates; managingthe complexity of the estimation phase itself is out of scope.Noticeably, our approach aims at preserving the key role playedby the team experience and knowledge in delivering an effectiveplan:•An optimal plan must be seen as an initial recommendation forthe team, and it can be manually adjusted. The “best” plan maybe one that also considers the personal experiences of the teammembers and some additional constraints that could not be for-mally modeled. For this reason, our model allows user stories tobe explicitly forced into sprints.•Some estimates cannot be reliably given when a plan is produced,because either requirements are not settled yet or there is notsufﬁcient information at that time. Our model copes with thisissue by distributing uncertain user stories as fairly as possibleamong the sprints.•Plans are meant to be interactively and ﬂexibly devised, used, andrevised by design teams across the whole project timeline. Oursmooth replanning enables the team to cope with the possiblefailure of a sprint (one or more user stories could not be deliveredas expected), with the emergence of new requirements (one ormore user stories are added), and with intrinsic changes in thedevelopment process (the development speed estimated mustbe adjusted).The optimization problem is formalized as a generalized assign-ment problem (Martello and Toth, 1990) and is solved using theILOG CPLEX Optimizer (IBM, 2011). To cope with the smoothreplanning problem, we provide an advanced optimization modelthat uses a minimum perturbation strategy (Alagoz and Azizoglu,2003) to ensure plan stability in case of changes.The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the relatedliterature, and Section 3 summarizes the key agile practices withparticular attention to Scrum and XP. Sections 4 and 5 formal-ize the baseline planning and the smooth replanning problems,respectively. Section 6 presents a set of tests on both synthetic andreal projects to prove efﬁciency and effectiveness of our approach.Finally, Section 7 draws the conclusions and sketches our futurework.2. Related literatureAgile principles gained increasing popularity over the lastdecade, and several approaches inspired by these principleshave been proposed from both practitioners and researchers(Abrahamsson et al., 2003). Dybå and Dingsøyr (2008) proposea systematic review and comparison of different agile methods,focusing on both organizational and technical features. They alsoemphasize the increasing penetration of Scrum and XP practices inindustries. The Scrum approach is deeply discussed by Schwaber(1995), who describes its key ideas and its life-cycle. A more prag-matic work is presented by Cohn (2004), who focuses on userstories and gives practical hints for estimating their complexity andutility.As to utility in particular, the literature proposes differentapproaches to estimate the value of software, but a common modelstill lacks. For instance, in the wide context of value-based softwareengineering, Rönkkö et al. (2009) propose a value-decompositionmatrix that combines three different software aspects (i.e., tech-nology, design, and artifact) with three different value components(i.e., intrinsic value, externalities, and option value). Each cell ofthe matrix contains a speciﬁc question that should aid the ana-lysts to correctly interpret the combination of different aspects. An M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 23702359Table 1Features of planning approaches for iterative life-cycles.Approach Scope Hard constr. Soft constr. Risk Change mgmt. PlanningGreer (2004) Multi-iter. Preced., coupling No Partial Partial HeuristicDenne (2004)Multi-iter.
 Preced. No Yes No GreedySaliu (2007) Single-iter. Preced., coupling No No Yes ExactLi (2010) Single-iter. Preced. No No Partial ExactSzoke (2011) Multi-iter. Preced., coupling No Yes No ExactValkenhoef (2011) Multi-iter. Preced. Coupling Yes No ExactOur approach Multi-iter. Preced., forced Coupling Yes Yes Exactalternative perspective is proposed by Yongtae and Gwangman(2004), who provide a model to express the software value withmonetary concepts, exploiting the relationship between technol-ogy and market factors. A comprehensive description of the existingutility concepts is provided by Khurum et al. (2012), who dis-tinguish four different viewpoints: ﬁnancial, customer, internalbusiness process, and innovation and learning. They propose a soft-ware value map (SVM) where each value perspective is decomposedinto its main components (and sub-components) that can be usedby analysts to develop a common understanding of value. More-over, they deﬁne a practical model, based on SVM, to obtain theﬁnal utility estimation, mainly summarized in 3 steps: (1) select-ing the scenario characterizing the speciﬁc project, (2) identifyingthe main pattern (i.e., set of value components) that best ﬁts theselected scenario, and (3) deﬁning a quantitative evaluation of thepattern by exploiting common components evaluations.As to tools for agile project management, a few solutions areavailable. AgileFant (Aalto University, 2011) offers a set of basicfunctionalities to monitor the progress of project iterations. Mingle(ThoughtWorks Studios, 2011) and ScrumWorks (Collabnet, 2011)provide a more complete set of agile parameters to deal with userstory risk, complexity, and utility. However, all these solutions lackin providing an automated solution to the sprint optimization prob-lem.In the broad context of project scheduling, the vast majority ofresearch efforts over the past several years have concentrated onthe development of exact or suboptimal procedures for the gen-eration of a workable baseline schedule assuming a deterministicenvironment. Several models and algorithms have been proposedin the literature to this end (a survey is given by Kolisch andPadman, 2001). When a team has to schedule multiple projects at atime, as it often happens, the problem becomes even more complexand requires ad hoc approaches, as stressed by Platje et al. (1994).For this case, de Boer (1998) distinguishes two planning levels. Theﬁrst level is known as rough-cut capacity planning and addressesthe planning problem in the medium term. The second level,called resource-constrained project scheduling, deals with the oper-ational (short-term) scheduling. In this two-level approach, alsoexplored by Gademann and Schutten (2005), a top-down decom-position of activities into large work packages is used to reducethe medium-term planning complexity. According to the classiﬁ-cations of project scheduling problems proposed by Herroelen et al.(1997) and Brucker et al. (1999), our planning problem can be cat-egorized as resource-constrained with renewable resources (i.e.,manpower) available on a period-by-period basis. As in the basicPERT/CPM model, ﬁnish-start precedences with zero time lag areconsidered and no preemption of activities is allowed. The objec-tive function we adopt is called a free completion measure, becauseits goal is not to minimize the project time-span, but rather tomaximize the business value perceived by users.In more recent years, the planning problem has gained increas-ing interest also for iterative and incremental methodologies.Denne and Cleland-Huang (2004) propose a software developmentstrategy based on ﬁnancial factors that can be applied in itera-tive contexts. An optimal sequence of requirements to deliver isgenerated by maximizing along time the net present value, i.e.,a combination of revenues, costs, and risks of each requirement.Two solution strategies are proposed: a greedy algorithm and alook-ahead approach. The ﬁrst one selects the next requirement todeliver by considering the requirements with no unfulﬁlled pre-cursors and maximum net present value; the second one extendsthe greedy approach by analyzing subsets of proﬁtable precedencesequences. A speciﬁc model for agile methods is described by Szoke(2011), who proposes a conceptual model for release schedulingand provides an optimization model aimed at assigning require-ments to the different iterations of a release by maximizing theoverall utility delivered and considering precedences and couplingconditions. Then, he describes a branch-and-bound algorithm tosolve the model incorporating risk management. Another work sit-uated in the agile context is the one by van Valkenhoef et al. (2011),that is mainly focused on managing risk and uncertainty in XPprojects. To this end, the authors estimate the team developmentspeed and consider multiple sets of user stories with decreasing rel-evance (“must have”, “should have”, “could have” sets); the goal isto assign each user story to the most proper set by maximizing theoverall utility of the sets and respecting precedences and couplingsbetween user stories. A branch-and-bound algorithm is used to ﬁndthe best solution. The limited number of sets they consider leadsto a coarse-grained plan that must be reﬁned to obtain an oper-ative schedule (e.g., by breaking sets according to budget boundsand splitting user stories into smaller tasks). In a previous workwe proposed an approach for baseline sprint planning in agile datawarehouse projects (Golfarelli et al., 2012). The underlying modelis simpler than the one we propose here (it does not include forcedstories and it models coupling in a less expressive way), besides thereplanning problem is not considered at all.In real cases the project environment can hardly be assumedto be deterministic because of the variety of unexpected eventsthat can occur and of the inherent imprecision of estimates, whichrequires policies for change management. While none of the above-mentioned works speciﬁcally deals with change management, anapproach in this direction is Evolve (Greer and Ruhe, 2004), that isaimed at iterative and incremental contexts. A release plan includesdifferent increments; at each stage, a set of requirements is allo-cated to the current and the future increments in such a way as toreturn the best trade-off between stakeholder priorities and devel-opment constraints (such as increment capacity, precedences, andcoupling conditions). The model is formalized as a multiple knap-sack problem and a genetic algorithm is used to solve it. To dealwith change, Evolve includes a partial strategy for re-planning:at each increment, new requirements and changes in prioritiesand/or constraints are allowed, and a new solution is generatedfrom scratch. In the context of Scrum planning, Li et al. (2010) give aknapsack formulation of an optimization model for single-iterationplanning that selects the requirements maximizing the proﬁt ofthe next iteration, coping with development requirements. Evo-lution is managed by allowing changes in parameters after eachiteration and coping with their impact on the model. A new solu-tion for next iteration is produced from scratch, by incorporatingchanges and additional stories. A more sophisticated approach is 2360M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 2370bi-objective planning (Saliu and Ruhe, 2007), in which the next iter-ation is planned considering the impact of new requirements orchanges on the existing system from either the business or thedevelopment perspective. A set of plans is generated, each reﬂect-ing a different importance of business and implementation aspects,then the optimal plan is chosen as the one that best satisﬁes a groupof interdependencies (called SD-couplings) between requirementsidentiﬁed through impact analysis.Though these approaches speciﬁcally address the issues relatedto plan uncertainty and replanning, none of them takes care ofpreventing the new plan from disrupting the previous one, thatis one of the contributions of this work. To ﬁnd some contributionsin this direction we must look at the research area on schedulingunder uncertainty, whose efforts went in two directions, namelyproactive scheduling and reactive scheduling (Demeulemeester andHerroelen, 2002). Proactive (or robust) scheduling focuses on thedevelopment of a baseline schedule that incorporates a degreeof anticipation of variability during project execution in orderto protect the baseline schedule. For example, Herroelen et al.(2002) deﬁne a ﬁrst aggressive schedule and then add a set ofresource/time buffers that protect the critical paths. Apart fromthumb rules (e.g., 50% buffer sizing rule), more sophisticated meth-ods for sizing the buffers are discussed by Newbold (1998). Reactivescheduling refers to the schedule modiﬁcations that may have tobe made during project execution. The reactive scheduling actionmay be based on various underlying strategies. On one hand,the reactive effort may rely on simple techniques aimed at quickschedule consistency restoration: for instance, the right-shift rule(Sadeh et al., 1993) postpones all the activities that are affectedby the schedule breakdown. On the other hand, a reactive sched-uling approach may involve a full rescheduling of the remainingactivities. In case of rescheduling, the new schedule can differ con-siderably from the baseline one and this is not desirable since itwould destroy the commitments previously set, thus generatingadditional costs, tensions, and dissatisfaction by both customersand team members. For this reason, naïve rescheduling approachesare often based on heuristics that carry out local rearrangementsof plans. Alternatively, rescheduling can use a minimum pertur-bation strategy that aims at ex-post stability; this strategy relieson exact or suboptimal algorithms whose objective is either theminimization of a function of the differences between the starttimes of each activity in the new and original schedules (El Sakkoutand Wallace, 2000) or the minimization of the number of activ-ities to be performed in different sprints (Alagoz and Azizoglu,2003).3. A summary of agile practicesAgile approaches are gaining an increasing attention by theresearch and industrial communities, and several methods basedon a common set of practices have been arising from the practi-tioners’ experience. As shown by VersionOne (2011), the Scrummethod and some hybrid approaches—combining Scrum and XPpractices—are preferred by companies. Since the success of aproject is directly related to customer satisfaction, agile meth-ods strive to better comply with user requests. In particular,agile principles aim at reducing the delivery time and makingthe development process more ﬂexible; indeed, accelerating thetime-to-market leads to overcoming the market pressure, whileﬂexibility ensures fast reactions to both technology evolution anduser requirement changes.To achieve the aforementioned goals, agile methods proposeseveral complemental practices. For instance, Scrum focuses onmanagerial and processing aspects, whereas XP deﬁnes speciﬁctechniques (such as pair programming) to make the coding phaseFig. 1. Scrum life-cycle. M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 23702361more efﬁcient. Overall, the main agile practices can be summarizedas follows:•Incremental process: The software is broken up into smallerportions which are scheduled, developed, and integrated whencompleted. Each portion represents an increment in businessfunctionality that users can validate.•Iteration: The software is built in iterations, and each cycleexpands the product until the project is completed. Since theprocess is also incremental, each iteration includes analysis,designing, coding, and testing.•User involvement: Continuous interaction with users is promotedto progressively reﬁne the project speciﬁcations, reduce inade-quate requirements, and increase the trust between users anddevelopers.•Team awareness: Self-organizing teams and people collaborationare encouraged, to increase ﬂexibility and productivity.•Continuous and automated testing: Unit tests are written for eachpiece of code, and they are written before coding to improvesoftware reliability; automated tests accelerate error detection.•Lean documentation: Small and simple documentation is pre-ferred to extensive speciﬁcations; thanks to continuous userinvolvement, up-to-date and clear documentation can beachieved.Fig. 1 shows the typical life-cycle of a Scrum project. In the pre-liminary phase, the team and the user—product owner in the Scrumterminology—sketch the overall structure of the system and deﬁnea set of user stories. During the estimation phase, a utility and adevelopment complexity (measured in terms of story points) areassigned to each user story, and possible correlations among storiesare deﬁned. Then, the team assigns a priority to each user story, alsotaking its risk into account. The resulting list composes the productbacklog that must be partitioned into sprints that should be shortand regular enough to guarantee a prompt feedback from users.During each sprint, the developers carry out a detailed analysis ofthe user stories involved, producing the sprint backlog: team mem-bers take charge of one or more user stories that are then designed,implemented, and tested.After closing a sprint, the product owner veriﬁes if the deliv-ered stories correctly implement the requested functionalities. Theapproved stories are removed from the product backlog, while theremaining ones are re-prioritized. Noticeably, new requirementsmay arise from user feedbacks. Finally, during the sprint retrospec-tive phase, the team analyzes the problems and the solutions takenso far in order to improve next iterations (e.g., the estimates madeso far could be updated). Obviously, if new or modiﬁed storiesarise or if estimates are relevantly changed, a new prioritizationphase is executed before the next sprint is started and a new planis produced by smoothly altering the baseline plan.4. An optimization model for baseline planningOur formulation of the multi-sprint planning problem is basedon the static model shown in Fig. 2 that takes into account themain variables that affects user stories prioritization and sprintcomposition. The concepts represented are:•Plan: a sequence of sprints.•Sprint: the time-bound unit of iteration, typically a one- to four-week period, depending on the project complexity and riskassessment. A sprint includes a set of user stories. A maximumduration is ﬁxed for each sprint.•User story: a relatively small piece of functionality valuable forusers (Cohn, 2004). It represents a light speciﬁcation that canbe later detailed thanks to a continuous communication withthe user; at the same time, it must be sufﬁciently described toestimate its development complexity. It represents a means tocommunicate between users and developers. In some situationsthe project team may want, for various reasons, to constrain someuser stories (which we will call forced) to be included in a speciﬁcsprint; for instance, a story for developing an Android app to col-lect and transmit data could be forced to belong to the third sprintbecause only during that sprint will an Android programmer beavailable.•Utility: the business value of a user story as perceived by the userthat deﬁnes it. As stressed by Racheva et al. (2009), a detailed def-inition of business value is still missing in agile methodologies;a general and self-evident interpretation is normally assumed,related to the earned value deﬁned in economics and trans-formable into dollar value. In practice, users normally expressthe value of each story using a single number, though they mayimplicitly take into account and combine different utility crite-ria. In some approaches it is only required to deﬁne an orderingfor user stories (i.e., user story 1 is more useful than user story2), but in general it can be quantiﬁed through a positive numer-ical score typically ranging between 10 and 100 (Nichols, 2009).For instance, a story for having a site map effectively indexedby a research engine could have utility 80, because it relevantlyimpacts on the site visibility on the web, while a story for showingphotographs of the staff members on the site could have utility10 because it adds small value to the site content.•Complexity: the development effort for a user story measured instory points. Team members assign story points to each user storybased on their experience and knowledge of the domain andproject speciﬁcities. Story points are non-dimensional and arepreferred to time/space measures to avoid subjective and incom-parable estimates. Typical complexities of user stories rangebetween 1 and 10 story points (Nichols, 2009). For instance, theindexing story mentioned above could have complexity 7, whilethe photograph story could have complexity 1.•Risk: we consider risks related to two different characteristics ofuser stories. A critical story is one that may have a strong impacton the quality of the system delivered, so that taking a wrongsolution for it dramatically affects the success of the project (e.g.,a story for deﬁning the deployment architecture that heavilyimpacts on performances and security). An uncertain story is onefor which it is somehow hard to estimate the complexity due tounexpected problems that could arise (e.g., a story for feeding adatabase from data ﬂows produced by a third-party company).•Coupling: a correlation between two or more afﬁne user stories.Afﬁne stories have higher utility if they are included in the samesprint, because users better perceive the overall business value ofthe functionality delivered. For instance, a “zoom-out” story mayhave low utility on its own, but its utility may increase if deliveredtogether with the complemental “zoom in” story. A user story canbe included in several coupling groups, each characterized by anafﬁnity: the higher the afﬁnity, the higher the utility in jointlydelivering the functionalities.•Precedence: a hard constraint stating that a user story can bedeveloped only after one or more other user stories (called pre-conditions) have been completed. For instance, a database can becreated and populated only after its conceptual schema has beendesigned and documented. A conjunctive precedence (AND-typeprecedence) implies all pre-conditions must be completed, whilea disjunctive precedence (OR-type precedence) implies at leastone of the pre-conditions must be completed.11More complex expressions, such an OR of AND’s and the like, could easily beused to model precedences, with small effects on the overall complexity of the 2362M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 2370utilitycomplexitycriticalityRisk
uncertaintyRiskprecedenceTypeUserStorymaxDurationdevelopmentSpeed
/capacitySprint11..*precedes**affinityCouplingGroup*2..*pre-condition
post-condition
Plan1*{ordered}1*includesmustinclude
Fig. 2. The user story model as a UML class diagram (static attributes are underlined, roles are in italics).•Development speed: the number of story points the team candeliver per day. It is used to convert the sprint duration intothe sprint capacity (i.e., the maximum number of story points theteam can deliver in a sprint).To make this model applicable, reference values and rangesmust be chosen for its concepts. We estimate both types of riskby associating values in the range [1 · · · 2] to four classes of risk: 1(no risk), 1.3 (low risk), 1.7 (medium risk), and 2 (high risk). Besides,the afﬁnity range we adopt is [0, 0.5], meaning that the utility of astory can be increased at most by 50%. We remark that the validityof our approach does not depend on the reference values and rangesproposed that were chosen to ﬁt the speciﬁc features and needs ofthe teams we worked with. Different teams may take advantagefrom using ﬁner or coarser classes and different ranges, dependingon the typical precision of their estimates.In this regard, some further considerations about utility are inorder. Following the agile principles, we do not formally modelthe process for correctly combining different utility criteria thatis left to the user experience. As a consequence we deﬁne utility asa number, which is obviously a simpliﬁcation that may reduce theaccuracy of estimates. On the other hand, we remark that our modelcan seamlessly accommodate different types of utility, meant bothfrom the users point of view (e.g., positive impact of a story on salesand revenues, or effects on customer ﬁdelity) or from other pointsof view (e.g., not degrading the overall software architecture) aslong as these can be combined into a formula.We can now list the goals an optimal baseline plan should pur-sue:#1 Customer satisfaction. It can be obtained by early deliveringhigh-utility sprints. In the agile philosophy, this also increasesthe user awareness and trust.#2 Coupling management. Afﬁne stories should be carried out inthe same sprint to increase their utility for users. We arguethat the increase in utility comes from the presence of anyafﬁne stories in the same sprint, i.e., users perceive higher utilityeven if only some of the stories in a coupling group are deliv-ered together. In light of this, couplings can be managed byoptimization model. However, here we prefer to adopt a simpler form for prece-dences because, in our experience, it is largely adequate to accommodate theexpressiveness required in practice by project teams.increasing sprint utility proportionally to the number of afﬁnestories jointly delivered.#3 Risk management. It can be achieved by in two complementaryways. On the one hand, critical user stories are advanced toreduce the risk of project failure. For instance, since a story fordeﬁning the deployment architecture heavily impacts on per-formances, developing this story during the last sprints couldlead to realizing too late that the performances achieved arenot satisfactory. If the same story had been developed ear-lier, the team could have taken effective correction actions intime (e.g., by implementing more efﬁcient algorithms or choos-ing performance-aware design solutions). On the other hand,uncertain stories are distributed in different sprints to balancethe risk that a sprint delivery is delayed. Indeed, if several uncer-tain stories were concentrated in the same sprint, having thatsprint severely delayed due to unexpected problems would bevery likely.Besides, all constraints related to the sprint capacity, forced userstories, and inter-story precedences must obviously be met.The problem of determining an optimal baseline plan, i.e., onethat achieves these goals, can be converted into a generalizedassignment problem, a generalization of the 0-1 multiple knapsackproblem where the knapsacks are the sprints and the items are thestories.2Story points measure the weight of an item, while utilityrepresents its value. Knapsack capacity is measured as the storypoints that the team can deliver given the sprint duration and theteam development speed, i.e., as the sprint capacity. The objectivefunction to be maximized is the integral of the cumulative utility ofthe project (goal 1), where the utility of each story is increasedif some afﬁne stories are included in the same sprint (goal 2)and/or if that story is critical (goal 3-i). Finally, in the formula-tion of the capacity constraint, the complexities of user stories areincreased by their uncertainties, which discourages the inclusionof two uncertain stories in the same sprint (goal 3-ii). The gener-alized assignment problem is NP-hard (Fréville, 2004); the linearprogramming formulation we adopt is shown in the following.2Using the terminology of operational research, the generalized assignment prob-lem can be described as follows. Given a set of items, each with a value (that dependson the knapsack the item is assigned to) and a weight, and a set of knapsacks, eachwith a capacity, assign each item to one knapsack so as to maximize the total valueassigned, without assigning to any knapsack a total weight greater than its capacity(Martello and Toth, 1990). M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 23702363Deﬁnition 1 (Multi-sprint planning problem). Given a set of msprints S and a set of n user stories U, let:•xij= 1 iff story j is included in sprint i, 0 otherwise;•pmaxibe the capacity of sprint i, measured in story points;•ujbe the utility of story j;•pjbe the complexity of story j, measured in story points;•rcrjand runjbe the criticality and uncertainty risks, respectively, ofstory j;•G be the set of coupling groups and Al G be a coupling group, i.e.,Al U;•albe the afﬁnity between the stories in Al;•yijlbe the number of stories of Alafﬁne to story j and included insprint i (yijlpositive and integer);•F  U be the set of forced stories, and fjfor j  F be the sprint wherestory j must be placed;•Dj U be the set of pre-conditions for story j;•UAND UOR U, where UANDand UORare the subsets of storieshaving precedence type AND and OR, respectively.The multi-sprint planning problem consists in determining an opti-mal assignment of the xij’s, i.e., in ﬁnding which stories composeeach sprint in an optimal plan. Its linear programming formulationis as follows:z = maxmk=1cuk, where cuk=ki=1nj=1ujrcrjxij+|G|l=1alyijl|Al| − 1(1)s.t.nj=1pjrunjxij pmax
ii  S(2)mi=1xij= 1 j  U (3)xfjj= 1 j  F (4)iw=1vDjxwv xiji  S, j  UOR(5)iw=1vDjxwv xij|Dj| i  S, j  UAND(6)yijlvAl,v /= jxivi  S, j  U, l  G s.t. uj Al(7)yijl (|Al| − 1)xiji  S, j  U, l  G s.t. uj Al(8)The explanation of the elements of the linear programming for-mulation is as follows:(1) The objective function z states that the optimal plan maximizesthe integral of the cumulative utilities, where each cumula-tive utility cukis the sum of the utilities achieved by the ﬁrstk sprints. The criticality risk rcrjincreases the utility ujof acritical story j, thus encouraging an early placement of criticalstories. Couplings are managed through term alyijl/(|Al| − 1): foreach coupling group Alstory j belongs to, the utility of story jis increased proportionally to the afﬁnity alof Al, and to thefraction of afﬁne stories of Alincluded in sprint i.(2) These inequalities ensure that the sum of the complexities ofthe stories included in each sprint i does not exceed the sprintcapacity pmaxi. The complexity pjof story j is increased accordingto the uncertainty risk runjof that story, so as to fairly distributeuncertainty risk among the sprints.(3) This constraint imposes that each story is included in exactlyone sprint.(4) This constraint correctly places each forced story j  F in sprintfj.(5) These inequalities handle OR precedences by stating that, foreach story j, at least one story v in Djis placed in a sprint wbefore sprint i where story j is placed, that is, story v is placedbefore story j.(6) These inequalities handle AND precedences by stating that allstories in Djare placed before each story j.(7) These inequalities manage couplings by counting the numberyijlof stories of coupling group Alafﬁne to story j and carried outin sprint i. Using an inequality is necessary to accommodate thefact that, if sprint i includes stories afﬁne to j but j is not part ofi, it is yijl= 0 (see constraint (8)). Nonetheless, the optimizer willset the value of each yijlas high as possible since this increasesthe objective function.3(8) These inequalities state that yijlis zero if story j is not partof sprint i, otherwise it cannot be greater than the number ofstories afﬁne to it, i.e., |Al| − 1.Note that in this work we chose to model coupling correla-tions between stories in the form of soft constraints because hardconstraints are typically avoided in agile projects. However, someplanning methods in the literature take a hard approach to cou-plings, i.e., they can force the afﬁne stories in a coupling group Altostay together in the same sprint (see Table 1). In our approach thiscan be indirectly achieved by replacing in U the stories that belongto Alwith a single story jl; as a rule of thumb, this story should besuch that (i) the complexity of jlis (at most) the sum of the com-plexities of the stories in Al; (ii) the utility of jlis (at least) the sumof the utilities of the stories in Al; (iii) the uncertainty and criticalityrisks of jlare the maximum of those of the stories in Al; and (iv) theprecedences for jlare an AND-type composition of those involvingthe stories in Al.CPLEX solves this optimization problem using a branch-and-cut approach (Caprara and Fischetti, 1997), that is, a method ofcombinatorial optimization for solving integer linear programmingproblems (i.e., linear programming problems where some or allthe unknowns are restricted to integer values—the xij’s and yij’sin our case). The method is an hybrid that dramatically improvesthe performance of classic branch-and-bound methods by incor-porating cutting planes, that is, inequalities that improve the linearprogramming relaxation of integer linear programming problems.Example 1. The example we report here is a simpliﬁed excerptfrom the ﬁrst case study presented later. The user stories con-sidered are listed in Table 2 together with their estimations, andare allocated into 4 sprints with capacity equal to 20 story pointseach—except the third sprint that was given capacity 14 to modelthe fact that one team member is temporarily unavailable. Twoprecedences (from s7 to s6, from s1 to s2) and one coupling (0.3between s2 and s10) were introduced.The optimal baseline planning for this example is shown inTable 3; for each sprint we report its complexity (i.e., the totalnumber of story points for the stories it includes), its uncertaintyrisk (i.e., the overall additional story points arising from uncertain3Using the auxiliary variables yijland the related additional constraints is neces-sary to keep the objective function z linear. Directly counting the stories afﬁne tostory j within the objective function would make the formulation quadratic, whichis recognized to be much more difﬁcult to be optimized (Li and Sun, 2006). 2364M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 2370Table 2A sample of user stories from the case study.Story Id Story name Utility Complexity Crit. risk Uncert. risks1 Fee conﬁguration 80 5 Low Lows2Cash
 cost computation85
 2 Medium Mediums3 Import from IBMS 75 2 Medium Mediums4 Parameterization logic 30 1 Medium Mediums5 Amortization mask 60 2 No Nos6 Exchange computation 60 2 Low Lows7 Exchange import from SAP 60 7 Low Lows8 Management control reporting 85 4 Medium Mediums9Operational
 reporting100
 10 Low Lows10 Scenario management mask 65 3 Low LowFig. 3. Sprint composition in function of the utility and complexity of user storiesfor the plan in Table 3.stories), and its cumulative utility. The integral z of the cumulativeutility turns out to be 3474.5. A few remarks:•The capacity constraint is always respected (for instance, for theﬁrst sprint, 14 + 5.2 < 20).•The uncertainty risk is well distributed over the ﬁrst three sprints,but advanced to the ﬁrst two sprints.•The stories with higher utilities are advanced to the ﬁrst sprint,also taking into account couplings and respecting the precedencefrom s1 to s2.•The precedence from s7 to s6 is solved within the second sprint;these two stories have low utility and risk so they can be post-poned.•Story s9 is placed in the third sprint in spite of its high utility. Infact, if it were advanced to the ﬁrst sprint it would take most ofit, so it would become impossible to advance other stories withhigher risk and still respect the precedences.•The fourth sprint is not completely full; leaving some space in thelast sprint is common in real projects because it allows for bettermanaging unexpected events.The way stories are distributed in sprints according to their util-ities and complexities is illustrated in Fig. 3.5. An optimization model for smooth replanningAs mentioned in the Introduction, the project uncertainties andthe inherent ﬂexibility of agile approaches often lead to somedisruptions from the original baseline plan. The term predictive-reactive planning has been coined by Vieira et al. (2003) to denotethe case of a baseline plan that has been developed before theproject starts and may be updated during project execution. Herewe prefer to use the term smooth replanning to emphasize that thenew plan delivered should limit as much as possible the changesmade to the baseline plan; smoothness is important to protect theallocation of resources made to the projects and to preserve themilestones agreed with users.Given the current optimal plan P (either the baseline plan orthe result of a previous replanning), let Udonebe the subset of thestories that were actually carried out at the end of sprint i, andUnewbe the set of new stories that arose due to additional require-ments. A new plan Pcan be easily obtained by running again theoptimization model for baseline planning on a new set of storiesU= U − Udone Unew, and by adjusting the other variables and con-straints accordingly; however, most probably, P and Pwould besubstantially different in the assignment of stories to sprints.To add some smoothness to the replanning process, a properminimum perturbation strategy must be adopted. Like done byAlagoz and Azizoglu (2003) we pursue a trade-off between effec-tiveness and stability that are respectively measured by theobjective function z and by the percentage ˛ of stories that werescheduled in corresponding sprints in P and P. In particular, we saya new plan Pis dominant when for each other possible plan Pitis either zP< zPor ˛P< ˛P. Picking one dominant plan meanssolving a bicriteria optimization problem, which can be done intwo ways. The hierarchical approach minimizes the secondary (i.e.,less important) criterion subject to the constraint that the value ofthe primary (more important) criterion is kept at its optimum. Thesimultaneous approach optimizes a weighted combination of thetwo criteria. In this paper we adopt a hierarchical approach sincewe argue that maximizing utility is deﬁnitely more important inthe agile context. Furthermore, the use of a complex objective func-tion would require a parameter-tuning step to achieve the desiredtrade-off.More precisely, we extend the optimization model proposed inthe previous section by adding a new constraint on suggested stories,that is, stories whose allocation into certain sprints is desirable butnot mandatory:jTxtjj ˛|T| (9)Table 3Optimal baseline planning for the stories in Table 2.Sprint Stories Complexity Uncertainty risk Cumulative utility1 s1, s2, s3, s5, s10 14 5.2 565.52 s6, s7, s8 13 5.5 866.03 s9 10 3.0 996.04 s4 1 0.7 1047.0z = 3474.5 M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 23702365Table 4New plan after smooth replanning with ˛ = 0.8.Sprint Stories Complexity Uncertainty risk Cumulative utility1 s1, s3, s5 9 2.9 291.52 s2, s6, s7, s10 14 5.0 721.53s9 10 3.0 851.54 s4, s8 5 3.5 1047.0z = 2911.5where T  U is the subset of suggested stories, tjfor j  T is the sprintthat should include story j, and ˛ (stability) is the percentage ofstories in T whose suggested allocation is to be respected.This extended formulation can be used for smooth replanningby setting T to the set of stories that during the previous planningwere scheduled to belong to sprints other than the current one, i.e.,T = U − Udone. Noticeably, constraint (9) can also be used to deal withforced stories in a less prescriptive way; in fact, it can be seen as arelaxation of constraint (4).Example 2. Going on with Example 1, we suppose that, at theend of sprint 1, stories s2 and s10 were not completed and mustbe rescheduled. Smooth replanning is carried out with T = {s4, s6,s7, s8, s9}, which means that all the stories that were previouslyplanned for sprints from 2 to 4 are suggested, while s2 and s10can be freely allocated. By setting ˛ = 0.8, the team decides that atmost one story in T can be disrupted (|T| × ˛ = 4 stories out of 5must be preserved). The new plan is shown in Table 4; sprint 1is in gray since it is not actually part of the current plan and it hasbeen reported for clarity.A few remarks:•No precedence constraint is posed on s2 since s1 has been carriedout in sprint 1.•s8 has been postponed since s2 and s10 bring a higher utility andthey are afﬁne.•The reason why s8 has been postponed instead of s6 (that haslower utility) is to leave enough space (i.e., story points) in sprint2 to contain both s2 and s10.6. Model validation6.1. Effectiveness tests for baseline planningTo verify the effectiveness of our model we carried out a casestudy. According to the classiﬁcation proposed by Runeson andHöst (2009), our case study can be described as explanatory (it aimsat conﬁrming the effectiveness of our optimization model in realcontexts), positivist (it tests the quality of the optimal plan producedby our model), quantitative and qualitative (it quantitatively meas-ures the quality of the optimal plan by computing the user storyFig. 4. The graphical interface for planning. 2366M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 2370gap, but it also collects a qualitative judgment by the team man-ager), and ﬂexible (the model parameters can change during the casestudy). A more complete description can be given by answering thebasic questions proposed by Robson (2002):•Objective—What to achieve?: the case study aimed at proving theeffectiveness of our approach to multi-sprint planning in the con-text of agile methods.•The case—What is studied?: we studied two real projects withdifferent characteristics and in different areas, namely, Web andPayTV; both projects were carried out by Italian companies thathave been successfully adopting agile methods for several years.•Theory—Frame of reference: the theoretical framework weadopted is the one deﬁned by our model of planning and therelated linear programming formulation.•Research questions—What to know?: we studied how the optimalplan differs from the one manually produced by the project teamin terms of sprint composition, risk distribution, and deliveredutility.•Methods—How to collect data?: for each project we collected databased on the static model of Fig. 2 during a couple of meetingsmade a posteriori, i.e., all our interactions with the team were con-ducted after the projects had ended. During these meetings (withan overall duration of 3 h) we asked three representatives of theteam, namely the team manager, an analyst, and a developer tomap onto our scale of values the estimates they had made duringthe estimation and prioritization phases (see Fig. 1). As to afﬁnityand precedences, whose estimates had not been recorded usingstandard forms at that time, the team representatives were askedto quantify the values they implicitly had given at planning timeby replicating the teamwork that is typical of the agile estimationand prioritization phases. Our role was just to explain them theexact meaning of the requested information and how to use thegraphical interface shown in Fig. 4 for collecting estimates andconstraints. As to utility estimation, with reference to the ter-minology of Khurum et al. (2012), both project teams adopted acustomer perspective and limited their analysis to the perceivedvalue deﬁned in terms of relevance of the functionalities and theirusability.•Selection strategy—Where to seek data?: we selected two differentprojects to cover all the aspects involved in multi-sprint planning.Web is a typical agile project on web applications, with a large setof user stories and a small number of precedences; PayTV hasa smaller number of user stories but it includes a larger set ofcomplex precedences and couplings.The ﬁrst project—PayTV—was aimed at developing a data martfor a large company in the area of pay-tvs. The project had an over-all duration of 8 months; it included 44 user stories and consistedof 10 sprints with an average duration of 17 days per sprint. 52precedences (mainly of AND type) and just one coupling wereinvolved. The project team included 4 members, but in a few casesone additional programmer was added to support the team. Thedevelopment speed we used to run the optimization model was2.43 story points per day and was empirically determined relyingon historical data.Fig. 5 compares the cumulative utilities of the optimal plan (Opt)and of the plan deﬁned by the team (Team). The curve of the optimalplan is always higher mainly due to a better optimization of sprintcomposition, but also to a better handling of risk. Indeed, in theteams plan some critical stories with low utility (essentially relatedto infrastructural needs) were advanced too much.Fig. 6 shows the distribution of story points among the differentsprints for the two plans. Remarkably, the optimal plan achievesa uniform distribution, with a light advancing of risk to the ﬁrstsprints.Fig. 5. Comparison of cumulative utilities for the PayTV case study.Fig. 6. Comparison of risk distributions for the PayTV case study.The third comparison aims at measuring how the two plans dif-fer in terms of sprint composition. The index we deﬁne to measurethe difference between the two plans is the average of the gaps ofall user stories, where the gap of a user story expresses the nor-malized lag of an optimally scheduled story relative to the teamplan:Deﬁnition 2 (User Story Gap). Let j be a story. Let iteamand ioptbethe sprints j belongs to in the team plan and in the optimal plan,respectively. The gap of story j isgap(j) =1N − 1|iteam− iopt|where N is the maximum number of sprints in the two plans.The user story gap ranges from 0 to 1, where 0 means that the storybelongs to the same sprint in both plans. As shown in Fig. 7, theaverage gap is always lower then 0.3, denoting a good correspon-dence between the two plans. The main difference arises in sprints1, 7, 8, and 10. In particular, in sprint 1, the team plan aimed atanticipating critical stories, thus exceeding the sprint capacity. Thestrong difference in the composition of the ﬁrst sprint necessar-ily affected the subsequent sprints. Noticeably, both plans made agood use of coupling correlations.In order to have a further evaluation of the optimal plan, wediscussed it with the team manager after the project end. Here arethe main outcomes:Fig. 7. Difference in sprint composition between the optimal and the team plans forthe PayTV case study. M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 23702367Fig. 8. Comparison of cumulative utilities for the Web project.•The team spent a couple of days in deﬁning their plan, while theoptimal plan was generated in a few seconds.•The team used to collect user story estimates using standardforms, but the level of detail required by our framework is slightlyhigher. This was perceived as a positive aspect since it leads tomore reﬁned estimates, thus producing a better plan. The graph-ical interface we provided was considered a valuable tool tosupport a deeper project understanding.•The team manager recognized that his plan failed in properlydistributing risks, which led to some delay in the ﬁrst sprint.•The optimal plan was judged to be feasible and realistic, show-ing that the elements considered in our model are sufﬁcient toprovide a good distribution of user stories.•Most of the differences in sprint compositions were evaluated asimprovements over the team plan. In particular, the team plandid not take into account the side effects of postponing somestories, thus causing the stories related to them be precedenceconstraints to be delayed too much.The second project—Web—was aimed at developing a complexweb site based on a Content Management System. Web is largerthan PayTV in terms of number of user stories (105 user stories); itwas organized in 4 sprints of 10 days each, so it had a shorter overallduration (40 days). This difference is due to the lower complexity ofthe single user stories and to a higher development speed (6 storypoints per day). Compared to PayTV, Web includes a small numberof chain precedences (6 overall) and no couplings. The input datawere collected in 4 h through an assessment with the whole projectteam, plus an extra session with the team manager who expressedsome extra desiderata that had not emerged before:•Web was the ﬁrst project with a new customer; gaining its loy-alty by delivering all the functionalities on time was a crucial goalof the project. Besides assigning each critical story an appropri-ate risk level, the team decided to anticipate some of them tothe ﬁrst sprint. This strategic decision goes beyond the typicaldevelopment constraints; rather than modeling it by changingthe risk parameters (i.e., the maximum values for rcrj), whichcould have undesired impacts on overall risk management, weexplicitly forced the most complex user stories to the ﬁrst sprint.•Some of the requested functionalities come for free in the ContentManagement Systems, so they have no development complexity.Though they could be delivered in the ﬁrst sprints from a tech-nical point of view, they had better be postponed since the usercannot perceive their utility until afﬁne stories are completed.We modeled these speciﬁc constraints using chain precedences.After running our optimization model we compared our solutionwith the baseline plan devised by the project team:•The cumulative utility of the optimal plan is higher than theone obtained by the team (see Fig. 8) and the team managerFig. 9. Difference in sprint composition between the optimal and the team plans forthe Web project.Fig. 10. Time for computing the optimal plan for projects with an increasing numberof stories and no precedences.recognized that our solution is feasible and it has a better trade-offbetween utility and complexity.•The user story gap (see Fig. 9) is very low (less than 0.22 foreach sprint) and is higher in the ﬁrst sprint. As discussed withthe team manager, two are the main motivations: (1) due to thelack of constraints and to the similar values for the utilities andcomplexity of user stories it was quite hard to manually deﬁnean optimal schedule; (2) the team was biased in its choices bythe urge to completely deliver the ﬁrst sprint, so it adopted anover-conservative solution.Overall, from an analysis of our case study it is apparent that notonly our model returns an optimal schedule, but it is also ﬂexibleand expressive enough to handle projects with different character-istics (in terms of sprint features and constraints) and it can supportteam-speciﬁc desiderata.6.2. Efﬁciency tests for baseline planningThese tests were carried out on an Intel Core 2 Duo platform with3 Gb of RAM, running at 3 GHz under Windows XP professional. Totest the model behavior on a broad benchmark we generated a setof 58 synthetic projects; utility and complexity of the user storieswere randomized in the intervals [10,100] and [1,10], respectively.The maximum sprint duration was set to 15 days, while the devel-opment speed was set to 3 story points per day (i.e., sprint capacitywas 45 story points). All problems were solved using CPLEX; per-formances were measured in seconds.First of all we evaluate performances in function of the totalnumber of user stories on projects that do not include precedences.Fig. 10 reports the average time needed to compute the exactsolution. As expected for a generalized assignment problem, thecomputation time grows non-linearly, reﬂecting an exponentialincrease in the search space.The presence of precedences makes planning harder for theproject team. To study their impact on our model, two types of 2368M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 2370Fig. 11. Time for computing the optimal plan for projects with an increasing numberof precedences and 50 stories.Fig. 12. Suboptimality of early solutions in function of the computation time forprojects with 100 stories and 30 or no precedences.precedences were added to our benchmark projects: (1) chainprecedences, where each story has at most one pre-condition;and (2) graph precedences, where a story can have several pre-conditions. In both cases precedences were obviously acyclic.Fig. 11 shows how the computation time changes in function of thenumber of precedences. This ﬁgure suggests that a small number ofprecedences tend to reduce the computation time because prece-dences allow a set of unfeasible plans to be pruned, thus reducingthe search space. However, when the number of precedences ishigh, the computation time increases again because ﬁnding a feasi-ble plan becomes harder for the solver. Noticeably, both chain andgraph precedences show similar trends.Though the time to obtain an exact solution for very complexproblems (more than 100 stories) can be too high, the time to obtaina good feasible solution is always limited. CPLEX can be conﬁguredso that it ﬁrst looks for a feasible solution, then it tries to improveit until the exact one is found; at each step it returns the objectivefunction value of the best solution found so far (i.e., an upper boundto the objective function value of the optimal solution) and a lowerbound to the objective function value of the optimal solution. Wemeasure the suboptimality at each step (i.e., how the current solu-tion is far from the optimal one) as the ratio between the lowerand the upper bounds. As shown in Fig. 12, a solution that is lessthan 1% worse than the optimal one is always produced within 5seconds. Overall, though the constraints posed in our problem donot signiﬁcantly reduce the search space, CPLEX is very efﬁcient inﬁnding a good heuristic solution.6.3. Effectiveness tests for smooth replanningThe effectiveness of smooth replanning can be evaluated by ana-lyzing to what extent the previous plan is disrupted when a sprintpartially fails, i.e., when it cannot deliver its expected results. Tothis end we considered a 50-story synthetic project and we mea-sured the model performance when 33% of the user stories wherenot completed in one of its sprints. Fig. 13a shows how the valueobtained for the objective function z of the new plan varies (as apercentage of the objective function value for the previous plan) infunction of the sprint where the failure took place and of the sta-bility ˛. As expected, due to the adoption of a cumulative objectivefunction, the earlier the failure takes place, the worse its effects onz. Remarkably, if the failure takes place after the ﬁrst sprint, thereduction in effectiveness is always less than 4% independently ofthe stability constraint.Fig. 13b illustrates how the actual smoothness (meant as thepercentage of stories that are not disrupted after replanning)changes with ˛. Noticeably, only when ˛ = 50% there are caseswhen less stories than the maximum allowed are disrupted; inall the other cases, the smoothness ﬂuctuations are actually dueto the rounding of the number of suggested stories (e.g., given 29suggested stories, if ˛ = 90% then 2.9 stories can be disrupted; sinceuser stories are atomic, only 2 of them can be actually moved todifferent sprints).The effectiveness of smooth replanning can be also evaluatedwhen intrinsic changes in the development process arise. In agileprojects, during the review phase at the end of each sprint thedevelopment speed is estimated again, and it may be adjustedconsidering the feedback of past sprints and possible changes inthe team composition. Then replanning is necessary to smoothlyadapt the old plan to the new project parameters. An increase inspeed implies an increase in the sprint capacities that may lead to anearlier placement of useful stories. Conversely, a signiﬁcant speedreduction could dramatically reduce sprint capacities, forcing a latedelivery of high-utility user stories. In this case, the lower the sta-bility ˛, the higher the probability that a good cumulative utilityis preserved at the expense of smoothness. The trade-off betweenquality and stability is well illustrated by Fig. 14 that shows how theobjective function z of the new plan decreases with the develop-ment speed for different values of ˛ (on the same 50-story projectused in Fig. 13).6.4. Efﬁciency tests for smooth replanningFig. 15 shows the average execution time of the smooth replan-ning model on our 58-project benchmark. The computation timeabFig. 13. Percentage objective function (a) and smoothness (b) in function of the sprint where failure took place. M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 23702369Fig. 14. Percentage objective function in function of speed decrease.Fig. 15. Time for replanning in function of the sprint where failure took place.is always much lower than that of baseline plans, because most ofthe user stories have already been assigned to sprints so that thesearch space is narrower.7. Conclusions and future workIn this paper we formalized the multi-sprint planning prob-lem and proposed a generalized assignment model to solve it.Our model was conceived for an interactive and ﬂexible use bya design team that progressively deﬁnes the best plan or revisesit during its execution; in particular, a smooth replanning processallows to effectively manage changes. Our model can be appliedwhenever the basic assumptions of agile methods hold, namely,deﬁnition of requirements in form of micro-functionalities (i.e.,stories), capability of producing estimates of story utility, complex-ity, and correlation, and frequent iterations based on user feedback(which implies allocation of stories to sprints). Noticeably, ourmodel is not geared toward a speciﬁc type of project: though inbespoke projects it can beneﬁt from user involvement during storydeﬁnition and estimation (mainly for utility assessment), it can alsobe effectively applied in market-driven projects where the teamexperience and the feedbacks received during the beta-test phasecan cope with the absence of key users.The tests we carried out show that, for medium-sized problems,an exact solution is found in a time that is fully compatible with thedevelopment process (i.e., from some seconds to a few minutes),while for large problems a heuristic solution that is less than 1% farfrom the exact one can be returned in a few seconds. As to effec-tiveness, the team managers judged the optimal plans to be feasibleand realistic, and most of the differences in sprint composition wereevaluated as improvements over the team plan. In smooth replan-ning, the trade-off between the quality and the stability of the newplan is always very good. For these reasons, we believe that our opti-mization module could be a very convenient and powerful add-onto the existing softwares for agile project management.We are currently working on extending our model to better sup-port the planning activity. Further improvements that may makethe model best ﬁt for real cases are: (1) allowing different develop-ment speeds for different sprints due to a variable team composi-tion; (2) modeling different team capabilities (e.g., design, imple-ment, test) so that, in each sprint, the team will be able to deliver adifferent number of story points for each capability; (3) extendingthe model to support multiple teams working on the same project,which requires to introduce a concept of chunks of stories like doneby Szoke (2011); (4) implementing a structured approach to utilitydeﬁnition and measure its impact on the accuracy of the estimatesand consequently on the effectiveness of plans.ReferencesAalto University, SoberIT, 2011. Agilefant. http://www.agilefant.org/Abrahamsson, P., Warsta, J., Siponen, M.T., Ronkainen, J., 2003. New directions onagile methods: a comparative analysis. In: Proc. ICSE, pp. 244–254.Alagoz, O., Azizoglu, M., 2003. Rescheduling of identical parallel machines undermachine eligibility constraints. European Journal of Operational Research 149,523–532.Beck, K., 1999. Embracing change with extreme programming. IEEE Computer 32,70–77.Beck, K., et al., 2001. Manifesto for Agile Software Development.http://agilemanifesto.org/de Boer, R., 1998. Resource-constrained multi-project management. Ph.D. Thesis.University of Twente, The Netherlands.Brucker, P., Drexl, A., Möhring, R.H., Neumann, K., Pesch, E., 1999. Resource-constrained project scheduling: notation, classiﬁcation, models, and methods.European Journal of Operational Research 112, 3–41.Cao, L., Ramesh, B., 2008. Agile requirements engineering practices: an empiricalstudy. IEEE Software 25, 60–67.Caprara, A., Fischetti, M., 1997. Branch-and-cut algorithms. In: Dell’Amico, M.,Mafﬁoli, F., Martello, S. (Eds.), Annotated Bibliographies in Combinatorial Opti-mization. Wiley Interscience Series in Discrete Mathematics, pp. 45–63.Cohn, M., 2004. User Stories Applied: For Agile Software Development. Addison-Wesley Professional.Collabnet, 2011. ScrumWorks. http://www.danube.com/Demeulemeester, E., Herroelen, W., 2002. Project Scheduling—A Research Hand-book. Vol. 49 of International Series in Operations Research and ManagementScience. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Boston.Denne, M., Cleland-Huang, J., 2004. Software by Numbers. Prentice Hall.Dybå, T., Dingsøyr, T., 2008. Empirical studies of agile software development: asystematic review. Information & Software Technology 50, 833–859.El Sakkout, H., Wallace, M., 2000. Probe backtrack search for minimal perturbationin dynamic scheduling. Constraints 5, 359–388.Fréville, A., 2004. The multidimensional 0–1 knapsack problem: an overview. Euro-pean Journal of Operational Research 155, 1–21.Gademann, N., Schutten, M., 2005. Linear-programming-based heuristics for projectcapacity planning. IIE Transactions 37, 153–165.Golfarelli, M., Rizzi, S., Turricchia, E., 2012. Sprint planning optimization in agiledata warehouse design. In: Proc. DaWaK, Vienna, Austria, pp. 30–41.Greer, D., Ruhe, G., 2004. Software release planning: an evolutionary and iterativeapproach. Information & Software Technology 46, 243–253.Herroelen, W., Demeulemeester, E., Reyck, B.D., 1997. A classiﬁcation scheme forproject scheduling problems. Technical Report. Katholieke Universiteit Leuven.Herroelen, W., Leus, R., 2004. Robust and reactive project scheduling: a review andclassiﬁcation of procedures. International Journal of Production Research 42,1599–1620.Herroelen, W., Leus, R., Demeulemeester, E., 2002. Critical chain project scheduling:do not oversimplify. Project Management Journal 33, 48–60.IBM, 2011. IBM ILOG CPLEX Optimizer. http://www-01.ibm.com/Khurum, M., Gorschek, T., Wilson, M., 2012. The software value map—an exhaustivecollection of value aspects for the development of software intensive products.Journal of Software: Evolution and Process, in press.Kolisch, R., Padman, R., 2001. An integrated survey of deterministic project sched-uling. Omega 29, 249–272.Larman, C., Basili, V.R., 2003. Iterative and incremental development: a brief history.IEEE Computer 36, 47–56.Li, C., van den Akker, M., Brinkkemper, S., Diepen, G., 2010. An integrated approachfor requirement selection and scheduling in software release planning. Requir.Eng. 15, 375–396.Li, D., Sun, X., 2006. Nonlinear Integer Programming. Springer.Martello, S., Toth, P., 1990. Knapsack Problems: Algorithm and Computer Imple-mentation. John Wiley and Sons Ltd.Newbold, R.C., 1998. Project Management in the Fast Lane—Applying the Theory ofConstraints. St. Lucie Press.Nichols, A., 2009. Agile Planning, Estimation and Tracking. http://www.slideshare.net/andrewnichols/agile-planning-estimation-and-trackingPlatje, A., Seidel, H., Wadman, S., 1994. Project and portfolio planning cycle: projectbased management for multi-project challenge. International Journal of ProjectManagement 12, 100–107.Racheva, Z., Daneva, M., Sikkel, K., 2009. Value creation by agile projects: method-ology or mystery? In: Proc. PROFES, Oulu, Finland, pp. 141–155.Robson, C., 2002. Real World Research. Blackwell.Rönkkö, M., Frühwirth, C., Bifﬂ, S., 2009. Integrating value and utility concepts intoa value decomposition model for value-based software engineering. In: Proc.PROFES, Oulu, Finland, pp. 362–374.Runeson, P., Höst, M., 2009. Guidelines for conducting and reporting case studyresearch in software engineering. Empirical Software Engineering 14, 131–164. 2370M. Golfarelli et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2357– 2370Sadeh, N., Otsuka, S., Schelaback, R., 1993. Predictive and reactive scheduling withthe MicroBoss production scheduling and control system. In: Proc. IJCAI, Cham-béry, France, pp. 293–306.Saliu, M.O., Ruhe, G., 2005. Supporting software release planning decisions forevolving systems. In: Proc. SEW, pp. 14–26.Saliu, M.O., Ruhe, G., 2007. Bi-objective release planning for evolving softwaresystems. In: Proc. ESEC/SIGSOFT FSE, pp. 105–114.Schwaber, K., 1995. SCRUM development process. In: Proc. OOPSLA.Svahnberg, M., Gorschek, T., Feldt, R., Torkar, R., Saleem, S.B., Shaﬁque, M.U., 2010. Asystematic review on strategic release planning models. Information & SoftwareTechnology 52, 237–248.Szoke, A., 2011. Conceptual scheduling model and optimized release scheduling foragile environments. Information & Software Technology 53,574–591.ThoughtWorks Studios, 2011. Mingle: Agile Project Management. http://www.thoughtworks-studios.com/van Valkenhoef, G., Tervonen, T., de Brock, B., Postmus, D., 2011. Quantitativerelease planning in extreme programming. Information & Software Technology53, 1227–1235.VersionOne, 2011. 6th Annual State of Agile Development Survey Results.http://www.versionone.com/Vieira, G.E., Herrmann, J.W., Lin, E., 2003. Rescheduling manufacturing systems: aframework of strategies, policies, and methods. Journal of Scheduling 6, 39–62.Yongtae, P., Gwangman, P., 2004. A new method for technology valuation in mon-etary value: procedure and application. Technovation 24, 387–394.Matteo Golfarelli received the PhD degree for his workon autonomous agents in 1998. Since 2005, he is an asso-ciate professor, teaching information systems, databasesystems, and data mining. He has published more than80 papers in refereed journals and international confer-ences in the ﬁelds of pattern recognition, mobile robotics,multiagent systems, and business intelligence that is nowhis main research ﬁeld. He coauthored a book on datawarehouse design. He is co-chair of the DOLAP12 andof the MiproBIS Conference and member of the editorialboard of the International Journal of Data Mining, Mod-eling, and Management and of the International Journalof Knowledge-Based Organizations. His current researchinterests include distributed and semantic data warehouse systems, and sentimentanalysis.Stefano Rizzi received his PhD in 1996 from the Univer-sity of Bologna, Italy. Since 2005 he is Full Professor atthe University of Bologna, where he is the head of theData Warehousing Laboratory and teaches Business Intel-ligence and Software Engineering. He has published morethan 100 papers in refereed journals and internationalconferences mainly in the ﬁelds of data warehousing, pat-tern recognition, and mobile robotics, and a research bookon data warehouse design. He joined several researchprojects on the above areas and has been involved in thePANDA thematic network of the European Union con-cerning pattern-base management systems. He is memberof the steering committee of DOLAP and ER. His currentresearch interests include data warehouse design and business intelligence, in par-ticular multidimensional modeling, OLAP preferences, and collaborative businessintelligence.Elisa Turricchia received her degree cum laude in Com-puter Science from the University of Bologna, Italy, inMarch 2009, presenting a thesis about interoperabilityissues among heterogeneous data warehouse systems.Currently, she is a PhD student at the Department ofComputer Science and Engineering (DISI) of Bologna. Herresearch interests include data warehouse design, perva-sive business intelligence, and data mining techniques. Inparticular, her current work focuses on the study of meth-ods for expressing and executing OLAP preference queriesand for managing distributed data warehouses.