 The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
j our na l ho me page: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssInvestigating the applicability of Agility assessment surveys:A case studySamireh Jalalia,, Claes Wohlina, Lefteris AngelisbaBlekinge Institute of Technology, SE-371 79 Karlskrona, SwedenbAristotle University of Thessaloniki, Department of Informatics, 54124 Thessaloniki, Greecea r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 31 December 2013Received in revised form 28 August 2014Accepted 30 August 2014Available online 8 September 2014Keywords:
Agile
Assessment
Surveya b s t r a c tContext: Agile software development has become popular in the past decade without being sufﬁcientlydeﬁned. The Agile principles can be instantiated differently which creates different perceptions of Agility.This has resulted in several frameworks being presented in the research literature to evaluate the levelof Agility. However, the evidence of their actual use in practice is limited.Objective: The objective is to identify online surveys that assess/proﬁle Agility in practice, and to evaluatethe surveys in an industrial setting.Method: The Agility assessment surveys were identiﬁed through searching the web. Then, they wereexplored and two surveys were identiﬁed as most promising for our objective. The selected surveys wereevaluated in a case study with three Agile teams in a software consultancy company.Results: Each team and its customer separately judged the team’s Agility. This outcome was comparedwith the two survey results in focus-group meetings, and ﬁnally one of the surveys was agreed to providea more holistic assessment of Agility.Conclusions: Different surveys may judge Agility differently, which supports the viewpoint that Agile is notwell deﬁned. Therefore, practitioners must decide what Agile means to them and select the assessmentsurvey that matches their deﬁnition.© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionAgile values and principles have emerged as a general approachto developing software. The formulation of Agile principles andpractices has been driven from a practitioner’s point of view(Beck et al., 2001). Agile software development has received moreattention in recent years and different Agile methods have beenutilized in software organizations. Each method consists of severalpractices, however, the extent to which practitioners utilize thepractices is not yet fully investigated.This has motivated researchers to study what practitionersexactly mean when claiming to be Agile through examining theirlevel of adhering to Agile values, principles, and technical practices.Therefore, several frameworks with the purpose of assessing orAbbreviations: CI, Continuous integration; GSD, Global software development;PP, Pair programming; RQ, Research question; S1, Survey 1; S2, Survey 2; TDD, Testdriven development; TR, Trouble report; T1, Team 1; T2, Team 2; T3, Team 3; XP,Extreme programming.Corresponding author. Tel.: +46 455 38 58 95.E-mail address: samireh.jalali@bth.se (S. Jalali).proﬁling Agility have been developed e.g. (Sidky, 2007; Hossainet al., 2009; Taromirad and Ramsin, 2009; Soundararajan andArthur, 2011). Although some of these frameworks are developedthrough empirical studies, to the best of our knowledge, only theparticipating organizations have used them afterwards. The majorreason could be that practitioners view them as context speciﬁc sothat they cannot apply them without the help of Agile experts.On the other hand, several questionnaires e.g. (James, 2007;Waters, 2008; Mayberg Consulting, 2008; Thoughtworks Studio,2010a, 2010b; Sutherland, 2009) have been developed and usedby practitioners that have not been investigated by researchers.This indicates that researchers and practitioners seem to evolvethe tenets of Agile software development in parallel to some extent.The objective in this paper is to bring research and practice closerby evaluating some of the questionnaires for assessing Agility inindustry.A number of online tools or surveys (henceforth referred to assurveys) for Agility assessment are identiﬁed and evaluated. Thesurveys identiﬁed are ﬁrst evaluated using a set of criteria afterwhich two surveys are selected for further studies. These two sur-veys are evaluated in an industrial case with three teams workingwith two different customers. Thus, the article contributes with anhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2014.08.0670164-1212/© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190 173industrial evaluation of surveys for assessing Agility. The resultsand experiences should be helpful in increasing the understand-ing of Agility for both researchers and practitioners alike. Moregenerally, Agility assessment forms an important step toward for-mulating ways of improving software development using Agilemethods. It would help organizations to identify areas for improve-ment to become better in practicing Agility and it could also behelpful in identifying speciﬁc practices that could be better prac-ticed. Based on the ﬁndings in the case study, a comparison of thetwo selected surveys are provided to enhance the understandingof the differences between them.The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2summarizes related work. Section 3 discusses the research method-ology and introduces the different steps taken in the research. Theresults are discussed from two different perspectives in Sections4 and 5, respectively. The results from using the surveys are pre-sented in Section 4, and a comparison of the two surveys is providedin Section 5. Threats to validity are discussed in Section 6. Finally,conclusions and future research directions are presented in Section7.2. Related workThe concept of Agility as “ﬂexibility” and “leanness” (Conboyand Fitzgerald, 2004) in software engineering was introduced bypractitioners (Beck et al., 2001) to mitigate the limitations of tradi-tional software development approaches such as perceived heavydocumentation, long time to market, etc. Agility is also deﬁned to becontinuously receiving feedback and making changes in the soft-ware rather than rejecting higher rates of change (Williams andCockburn, 2003).Different approaches to Agility exist; the most common ones areExtreme Programming (XP), Scrum, Feature Driven Development,Dynamic Systems Development Method, and Lean development(Bose, 2008; Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2008). Most Agile methods,however, encourage frequent and continuous face-to-face commu-nication, customer feedback and requirements gathering, as well asPair Programming (PP), refactoring, Continuous Integration (CI) andminimal documentation (Bose, 2008).Despite the popularity of Agile methods, there is a lack of under-standing to what extent different practices need to be used tobecome more efﬁcient in software development, and which prac-tices are actually applied in Agile or Lean software organizations orteams.To the best of our knowledge, the majority of the availableresearch aims at assisting software organization in the processof Agile adoption by assessing, measuring, or evaluating Agility,rather than building a mutual understanding between academiaand industry about Agile methodologies and practices. The relevantresearch is brieﬂy summarized below.We have grouped the related work based on their outcome,which are: (1) methods and guidelines and (2) tools and frame-works. At the end of Section 2.2, a brief summary of the existingresearch is provided to put our contribution into the context of therelated work.2.1. Methods and guidelines for evaluating AgilityAgile values and principles depict the fundamental characteris-tics of Agile methodologies and can be used as evaluation criteria.Conboy and Fitzgerald introduced ﬂexibility and leanness as theessential properties of any Agile software development methodthorough reviewing Agility across many disciplines (Conboy andFitzgerald, 2004). They have concluded that the Agile Manifestoprinciples do not provide practical understanding of the concept ofAgility outside the ﬁeld of software development.Furthermore, Boehm and Turner identiﬁed project size, projectcriticality, dynamism of the environment, personnel, and culture ascrucial variables in Agile methods (Boehm and Turner, 2004). Theirproposed ﬁve-step risk-based software development method com-bines the characteristics of both Agile and plan-driven approaches.Although it is a helpful guide for academics, it may not provide thenecessary details for practitioners.Other researchers evaluated Agile methods in relation to othercriteria than Agile values and principles. Abrahamsson et al. intro-duced a structure in which the process, roles and responsibilities,practices, status of adoption, experiences, scope of use, and currentresearch regarding each method are identiﬁed (Abrahamsson et al.,2002). They have used this structure as their analytical foundationto analyze the differences and similarities between different Agilesoftware development methods.McCaffery et al. (2008) proposed an assessment method thatcombines ﬂexibility of Agile practices with the ﬁrm structureof plan-driven software process improvement models i.e. CMMI(Software Engineering Institute, 2011) and Automotive SPICE(International Organization for Standardization, 2012). However,the assessment is designed speciﬁcally for small-to-medium sizedautomotive software supplier organizations.Germain and Robillard provided an empirical comparisonbetween an engineering-based process (Uniﬁed Process for Edu-cation – UPEDU) and an Agile process built around XP principles,mainly through comparing and analyzing the work and time spentin each of their “cognitive” activities (Germain and Robillard, 2005).In the latest work, Yauch constructed an objective metricthat measures Agility as a performance outcome and capturesboth organizational success and environmental turbulence (Yauch,2011). The metric was developed as a theoretical model and thenvalidated through literature review, case studies, and pilot surveydata.In addition to the above-mentioned methods and guidelines,several Agility evaluation tools and frameworks exist, which aresummarized in the following section.2.2. Tools and frameworks for evaluating AgilityIn 2003, Abrahamsson et al. proposed an analytical frameworkfor the analysis of existing Agile methods (Abrahamsson et al.,2003). They have used software development notions such aslifecycle coverage (including the process), project management,abstract principles vs. concrete guidance, universally predeﬁned vs.situation appropriate, and empirical evidence as “analytical lenses”.Later, Williams et al. provided a benchmark measurementframework for assessing XP practices adopted in software organi-zations (Williams et al., 2004) which is composed of three parts: (1)XP Context Factors to record essential contextual information, (2)XP Adherence Metrics to concretely and comparatively express theutilized practices, (3) XP Outcome Measures to assess the team’soutcome when using a full or partial set of XP practices.In 2006, Hartmann and Dymond collected some of the currentthinking on appropriate Agile metrics, and proposed simple tools tobe used by teams or organizations (Hartmann and Dymond, 2006)with the purpose of encouraging metrics that are more in alignmentwith the objectives of Agile teamwork.Simultaneously, Qumer and Henderson-Sellers proposed 4-DAT, which is a framework-based assessment tool for the analysisand comparison of Agile methods (Qumer and Henderson-Sellers,2006). It provides evaluation criteria for the detailed assessmentof Agile software development methods through deﬁning fourdimensions: (1) method scope characterization, (2) Agility char-acterization, (3) Agile values characterization, and (4) software 174 S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190process characterization. 4-DAT provides a mechanism for quanti-tatively measuring the degree of Agility of any method at a speciﬁclevel in a process using speciﬁc practices.In 2007, Sidky (2007) proposed Sidky Agile Measurement Index(SAMI), which is based on the concepts and principles of the existingsoftware process improvement standards CMM (Paulk et al., 1993)and CMMI (Software Engineering Institute, 2011). SAMI deter-mines ﬁve Agile levels by measuring the number of Agile practicesadopted by an organization. The objectives for each level are setrelatively to Agile values and principles as stated in the Agile Man-ifesto, and a set of practices is suggested for each level. However,enforcing these predeﬁned practices is not in alignment with theﬂexibility of Agile methods.Later in 2009, Hossain et al. introduced a conceptual frame-work based on the research literature to address the challengesof combining Global Software Development (GSD) and Agile meth-ods (Hossain et al., 2009). It is expected to assist project managersin deciding which Agile strategies are effective for a particularGSD setting considering the contextual information. Furthermore,Taromirad and Ramsin introduced the Comprehensive EvaluationFramework for Agile Methodologies (Taromirad and Ramsin, 2009),aiming at covering all different aspects of Agile methodologies.Lastly, Soundararajan and Arthur proposed the Objectives, Prin-ciples and Practices framework, in which the “goodness” of an Agilemethod is assessed by evaluating its adequacy and effectiveness,and the capability of the organization to provide the supportingenvironment (Soundararajan and Arthur, 2011). It means that fora given set of objectives for an Agile method, it has to be ensuredthat the appropriate principles and the proper practices are set.According to the provided summary of the related work, themajority of the existing research does not adequately address allAgility issues in their criteria, and rarely considers the usage con-text, which is the main concern of project managers. Furthermore,it does not suggest any quantitative metrics that are easily applica-ble in practice. Therefore, our study aimed at examining the Agilityassessment surveys that are proposed by practitioners.3. Research methodology3.1. Research questionsThe major purpose of the research was to investigate the appli-cability of the existing surveys for assessing the Agility of a team oran organization. The research questions (RQ) were formulated asfollows.RQ1: Which surveys exist to evaluate the Agility of a team or anorganization and what are their strengths and weaknesses?RQ2: Are the existing surveys applicable to assess Agility?RQ3: Do the existing surveys give the same assessment results?3.2. Research stepsThe research methodology consists of three steps: preparation,case study, and statistical analysis. The core step is the case studyi.e. the second step. The ﬁrst step provides the basis for conductingthe case study and the third step involves the statistical analysis ofthe data collected in the case study. Each of them is presented inmore details in the following subsections.(1) Preparation: survey identiﬁcationThe research started by a systematic search of the relevantliterature in the web for current frameworks, or surveys withthe purpose of evaluating the Agility of a software develop-ment team or an organization. Since, we did not ﬁnd the existingframeworks sufﬁciently testable (e.g. through a questionnairethat could be used in a case study), we ended up focusingthe searches on the surveys that are developed and used bypractitioners. Thus, to answer RQ1, we searched the web andpreliminary evaluated the surveys and selected a few of them.(2) Case study in industryThe surveys identiﬁed in the web search were input to a casestudy to answer RQ2. The objective was to evaluate the applica-bility of the surveys. The applicability in this context means towhat extent it represents the actual status of the studied teams,and is measured by comparing the results given by the surveyswith the participants’ perceptions and expectations as well aswith their customers (i.e. the product owners).(3) Statistical analysisThe data collected from the three teams in the case studywere analyzed using statistical tests. Furthermore, RQ3 wasanswered by comparing the results of the surveys examinedin the case study. This was also evaluated using statistical tests.In summary, the research methodology was a mixed approach(Creswell, 2003) applying both qualitative and quantitative datacollection and analysis methods in an industrial case study. Themixed approach includes using both interviews and focus groups(qualitative) and a survey (quantitative). The classiﬁcation of thestudy as a case study is based on the guidelines for case studyresearch in software engineering (Runeson and Höst, 2009).3.3. Preparation: survey identiﬁcationThe preparation phase consisted of ﬁnding existing surveys andpreliminary evaluating them in order to minimize the time requiredfrom industrial participants.3.3.1. Searching the webTo address RQ1, we searched the web for existing tools or sur-veys that are not found in the research literature. Here, a tool isviewed as a set of questions (e.g. a survey or questionnaire) plusan analysis on the responses to the questions. The search wasconducted using the Google1search engine. The intention was touse the following search string: Agile AND (assess OR measure ORframework OR tool OR evaluate OR proﬁle). If this string resultedin too many items, the objective was to try simpler search stringsto be able to handle the amount of information.3.3.2. Initial evaluations of the surveysThe surveys found in the searches are to be evaluated. The objec-tive is to only select a few surveys as input to an industrial casestudy. The main reason for doing so is that it would be too timeconsuming for the industrial partner to evaluate all potentiallyavailable surveys. The following criteria were decided to form thebasis for identifying the surveys that should go into the industrialcase study:•Covering all Agile methods: We were looking for a survey thatassesses Agility in general rather than being focused on one ora combination of a few Agile methods, e.g. Scrum or XP.•Being free of charge: Since the scope was wide (i.e. all surveysthat assess Agility), and the participating teams could potentiallybe from different companies (as initially planned), we decidedto continue with the surveys, which are available for free. Inaddition, companies normally prefer cost-efﬁcient solutions. Itbecomes even more expensive if a company would like to repeat1http://www.google.com. S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190 175the assessment in different points of time and has to pay for thelicense each time.•However, we also examined the ones that provide trial version.In addition, they were further examined based on their questionsand the covered areas regarding the Agility. Another importantfactor was the presentation of the results. Therefore, we gave ran-dom answers to all questions of available surveys and exploredthe results in order to ﬁgure out how they are extracted.•Assessing a team and an organization: Agility can be measured atdifferent levels i.e. individual, team, department, division, orga-nization, etc. We were interested in the surveys that assess asoftware development team and its software organization.•Having a reasonable number of questions: Each survey should coverdifferent Agility areas (e.g. development and management prac-tices). On the one hand, too many questions may be hard to havepeople answering, but on the other hand having too few ques-tions would make it hard to evaluate the actual Agility in anorganization.•Providing a sufﬁcient analysis on the given responses: The funda-mental part of all assessments is the analysis and presentationof the given data. Therefore, we omitted the surveys that did notprovide sufﬁcient analysis or the presentation was not clear.•Simplicity: An assessment survey must be easy to use, both inentering the data and in interpreting the results. Most small tomedium size organizations prefer surveys that can be utilizedwith the internal expertise and as often as they need to.3.4. Case study in industryUsing the selection of surveys, we planned a case study to eval-uate their applicability through comparing their results with theperceptions/expectations of the participating teams and their cus-tomers.3.4.1. ParticipantsIn the following subsections, we describe the participating orga-nization and the teams taking part in the case study as well as theircustomers. The contextual information is reported according to theguidelines recommended by Petersen and Wohlin (Petersen andWohlin, 2009).3.4.1.1. Softhouse consulting. Softhouse Consulting was founded in1996 as an independent IT consultancy company in Sweden, andcurrently is one of the leading Scandinavian suppliers of Lean Soft-ware Development with over 100 employees.2It has sites locatedin Malmö, Karlskrona, Växjö, Stockholm and Gothenburg.The company encourages simplicity, reliability, and profes-sionalism in its work process and employs cross-functional andself-organizing teams to deliver fully functional software with thedesired quality.This study was conducted in cooperation with the developmentsites located in Karlskrona and Malmö. Three teams participatedin the surveys. Two of the teams were located in Karlskrona andthe third team in Malmö. The teams in Karlskrona work with thesame customer while the team in Malmö has a different customer.More detailed information about the teams is given in the followingsubsections.3.4.1.2. Telecom development team (Team 1). The team is responsi-ble to add new features to an already existing system.Product: The work is contract-based and the business relation-ship is onshore outsourcing (Prikladnicki et al., 2007). The ﬁnal2http://www.softhouse.se/en/index.php/about-us/about-softhouse.product is commercial and is customized for speciﬁc telecom oper-ator(s). At the time of data collection, the collaboration was builtover 2.5 years through different projects, and each project is about500 person-hours. The programming languages are C++ and Java.Processes: If the end customers are not satisﬁed with the stan-dard features, they can order new features. The product ownerprioritizes the orders applying ﬁrst-in-ﬁrst-out strategy. A projectto add a new feature is normally about 200–400 hours.Requirements (i.e. features) are small and therefore a number ofsmall projects are run simultaneously within the team. One projectis normally accomplished within four weeks (i.e. one sprint). Theteam receives a ﬁxed set of requirements and a ﬁxed deadline,and then independently performs Sprint planning and the design.However, the team must handshake the design with the customer’sarchitect team to ensure its consistency with the whole product.Although the team applies Scrum practices, the work processis adapted to the customer’s processes. For example, the practiceswithin the team are Scrum, but the reports are made according tothe customer’s preferences. The team follows coding conventions,which are accessible in a wiki. In addition, it applies automatedtesting and Test Driven Development (TDD). Daily meetings areheld within the team to report the progress and discuss the issues,and weekly meetings with all personnel.Practices, Tools and Techniques: Since the customer does notprovide any Agile speciﬁc tools, Excel sheets are used for Sprintplanning (e.g. to visualize the task loads, reprioritize the tasks, andprovide burn down graphs to be sent to the customer as weeklyreports).People: One functional team shall consist of four to ﬁve peo-ple according to the customer’s demands. However, eight peopleare in Team 1 (T1) so that they can form two teams at the sametime working on different tasks if needed. One person out of eighttakes the role of system analyst, one is Scrum master, and six aredevelopers/testers. The average prior experience of Agile (beforethis project) is about one year excluding the Scrum master and 1.2years including the Scrum master.Organization: The team is co-located at the customer site in thesame city, but works independently. The team uses informal andface-to-face communication with no bookings.Market: The project is developed for only one customer(although the customer would sell it to more than one other cus-tomers), and the studied organization’s strategy is to reduce thedelivery time with maintained good quality.Customer: The customer organization is globally distributedand its software development teams have adopted customizedAgile.3.4.1.3. Telecom maintenance team (Team 2). Team 2 (T2) wasformed 0.5 year after T1 to work with reported defects and main-tenance issues (the same product as for T1). Most of the contextualinformation is the same as for T1 and therefore we describe onlythe differences.Processes: Any types of problems with the product found by theend users, market, or test departments, are documented as “troublereport” (TR). T2 receives TRs and runs trouble shooting i.e. recreat-ing the failure, ﬁnding where to ﬁx it in the code, writing the testcase, preparing the follow up forms, and sending the follow up tothe test team.The team has the freedom to plan only the tasks of a day becausethe customer prioritizes the tasks i.e. which TRs should be doneﬁrst. So, the operation is somehow sprint-less. Regular meetings(three times per week) are held with the customer to collect theTRs and discuss the progress.Practices, Tools and Techniques: A customized Kanban boardis used which shows only backlog, team, and done columns torepresent the plan and the workﬂow. Since the work is not really 176 S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190planned in Sprints, retrospective meetings have not been held reg-ularly.People: T2 consists of 10 people in total, two system analysts,one Scrum master, and seven developers/testers. The average priorexperience of Agile is about 0.5 year excluding the Scrum masterand 0.75 years including the Scrum master.Customer: Although the customer organization is the same asfor T1, the customer unit is different.3.4.1.4. Building management development team (Team 3).Product: The business relationship is onshore outsourcing, and theproduct is a building management system, which is supervisingand controlling technical systems in buildings. For example, it isused for monitoring heating/cooling, ventilation, ﬁre preventionalarm systems, light control, etc. At the time of data collection, thecollaboration was built over four years.Processes: The product owner prioritizes the tasks for the devel-opment team. Team 3 (T3) performs Sprint planning and the designthemselves. The team applies Scrum practices with some adapta-tions to the customer’s processes. Daily meetings are held withinthe team to report the progress and discuss the issues, togetherwith all personnel.Practices, Tools and Techniques: The team applies only prac-tices that are needed, but TDD is not used since testing is doneexternally by a test department at the customer site.People: The team consists of six developers, one Scrum master,one product owner, one project leader (who works as an interfacetoward the customer organization), and one technical publicationperson (who writes how the system works). It accomplishes fourto ﬁve user stories in a two-week Sprint. Tasks are done in parallel,and PP seems to increase the quality of the output (the number ofdefects seems to be lower). The average prior experience of Agile(before this project) is about 4 months including the Scrum masterand the team leader, and is 6 months when excluding them.Organization: The team is co-located at the customer site in thesame city, but works independently. The team uses informal andface-to-face communication.Market: Since the participating organization is a consultancyﬁrm, the projects usually have only one customer.Customer: The customer organization is a multicultural com-pany and is globally distributed.3.4.2. Design and conduct of case studyIn this section, we explain the details of the research design andconduct in relation to the case study, including the questionnaire,interviews, and open discussions.3.4.2.1. Questionnaire. All questions from the selected surveyswere to be merged into one Excel ﬁle (in separate sheets). Inaddition, some questions were added to capture the demographicinformation of the participants (e.g. role and years of experience)as well as project information (e.g. type and customer).For each question in the surveys, we added the option to skipanswering if it was not applicable or the respondent did not wantto reply to it for any reasons. Furthermore, participants were sup-posed to declare how sure they were of the given answer for eachquestion. The reason for this was to weigh the answers with moreconﬁdence level higher than the answers with low conﬁdence.In addition, classiﬁcation of the questions as it was in the originalsurveys was removed in order to reduce the bias when answeringthe questions although hiding the classiﬁcation might have causedconfusions when answering the questions. A sample of the surveyis presented in Appendix A.The detailed planning of the case study was done when it wasknown that two surveys were selected from the survey identiﬁca-tion step. The two chosen surveys are denoted S1 and S2. At thetime we designed the questionnaires for each survey, S2 consistedof 127 questions excluding the demographic questions and S1 had20 questions. Hence, in total, the study includes 147 questions.Therefore, the time to ﬁnish the questionnaire was estimated to bemaximum 150 minutes. All participants were informed about thepurpose of the study as well as its potential beneﬁts in advance.3.4.2.2. Interview with Scrum master and a team representative. Themajor reasons for conducting interviews with the Scrum masterand a team representative (separate interviews) were to discussany inconsistencies observed in the collected answers, and togather additional contextual information of the organization, team,project, and the customer.For this purpose, shortly after data collection, the objective wasthat two of the researchers should scan the answers separatelyand ﬁnd inconsistencies and prioritize them before going into theinterviews.The candidate questions to bring up at the interviews wereidentiﬁed as follows: (1) with no majority (if at least half of theparticipants did not give the same response), (2) with a big differ-ence in the answers (e.g. “strong yes” vs. “strong no” for the samequestion), (3) questions that could dramatically change the score inspeciﬁc areas, (4) with a big agreement, and (5) with the majorityof “Not Applicable” response.They were prioritized in the same order too (i.e. the ones “withno majority response” were more important to be discussed and soon). The main motivation for prioritization was the time limit forthe interview, which was agreed to be maximum 90 min. Since wehad to collect additional contextual information, it was impossibleto discuss important identiﬁed inconsistencies during the inter-view if they were not prioritized.The team representative was to be nominated by the Scrummaster and the company’s director. The same items were to bediscussed with the Scrum master and the team representativeintending to openly discuss the reasons causing the inconsistentresponses. If both interviewees had given the same or similarresponse, that was considered as the team’s response. Otherwise,we considered the question as “Not Applicable”.3.4.2.3. Interview with customer (i.e. product owner). In order to col-lect the customers’ perception on the team Agility, we designed a60-minute interview with their customer representatives (sepa-rate customer interviews for T1, T2, and T3). The purpose of theinterviews was explained beforehand to the interviewees in anemail.Since the customers were not expected to be aware of all detailsabout the teams in particular the technical aspects, we designed theinterviews in a way to generally discuss the following items, whichare similar to the categorizations made by the studied surveys:Teamwork: The perception of the Agility of the team’s compo-sition, management and communication.Requirements: This area includes the level of details of require-ments, accommodating changes, technical design of requirements,and collaborating with the product owner.Planning: It concerns the suitability of planning activities e.g.planning time, levels of planning and progress tracking.Technical Practices: Technical practices are TDD, PP, refactor-ing, CI, coding standards, and collective code ownership.Quality: This relates to automated unit testing, customer accep-tance tests, and timing.Culture: To what extent the customer views the team’s man-agement style, response to stress, and the customer involvementas Agile.Knowledge creating: If the team learning is evident to the cus-tomer and is useful. S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190 177In addition, each interviewee was asked to assign a score from0 to 5 (not Agile to highly Agile) to each before mentioned area. Asample of interview questions is presented in Appendix B.3.4.2.4. Focus group. The results were from the survey and inter-views were to be presented to the whole teams in a retrospectivemeeting, where team members openly could discuss if it matchedtheir own perceptions. The objective was to involve the teamsactively in discussing the reasons for not being Agile in some areas,and how it can be improved or why it is an external factor thatcannot be changed.After presenting the results to the teams and discussing howit matched their own perceptions of practicing Agile as well asthe reasons for not being Agile in relation to speciﬁc aspects, weconducted additional interviews (in addition to the interviewsdescribed in Section 3.4.2.2) with two Scrum masters (one for T1and T2, and one for T3). The main intention of the interview wasto plan for an in-depth discussion around the applicability of thestudied surveys as well as the potential combination of them. Theapplicability in this context means to what extent it represents theactual status of the studied teams.3.4.3. Statistical analysisStatistical analysis was to be performed to objectively exam-ine the surveys’ applicability. Finally, the plan is to compare theresults given by the surveys with the results of the statistical anal-ysis, and to propose an applicable survey based on this comparison.Statistical analysis was conducted to provide answers to the posedresearch questions.RQ1: Which surveys exist to evaluate the Agility of a team or anorganization and what are their strengths and weaknesses?Descriptive analysis was to be utilized to provide answer to RQ1by summarizing and classifying the surveys that were found in thesearches.RQ2: Are the existing surveys applicable to assess Agility?Applicability was deﬁned as to what extent a survey representsthe actual status of a studied team, and it was measured by per-forming comparative analysis (Marascuilo and Serlin, 1998) i.e.comparing the results given by the surveys with the participants’perceptions/expectations as well as with their customers’ view.RQ3: Do the existing surveys give the same assessment results?This question was to be answered through conducting both acomparative analysis and statistical tests (Marascuilo and Serlin,1998).Firstly, we apply fuzzy approval voting (Lapresta and Panero,2002; Kangas et al., 2006) to calculate team representative answersfor all questions as input for the studied surveys to get the teams’Agility scores, and compare the scores provided by the two studiedsurveys. Secondly, we enter the data of each participating indi-vidual in the studied surveys to calculate their scores, and applystatistical tests on the individual scores to examine differences andsimilarities between the teams as well as between the surveys.The ﬁndings of statistical tests are then to be compared with theresults given by the surveys. Both approaches are elaborated in thefollowing subsections.3.4.3.1. First approach: comparing teams’ Agility ranks provided bythe studied surveys. This part of the data analysis consist of: calcu-lating the mode value for each question of the survey to representeach team’s answer, calculating the level of Agility based on thecustomer interview, and discussing each team’s Agility accordingto the studied surveys.Participants could determine how conﬁdent they are about thegiven answer for each question by selecting an option among:“sure”, “more sure than unsure”, “neither sure not unsure”, “moreunsure than sure”, and “unsure” (i.e. to weight the answer between1 to 0). In addition, it was possible to write comments.Immediately after data collection, we check whether the partic-ipants had provided all required information. Otherwise, we planto contact them for clariﬁcation or to complete the questions notanswered.We use a special case of fuzzy approval voting (Lapresta andPanero, 2002; Kangas et al., 2006) in which a person was allowedto choose only one alternative answer among a given set of answersfor each question. In the following, it is elaborated how we calculateeach team’s representative answer.We sum the conﬁdence levels for each speciﬁc option/answergiven for a question. The answer with the highest sum of conﬁ-dence (mode value) is then considered as each team’s answer. It isexplained in the following example.Suppose six team members have answered question 1 as it isshown in Table 1. Option 1 has 0.75 + 0.5 + 0 conﬁdence level (per-sons: 1, 3 and 6), option 2 with 1.0 (person: 2), and option 3 with0.5 + 0.25 (persons: 4 and 5) as it is shown in Fig. 1. After weightingthe answer with the level of conﬁdence, answer number 1 becomesthe team’s answer, since the total conﬁdence level is 1.25 comparedto 1.0 and 0.75 respectively for the other options.For some questions, it may be possible that a mode value isnot identiﬁed because either more than one answer/option hadthe highest weight or less than the majority of the team members(i.e. (team size/2)+1) had given an identical answer regardless ofits weight. Those questions were to be brought to the discussionswith the Scrum master and each team’s representative separately.If both gave similar explanation and selected the same answer,we considered that as the team’s answer, otherwise it was set to“Not Applicable”. Then, all answers were entered into the studiedonline surveys and the results were presented and discussed withthe team. The actual analysis is elaborated in more details in Section4.In the meeting with the product owners, they are asked to givea score from 0 to 5 (not Agile to highly Agile) to each Agile area asdiscussed in Section 3.4.2.3. Each area is weighed the same (i.e. allare equally important) and the mean value is calculated to repre-sent each team’s Agility level from the customer’s perspective. Ifthe customer did not have enough information of a speciﬁc area,it is removed from the calculations. The results are elaborated inSection 4.3.4.3.2. Second approach: comparing teams and comparing surveysusing statistical tests. The results given by the studied surveys arecomplemented by additional statistical tests. To be able to performthe calculations and relevant tests, we need to calculate the indi-vidual Agility ranks ﬁrst. Therefore, the respondents’ answers wereto be put into the surveys and the rank provided by the surveys wasconsidered as her/his Agility rank.It is anticipated that some data points will be missing, so weplan to apply the nearest neighbor approach for data imputation(Chen and Shao, 2000) before entering data into the surveys, whichis elaborated in the following.Suppose person X has a missing data point (i.e. an answer)for question A. We calculate the similarity between person X andother team members regarding the given answers (no missing, noimputed) for all other questions. The similarity value for all partic-ipants in the team was set to zero at the beginning, and we will gothrough all questions (without missing data and without imputeddata) and follow the procedure below:•For each other question:- If person Y had selected the same option as person X, then thesimilarity value was increased by 0.5 point 178 S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190Table 1Sample of given answers.Person 1Person
 2Person
 3Person
 4 Person 5 Person 6Sure Answer Sure Answer Sure Answer Sure Answer Sure Answer Sure Answer0.75 1 1.0 2 0.5 1 0.5 3 0.25 3 0 1Fig. 1. Example of calculating mode value.- If the certainty value (see Table 1) was also the same, the simi-larity value was increased by another 0.5 point•The person with the greatest similarity value was considered asthe nearest neighbor for person X- If there were more than one nearest neighbors, we chose oneperson randomly, using the random function in MS Excel3•Both the selected answer and its certainty value (see Table 1) forquestion A from the nearest neighbor were imputed for person X3.5. SummaryThe major objective of the research was to investigate theapplicability of the existing surveys for assessing/proﬁling Agility.Therefore, we studied several surveys to select a few of them asinput to a case study. The case study was the participating organi-zation and the three units of analysis were the three participatingteams (Runeson and Höst, 2009).The participants of the case study were: (1) three softwaredevelopment teams in a consultancy company in Sweden thatanswered the questions of the selected surveys, (2) the Scrum mas-ter of the teams to clarify the answers of questions that requireddiscussions, (3) representatives of each team with the same pur-pose as meeting the Scrum masters, and (4) customers of all teamsto collect their perception of each team’s Agility.The extracted results of surveys on the level of practicing Agilityby teams were compared against the teams’ own perceptions ofAgility, and their customer’s perception. The results of the investi-gations are presented in the following section.4. ResultsThe results from using the two surveys are presented based onthe three research steps presented in Section 3.2. In Section 4.1, wepresent the selection of two surveys starting from the search forsurveys on the web and the evaluation of them based on a set ofcriteria. In Section 4.2, the case study is presented where the resultsfrom using the two selected surveys are discussed and compared.3RAND()*(b − a) + a: to generate a random real number between a and b.Furthermore, the results from the surveys are compared with thecustomer’s perception of the Agility of the teams, and the teams alsoreﬂect on the results. Section 4.3 ﬁrst presents an imputation of datato complete the data set and then a statistical analysis, where theresults from the point of view of the teams are compared. However,a detailed comparison of the two surveys is provided in Section 5.4.1. Survey identiﬁcation4.1.1. Surveys from searching the webWe used of the following search string: Agile AND (assess ORmeasure OR framework OR tool OR evaluate OR proﬁle) whichresulted (as feared) in an enormous number of items (i.e. about323000). Therefore, simpler search strings were tried such as “Agileassessment tool” and “Agile measurement survey”. However, thesearch string that gave the most reasonable results was “Agilityassessment tool”. Thus, the surveys found and evaluated werefound using these search strings.Some commonly used checklists by Agile practitioners seems tobe (1) the Nokia Test (Sutherland, 2009) for Scrum, (2) How AgileAre You: 42-Point Test (Waters, 2008), (3) the Scrum Master Check-list (James, 2007), and (4) the Do It Yourself (DIY) Project ProcessEvaluation Kit (Dinwiddie, 2009). It should be noted that most ofthese checklists are tailored to one or a few speciﬁc Agile methods.Another concern for software organizations is to ﬁgure out howefﬁcient the Agile adoption has been, which implies identifyingproblem areas and taking proper actions to address them. For thispurpose, retrospective meetings at the end of each iteration areheld to “ﬁne-tune” the Agile practices. Furthermore, external con-sultants or surveys can also help the assessment. Most assessmentsurveys are, however, not publicly available free of charge, andtherefore, information about them is also hard to ﬁnd. A summaryof Agile assessment surveys found in our searches is presented inTables 2 and 3.4.1.2. Initial evaluation of surveysAmong the presented surveys above (see Tables 2 and 3), twosurveys i.e. (Thoughtworks Studio, 2010a) and (Cohn and Rubin,2007) were selected for further evaluation after studying and dis-cussing them with the practitioners. The basis for the selection S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190 179Table 2Summary of available surveys 1.Test Assessment unit Score Free Agile method FocusTeam Department Division Organization Comparative Absolute Generic
AgileOnly AgileprinciplesGeneric AgilepracticesSpeciﬁc AgilepracticesAgile Karlskrona Test (Mayberg Consulting, 2008)
CMI Lean Agility (CMI Lean Agility, 2009)  Comparative Agility Assessment (Cohn and Rubin, 2007)   a  Dr Agile (Santeon Group, 2012)  Nokia Test (Sutherland, 2009) ScrumScrum Checklist (Kniberg, 2010)  ScrumSignet Consulting (Signet Research and Consulting, 2005)
     Thoughtworks Agile Self Evaluation (Thoughtworks Studio,2010a)
Thoughtworks Build And Release Management(Thoughtworks Studio, 2010b)
42-Point Test (Waters, 2008)
aComparing to the answers in the database which are provided by other respondents.Table 3Summary of Available Surveys 2.Test Usage Questions Criteria AnalysisGeneric AgileAdoptionPartial AgileAdoptionGeneric AgileAssessmentPartial AgileAssessmentNumber Type Sufﬁcient PartialAgile Karlskrona Test (Mayberg Consulting, 2008)11 Multiple choiceCMI Lean Agility (CMI Lean Agility, 2009)Comparative Agility Assessment (Cohn and Rubin, 2007)±120Five-point
 scaleDr Agile (Santeon Group, 2012)22 Organization’s readiness toadopt Agile practicesNokia Test (Sutherland, 2009)9Scrum Checklist (Kniberg, 2010)Existence of requiredpracticesSignet Consulting (Signet Research and Consulting, 2005)22 Level of applying practicesThoughtworks Agile Self Evaluation (Thoughtworks Studio,2010a)20 Multiple choiceThoughtworks Build And Release Management(Thoughtworks Studio, 2010b)20 Multiple choice42-Point Test (Waters, 2008)42 True/false statements Team’s consistency ratherthan Agility score 180 S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190was the criteria presented in Section 3.3.2. The chosen surveyswere judged having a good coverage of different perspectives ofAgility (e.g. team and organization) as well as different areas (e.g.requirements, testing and communication). Thus, the two surveysremaining for further investigation in the case study were:(1) Thoughtworks’ Agile self evaluation (S1): It is devel-oped by Thoughtworks, which is a leading Agile develop-ment/consulting organization (Thoughtworks Studio, 2010a).The survey consists of 20 multiple-choice questions addressingAgile development and management practices. Managementpractices are related to requirements analysis, businessresponsiveness, collaboration and communication, projectmanagement, and governance. Development practices addresssimplicity, build management, conﬁguration management, andtesting and quality assurance. Practitioners can complete thesurveys online and get a report on the level of Agility withintheir organization/team, as well as improvement opportunities(Thoughtworks Studio, 2010a).Although the questions are related to different Agile areasand perspectives, the number of questions per area is not sufﬁ-cient for all categories. However, Agility and the highest level ofpractices are clearly deﬁned and are transparent to the users. Inaddition, the results are presented visually along with relevantimprovement recommendations for each Agile area.(2) Comparative Agility assessment (S2): It is developed basedon the assumption that most organizations prefer to be moreAgile than their competitors rather than striving to be “perfectlyAgile” (Williams et al., 2010). Therefore, it assesses the Agility ofteams/organizations relative to other teams/organizations thatresponded to the questionnaire.It is a survey-based tool, in which answers are recorded ona ﬁve-point scale (true, more true than false, neither true norfalse, more false then true and false). Questions can be answeredfrom four different views, which are team, department, divi-sion, and organization. Eight dimensions are considered as thebasis for the assessment: (1) teamwork, (2) requirements, (3)planning, (4) technical practices, (5) quality, (6) culture, (7)knowledge creating, and (8) outcomes (Cohn and Rubin, 2007).Each dimension consists of three to six characteristics, andeach characteristic of a number of statements that have tobe veriﬁed by the respondents. Each statement indicatesan Agile practice, and the respondent should determine thetruth of the statement based on their actual practices in theteam/organization.The questions sufﬁciently address different areas of Agilityand the number of questions per area is reasonable. Partici-pants get a free report indicating their level of practicing Agilityin each dimension and each characteristic separately in com-parison to other practitioners.4.1.3. Reﬂections on survey identiﬁcationIt may be perceived that Agility ought to be deﬁned before beingable to assess it. However, we intentionally did not pick any deﬁ-nition from any sources in order to be able to objectively conductsearches. The intention was to compare the deﬁnitions of Agilityfound in several surveys with the opinions and expectations of thepractitioners who participated in this research study. Therefore, wedid not begin our research with a strict deﬁnition for Agility.To enable process improvement systematically and efﬁcientlyin an Agile development environment, software companies/teamsneed to know how Agile they are and what Agile practices theyshould be implementing or improving. For process improvementpurpose, it is crucial to understand the current situation (baseline)before planning any improvement initiatives. However, we do notclaim that the objective should be to become fully Agile and imple-menting all Agile practices, but we encourage examining the statusof practicing Agility within a team/organization in alignment withthe goals and objectives of the team and/or organization.Thus, the major purpose of conducting this research study wasto understand how Agility can/should be assessed. Hence, wesearched for proper surveys that evaluate Agility of a team or anorganization. The existing frameworks found in the research liter-ature did not seem to be applicable in practice because it was notknown whether they could be used without help of a consultant. Onthe other hand, Agile researchers have not evaluated the availablechecklists and surveys developed by practitioners.In this research, we searched and evaluated the available sur-veys and utilized two of them as input to an industrial case studywith the purpose of evaluating the applicability of the surveys.Therefore, instead of introducing a new framework, we scientif-ically examined the Agile assessment surveys. This helps bothresearchers and practitioners to gain awareness of the existingwork in the area and to beneﬁt from an analysis on the strengthsand weaknesses of the studied surveys.4.2. Case studyThe results of each survey for the three teams T1, T2, and T3 arepresented separately as well as for T1 and T2 together (since theyhave the same customer) and in comparison with T3, followed bythe customers’ perception. It should be noted that one person iscommon in both T1 and T2, i.e. both teams have the same Scrummaster.4.2.1. S1 – thoughtworks’ Agile self evaluation surveyIt considers Agility as the ability to adapt to ever-changingenvironments, and the questions are based on the Agile princi-ples including both management and development practices. Basedon the answers, it ranks the team/project on a scale ranging from“regressive” to “Agile”.Being in the “regressive” state represents behaviors that hinderthe ability to adapt and the “Agile” state represents behaviors thatfocus almost exclusively on adapting to changes.When presenting the results to the team, we made minormodiﬁcations, which were changing “ad-hoc” to “neutral”, and“regressive” to “non-Agile”, which sounds more positive andencourages the team to participate in the discussions around theresults instead of risking a more defensive mode.Fig. 2 summarizes the results of the survey for all teams sepa-rately as well as for T1 and T2 together (represented as C1). T1 andT2 have the same customer and practically are seen as one teamby the customer organization, while T3 has a different customer.Therefore, T1 and T2 can be compared against each other, and bothtogether (C1) against T3 with the purpose of learning from eachother. In addition, the comparisons would also help to estimate theAgility of the studied organization.During the presentation session, the teams also categorized theimprovement areas as external and internal. The external refers tothe factors that are introduced outside the team (e.g. due to thecustomer side). The internal areas were listed down in the actionplan of the team.Fig. 2 indicates that only T2 is Agile. T3 is more Agile than C1and T1 is less Agile than C1, but all of them are in the neutral area.Surprisingly, the score for C1 (T1 + T2) is closer to T1’s score.Considering the weighted mode response for each question as themajority might lead to domination of the answers with higher levelof conﬁdence, and hence this type of outcome. By looking at thecollected data, T1 team members are more conﬁdent about the S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190 181Fig. 2. Results of survey 1.given answers to some questions comparing to T2, which can beone explanation to this unexpected result.4.2.2. S2 – comparative Agility assessment surveyThis survey produces two different graphs based on theanswers. The ﬁrst graph shows the level of Agility in differentareas/dimensions (Cohn and Rubin, 2007) in comparison to theother answers in the survey’s database. The second graph repre-sents Agility level for all characteristics of each area. The analysisfor each question is given in terms of the number of standard devi-ations from the mean value in the survey’s database. So, havinga positive score means the answer is “better than” the averageanswers in the database. More details regarding the analysis canbe found in (Cohn and Rubin, 2007).Fig. 3 summarizes the results (only the ﬁrst graph) for T1, T2, T3,and T1 together with T2. Surprisingly, T2 is ranked less Agile thanT1 in this survey, which is different from S1. Also, T3 is signiﬁcantlymore Agile than T1 and T2 separately and together unlike S1. Wewill discuss the possible reasons for this contradiction in Section5.2.4.2.3. Collective Agile areas – all surveysOne critical topic of discussion was around the contradictions inthe results of different surveys. For example, T2 is more Agile thanT1 in S1, but less in S2. Furthermore, T1 is Agile in most areas of S2while T2 is not, but all together becomes sufﬁciently Agile (Fig. 3).On the other hand, T3 is not Agile according to S1, but according toS2 it is signiﬁcantly more Agile than T1 and T2 and both together.To examine the combination of surveys, we put all Agile areasfrom all surveys in a scale from “not Agile” to “very Agile” anddiscussed whether it depicts the teams’ status better than eachindividual survey. Table 5 maps the studied Agile areas to the Agilescales. If one speciﬁc area was examined in more than one survey,we considered the one with higher Agility rank.It is surprising that T1 and T2 perceive project management (PM)differently although the same person (i.e. Scrum master) is respon-sible. It however might be due to the differences in their tasks andthe way the work is formulated e.g. T1 uses sprints while T2 tasksare oriented differently to handle TRs. The results for T3, however,seem to be closer to the results of S2 than the results of S1.4.2.4. Customer’s perception and team’s self-assessmentThe customer representatives were interviewed in order tocomplete the contextual information of the project as well asto gather their view on the teams’ Agility. Fig. 4 summarizes allteams’ scores (0 to 5) in different areas. It should be noted thatthe customer representative for T2 did not assign any score tothe “knowledge creating” area due to unawareness of the detailsregarding how the team performs knowledge creation. Similarly,T3 did not receive any score in the “technical practices” area. There-fore, these areas were not considered in calculating the mean Agilevalue for T2 and T3.The mean values were calculated to be 4.4 for T1, 3.5 for T2, and3.9 for T3. This is in alignment with the Scrum masters’ perception.Accepting these perceptions, T1 is more Agile in practice than T2(which matches the results of S2), and T3 (which contradicts theresults of S2). More in-depth discussions are provided in Section5.2.In the team self-assessment, the teams had many discussionsand reﬂections on their own practice of Agility. This helped to createa better joint understanding of their strong areas in terms of Agility.The teams agreed that S2 better captured their perception of theirown Agility as well as a comparatively to the other teams. The mainadvantage was that it had more questions, and hence the resultsbecame for ﬁne-grained and less dependent on single questions. Amore in-depth comparison of the surveys is provided in Section 5.4.3. Using statistical tests for comparing teams and surveys4.3.1. Data imputationAs expected, data imputation was needed since not all partici-pants were able to provide responses to all questions or they forgotto answer some questions given the number of questions. Table 4summarizes the results of data imputation. All teams have lowerimputation rates in S2 compared to S1. T2 has the greatest impu-tation rate of 12.6% in S1.After data imputation, we calculated each person’s Agilityscore/rank in each survey (i.e. two distinctive scores from twosurveys). Then, these scores were used to calculate descriptivestatistics (i.e. minimum value, maximum, mean, standard devia-tion, and median) for each team. In addition, a variety of statisticalmethods were used in order to compare the surveys and the teams.Fig. 3. Results of survey 2. 182 S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190Fig. 4. Customers’ perception.Table 4Summary of data imputation.S1 Total number of options = 64Team Participants Total options Imputed1 6 64 × 6 = 38410
 out of 384, i.e. 2.6%2 6 384 12.6%3 5 320 4%S2 Total number of options = 348Team Participants Total options Imputed1 6 348 × 6 = 2088 1.4%2 6 2088 1.4%3 5 1740 1.4%Table 5Collective Agile areas from both surveys.Not Agile Neutral Acceptable Agile Agile Very AgileTeam 1(1) Project Management(2) Business Responsiveness(3) Requirements(4) Technical practices(1) Build Management(2) Simplicity(3) Testing(1) Planning (1) Collaboration andCommunication
(2) Teamwork(3) Quality(4) Culture(5) Knowledge Creation(1) Governance(2) Conﬁguration ManagementTeam 2(1) Requirements(2) Technical practices(3) Knowledge creation(4) Quality(1) Simplicity(2) Testing(1) Teamwork (1) Collaboration andCommunication
(2) Project Management(3) Culture(4) Planning(1) Business Responsiveness(2) Governance(3) Build Management(4) Conﬁguration ManagementTeam 1 + Team 2(1) Business Responsiveness(2) Requirements(3) Technical practices(4) Knowledge Creation(1) Simplicity(2) Testing(1) ProjectManagement
(2) Quality(3) Planning(1) Collaboration andCommunication
(2) Culture(3) Teamwork(1) Build Management(2) Conﬁguration Management(3) GovernanceTeam 3(1) Testing(2) Quality(1) Simplicity (1) Project Management(2) Conﬁguration Management(3) Technical Practices(4) Culture(1) Business Responsiveness(2) Governance(3) Collaboration andCommunication
(4) Build Management(5) Requirements(6) Teamwork(7) Planning(8) Knowledge Creation S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190 183Table 6Summary of descriptive statistics for the Agility scores.Team Score of S1 Score of S2T1Participants 6 6Minimum 0.40 0.37Maximum 0.57 0.57Mean 0.51 0.46Std. Deviation 0.06 0.065Median 0.51 0.44T2Participants 6 6Minimum 0.300.30
Maximum 0.65 0.59Mean 0.53 0.45Std. Deviation 0.12 0.11Median 0.54 0.49T3Participants 5 5Minimum 0.50 0.53Maximum 0.67 0.67Mean 0.61 0.61Std. Deviation 0.069 0.07Median 0.650.63
TotalParticipants 17 17Minimum 0.30 0.30Maximum 0.67 0.67Mean 0.55 0.50Std. Deviation 0.10 0.11Median 0.55 0.50These techniques include graphical methods, statistics like thePearson correlation coefﬁcient and agreement indices and further-more tests of hypotheses like ANOVA and Mann–Whitney. Thestatistical analysis is presented in depth in Section 4.3.2.4.3.2. Descriptive statistics for Agility scoresThe statistical analysis described below includes methodsapplied to the individual Agility scores obtained from the studiedSurveys.The descriptive statistics of the Agility scores, separately for eachteam and for all individuals, as outcome of S1 and S2 are presentedin Table 6.All samples (six in total which is three teams participating intwo surveys) are very small, and the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test ofnormality for each team and each survey separately did not showstatistically signiﬁcant difference from the normal distribution forany of the six samples (p > 0.05).The dot plots in Fig. 5 show the distribution of the scores ofthe three teams from S1 and S2. One individual score in each teamseems to be an outlier in S1 while the scores are more divergent inS2. However, we have not removed any individuals from analysesbecause our intention was to reﬂect the participating teams’ Agilityas it is and the dot plots only show that either individuals are prac-ticing different level of Agility or their awareness or perception ofactual practices are different.4.3.3. Correlation analysis of Agility scoresWe used the Pearson’s r correlation coefﬁcient (Marascuiloand Serlin, 1998) for each team separately to test whether thecorrelation between the scores of different surveys is signiﬁcant.Correlated scores would indicate alignment of different surveys’results.There is a signiﬁcant correlation (r = 0.897, p = 0.021) betweenthe scores of T1 in S1 and S2. On the contrary, the scores of T2 arenot signiﬁcantly correlated (r = 0.682, p = 0.136) and the same holdsfor T3 (r = 0.376, p = 0.533).In other words, this test examines whether a signiﬁcant correla-tion exists between the Agility scores given by S1 and S2. We founda signiﬁcant correlation only for one team (out of three), and hencethe surveys do not show strong correlation.4.3.4. Comparison between average of individual scores and teamscore from fuzzy approval votingWe applied the “one-sample t-test” (Marascuilo and Serlin,1998) and the results are summarized in Table 7. The t-test wasused to compare the mean value of the individual scores (repre-sented as “Mean value of individual scores”) of each team withthe unique score that each team received after entering the fuzzyapproval voting results, separately for each question (representedas “Team score”). The p-value is also given for each test.The goal of this test is to compare the mean value of indi-vidual Agility scores with the team’s score. This test is useful toexamine which team’s score has probably been affected by uncer-tainty and in which survey, because the uncertainty of individualresponses is considered when computing the team’s Agility scorewhile it is not considered in computation of individual Agilityscores.In general, there are no signiﬁcant differences. The only excep-tion is T2 in S1. The mean score of individuals (0.53) is signiﬁcantlydifferent (p = 0.018) from the Team score (0.70). In an effort to lookcloser at this result, we calculated the mean conﬁdence of eachindividual based on their answers to the fuzzy approval voting, andfrom them the mean conﬁdence of each team.We can see in Table 7 that the lowest mean value for team con-ﬁdence appears in T2 and in S1. We can also see that the meanconﬁdence for all teams in S2 is very high, close to 1. This may bean indication that the Agility score derived from automated surveysis vulnerable to uncertainty, which cannot actually be measured bysuch implementations.4.3.5. Differences among mean scores of teams for each surveyOne-way ANOVA (Analysis of Variance) (Marascuilo and Serlin,1998) was used in order to test if there are signiﬁcant differencesbetween teams. The ANOVA test was applied separately for thetwo different surveys. The test did not show signiﬁcant differencebetween the teams (p = 0.153) for S1, but S2 gave p = 0.013, whichindicates a signiﬁcant difference between teams. The Bonferronipost hoc test (Marascuilo and Serlin, 1998) for S2 revealed a signif-icant difference between T2 and T3 (see also Fig. 5).4.3.6. Degree of agreement on team levelEach question in both surveys (1 and 2) has multiple choices.In order to examine the degree of agreement between teams,we ﬁrstly calculated the Pearson correlation coefﬁcient from theresults of fuzzy approval voting for each question separately. So ifthe four options of a question receive “votes” (0.75, 0.75, 3.75, 0)from the members of T1 and (0, 2.75, 0, 0) from the members of T3the Pearson coefﬁcient is r = −0.225. Since the Pearson coefﬁcientranges from −1 to +1, a value of −1 means that two teams havevoted in complete disagreement for a speciﬁc question while +1means that they have voted in complete agreement. Fig. 6 shows thedistribution of these indices of agreement and Table 8 summarizestheir descriptive statistics.As Fig. 6 and Table 8 show, there are questions where we hadabsolute or large disagreement and questions with perfect agree-ment. However, the differences between teams were not foundto be statistically signiﬁcant according to the results of the Fried-man’s test for related samples (they are not normally distributed)separately in S1 and S2.The differences between the two surveys were also not sig-niﬁcant at the 0.05-level according to the Mann–Whitney test(although there are indications at the 0.10-level).In general, the picture in S1 seems to be different from S2. In S1,we have a high degree of disagreement between T1 and T3 and a 184 S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190Fig. 5. Distributions of Agility scores from S1 And S2.Table 7Summary of t-tests – comparing mean values of individual scores versus team score.S1 S2Team score Mean value ofindividual scoresp-value Mean teamconﬁdenceTeam score Mean value ofindividual scoresp-value Mean teamconﬁdenceT1 0.520.510.6050.840.49
 0.46 0.247 0.92T2 0.70 0.53 0.018 0.81 0.48 0.45 0.546 0.90T3 0.67 0.61 0.143 0.85 0.62 0.61 0.663 0.96Fig. 6. Degree of agreement between teams in S1 and S2.Table 8Descriptive statistics – Pearson coefﬁcients between pairs of teams – S1 and S2.T1 vs. T2 T1 vs. T3 T2 vs. T3S1
N 20 20 20Minimum −1.00 −1.00 −1.00Maximum 1.00 1.00 1.00Mean 0.377 −0.052 0.437Std. Deviation 0.696 0.820 0.656Median 0.688 −0.033 0.840S2N 58 58 58Minimum −0.378 −0.794 −0.908Maximum 1.00 0.980 0.980Mean 0.515 0.357 0.276Std. Deviation0.389
 0.499 0.501Median 0.624 0.445 0.312high degree of agreement between T2 and T3. In S2, the disagree-ment seems to be smoothened since the means and medians of allcoefﬁcients computed are positive.These results are indications of divergence between the twosurveys. It is also interesting that the standard deviations of agree-ments are large in S1, which can be due to the fact that too fewquestions are asked in S1 to assess a team’s Agility, and hence, thescore may change dramatically depending on the given answers.S2 is less sensitive in this regard since many more questions areasked. It should also be noted that the same team has shown dif-ferent behavior in different surveys, which can be related to thenumber of questions as well.4.3.7. Degree of agreement within teamsHere, we tested the level of agreement within teams. In thisregard, we focused on the maximum number of participants within S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190 185Fig. 7. Distribution of agreement index for each question within teams in S1 and S2.Table 9Descriptive statistics – agreement index within teams – all questions in S1 and S2.T1 T2 T3S1
N 20 20 20Minimum 0.330.330.20
Maximum 1.00 1.00 1.00Mean 0.62 0.66 0.73Std. Deviation 0.22 0.18 0.25Median 0.58 0.67 0.80S2N 58 58 58Minimum 0.17 0.17 0.20Maximum 0.83 0.83 1.00Mean 0.53 0.44 0.72Std. Deviation 0.17 0.14 0.24Median 0.50 0.42 0.80each team who had provided the same answer in response to eachquestion in S1 and S2 (regardless of their conﬁdence).Hence, for each question in S1 and S2, we computed the agree-ment index for the teams separately. The agreement index is theratio of the maximum number of team members that chose thesame answer divided by the total number of team members. So,if in a question, regardless of its options, the maximum numberof participants that agreed in the same option is 4, while the totalnumber of team members is 6, the agreement index is 4/6 = 0.67. Anagreement index equal to 1 means that all team members chose thesame answer while the lowest agreement level can be 1 divided bythe number of team members in the case where each team mem-ber had different opinion. The results are presented in Fig. 7 andTable 9.The difference of each team between the two surveys was testedfor signiﬁcance with the Mann–Whitney (M–W) test. The T1 agree-ment does not have a signiﬁcant difference in both surveys (M–Wp = 0.135) although in S1 the agreement seems to be generallyhigher. T2 has signiﬁcantly lower agreement in S2 (M–W p < 0.001).The consistency of T3 in both surveys is impressive. Indeed, T3shows the same highest mean and median agreement index in bothsurveys (M–W p = 0.809).The agreement indices of the three teams have no signiﬁcantdifference in S1 (related samples Friedman’s test, p = 0.170), whilethe difference is signiﬁcant (p < 0.001) in S2. More speciﬁcally, theagreement within T3 is signiﬁcantly higher than within the othertwo teams, which can be due to the fact that team members havebeen working together over a longer period of time compared tothe other two studied teams and hence are more familiar with theactual practices and processes.4.3.8. Interpretation and conclusion of the scoresBased on the analyses of the ﬁnal scores, it seems that differentsurveys give different results regarding both the individual and theteam scores, which is not completely surprising given the charac-teristics of each team and posing different questions in differentsurveys.However, we cannot claim that the inﬂuence of imputation canbe neglected since the score of T2 after data imputation in S1 issigniﬁcantly different from the mean of individual scores. It shouldbe noted that this combination had the highest imputation rate aswell (see Table 4).5. Comparison of the two surveysThis section provides a reﬂection and discussion of the use ofthe two surveys. Section 5.1 presents a comparison of the two sur-veys chosen based on the evaluation criteria presented in Section3.3.2. The outcome with respect to the different teams and the useof the two surveys is discussed in Section 5.2. Here, the outcomesare discussed from the surveys’ point of view, while in Section 4 theresults were discussed as outcomes for the organization and teams.In Section 5.3, a candidate survey is suggested based on the expe-riences from the case study. Finally, in Section 5.4 the deﬁnition ofAgility based on the selected survey is presented.5.1. Strengths and weaknesses of surveysS1: Although the examined Agile areas seem to be sufﬁcient, thenumber of questions per area is rather low. The potential risk is thatsome areas are assessed only by one question (e.g. “governance”).On the other hand, the total number of questions is 20, which canbe considered as an advantage since it does not take long time toanswer all of them. The participants had some difﬁculties in inter-preting a few questions, but in general we cannot claim that theyare ambiguous. For each question, different number of options aregiven that can be seen as a disadvantage if one plans to analyze thedata besides the provided analysis conducted automatically by thesurvey.The analysis is transparent and the presentation of the resultsis visual along with valuable recommendations. The organiza-tion providing the survey is well known and the survey has beenrecently mentioned in the research literature e.g. in (Taromirad andRamsin, 2009).S2: A sufﬁcient number of Agile areas are examined with arather high number of questions. The total number of questionsis high in comparison to the previous survey, but answering themis quite simple since one should determine to what extent given 186 S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190Table 10Strengths and weaknesses of the studied surveys.Criterion Survey 1 Survey 2Covered Agile areas Sufﬁcient SufﬁcientNumber of questions per areaLow
 SufﬁcientTotal number of questions 20 127Formulation/readability of questions Acceptable AcceptableTransparency of the analyses Acceptable LowPresentation of the results Acceptable AcceptableUpdates/reformulation of the questions/analyses No YesBeing acknowledged by academia Yes YesTable 11Teams’ Agility Scores Given by the Studied Surveys.Survey 1 Survey 2Team 1 Neutral AgileTeam 2 Agile Non-AgileScore of Team 1 > Score of Team 2Team 1 + 2 Neutral AgileScore of Team 1 + 2 = Score of Team 1Score of Team 1 + 2 > Score of Team 2Team 3Neutral AgileScore of Team 3 = Score of Team 1Score of Team 3 = Score of Team 1 + 2Score of Team 3 > Score of Team 2statements are correct (using a ﬁve grade Likert scale as describedin Section 4.1). Like S1, it is hard to judge its clarity (there is alwayssome possibilities to misinterpret a speciﬁc question, but this isvalid for most surveys). This survey is mentioned in literature e.g.in (Taromirad and Ramsin, 2009) and is updated continuously (thishas been observed when looking at the survey at different pointsof time) and changes such as reducing the number of questions,reformulating the questions, etc. were made. We believe that themain disadvantage with this survey is that the analysis is not trans-parent although the results are sufﬁciently well presented. In S2, itis possible to ask for a separate link so that all team members couldparticipate and give their own answers independently whilst thisfeature is not provided in other studied surveys. A summary of thisevaluation is presented in Table 10.5.2. Comparisons of the survey resultsThe Agility of three different teams was assessed through twosurveys as well as interviews with the Scrum master, a team repre-sentative and the respective customer (i.e. product owner) for eachteam. Below, we compare the results of the two surveys with eachother and with the perception/expectation of the teams, the cus-tomers, and the Scrum master. It should be noted that the resultswere not discussed with the customers and interviews with themwere held separately with a different set of questions. In brief, theobjective here is to compare the outcomes of the surveys fromthe surveys’ point of view, while in Section 4 the outcome wasdiscussed from the organization’s and teams’ point of view. Thecomparison here is conducted to form a basis for identifying a can-didate survey based on the results from the case study.A summary of different teams’ Agility ranks given by the studiedsurveys is provided in Table 11 to help to better understand thediscussions presented in the following sections.5.2.1. Team 1T1 is “neutral” in S1, and “Agile” in S2. One reason for this contra-diction could be that S2 is comparative and T1 could be more Agilethan the teams in the database whilst not highly Agile by itself. Inaddition, the number of questions per area in S1 is smaller thanin S2, which means if the participants had difﬁculty interpretinga question in S1 and answered wrongly, the rank could become“non-Agile” only by that question in that speciﬁc area whilst morequestions were asked in S2 to judge the Agility.Another type of contradiction in the results is having differentscores in the same areas that are examined in the surveys. Such anarea is “requirements analysis”. S1 ranks the team as “non-Agile”whilst it is “neutral” in the “requirements” area according to S2.The difference could be due to the number of questions that isthree in S1 and 14 in S2. The greater number of questions could leadto the higher score since misinterpreting one or two questions outof three could lead to being “non-Agile” in S1.The team and the Scrum master believe that not being Agile inrequirements analysis is not unexpected since the team’s inﬂuenceon this process is minimal because it is completely handled by thecustomer.In addition, they think that they can be interpreted as “non-Agile” in “technical practices” too since they do not follow themexactly as in literature. However, they perceive themselves as Agileregarding the quality, testing, and communication. The customerhas scored the team highly Agile in all areas and is satisﬁed with itsworking style and the performance.For T1, it is hard to evaluate whether the outcome from S1 orS2 is correct. There was a perception that more questions provideda more ﬁne-grained judgment, which was perceived as good, andhence gave an advantage to S2.5.2.2. Team 2Surprisingly, T2 is “Agile” in S1, and “non-Agile” in S2, whichis different from T1. This could be due to the large number of “notapplicable” answers given by the team members in S2, which couldsimply be caused by the order of surveys in the questionnaire or thequestions were not perceived relevant given their focus on TRs.4S2 questions were the last in the list of questions and participantscould become tired or less motivated to respond to them carefullyin comparison to S1 (supposing that one responds to the questionsfrom the beginning to the end). However, we contacted the teammembers to conﬁrm their responses, but did not receive any newresponses.The observed contradiction in “requirements analysis” is, how-ever, exactly the same as for T1. In addition, S1 scores T2 “Agile”in “collaboration and communication” and S2 “neutral” in “team-work”, which is contradictory.Both teams and the Scrum master were not surprised by notbeing scored Agile in “requirements analysis” “technical practices”,and “knowledge creating”. They agree with being Agile in “quality”,“testing”, and “communication”. Their customer perceives the teamAgile in all areas as for T1.The customer and the team perceived the team as more Agilethan the outcome of S2. Thus, the team favored S1 over S2.5.2.3. Team 3Similar to T1, T3 is “neutral” in S1, and “Agile” in S2. The reasonsfor this contradiction are also similar to the motivations providedin Section 5.2.1.The observed contradiction is also similar to the previous teams,which is in “requirements analysis” area. S1 scores T3 in “require-ments analysis” as “acceptable Agile” while S2 gives “highly Agile”score for “requirements”.The results were shared and discussed with the team. Someactivities such as “testing” and “requirements analysis” that areexternally performed shall be further discussed before making anydecisions. In other areas, the team believes that respective practicesare customized over time according to the needs of the project and4This speculation has been discussed with the Scrum master and it is conﬁrmed. S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190 187in alignment with the team’s culture and capabilities and henceshall not be changed.All surveys have given a “non-Agile” score to T3 in areas relatedto “testing” or “quality”, which is deﬁned as externally performedby the team. The customer has also given the lowest score (3 outof 5) to the “quality” area compared to other areas. In order to beconsistent with the testing process in the customer organization, afew sprints is taken together as input for testing. This may result inlate detection of defects.In summary, the team perceived S2 to provide the best pictureof their status with regards to agility.5.2.4. Comparing T1 with T2T2 is scored as more Agile than T1 in S1 and less Agile in S2. Afterdiscussions with the teams and the Scrum master, we believe thatthe results of S2 are closer to reality (as perceived by the partici-pants). However, we have observed some inconsistencies that areexplained as follows.T1 and T2 had different scores in the areas that are expected tobe exactly the same mainly because either the same people havebeen involved in performing them or the execution approach hasbeen the same. These areas are “project management” and “buildmanagement”.In the results, T1 is “non-Agile” whilst T2 is “Agile” in “projectmanagement” which pinpoints a big difference between the teams’perceptions. Furthermore, T2 is “Agile” in “build management” butT1 is “neutral”. Although the difference between “Agile” and “neu-tral” is smaller than between “Agile” and “non-Agile”, it showsmisalignment in the teams’ perceptions/expectations.T1 and T2 work in the same organization, the same ﬁeld, forthe same customer organization (but different units) and are man-aged by the same Scrum master. Having these similar conditions,we expect the teams to be equally Agile and aligned in the Scrumway of working. The differences however could be due to utilizingslightly different practices by the teams. For example, retrospectivemeetings are skipped by T2 while T1 regularly holds them. In addi-tion, if the communication among team members is not effective,misalignment could be seen as we observed in this research study.On the other hand, both teams were very open to the discussionsand actively participated in interpreting the results of the surveys,which is according to the Agile principles.Based on the discussions with the teams and the Scrum mas-ter, it was concluded that S2 provided a truer picture of the agility(despite T2 preferring S1, see Section 5.2.2).5.2.5. Comparing all teams against each otherS1: The results of S1 show that T2 is more Agile than T3, and T3 ismore Agile than T1. However, T1 and T2 as a team (represented asC1 in Fig. 2) is less Agile than T3. Thus, the order of Agility accordingto S1 is: T2 > T3 > C1 > T1S2: T3 is more Agile than T1, and T1 is more Agile than T2, butC1 is less Agile than T3. Thus, the order of Agility according to S2is: T3 > T1 > C1 > T2This ranking was also discussed with the Scrum masters andteams, and the conclusion was that the results of S2 are again closerto reality.In summary, the ﬁndings illustrate that different surveys maygive different results, and hence it becomes important to use thesurvey that best reﬂect the perception of the people working in theunit being assessed.The comparison illustrates that different surveys come up withquite different results, and hence it becomes a matter for an orga-nization to judge which survey provides the truest picture withrespect to their own perception of their Agility. In this case study,S2 is judged to provide the truest picture of Agility (as deﬁned bythe context of the case study).5.2.6. Comparing results of surveys with the statistical testsThe results of the statistical tests indicated a signiﬁcant correla-tion between the scores of T1 for S1 and S2. This means if T1’s scoreis high in S1, it most probably is high in S2 as well. This correlationis, however, not observed for the other teams.In addition, we found a signiﬁcant difference between T2 and T3for S2, which is similar to the ﬁndings presented in Fig. 2. Findinga signiﬁcant difference between T3 and T2 or T1 is not surprisingsince the context is not similar e.g. product and contract features aredifferent. We would have been suspicious if the difference wouldhave been between T1 and T2 (see Section 5.2.4 for detailed discus-sion).5.3. Candidate surveyAs discussed in the previous sections, the studied surveys didnot assign the same scores of Agility to the studied teams. There-fore, we discussed the results with the participants to decide whichsurvey or a combination of surveys is the best tool for assessing ateam/project’s Agility (at least in our context).We compared the results with the perceptions of the teams,their customers, and the Scrum masters. Generally, the perceptionis that the S2 results are more aligned with the collected percep-tions for T1 and T3. However, its results for T2 are slightly differentfrom the expectations. Furthermore, we discussed the differencesbetween the teams with the Scrum masters and ﬁgured out that S2shows the differences better than S1.The main advantage of S2 is that it provides more questions foreach area in comparison to S1. In addition, it partially examinesthe goodness of utilizing Agile rather than only presence/absenceof certain practices, which is an advantage over most availablesurveys. Therefore, S2 seems to be sufﬁciently good for the pur-pose of assessing a team/project’s Agility. Furthermore, it comparesteams/projects/organizations to similar ones in the world and givesa comparative rank.5.4. Deﬁnition of agility according to the selected surveyAccording to the structure of questions for survey 2 (Cohn andRubin, 2007), the survey deﬁnes Agility as constant changes ina team or organization as it evolves in its lifecycle. The changesare classiﬁed as related to: (1) teamwork, (2) requirements, (3)planning, (4) technical practices, (5) quality, (6) culture, and (7)knowledge creating.Each category of change has its own characteristics that mustbe fulﬁlled through applying certain practices (i.e. Agile practices).6. Threats to validityThe validity threats regarding reliability and generalizability ofthis research as well as what we did to overcome them are discussedas follows.Internal validity: In order to draw valid conclusions, we applieda triangulation technique, which is a method that compares threeor more types of independent perspectives on a given aspect ofthe research process e.g. methodology, data, etc. (Guion, 2002).The triangulations used in this study were data, investigator, andmethodology triangulations.Data Triangulation: The data was collected from three sources(team, Scrum master and customer) to capture different perspec-tives/expectations on Agility. 188 S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190Investigator triangulation: In data collection and data analyses,more than one researcher was involved in performing and validat-ing the work.Methodology triangulation: We collected data both qualitatively(interviews and open discussions) and quantitatively (survey).Hence, both quantitative and qualitative data analyses were per-formed.Furthermore, we studied three units of analysis (T1, T2, and T3)in the case study rather than relying on single data points for asingle team.In the following, we summarize the potential threats regardingthe internal validity of this research study and elaborate on howthese concerns were addressed (if applicable).Not all surveys consider the certainty of respondents about thegiven answers. Therefore, the same person can answer differentlyin a replication of the study if he/she is not certain about his/hergiven answer. We considered this as a threat to the reliability of allsurveys and addressed it by adding an option of self-conﬁdence asdescribed above.It should be noted that we did not transcribe the interviewsimmediately and did not directly conﬁrm the content with theinterviewees. However, the results of analyses and the conclusionswere openly presented and discussed with all participants, whichreduces the risk of misinterpretations and misunderstandings.A concern with the results is that the analyses performed by thesurveys are not completely transparent. For example, the numberof participants is small in comparison to the number of questions,and we are not aware how it is managed in S2 to ensure the reli-ability of the statistical calculations. In addition, the S2 questionsare updated over time, which makes it hard for us to know how thenew questions are compared against the existing database with adifferent set of questions. This threat may affect our statistical cal-culations as well since we used the surveys to calculate the Agilityrank for each individual.S2 provides a separate link that all team members can answerthe questions independently, and it provides the collective resultsfor the team rather than for each individual participant. We didnot use this feature mainly because we intended to independentlycalculate the team’s representative answer. Furthermore, beforeinserting the responses to the surveys, we discussed ambiguitiesaround the responses in separate meetings with the purpose ofclarifying the answers. The team’s representative answer for eachquestion was ﬁnalized after discussions with the Scrum master andthe person representing the team.We used the survey questions and options with no modiﬁcationsand therefore any ambiguity with them remained. However, weadded the option to skip a question as well as to provide the conﬁ-dence level for the given answer in a way that the participants coulddetermine how sure they are about the given answer rather thanskipping it completely. Furthermore, the questions are grouped inthe original surveys whilst we hid the classiﬁcations to the partic-ipants mainly to avoid bias when answering the questions. On theother hand, this could cause confusions and misinterpreting theintention of the question.Optimally, from a research methodology point of view, the orderof questions in each survey and order of the surveys should havebeen random. We did not manipulate the list of questions in thesurveys, but placed each studied survey in a separate Excel sheetso one could answer them in any desirable order, although mostlikely the respondents answered them in the same order.Another threat is that one participant (the Scrum master) is inboth T1 and T2. We performed separate analyses for the teamsexcluding the Scrum master, and concluded that the scores forT1 and T2 become less alike in this case. In this paper, we havenot reported the results of separate analyses excluding the Scrummaster.Finally, due to other obligations of the participating teams, someof the team members could not take part in the case study. Nev-ertheless, 6 members out of 8 from T1, and 6 out of 10 from T2, 5out of 9 from T3 indicate 75%, 60%, and 55% participation respec-tively, which is more than average for all three teams. However, theresponses of other members of the team (e.g. 4 others in T2) mighthave inﬂuenced the team’s score in different Agile areas and hencethe results of this study.External validity: We discuss the external validity regardinggeneralizability, which is to what extent ﬁndings can be generalizedto and across populations of persons, settings, and time (Creswell,2003). The results of assessing Agility are speciﬁc to the partic-ipating teams. Hence, the conclusions might be context speciﬁc.Therefore, we cannot claim that a similar study on different teamscould result in nominating the same survey for assessing/proﬁlingAgility.There is not much reason to believe that the results can be gen-eralized over time because the studied surveys may evolve and newsurveys will be introduced to support Agility assessment.Finally, the differences in the results achieved by S1 and S2 mightindicate that conducting the same research in different contextmight result in ﬁnding other surveys than S2 as the best repre-sentative of the Agile status.7. ConclusionsIn this research, surveys for assessing Agility have been studied.Although the initial searches indicated that several surveys existfor the purpose of evaluating Agile software development, theyhave different focuses and perform different analyses. We studied aselection of surveys based on a search on the web, and chose two ofthem based on the criteria described for further examination in anindustrial case study, including three software development teams.The objective was to evaluate the practical usefulness of the sur-veys. The different strengths and weaknesses have been discussedfor those found and a more in-depth comparison has been done fortwo of the surveys, which answers RQ1.Based on the case study, results for the organization and thethree teams were reported, and then the results were used to com-pare the two surveys. It is concluded that one of the surveys (S2)was perceived as portraying the Agility in the three teams and theorganization better than the other survey (S1) used. This respondsto RQ2.The answer to the third research question (RQ3) is that differ-ent surveys do not assess Agility similarly and hence they are notexpected to give the same scores to a speciﬁc team/organization.This is conﬁrmed by the results from the case study and whencomparing the two surveys used and studied in more details. Insummary, it means that Agile is not necessarily assessed in the sameway and hence Agility becomes context-dependent and it could bepracticed in different way. Each user of Agile methods or practicesmust decide what Agile means to them, and hence select the bestassessment survey in relation to their chosen deﬁnition of Agile.Rapid changes in the market, customer demands, and technol-ogy push software organizations toward more Agility, which meansif Agile is not applied properly, it could introduce difﬁculties in theorganization instead of ﬂexibility. Therefore, some way of assessingand measuring Agility would be helpful. However, besides the needfor assessing/proﬁling Agile, there is not one clear answer how itshould be assessed.We would like to recommend open discussions of the evalua-tion results with all team members and managers to prioritize thepractices that are critical for the organization (e.g. are in alignmentwith the organizational goals). This implies a selective approachin adopting/improving Agility rather than encouraging being per-fectly Agile. S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190 189Validating S2 in a separate case study on a different team is anitem for future research directions. In addition, we would like toexamine possible approaches of combining product goals and anAgile assessment survey.AcknowledgementsThis work was partly funded by the Industrial ExcellenceCenter EASE – Embedded Applications Software Engineering(http://ease.cs.lth.se).Appendix A.A Sample of Survey QuestionsS1 – Question Answer CommentsHow is work assigned? Sure(a) People are given speciﬁc tasks to perform(coding, analysis, etc.) by leads/managers.(b) People choose what they are going to workon from a backlog.Which of the following most closely describesthe ratio of business analysts to developerswithin your organization?More surethan
unsure(a) 1 business analyst to 4 or fewer developers. (b) 1 business analyst to 7 or fewer developers.(c) 1 business analyst to 8 or more developers. . . .S2 – Question Answer Sure CommentsTeam members are kept together as longas possible.True SureTesters and programmers are on the sameteam.True SureTeams have 5–9 people on them. True SureTeams can determine who is on or off theteam.False Unsure. . .Appendix B.A Sample of Interview QuestionsTeamworkHow is the team built? Composed? Located? Who does it?How do the team work together?Who decides on priorities or changes them?Standup meetings? Duration?. . .Requirements
Who is product owner and how collaborates with the team during an iteration?How is the requirement handling and agreement process?. . .Planning
When and who does the technical design?How often the team updates the iteration burn down charts?. . .Technical PracticesIs TDD applied? PP? Refactoring? Etc.. . .Quality
Is unit testing done before checking in the code?What type of testing is performed for iteration?. . .Culture
Is productivity on the focus or the overwork?. . .Knowledge creatingHow good is the team’s knowledge to Agile?Who is present in retrospective meetings?ReferencesAbrahamsson, P., Salo, O., Ronkainen, J., Warsta, J., 2002. Agile Software DevelopmentMethods: Review and Analysis. VTT Publication, Finland.Abrahamsson, P., Warsta, J., Siponen, M.T., Ronkainen, J.,2003. New direc-tions on Agile methods: a comparative analysis. In: Proceedings ofthe 25th International Conference on Software Engineering. ACM Press,pp. 244–254.Beck, K., et al., 2001. Manifesto for Agile Software Development. http://www.agilemanifesto.org (accessed 29.06.14).Boehm, B., Turner, R., 2004. Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide for the Per-plexed. Addison-Wesley.Bose, I., 2008. Lessons learned from distributed Agile software projects: a case-basedanalysis. Commun. Assoc. Inf. Syst. 23 (34), 619–632.Chen, J., Shao, J., 2000. Nearest neighbor imputation for survey data. J. Off. Stat.Stockholm 16 (2), 113–132.Lean Agility, C.M.I., 2009. CMI Lean Agility Assessment. http://cimes.promes.be(accessed 29.06.14).Cohn, M., Rubin, K., 2007. Comparative Agility. http://comparativeagility.com(accessed 29.06.14).Conboy, K., Fitzgerald, B.,2004. Toward a conceptual framework of Agile methods:a study of agility in different disciplines. In: Proceedings of XP/Agile Universe.Springer Verlag, pp. 37–44.Creswell, J.W., 2003. Research Design: Qualitative, Quantitative, and Mixed MethodApproaches, 2nd ed. SAGE, ISBN: 0761924426/9780761924425.Dinwiddie, G., 2009. DIY Project/Process Evaluation Kit. http://blog.gdinwiddie.com/2009/08/18/diy-projectprocess-evaluation-kit (accessed 29.06.14).Dybå, T., Dingsøyr, T., 2008. Empirical studies of Agile software development: asystematic review. J. Inf. Softw. Technol. 50, 833–859.Germain, E., Robillard, P., 2005. Engineering-based processes and Agile method-ologies for software development: a comparative case study. J. Syst. Softw.,17–27.Guion, L., 2002. Triangulation: establishing the validity of qualitative stud-ies. University of Florida Extension, Institute of Food and AgriculturalSciences.Hartmann, D., Dymond, R., 2006. Appropriate Agile measurements: using met-rics and diagnostics to deliver business value. In: Agile 2006 Conference, pp.126–131.Hossain, E., Ali Babar, M., Verner, J., 2009. Towards a framework for using Agileapproaches in global software development. In: Product-Focused Software Pro-cess Improvement, pp. 126–140.International Organization for Standardization, 2012. ISO/IEC 15504-5:2012,Information technology – Process assessment – Part 5: An exemplar soft-ware life cycle process assessment model. http://www.iso.org/iso/home/store/catalogue ics/catalogue detail ics.htm?csnumber=60555 (accessed 29.06.14).James, M., 2007. A Scrum Master’s Checklist. http://blogs.collab.net/agile/2007/08/13/a-scrummasters-checklist (accessed 29.06.14).Kangas, A., Laukkanen, S., Kangas, J., 2006. Social choice theory and its applicationsin sustainable forest management – a review. For. Policy Econ. 9 (1), 77–92.Kniberg, H., 2010. Scrum Checklist. http://www.crisp.se/scrum/checklist (accessed29.06.14).Lapresta, J.L.G., Panero, M.M., 2002. Borda count versus approval voting: a fuzzyapproach. Public Choice 112 (1–2), 167–184.Marascuilo, L.A., Serlin, R.C., 1998. Statistical Methods for the Social and BehavioralSciences. W.H. Freeman and Company.Mayberg Consulting, 2008. Agile Karlskrona Test. http://mayberg.se/learning/karlskrona-test-online (accessed 29.06.14).McCaffery, F., Pikkarainen, M., Richardson, I., 2008. Ahaa-Agile, hybrid assessmentmethod for automotive, safety critical SMEs. In: Proceedings of InternationalConference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2008), Leipzig, Germany.Paulk, M.C., Curtis, B., Chrissis, M.B., Weber, C.V., Technical Report 1993. Capa-bility Maturity Model for Software (Version 1.1). Software EngineeringInstitute, Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA https://resources.sei.cmu.edu/asset ﬁles/TechnicalReport/1993 005 001 16211.pdf (accessed29.06.14).Petersen, K., Wohlin, C., 2009. Context in industrial software engineering research.In: 3rd International Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering and Mea-surement, pp. 401–404.Prikladnicki, R., Audy, J.L.N., Damian, D., de Oliveira, T.C., 2007. Distributed softwaredevelopment: practices and challenges in different business strategies of off-shoring and onshoring. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference onGlobal Software Engineering (ICGSE), pp. 262–274.Qumer, A., Henderson-Sellers, B., 2006. Comparative evaluation of XP and scrumusing the 4D analytical tool (4-DAT). In: Proceedings of the European andMediterranean Conference on Information Systems (EMCIS), Spain.Runeson, P., Höst, M., 2009. Guidelines for conducting and reporting case studyresearch in software engineering. Empir. Softw. Eng. 14, 131–164.Santeon Group, 2012. Dr Agile Agile Assessment. http://www.dragile.com (accessed29.06.14).Sidky, A., 2007. A structured approach to adopting Agile practices: the Agile adoptionframework. Computer Science, Virginia Tech, Blacksburg, Ph.D. Dissertation.Signet Research and Consulting, 2005. A quick self-assessment of your organization’sagility. http://signetconsulting.com (accessed 29.06.14).Software Engineering Institute, 2011. CMMI Version 1.3 Information Center. Soft-ware Engineering Institute http://www.sei.cmu.edu/cmmi/index.cfm (accessed29.06.14). 190 S. Jalali et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 98 (2014) 172–190Soundararajan, S., Arthur, J.D., 2011. A structured framework for assessing the good-ness of Agile methods. In: 18th IEEE International Conference and Workshopson Engineering of Computer Based Systems (ECBS), Las Vegas, NV, pp. 14–23.Sutherland, J., 2009. The Nokia Test. http://antoine.vernois.net/scrumbut/?page=intro&lang=en (accessed 29.06.14).Taromirad, M., Ramsin, R., 2009. CEFAM: comprehensive evaluation framework forAgile methodologies. In: 32nd Annual IEEE Software Engineering Workshop(SEW’08), Kassandra, Greece, pp. 195–204.Thoughtworks Studio, 2010a. Agile Self Evaluation. http://www.agileassessments.com/online-assessments/agile-self-evaluation (accessed29.06.14).Thoughtworks Studio, 2010b. Build and Release Management Assessment.http://www.agileassessments.com/online-assessments/brm-self-evaluation(accessed 29.06.14).Waters, K., 2008. How Agile Are You? (Take This 42 Point Test).http://www.allaboutagile.com/how-agile-are-you-take-this-42-point-test(accessed 29.06.14).Williams, L., Cockburn, A., 2003. Agile software development: it’s about feedbackand change. IEEE Comput. 36 (6), 39–43.Williams, L., Kerbs, W., Layman, L., Anton, A.I., Abrahamsson, P., 2004. Toward aframework for evaluating extreme programming. In: 8th International Confer-ence on Empirical Assessment in Software Engineering, pp. 11–20.Williams, L., Rubin, K., Cohn, M., 2010. Driving process improvement via comparativeagility assessment. In: AGILE Conference, pp. 3–10.Yauch, A., 2011. Measuring agility as a performance outcome. J. Manuf. Technol.Manag. 22 (3), 384–404.Samireh Jalali is a Ph.D. student at Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden. Shehas a M.Sc. degree in Software Engineering and four years of industrial experienceas software developer and designer. Her current research focus is on identifyingsuccess factors in implementing Agile methodologies in software organizations, andother research interests include global software engineering, process improvement,and empirical software engineering. Contact her at samireh.jalali@bth.se.Claes Wohlin is a professor of Software Engineering and dean of the Faculty ofComputing at Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden. He has previously heldprofessor chairs at the universities in Lund and Linköping. His research interestsinclude empirical methods in software engineering, software process improve-ment, software quality, and requirements engineering. Wohlin received a Ph.D.in Communication Systems from Lund University in 1991. He is Editor-in-Chief ofInformation and Software Technology. Claes Wohlin was the recipient of Telenor’sNordic Research Prize in 2004. He is a member of the Royal Swedish Academy ofEngineering Sciences. Contact him at claes.wohlin@bth.se or visit his website atwww.wohlin.eu.Lefteris Angelis studied Mathematics and received his Ph.D. degree in Statisticsfrom Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece. He is currently an Associate Pro-fessor at the Department of Informatics and coordinator of the STAINS (Statisticsand Information Systems) research group. His research interests involve statisti-cal methods with applications to information systems and software engineering,computational methods in mathematics and statistics, planning of experiments andsimulation techniques. Contact him at lef@csd.auth.gr.