 The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
j ourna l ho me page: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssA lightweight framework for describing software practicesDiana Kirk,Ewan
 TemperoDepartment of Computer Science, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, Auckland, New Zealanda r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 25 March 2011Received in revised form12 September 2011Accepted 12 September 2011Available online 19 September 2011Keywords:
Software practicesSoftware organisationsIndustry case studySoftware process discoveryResearch frameworka b s t r a c tIn order to maximise software project outcomes, software organisations adapt development methodolo-gies and implement practices in a way that is appropriate for project contexts. This suggests that ‘BestPractice’ is context-dependent. To better understand the contextual nature of best practice, we wantto explore how organisations actually go about achieving software objectives. We require a researchframework that captures this information in a way that makes no assumptions about practices and thatis descriptive in nature. We have developed a framework based on the perspective that practices existto meet speciﬁc objectives. We have experimented with the framework by using it to capture the prac-tices of three New Zealand organisations and by application to an idealised XP process. Our capture oforganisational practices revealed interesting mechanisms for further study, including a dependence uponinformal practices linked with strong communication and the idea of ‘push’ versus ‘pull’ for informationelicitation. Our capture of XP exposed some context-dependent risks.© 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionAll software organisations carry out the same kinds of activ-ities when creating and enhancing software-intensive productsand services, but these activities are implemented in many dif-ferent ways. For example, in some organisations, analysts carryout requirements elicitation in a formal way and capture require-ments in software speciﬁcation documents from which developersimplement the product while in others developers speak directlywith clients and are involved in both requirements elicitationand product implementation. In many cases, the more informalapproach appears to work as well as the formal, for example, insmall organisations. Indeed, it is likely that, for such organisations,implementing a more formal approach would be inappropriateand introduce unnecessary overhead. Although the industry pro-motes formality, there is increasing agreement that in these casesactivities are best tailored according to an organisation’s businessobjectives and contexts (Basili et al., 1994; Dawson et al., 2004;MacCormack et al., 2003; Munch, 2005). Recent research suggeststhat many organisations successfully combine agile and traditionalpractices to achieve the beneﬁts of both (Baskerville et al., 2011).The long-term goal of our research is to better understand howsuccessful organisations adapt software development activities tosuit their own, speciﬁc context. If we are able to successfully modelan organisation with respect to activities and contexts, we mayCorresponding author. Tel.: +64 9 373 7999; fax: +64 9 373 7453.E-mail addresses: dianakirk@acm.org (D. Kirk), e.tempero@cs.auckland.ac.nz(E. Tempero).uncover useful trends and patterns that can be used to categoriseorganisations along a number of key dimensions. This understand-ing would provide us with a means of more effectively predictingperformance and advising suitable improvement directions that arecontext-speciﬁc.Representing how groups develop software typically involvesassessing software development organisations according to theexternally architected assessment models such as CMMI (Chrissiset al., 2007) or ISO/IEC 15504 (ISO, 2004/2006). This approach doesnot suit our needs because many software development organi-sations, particularly small-to-medium enterprises (SMEs), do notfollow such process models (Cater-Steel et al., 2004; Staples et al.,2007) and so this approach would help expose what the organisa-tions do not do, but would not help us understand their mechanismsfor success. The root of the problem is that such models are prescrip-tive in nature and inherently contain many assumptions about whatconstitutes ‘best practice’. We want a descriptive model that makesno assumptions but rather supports uncovering what organisationsactually do as opposed to what they should do.Simply asking organisation members in a general way aboutmethodologies adopted also is ineffective, because we have foundthat often an organisation will report following a particularmethodology, but in fact only part of the methodology is adoptedor adoption is not true to the intent of the methodology. If imple-mentation of an agile methodology is claimed, the problem isexacerbated because the vague nature of the term agile meansthat the claim of ‘agile practices’ could mean practically anything(Baskerville et al., 2011; Livari and Livari, 2011). As illustration, con-sider a study to determine if Scrum is more productive than XP. Ourapproach may be to study productivity in a sample of organisations0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.jss.2011.09.024 D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595583that implement Scrum and a sample that implement XP. However,we cannot be sure that each organisation is true to the Scrum orXP approach and without such understanding our study is mean-ingless. We need to effectively capture what actions actually takeplace in a way that addresses concerns like these.As a ﬁrst step towards meeting our long-term goal, we requirea mechanism for capturing information about implemented prac-tices that will support exposure of some key differentiating aspectsbetween organisations. Our ﬁrst attempts at capture, based on theISO/IEC 15504-5 process reference model (ISO, 2004/2006), werehighly unsuccessful. We found that the prescriptive nature of thestandard was too restrictive, in that there were situations wherewe could not be sure we had captured what a company was doing,because it did not appear to ﬁt in the standard. In addition, compa-nies often did not use the same terminology as the standard and thisled to a frustrating and ineffective experience for both researcherand participant.We realised that we needed a change of focus. We haveelsewhere suggested that an appropriate approach for under-standing software practice is to ‘lift’ the focus from ‘choosingpractices from a pre-deﬁned set’ to ‘identifying project objec-tives and selecting activities to meet these objectives’ (Kirk et al.,2009). Our contribution in this paper is a research frameworkbased on this focus. Practices are collated in this frameworkand are effectively treated as the factors (independent variables)that potentially affect project outcomes, such as functionalityand quality (the dependent variables). The framework providesa means of establishing how organisations apply software prac-tices to meet speciﬁc objectives. As such, it may be used tosupport research questions relating to, for example, categorisingorganisations, context-dependent best practice and risk and issueexposure.In this paper, we overview the study that led to the developmentof our research framework and present the resulting framework.As the framework supports different kinds of research question,we have chosen an evidence-based approach to evaluation. Wedescribe three studies, the ﬁrst a case study involving three soft-ware organisations in Auckland, New Zealand (NZ), and the others atheoretical examination of risk in an both ‘ideal’ and implementedXP practices.The rest of this paper is organised as follows. In Section 2,we overview other studies aimed at understanding how softwareorganisations operate. In Section 3, we present the details of ourstudy. In Section 4, we present the proposed research framework.In Section 5, we describe the three studies using the framework anddiscuss insights gained. In Section 6, we discuss the evidence as itrelates to the kinds of questions we need to ask about our frame-work. Finally, we present our conclusions and we discuss futurework in Section 7.2. Related workA number of empirical studies have been done that seek tounderstand the operation of software development organisations.Many of these studies have as their main goal evaluating orassessing the organisation’s operation against a particular modelor set of practices. One study with a similar goal to ours is byColeman (2005). The author tries to determine why softwareSMEs do not appear to be using standard process models. Heinterviewed 15 CTOs from SMEs in Ireland and reported their rea-sons for not using standard models. His main ﬁnding was thatthis was due to the perceived overhead of such process mod-els. While Coleman’s goal is similar to ours, he reports whythey do not use some models rather than what they do to besuccessful.Cusumano et al. conducted a survey to determine what inter-national differences there are in how software is developed(Cusumano et al., 2003). Their survey gathered data on the use ofspeciﬁc practices from 104 projects from organisations across theworld. While they limited their survey to a set of practices, theirresults do indicate possible differences between organisations indifferent countries, and this may affect the generalisability of theresults described in this paper.There have been several studies evaluating different aspects ofSPI programs. For example, Cater-Steel, Toleman and Rout presentthe results of a study of 22 Australian SMEs evaluated using anassessment method based on ISO/IEC 15504 (Cater-Steel et al.,2004). Their goal was to determine the extent to which these com-panies meet the standard and to provide advice on software processimprovement. They identiﬁed three common ‘problems’, one ofwhich was “competent staff were relied upon rather than docu-mented processes.” Staples et al. did a study to identify reasons whyorganisations do not adopt CMMI (Staples et al., 2007). Their resultsindicated a perception that CMMI was not for “small” organisations,and a perception that CMMI was too costly to adopt.Other empirical studies have evaluated the predictive power ofSPI standards. One example is by El Emam and Garro, who looked atthe part of ISO/IEC 15504 relating to requirements engineering, andfound evidence to support that higher capability for requirementsengineering as assessed by this standard related to increased pro-ductivity for large software development organisations, but foundnot such evidence in the case of small organisations (El Emamand Garro, 2000). All of the organisations in our study would beregarded as small.Another category of studies examines software developmentpractices on a region-speciﬁc basis. However they also assessagainst speciﬁc software development models or sets of practices.This is true of the Cusumano et al. (2003) and Cater-Steel et al.(2004) studies mentioned above. Other examples include: Duttaet al. (1999) surveyed 397 groups in 20 European countries to deter-mine the degree to which formal models such as SPICE and CMMIare used; Sison et al. (2006) surveyed organisations in ﬁve ASEANcountries (Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam)to better understand practices uses in that region. Their survey wasbased on published best-practice, such as SEI’s SW-CMM MaturityQuestionnaire for Level 2. Our study is speciﬁc to New Zealand,however that was a consequence of limited resources rather thana speciﬁc goal.The studies described above are valuable to understand whatissues may be associated with particular models, however they donot directly help us understand why those organisations that do notappear to use speciﬁc models nevertheless also appear successful.3. Motivation for frameworkOur motivation for studying the practices used in NZ organi-sations comes from our perception, based on anecdotal evidenceand our own experience, that by and large these organisations donot use formal models such as CMMI or SPICE, or sets of prac-tices such as those used in the Agile community. Despite this theseorganisations seem successful, leading us to want to understandwhy. Although our ﬁndings will relate to NZ organisations, we notethat many other countries have a demographic similar to NZ, i.e.mainly SMEs with a tendency towards creative endeavour (Bach,1995; Laporte et al., 2008; McCaffery et al., 2008; MoRST, 2009;Petterssen et al., 2008), and so we believe that ﬁndings will be ofgeneral interest to the software community.Our original intent was to identify possible explanations fromthe literature and verify them with quantitative studies of com-panies in New Zealand. However, we found that most empirical 584D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595studies reported in the literature evaluate an organisation’s oper-ation against a particular model or set of practices, rather thancapture how organisations actually work. This led us to realise thatwe ﬁrst needed a research model to help us ﬁnd out what might begoing on, and to support creation of hypotheses for further testing.We planned to reﬁne a model based on the ISO/IEC 15504-5 pro-cess reference model (ISO, 2004/2006) by conducting a trial withtwo software organisations and then testing the reﬁned model byapplying to a further three organisations. Our experiences duringthe trial caused us to rethink what we needed to achieve.We overview the research approach in Section 3.1. In Section3.2, we brieﬂy describe the problems found during the trial andpresent the revised research questions. In Section 4, we presentour framework.3.1. Research descriptionThe research questions for our original planned study relatedto understanding software practices in NZ organisations. It iswidely acknowledged that software projects are complex as a resultof the mix of people, changing technologies and the difﬁcultiesinvolved in deﬁning software products. The case study is an estab-lished approach for gaining insights in complex environments (Yin,1994), so we implemented an exploratory multiple-case study. Asthe research relates to understanding how organisations carry outpractices, the unit of analysis was a software organisation. As thepractices carried out were the focus of our attention, the sub-unit ofanalysis was the set of practices carried out by a software organisationwhen creating software products or services.The organisations approached for participation were selectedfrom a list of organisations currently involved in a governmentfunded Software Process and Product Improvement (SPPI) projectof which this research is a constituent. The reason for this was prag-matism. In the ﬁrst instance, our research was exploratory in naturewith the aim of creating a suitable research model, and so issues ofrandomness do not occur. In addition, the organisations availablevaried in size and application area and thus provided a suitable sam-ple space to support our desire to capture the practices of differentkinds of software organisation.The main contact for each organisation, the manager for ourstudy, was the CEO or owner (for smaller organisations) or a seniormanager with authority to make decisions relating to the softwaredevelopment function (for larger organisations). The names of indi-viduals from within organisations were provided by the managerat the end of the ﬁrst interview. We believed the manager would atthis point have a clear understanding of what we hoped to achieveand would be more likely to provide a realistic cross-section ofparticipants rather than providing only participants who wouldgive an optimistic version of organisational functioning. Talkingto employees other than those provided by management was notconsidered both for formal ethical reasons and because we wouldview this as a serious breach of trust. However, we did mitigatein two ways. We asked the manager to provide participants cov-ering a range of activities at a range of levels, i.e. not all managersand team leaders, who might present an idealised version of thetruth. We also reminded participants at the start of interviews thatall information given was conﬁdential and would not be passedback to management (as required by the University Ethics Approvalprocess). We indeed found that comments were both positive andnegative.We interviewed two or three persons with varying roles plus themanager from each organisation. This number was also based onpragmatism. We thought three employees in different roles wouldprovide a sufﬁcient breadth of viewpoints to support the consolida-tion of reports about practices and would expose inconsistencies.We requested from the manager ‘at least three’ persons and wereprovided with three names from each of the participating organi-sations.As suggested by Yin (1994), we focused the research by address-ing speciﬁc questions, i.e. our research questions. As data collectioninstrument and protocol, we applied a semi-structured interviewbased on a questionnaire (for the manager only) and a practices tem-plate for all other participants, based on the reference model (ISO,2004/2006). Both were tested and evolved during a trial involv-ing volunteers from two development groups from within a fourthorganisation.We implemented a number of standard research protocols, forexample, relating to permission, anonymity and conﬁdentiality.3.2. TrialThere were three main drivers for the design of our study. Antic-ipating that NZ organisations would be unwilling to spend a lotof time on our study, our research approach would have to belightweight. Organisations are reluctant to have their staff involvedin non-core activities and the more time it takes, the less likely theywould be willing to participate in our study. In order to minimisethe impact of our study on an organisation, we set 1 h as the max-imum amount of time to spend with any one person, that beingan amount of time we thought organisations would be willing tocontribute.The second driver was, we needed to be sure we elicited thesame kind of information from each organisation, that is, we didnot ask different kinds of questions of different organisations. Thiswas complicated by the fact that different individuals would knowdifferent aspects of their organisation. That meant we needed themodel we used to be quite well structured, a property we refer toas repeatability.At the same time, we needed to be conﬁdent that we had fullycaptured the practices of an organisation. If we missed some prac-tices that were being used we would mis-represent what was in factwas going on. This meant our study had to cover all the possibilitieswe might encounter, a property we refer to as completeness.We learned that participants tended not to ‘stick to the script’and would offer comments as they occurred to them that were notnecessarily relevant to the current topic. That left us either ask-ing them to repeat the information when we got to the relevanttopic or try to capture it outside the process we were following.This convinced us that any framework we used had to be ﬂexible,in that it had to give freedom to participants to provide informa-tion when it occurred to them and answer questions how theychose.During the trial, we found that our original approach, based onthe ISO reference model, was unsuccessful in supporting the abovegoals. The main barriers related to terminology and model struc-ture. In the ﬁrst instance, participants often did not understandphrases such as ‘criteria for the integrated software to demon-strate compliance with software requirements’ (ISO, 2004/2006).The need to ask very ﬁne-grained questions and explain terminol-ogy resulted in us being unable to ﬁt in the 1 h limit, risking eitherrepeatability or being too heavyweight. We also found that partic-ipants wanted to discuss all aspects of an activity at the same timeand so the separation of engineering and support processes suchas documentation led to an interview experience that was frustrat-ing for both interviewer and participant. The lack of ﬂexibility inthe model left us unsuccessful in achieving our objectives. Furtherdetails on the study are available in Kirk and Tempero (Submittedfor publication).Our problems during the trial caused us to question if our goalswere even possible to achieve. This led to the following revisedresearch questions for our study. D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595585Fig. 1. Basic research framework.3.3. Research questions1.Can
 we establish a useful mechanism for describing practices asimplemented by software organisations?2. Does the use of this mechanism yield any insights that mightbecome the basis of more formal study.As a result of the changed questions, we had to reconsider ourstudy approach. We ﬁrst created a framework based on earlier workand the experiences described above. We describe this frameworkin Section 4. We then applied the framework in a number of dif-ferent kinds of research context in order to evaluate its usefulnessas a mechanism for describing practices and yielding insights. Wediscuss framework evaluation in detail in Section 5.4. Research frameworkIn this Section, we describe the two dimensions that comprisethe basic framework structure and follow with a description of theextensions to the basic framework that resulted from the case stud-ies. We then overview some possible research scenarios where theuse of the framework might yield insights and avenues for fur-ther exploration. We ﬁnally describe how to use the frameworkfor describing practices.4.1. The basic frameworkAs a result of the problems we experienced in the early attempts,we instead took an approach focusing on what organisations needto achieve rather than on the processes required to achieve it. Thus,instead of working through a list of practices that the organisationmight have, or asking for a list of practices used by the organisationand us having to try to map them on to some standard list, westructured our framework according to some key needs that mustbe addressed when software is developed. This approach is basedon some earlier work, in which we highlighted the need to viewsoftware process activities as being there for a reason, that is, tosupport the achievement of some business objective (Kirk et al.,2009). For example, testing is carried out with the aim of ensuringquality objectives are met and prototyping is often applied to helpensure the software product exhibits appropriate functionality.The framework is thus based on the viewpoint that the softwarepractices implemented by an organisation can be understood onlyin the context of the organisation’s key objectives. There are manypossible such objectives, for example, relating to quality, func-tionality, stakeholder and user satisfaction and cost. For reasonsof pragmatism, we focus on the objectives of content and quality.Other objectives will be added to the framework in future work. InFig. 1, we show the basic research framework structure with theobjectives along the top.Content refers to the expected features and functionality inthe software product from the perspective of the customer(s). Aproduct delivered with missing or incorrect functionality is, fromour perspective, deﬁcient in Content. Examples of the kinds ofactivities carried out to ensure correct Content are formal require-ments tracking, prototypes discussed with the client, separate testteam who test based on requirements documents, inspections andreviews focused on checking for correct functionality, the use ofa wiki to store information about features and how these shouldwork, having a subject area expert on the team.Quality refers to agreed stakeholder expectations other than thoserelating directly to features and functionality. For example, expec-tations may relate to efﬁciency, security or how easy it is toaccess the functionality. A product delivered with missing orincorrect functionality but with efﬁciency and usability expecta-tions met is, from our perspective, high in Quality. Examples ofthe kinds of activities carried out to ensure appropriate Qualityinclude formal requirements documents that include a section fornon-functional requirements, pair programming where one pro-grammer constantly checks for injection of defects into the code,a test environment that is the same as, or similar to, a client’senvironment, adherence to a strict build submission process.The above perspective is not the commonly understood idea that‘high Quality’ infers that both functional and non-functional expec-tations are met. A ‘good’ testing approach is perceived as beingone that tests for both. Our reasons for separating these aspectsare grounded in the observation that many activities assumed toaddress both aspects equally do not, in fact, do so. This means thatwe often make assumptions about what is being done. For exam-ple, speciﬁcation techniques such as ‘Use Cases’, and ‘User Stories’do not inherently consider non-functional requirements. This oftenresults in a belief that the ‘product has been speciﬁed’ when it isin fact only partially speciﬁed. In a similar way, we might assumethat a product testing approach that is effective for ﬁnding defects iseffectively addressing both Content and Quality. However, if the testteams source expected functionality from a wiki where features aredescribed by developers, the testing activity may be extremely inef-fective at uncovering Content issues because the developers mayhave misunderstood user expectations. The ‘dimensional’ approachprovides us with a means of clarifying what is actually being done.We also note that:•‘Content’ is often used to mean the aggregation of all itemsincluded in the delivered product, for example, binaries, persis-tent data ﬁles, conﬁguration ﬁles and documentation. This is adifferent meaning from the one in our framework. From our per-spective, the management of such an aggregation may constitutea practice that affects either delivered Content (for example, if anincorrect conﬁguration ﬁle is delivered) or Quality (for example,if an older, more buggy version of a binary is delivered).•During development, developers often test the ‘functionality’implemented in their code. Unless these tests directly checkexpected features and/or functionality from the perspective ofthe client, the developers are addressing Quality and not Content,i.e. are checking the integrity of their code.In order to help focus questions and organise information pro-vided by people in different kinds of roles, we next introduced anorthogonal categorisation. It is based on what must be achieved ata high level, i.e. on the fact that, when producing any product, theproducing organisation must•Deﬁne what is to be made.•Make it.•Deliver it. 586D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595In Fig. 1, these functional categories are shown down the left-hand side. We extended the above categories to include what webelieve are the main sub-categories for software. Functional sub-categories for Deﬁne relate to approaches to long-term strategic(Roadmapping) and short-term project (Scoping) product planning.Categories for Make include what appear to be the most generallyaccepted elements of making software, i.e. choosing a suitable solu-tion (Design), implementing the pieces of the solution (Implement)and putting it all together (Integrate). For Deliver, we include aspectsrelating to the interface between development and client organisa-tions, namely transfer of the product (Release) and the product aspart of the target system (Support).According to our framework, these functions provide a sufﬁ-cient and exhaustive set for software development activities. Note,however, that the intention is not to impose any ordering of thefunctions. The intent of the framework is to provide a structure forasking questions and collecting data in a repeatable, ﬂexible andcomplete way, with no assumptions about practice implementa-tions. For example, with Make, there is no expectation that practicesassociated with Design and Implement need be separate.Each cell of the framework is a repository for information aboutthe practices that relate to the function (row) and objective (col-umn) for that cell. In Fig. 1, we show an X in each cell to denote thatthese practices will vary according to context. To illustrate somepossible contexts and practices, we present some examples.1. The owner of a small start-up company brainstorms his ideafor a new software product with an experienced developer. Hesketches some diagrams for the developer to work from. Bothare involved in the Deﬁne:Roadmap function for the Contentobjective. The discussions include the need for scalability andefﬁciency and so the discussion activity also addresses the theDeﬁne:Roadmap function for the Quality objective.2. The Product Manager for a software organisation that deliversto both the US and Asia-Paciﬁc marketplace bases all decisionsabout product introduction and upgrades on an extensive mar-ket analysis which includes consideration of both functionality(Content objective) and quality (Quality objective). Resultingdecisions are then captured in formal requirements speciﬁ-cations which are signed off by the Business Analysis team.Activities for Deﬁne:Roadmap for both objectives include ‘For-mally analyse market’ and ‘Formally document and sign offrequirements’.3. A developer who unit tests a code module prior to submission tothe build is involved in the function Make:Implement for the Qual-ity objective, i.e. the tests are aimed at exposing defect injectionand thus aim to improve the quality of the delivered product.4. A development lead works for a company that produces cus-tom software. The company has a policy of client involvement inthe process and always assigns a senior developer to act as theprimary interface to each client. At project start-up, the clientdescribes the kind of product he wants and some key desiredfeatures to the development team. The development lead thenmeets weekly with the client and uses prototypes to help consol-idate functionality (Content objective). Functionality is capturedin Use Cases and these are passed to the team for implementa-tion.The development lead is involved in Deﬁne:Scope, with activ-ities including ‘Prototyping’, ‘Regularly meet with client’ and‘Document functionality in Use Cases’. He monitors developmentby regular, but informal meetings with the development teamand is thus involved in the Make function. He also participates inthe Deliver:Release function because, before releasing a product,he checks the status of agreed Use Cases and the defects log anddiscusses status with the client. As speciﬁc quality expectationsare not discussed, the Quality objective is addressed only by thedefect log.5. A developer is involved in design reviews held with the inten-tion of checking design quality. The activity addresses theMake:Design function for the Quality objective. If the designreview also checks for compliance against requirements, theactivity would also address the Content objective. We observethat the same practice might appear in more than one cell. How-ever, although the practice might be included in more than oneplace, its efﬁcacy according to the viewpoint of the practitionersmight be quite different. For example, the design review mightbe reported as being extremely effective as a quality assurancemechanism, but weak as a content assurance mechanism due tothe unavailability of comprehensive requirements documenta-tion.6.A
 test team validating the product prior to delivery to a clientis involved in the function Make:Integrate, (i.e. is working withthe integrated product). It is likely that they are addressingobjectives for both Content (testing functionality is as expected)and Quality (checking for defects and non-functional require-ments). However, they may be addressing the two objectiveswith varying levels of effectiveness. The team may be extremelyexperienced, motivated and proﬁcient at ﬁnding defects, but ifthey do not have good access to descriptions of what the productshould do, they may be ineffective when addressing the Contentobjective.7. A developer enhancing a delivered product is involved in thefunction Make:Implement (and perhaps also Make:Design). TheContent objective may be addressed by having a descriptionof expected functionality and the Quality objective by a test-ing standard for patches. Note that, for a defect resolution, theabsence of the functionality description may result in the devel-oper unknowingly modifying functionality, thus compromisingthe Content objective. If the developer provides a patch with theresolved defect to a client, (s)he is involved in the Deliver:Releasefunction, i.e. there is now some relationship with the client.8. A development lead is expected to liaise regularly with the clientto ensure the delivered product continues to meet needs. Theorganisation have found in the past that clients have becomeunhappy because product effectiveness is reduced as a resultof technology changes in the client’s system. The oganisationasks the development lead to monitor the situation. As (s)he isconcerned with understanding the product in the client environ-ment, (s)he is involved in Deliver:Support.9. A team that provides ﬁrst tier support for a product, i.e.troubleshoots reported product malfunction, is involved inDeliver:Support. If an issue is acknowledged as being a defectand is passed to the development team, the developer assignedis involved in Make:Implement.In Fig. 2, we illustrate how practices relating to Content mightbe assigned to cells in the framework after interviewing the leaddeveloper described in example 4 above.4.2. Framework extensionsThe basic framework illustrated in Fig. 1 enables us to build up apicture of the kinds of practices applied by organisations and theirreported efﬁcacy in meeting speciﬁc objectives. As a result of obser-vations made during our trial study, we extended the framework inthe following way. The extensions are used to both guide questionsduring framework use and to support data analysis. The frameworkhas a number of possible applications (see Section 4.3) and the var-ious applications will require the inclusion of speciﬁc extensionsrelevant for that application. D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595587Fig. 2. Practices for the developer in example 4.1.There
 appear to be a wide range of mechanisms for understand-ing what is to be done, for example, regular meetings, formal orinformal documentation, informal discussions with team mem-bers, etc. We included for each cell a description for each of input(In), procedure (Proc) and output (Out). Mechanisms for inputrefer to the means by which participants get to know what theyare supposed to do (as opposed to a list of documents requiredfor the activity or a deﬁnition of the event that causes the activ-ity to commence). Examples are ‘formal document is given tome’, ‘I look on a wiki’, ‘we meet every day’. Mechanisms for pro-cedures relate to tasks, tools and task-related communicationsmechanisms. Mechanisms for outputs relate to what happens tothe result of the procedures, for example, ‘I report to my man-ager’, ‘I put the information on a wiki’, ‘I deliver a test plan to mymanager’.2. In order to understand if a reported practice is consistentlyimplemented, we have for each cell the concept of (Same). Shouldimplementation of a practice differ across projects, teams orindividuals, the Same value will be ‘No’.3. As we found during our trial that participants did not generallyappear to distinguish between practices for new work, upgradesand defect management, we assumed in the framework similarpractices for these but provided a different identiﬁer for eachto cover differences (‘N’ = new; ‘U’ = upgrades and ‘D’ = defects).If, for example, a practice is speciﬁc to new work, the capturedpractice is appended with the character ‘N’.4. As we are aiming to ﬁnd out what really happens in softwareorganisations, it is important that we distinguish between com-ments made by participants that relate to what they actuallydo and those that relate to ‘how things are done’. For exam-ple, a manager might report strong process in place while theimplementer might report otherwise. We need to know if thereis conﬂicting information from implementers (implying lackof consistency) or agreement among implementers but man-agement reports differ (implying management does not knowwhat is going on). The protocol for use includes differentiatingbetween general and experienced-based comments.We illustration these ideas in Figs. 3 and 4. In Fig. 3 weshow a basic capture of a design review practice addressing theFig. 3. Basic practice description.Fig. 4. More detailed practice description.Content objective. The name of the practice in this cell indicatesthat design reviews are implemented and address product content,i.e. functionality. Practitioners involved understand what to do byconsulting feature descriptions on a wiki and put a log of results ona wiki. All projects in the organisation carry out this practice in thesame way.For a more extensive capture, we expand (a) the Proc cell toinclude the information that the practice as relating to this objectivetakes place only for new work (‘N’) and (b) the In cell to state thatthe mechanism for knowing what to design is ineffective becausethe wiki generally does not contain all required information. Thisis shown in Fig. 4. If required for a speciﬁc study, a numeric scalemight be applied to capture the degree of effectiveness (rather thantextual comments).This version of our framework does not deal explicitly with man-agement practices, for example, risk, cost, knowledge management.Our hope is that practices will be reported if relevant for statedobjectives. For example, if a project manager is asked about howcontent is assured in his or her projects, (s)he might report somecommunications mechanism involving the client. Quality objec-tives might be addressed by a formal acceptance procedure forsub-contractors or a risk assessment process for new technologies.Cost mechanisms will not be exposed when asking about objec-tives of content and quality, but would likely be reported whencost objectives are included in the future. In a similar way, if weare in the future investigating an objective relating to an objec-tive ‘developer satisfaction’, practices such as ‘Friday night drinks’might be revealed. We hoped to learn about some aspects of organ-isational maturity with the Same questions, i.e. is there a consistent,organisation-wide approach to practices.4.3. Framework as research instrumentWe stated in Section 1 that the contribution of this paper is aresearch framework that will help us investigate various aspects ofsoftware practices. In this Section, we expand upon this idea.Our approach to understanding what goes on when developingcomputer software requires that we examine the actual practicesthat are carried out. This is in contrast with approaches that func-tion at a higher level, and effectively ‘wrap up’ practices accordingto some paradigm. For example, the paradigm of ‘software-as-manufacturing’ has resulted in a wrapping up of practices intoa set of processes and the paradigm of ‘software-as-a-human-endeavour’ has spawned the agile methodologies. We submit that afocus on terms such as ‘agile’, ‘traditional’, ‘process’ and ‘methodol-ogy’ is not helpful and rather we must model at a more ﬁne-grainedlevel, i.e. at the practices level. Only is this way can we begin tocompare these various paradigms and understand similarities, dif-ferences and gaps.A model is generally understood as being some kind of abstrac-tion of reality, one that allows us to view a real-world system ina way that is useful for some purpose. “Although wrong by def-inition, [models] are the wind that blows away the fog and cutsthrough the untamed masses of data to let us see answers to ourquestions” (Keller, 2006). When applying the framework described 588D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595above, we are declaring that we believe it may be useful to analysea software development effort by:•being clear about what are the main objectives to be met by theeffort;•categorising all practices that take place as addressing one ormore basic functions;•understanding exactly what are the practices project memberscarry out to effect the function and how effective these are atmeeting the stated objectives;•building up a picture of the development effort by asking thepeople who are actually doing the work.We further believe that viewing a software development effortfrom the perspective embodied in the framework has potential forinvestigating the following kinds of research questions:Is ‘best practice’ context dependent? The framework does notdictate what organisations should do but rather provides a mecha-nism for asking what works. We have an opportunity to investigatecontext-based best practices in an evidence-based way. For exam-ple, in the study reported in Section 5.2, we found that ‘informaldocumentation’ in conjunction with ‘high collaboration’ wasreported as being the key mechanism for understanding what isto be done. We might now further investigate if this is a commonapproach for smaller groups and, whether it is, in fact, effective.What are the risks of implementing a speciﬁc methodology?When we analyse the practices that make up a methodology by ﬁt-ting these practices into the cells of our framework, do we ﬁnd anygaps or badly-supported cells? Does the picture change when weconsider the effectiveness of the practices in speciﬁc contexts? Forexample, in Section 5.3, we expose a gap in the Roadmap functionfor an ‘ideal’ eXtreme Programming (XP) approach.Can we measure how cohesive a group is? We build our proﬁleby entering data obtained from individuals. We would expect thatseveral individuals will report the same practices for a given func-tion and objective. However, we have found that it is often the casethat individuals have varying perceptions about the effectivenessof practices. A development manager may believe the practice ofproduct functionality documented on a wiki is extremely effec-tive, while developers report that the wiki is never up-to-date, theinformation they need is too difﬁcult to ﬁnd and in the end theyalways have to ﬁnd someone to ask. (Based on consulting workcarried out by one of the paper authors, this lack of agreementis a relatively common occurrence.) If individuals report similarapproaches to practices, we may infer that the organisation isfunctioning in a cohesive way. However, if individuals report dis-parate approaches, we might infer some lack of common vision orunderstanding within an organisation. The framework thus acts asa diagnostic tool.Can we help a group streamline its processes? For each prac-tice sub-category, we capture practice approaches in relation tospeciﬁed objectives. We may notice some approaches that do notappear to contribute in a positive way to objectives and these maybe viewed as possibly representing targets for software processimprovement initiatives. For example, during our evaluation of theframework (see Section 5.2), we noticed developers often had toseek out information, either from a team member or from a wiki.This ‘pull’ approach to information elicitation may be inefﬁcientand the possible effect on efﬁciency represents an area for futureresearch.
Can we analyse how two groups differ? Two organisations claim-ing to implement an agile approach or a practice, for example, pairprogramming, may do so in very different ways, because of dif-ferent contexts. Even if the actual procedures are the same andcomply with recommendations, the effects on objectives may bequite different. For example, organisation A may always use expe-rienced developers whereas B may often assign inexperienceddevelopers. A is likely to be effective in meeting quality objectiveswhereas B is not. Further, when talking with one of A’s developers,we may learn that ‘Fred never listens to what I say and wants to doit all himself and I think we actually do very little quality checking’.With our framework we speciﬁcally ask individuals about effec-tiveness and so we have an opportunity to investigate the effectsof different contexts on productivity.Is it possible to categorise organisations? At the moment, theindustry categorises software organisations according to charac-teristics such as ‘organisational maturity’ or ‘traditional versusagile’. The ﬁrst appears to be of low interest to many (especiallysmaller) organisations and the second is so ill-deﬁned as to beof little use. Our research framework presents us with the pos-sibility of uncovering new ways of categorising, i.e. according toapproaches to, and perceived efﬁcacy in, meeting software objec-tives. We are in the process of further investigating this possibilityof proﬁling organisations in this way with a survey based on theframework and involving 198 participants from 51 NZ softwareorganisations.
Do comparison studies actually compare the same thing? Oneissue with gathering evidence relating to speciﬁc practices is thatoften practices with the same name are carried out in quite dif-ferent ways. For example, in an attempt to compare three studiesinto pair programming, (Kirk, 2007) exposed some key differencesbetween the practices described in the studies that effectively ren-dered comparison impossible. A ﬁrst step towards measuring is tounderstand what is actually taking place. We have an opportunityto ﬁnd out what a practice really entails and thus support evidenceaccumulation.When using the framework, the actual information sought andlevel of detail will depend upon what the question is. For example,when exploring group cohesion, we are interested in effectivenessratings as we want to expose differences in perceptions. Whenanalysing differences between groups, we need to ﬁnd out whatthe practices actually entail as we suspect different people meandifferent things. When analysing an ‘ideal’ process or methodol-ogy for risk, i.e. where we assume the claims of the methodologyare met, we simply need check that each cell in the framework isaddressed by some activity. For risk assessment in a real context,we would like to know, in addition to how many different prac-tices relate to each cell, whether these are effective in the speciﬁccontext.4.4. Proﬁling with the frameworkThe framework described above supplies a structure for under-standing practices in organisations. In this Section, we show howthe proﬁle for an organisation can be built up based on individualviewpoints about practice importance and efﬁcacy in relation to agiven objective.The importance of acknowledging the perspective of individu-als regarding process efﬁcacy has long been established, and hasroots in the ‘continuous improvement’ paradigm emerging fromJapan in the 1940s. In more recent years, there has been a renewedinterest in approaches such as the Repertory Grid Technique, a tech-nique that is based on personal construct theory and the notionthat individuals’ cognition can affect outcomes (Edwards et al.,2009; Tan and Hunter, 2002). We leverage the strengths of theseapproaches by basing our proﬁle on information elicited from arange of individuals from the group to be studied. The expecta-tion is that, as we enter information from different people intothe cells of our framework, a picture will emerge that will helpus answer the questions we were asking, or will highlight new D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595589Fig. 5. Typical coding scheme for elicited information.questions to ask. In this Section, we describe the mechanics of usingthe framework.The approach for applying the framework involves the followingsteps:1.Identify
 with the manager the objectives and scope of the study.For example, a manager may want to study a ‘typical’ project toexpose ineffective practices or may want to explore whether theemployees in his organisation function in a cohesive way.2.Identify
 the main objectives. The manager must be clear aboutwhich objectives matter the most. For example, is product relia-bility and security more important than delivering all expectedfunctionality?3.Establish
 the detail of information required and the codingscheme to be used (an example is presented below).4.Obtain
 from the manager a list of employees to interview.Employees should cover as wide a range of roles and experiencesas possible.5. Hold interviews, coding each relevant piece of practice informa-tion, for example, using the coding scheme depicted in Fig. 5.6. Collate all information into the cells of a spreadsheet and analyse.A typical basic coding scheme for a study with objectives Contentand Quality is shown in Fig. 5.The mechanism for interviewing practitioners involves, for eachfunctional sub-category, establishing if the practitioner is activein this sub-category and then asking questions relating to thesub-category. The information provided is captured in note formon paper with comments numbered to reﬂect their ‘meaning’ interms of the deﬁned coding. Questions are based directly on theframework and we illustrate with an example involving a devel-oper whose main task is low level design and coding. We haveestablished that (s)he is mainly involved in Design, Implement andIntegrate, has no involvement in roadmapping or project scoping,does not deal with the product in the target environment (and sois not involved in support) but does release patches directly to theclient, and so has a role in Release.For this practitioner, the relevant framework rows in Fig. 5 arerows 3, 4, 5 and 6. Questions are asked for each relevant cell andrelate directly to the extended framework as described in Section4.2. In Appendix A, we illustrate the interview procedure for cells4b and 6b, i.e. how the developer addresses ensuring the qualityof implemented software and how (s)he makes decisions aboutquality when releasing patches.Information that is noted includes the practice name anddescription along with some observations about the perceivedeffect on the objective and rationale for the observation. The extentof information captured will be dependent upon the reason forusing the framework. The process thus involves ﬁrst ensuring allrelevant activities are reported for each participant and then col-lating the comments in a spreadsheet. Information may then beanalysed according to the form of the research that is being carriedout.We reiterate that, because we are aiming to understand whatactually happens, there can be no separation of practice and con-text. Unless we are proﬁling an ideal process or methodology(see Section 5.3), activities such as, for example, ‘Prototype’ and‘Pair Programming’ are understood only when we know who wasinvolved and their characteristics. Was a prototype whose aim wasto consolidate functionality actually shown to the client, or wasit merely used as a basis for development? In the former case, itprobably served as an effective activity for the Content objective,whereas in the latter case it was probably extremely ineffective. Isa large group who practice pair programming less effective than asmall one? If we apply our approach to individual members of thelarge group, we might ﬁnd that there is disagreement about whatthe practice actually entails, or that different people have differentexperiences when applying the practice. If we have questions aboutthe efﬁcacy of pair programming in a large group, we must capturethe experiences of individuals within the group and then examinethe experiences for consistency or otherwise. The (in)consistenciesin responses along with gaps are an integral part of proﬁling thelarger group. For example, if those with role ‘Manager’ report thata practice is extremely effective and those with role ‘Developer’mostly report otherwise, we can infer some lack of common under-standing, either accidental or intended, between management anddevelopment and need to explore this before we can study pairprogramming effectiveness in large groups.5. Evaluating the frameworkWe have introduced a research framework and made claimsthat the framework will be useful for supporting various kindsof research in software development. We must now provide evi-dence to support these claims. Dawson et al. (2004) suggests that,for complex, human-intensive systems, there is a case for accumu-lating many little evidences of different kinds and they referencethe ﬁelds of medicine, law, industrial engineering and knowledgemanagement to support this viewpoint. This approach compareswith that of other researchers who draw from the ﬁelds of psy-chology and sociology to suggest the accumulation of an ‘evidenceportfolio’ comprising case studies, anecdotes, surveys, expert opin-ion and controlled experiments (Kitchenham et al., 2005; Weaveret al., 2005).As a means of presenting evidence to support our claims, wehave chosen an approach called argumentation along with an estab-lished notation, goal structure notation (GSN), for structuring andcapturing arguments. This approach has been used for many yearsin the safety critical domain and has more recently been appliedin the software domain (Weaver et al., 2005). Argumentation is “anapproach which can be used for describing how evidence satisﬁesrequirements and objectives” (Weaver et al., 2005). The use of asuitable notation such as GSN helps researchers to easily identifywhat evidence is required and helps stakeholders see at a glancewhat is the ‘evidence coverage’. We have chosen this strategy fortwo reasons. The ﬁrst relates to the fact that, as we are evaluat-ing a research framework to be used for answering different kindsof questions, the breadth of evidence required is large. The argu-mentation approach helps organise and display evidence such thatboth evidence and lack of evidence are relatively easy to see. Thesecond reason relates to the idea presented above that, for people-intensive systems, accumulating a portfolio of different kinds ofevidence is appropriate. The argumentation approach provides forindividual items of evidence and so is suitable for the portfolioidea.In this Section, we present the evidence map for our frameworkand then discuss in greater detail the three existing pieces of evi-dence, relating to gaining insights into possible context-dependent 590D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595success mechanisms in three New Zealand organisations and toexposing risk in the eXtreme Programming (XP) methodology.5.1. Evidence mapIn Fig. 6, we show the evidence map relating to our researchframework. With GSN, goals are presented as rectangles, argumentsas parallelograms and evidence as circles. The goal hierarchy is thusa structure showing how goals are addressed by arguments andhow arguments are supported by evidence. Arguments for which noevidence exists, i.e. undeveloped goals, have an attached diamond.Our top-level goal (Goal 1) is to accumulate evidence relating toour research framework. For each of the possible research questionsto be supported by the use of the framework (see Section 4.3), wehave created an argument and we have expanded each argument asone or more sub-goals. Sub-goals at this point are minimal and willmultiply as the research matures further, possibly creating morelevels in the hierarchy. For sub-goals 1.1.1, 1.2.1, 1.2.2 and 1.4.1,we have referenced our current evidence. Evidence for 1.1.1 and1.4.1 relate to an organisational case study. The evidence is labelledas evidence circle 1 and is presented in Section 5.2. Evidence forgoal 1.2.1 (evidence circle 2) relates to a paper study of an idealXP process (presented in Section 5.3) and evidence for goal 1.2.2(evidence circle 3) is a ‘what-if’ consideration of XP in context (seeSection 5.4).Note that this ‘evidence map’ captures breadth of evidencerather than depth, i.e. the strength of individual pieces of evidencemust be obtained from studying the actual evidence. The strengthof the map is rather to provide a quick idea of what evidence existsand easy access to that evidence (Weaver et al., 2005).As evidence accumulates, we may ﬁnd that our framework isuseful for some kinds of research questions and not for others.We may, of course, also identify other areas of investigation webelieve may be supported by the framework and add these to themap. For example, for Goal 1.2.2, we clearly need to accumulateevidence gained by studying a number of standard methodologiesas implemented in different kinds of organisations with differentobjectives.5.2. Evidence 1: Organisational practices in contextIn this Section, we describe how our research framework wasapplied in the three New Zealand organisations that had agreed toparticipate in our original study. We overview the characteristicsof these organisations below.Organisation A delivers health information systems to both localand global markets. It originated ten years ago and now has 250staff, with approximately 100 involved in development. All devel-opment takes place at a single location. The culture was reportedby the manager as informal with a ﬂat management structure andfocus on personal communications rather than a strict adherenceto a speciﬁc development methodology. We interviewed a productmanager, a design engineer, a developer and a test engineer.Organisation B delivers business design software and services toa range of clients in the private and public sectors. There is a coreteam of approximately six and development is carried out by a smallnumber of contractors who have been involved since inception. Thegroup reports being informal and focuses on the use of technologyto support operations. Again, the manager reported no adherence toa speciﬁc methodology. We interviewed the CEO, a senior managerand a QA manager. One potential participant, a developer, did notrespond to our invitation to participate.Organisation C produces network monitoring software forboth public and private sectors. There are approximately 40development staff spread over two locations, with quality assur-ance personnel located at one of these. The organisation isundergoing growth and has recently restructured, with plans toimprove operational effectiveness by introducing formality into allsoftware processes. Development processes are thus in ﬂux. Weinterviewed a senior product manager, a development managerand a QA manager.Although each of the participating organisations had an interestin process improvement, only organisation C was actively involvedin an improvement initiative at the time of the interviews. Thisinitiative was informal in that its direction was set by the seniormanager and based on his previous experience.We held informal interviews using the kinds of questions pre-sented in Appendix A. We applied a coding scheme as suggestedin Section 4.4 to match information about practices to the appro-priate cells in the framework. In addition to questions guided bythe framework, we also asked each participant what (s)he believedwere the main contributors to success and which practices wereproblematic. Comments were recorded as free-form sentences.We were able to complete all interviews within an hour. As thequestions directly related to the framework, we were able to codecomments easily.Collected data was collated in a spreadsheet. Comments foreach code were placed in the appropriate cell and colour-codedaccording to the owner of the comment. Comments about prac-tices actually carried out by the participant were in plain font andthose reporting what others did were italicised.The cells were then examined for any potential insights or obser-vations of interest. We observed the following:•For cells with several comments, the comments were similar forsome organisations and not for others. Comments for Organi-sation A tended to exhibit consistency in both cells relating toinputs and those relating to procedures. For example, commentsof the form ‘I ﬁnd out about the product from regular, infor-mal chats with team members’, ‘I talk to the analyst when I’munsure’, ‘we get it right because we have subject area experts onthe team’ were common to all roles interviewed. This was notthe case for organisations B and C. Although we do not have sufﬁ-cient data to infer reasons, we suggest that such inconsistencyrepresents a serious symptom. When involving managementand employees (as in the case with B and C), the implication isthat managers do not know what is going on. When involvingemployees only, the implication is a lack of a common vision andculture.•Two of the three organisations reported use of informal docu-mentation for understanding, informal processes for activitiesand a reliance on expertise, i.e. an ‘informal’ culture. However,one organisation also reported a reliance on extensive commu-nication and collaboration within the group while staff in thesecond organisation tended to work in a more individual way.We wonder if the existence of communication and collabora-tion in some way ‘strengthens’ the organisation and we wonder ifthere is a possibly useful distinction between ‘strong’ and ‘weak’informal cultures.•All of the participant organisations reported a dependence onPull mechanisms, i.e. the participant has to actively search forinformation about what needs to be done. There is a possibilitythat this implies an inefﬁciency, for example, as individuals mustspend time ﬁnding the relevant information.•For organisations that appeared to be low in agreement aboutpractices, the employee participants reported higher numbers ofissues.It is clear that, despite interviewing only a small number ofpeople from each organisation, basing questions on our frame-work allowed us to make a number of interesting observations in a D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595591Fig. 6. Evidence map for framework.relatively short space of time. Each of the observations mentionedabove represents an area for further investigation.5.3. Evidence 2: Risks in idealised XPIn this Section, we use our framework to capture the twelve XPPractices as cited by Beck (2000). XP was selected for exploring riskbecause its practices are well-deﬁned but do not obviously ﬁt intoa standard process paradigm. For example, what is the process thatis described by Metaphor? We hoped the attempt to capture in ourframework would provide an interesting and useful addition to ourevidence portfolio.As in the rest of this paper, we restrict objectives to functionalityand quality. We ﬁrst take the perspective of Beck, i.e. we captureXP characteristics as claimed rather than as experienced by indi-viduals in speciﬁc contexts. We then experiment with differentenvironmental characteristics.Planning game is the main mechanism for participants in an XPproject to help them understand what is to be made. As all projectroles participate, assuring correct functionality is addressed inScope, Design, Implement, Integrate and Release. The practice doesnot address Roadmap (long term, strategic planning) or Support(strategies relating to the product in the target environment).Small releases introduces constraints on the Release interfacebetween client and development organisation by deﬁning releasefrequency and providing an opportunity for the client to monitorcontent and quality. The practice itself does not involve feedbackand so no other categories are involved.Metaphor supports a common understanding between client anddeveloper. The Content objective is supported for all categoriesother than Roadmap.Simple design is an instruction to developers to keep code designas simple as possible, with a view to minimising errors. The Qualityobjective is addressed in Design and Implement.Testing has two aspects. The ﬁrst is the instruction to a developerto continuously write unit tests. This supports Quality in Designand Implement. The second is the need for a client to test all deliv-ered software. The aim is not to accept or reject the release, i.e. thepractice does not represent a constraint on the Release category asthe software is delivered no matter what, but rather the aim is toprovide feedback to the team. This means increased understand-ing of the product for both team members and client and so bothobjectives are addressed in all categories other than Roadmap.Pair programming mandates a speciﬁc procedure involving twodevelopers who act as checks for each other. Both objectives areaddressed in Design and Implement.Collective ownership mandates that all code may be changed byany developer. The intent is to improve code quality. The Qualityobjective is addressed in Design and Implement.Continuous integration demands that code is integrated afterevery change with a view to quickly identifying and resolvingdefects. The Quality objective is addressed in Integrate.40-h week has the aim of ensuring team members remain moti-vated and able to work in an effective way. This potentially affectsboth objectives in Make and Deliver.On-site customer acts as an information source for resolvingproduct-related uncertainties. Both objectives are addressed inMake. The increased product understanding of the customer alsopotentially addresses issues relating to the product in the targetenvironment, i.e. Support.Coding standards speciﬁes that code must comply with an agreedstandard. The Quality objective is addressed in Design and Imple-ment.In Fig. 7, we have inserted these practices into the appropriatecells in our framework.One observation from our capture of a ‘theoretical’ XP approachis that the Roadmap function is not addressed. This highlights apotential issue for product-line contexts, i.e. the function mustbe addressed outside the XP methodology. This outcome is to beexpected, as XP was not designed to address roadmapping. Thepoint is, of course, that the framework successfully highlighted theexpected gap.A second observation is that most of the practices address bothContent and Quality objectives across a range of function categories.This is a result of the managed information sharing in XP whereeveryone, including the client, attends regular Planning game meet-ings and a client is always available for feedback. We may ask whatwould happen if one of the project roles, for example, test, wasmissing from these meetings.5.4. Evidence 3: Risks in XP in contextWe now experiment with the contextual nature of organisationsby considering a context in which a capable client representativeis not available. When we remove the contributions of the client-dependent practices (Planning game, Metaphor, Client testing andOn-site customer), we have the framework shown in Fig. 8. Although 592D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595Fig. 7. XP practices as captured in the research framework.the Make function continues to be well-addressed, we now observerisk in the product deﬁnition and delivery functions. There are nomechanisms for roadmapping and scoping the product, and deci-sions relating to releasing the product to the client are addressedby only Small releases, i.e. efﬁcacy is no longer supported by highproduct knowledge within the development organisation. The con-sequences indicated by this analysis relate to possible problems inidentifying and managing requirements and in establishing releasecontent and quality. Indeed, recent research by Hoda et al. (2011)indicates that inadequate customer involvement may result in suchFig. 8. XP practices without effective client participation.issues. Our framework has helped us expose another valid area ofrisk.Some other contexts that might be worth modelling includeinexperienced development staff (reduced effectiveness for Pairprogramming and Collective ownership, introducing risk in the Makefunction) and large products that take some time to build (now nomechanisms in place for assuring an effective integration function).It might also be fruitful to introduce new objectives. For example,how does an XP approach address a Cost objective?6. DiscussionThe framework we have described has been developed with dif-ferent uses in mind. Primarily we would like to answer the kinds ofquestions described in Section 4.3. To do so requires capturing theright kind and amount of information about how an organisationdevelops software with minimal cost. Ultimately, how successfulour framework is will only be determined with experience. How-ever we believe the evidence we have presented in this paper givesus reason to believe it can be successful.The evidence we have presented in Section 5 addresses the mainquestions about the usefulness of our framework. These are:1. Is the framework complete, that is, are there no gaps in theframework so that every aspect of how an organisation developssoftware can be represented?2. Is the information captured by the framework sufﬁcient foranswering the research questions we care about?3. Is the framework lightweight, repeatable, and ﬂexible?We address the ﬁrst question in two ways. First we applied theframework to an established process, reasoning that if we couldnot represent such a process that would indicate a ﬂaw in theframework. We chose XP for this test, because we developed theframework based on our experience with more traditional pro-cesses, and so reasoned that if there were any gaps they wouldbe exposed by examining an agile process.The second test was to use the framework for real. Our reasoningwas that organisations may have practices not described in formalprocesses, and so this would test our framework for such situations.The second question is more difﬁcult to address without actu-ally performing studies based on the kinds of questions described inSection 4.3, but we do not want to do such (expensive) studies with-out some assurance that the framework will be successful. Instead,we tried to answer a more nebulous question—Can we learn some-thing interesting from the information captured by the framework?If the answer to this question is yes, then that gives us conﬁdenceto use the framework in a more expensive study.Again both the application to a formal model and use withreal organisations provides evidence to support our belief thatthe framework will be successful. From the results for theorganisations, we discovered a potentially interesting pattern forcommunication that may impact the success of organisations. Fromthe ‘what-if’ application to the results for XP, we were able toidentify risks that occur if the context for the use of XP is not asexpected.For question 3, using the framework in industry allowed usto test whether the framework was lightweight enough to beused with minimal cost, and whether its use was acceptable toorganisations. Because different people answered differently tothe questions we posed, this also allowed us to test the frame-work’s ﬂexibility. Repeatability is supported by the fact thatthe researcher asks the same kinds of questions each time (seeAppendix A). D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595593The apparent success of our framework could be due to the num-ber and choice of organisations we used it for, and the number andchoice of participants. It is unlikely that our sample is represen-tative of all software development organisations, or even a largesubset, but getting a representative set will take time and experi-ence, and the evidence we have gathered gives us the conﬁdencethat it is worth spending this time.A threat to validity of the organisational case study is that wewere dependent on managers suggesting individuals to includeand so we may have interviewed only individuals with a common‘story’. This could mean that our framework is more difﬁcult toapply effectively when a more realistic cross-section of employeesis involved. We mitigated against this risk by asking managers fornames of potential participants only after the manager had a goodidea of what we were trying to achieve. This appeared to work,as two of the three organisations exhibited dissenting viewpoints.Other threats to validity are the small number of organisationsand participants included and issues of objectivity raised by a sin-gle person carrying out interviewing, coding and analysis. As thecase study was intended as being exploratory in nature, we do notbelieve these threats pose great risk. The fact that some potentiallyuseful insights were gained despite low numbers of participantsmay be viewed as a likely strength of the framework.Threats to validity for the idealised XP study are that analysis ofthe XP practices in relation to the framework was subjective andthat it is known that XP does not deal with planning.A limitation of the research framework relates to the ‘gen-eral’ information about the organisation and its products. Theparticipant template has a focus on the project, i.e. asks about devel-opment and planning and does encourage some organisationalinformation by means of the ‘same each time’ questions. However,in one interview, the participant had a role that included market-ing and provided much information about the product’s history,for example, which products had been acquired and rebranded.This information is possibly important but there was nowhere tocapture this in the framework in its current form.7. Conclusions and future workWe have developed a research framework to support studiesrelating to software practices. Our approach differs from othersin that we are trying to avoid any preconceptions of how soft-ware ought to be developed, and so are explicitly not evaluatingagainst a speciﬁc formal model or set of practices. Our motivationfor this approach is the evidence in the empirical software engi-neering literature that many organisations have not adopted theformal models.Our research framework was created as a result of experiencesduring a trial to test an approach based on a standard assessmentmodel. The trial, involving 4 staff from two separate groups in anorganisation, exposed the need for a new approach. The result is ourresearch framework. This is based on the viewpoint that practicesexist to meet speciﬁed objectives and on the understanding thatwe must understand practices as actually implemented in the con-text under study. The framework provides a means of describinghow organisations implement software practices to meet speciﬁcobjectives.The research question addressed in this paper relates to the use-fulness of the framework for yielding insights for investigation. Wehave presented three studies as evidence to support this question.The ﬁrst was an exploratory case study involving 11 staff of three NZsoftware organisations. Questions asked were based on the frame-work. We found that we were able to ask all relevant questionswithin an hour and we could easily capture and classify informa-tion provided by participants. For this kind of study, the frameworksupports a lightweight and ﬂexible approach. Although only a smallnumber of participants was interviewed, we exposed some pos-sible mechanisms for success, for example, the use of informalpractices in conjunction with strong communications. We alsoexposed the use of a ‘pull’ mechanism for understanding require-ments and suggest this represents a possible area of inefﬁciencywithin the organisations. We note that these insights result directlyfrom studying the data collected when applying the framework andrequired neither a targeted approach nor specialised interview andanalysis techniques.In the second and third studies, we applied the framework toan idealised and ‘what-if’ XP process. We exposed a gap in supportfor long-term planning in the idealised methodology and yieldedsome understanding of vulnerabilities resulting from ‘non-ideal’contexts. For example, when experimenting with removing clientavailability, we noted a gap in practices for deﬁning and deliveringsoftware products.The successful application of the framework in the three stud-ies described suggest that the framework does adequately capturewhat happens in an organisation in a way that supports answeringquestions relating to (a) project risk caused by gaps in practicesand mis-matches in project members perceptions of practices,(b) comparing organisations by understanding contextual effectson practices, (c) streamlining by identifying practices that do notcontribute effectively to a stated objective and (d) categorisingorganisations according to practices implemented.The framework presented here allows us to see software devel-opment efforts in a different way, and presents many avenues forfuture investigation (see Section 4.3). We will follow two paths inthe immediate future. We are ﬁrst exploring the possibility of cate-gorising organisations according to the practices implemented. Ourapproach is to carry out a large-scale on-line survey using a ques-tionnaire instrument based on the framework. The survey stage iscomplete, with 198 participants from 51 NZ organisations, and weare now in the analysis stage. We next plan to investigate the ‘agile’nature of organisations by using the framework to compare stan-dard agile processes and organisations claiming to be ‘agile’. We willapply a case study approach for this investigation. The research willtake some years to mature and requires the contribution of othersfor effective advancement.Role of the funding sourceThis research is funded by the New Zealand Foundation for Sci-ence and Technology Research (FRST). The funding source had noinvolvement in study design, collection, analysis and interpreta-tion of data, report writing or in the decision to submit the paperfor publication.AcknowledgementsThis research is part of the Software Process and ProductImprovement (SPPI) project, funded by the New Zealand Founda-tion for Science and Technology Research (FRST). We would like tothank the organisations and individuals who agreed to take part inour study.We would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers for thepaper. Their thoughtful feedback was extremely helpful to us andhas thus contributed greatly to the quality of the paper.Appendix A. Examples of interview questionsWe illustrate the interview procedure for eliciting informationfor cells Implement:Quality and Release:Quality, i.e. how the devel-oper addresses ensuring the quality of implemented software and 594D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595how (s)he makes decisions about quality when releasing patches.We reference the questions back to the extensions described inSection 4.2.A.1. Questions for Implement:QualityWe would like to know how you address the quality of the soft-ware you produce. Please tell us when you are involved in a practiceyourself and when you are telling us about a practice carried outby someone else in your group (Framework extension 4, coded asO if report about others).1. First of all, tell us how you get to know what is expected in theway of software quality. For example, are the expectations writ-ten down somewhere or do you ﬁnd out by talking to people?(Framework extension 1, coded as In.)2. Now tell us if you have anything in place for ensuring the qual-ity of the software you implement. For example, do you writeunit tests or run tests written by others? Does someone reviewyour code or your tests? (Framework extension 1, coded asProc.)3. How do others get to know about the quality of your software?For example, do you log formal review sign-offs or is it assumedthat tests have been run and passed? (Framework extension 1,coded as Out.)4. Is this the same for new development and maintenance work?If not, tell us how these differ? (Framework extension 3, codedas N, U and/or D.)5. Do you always do things this way? (Framework extension 2,coded as Same.)6. How well do you think this works—is what happens effective, orare there any problems? What are they? Why?A.2. Questions for Release:QualityWhen you release patches to the client, we would like to under-stand the kinds of decisions you make about the quality of the patch.Please tell us when you are involved in a practice yourself and whenyou are telling us about a practice carried out by someone else inyour group (Framework extension 4, coded as O if report aboutothers).1.First
 of all, tell us how you get to know what level of quality isappropriate for the patches you send to the client. For example,do you check documents stating quality expectations or perhapsyou talk it over with a colleague? (Framework extension 1, codedas In.).2. Now tell us how you actually go about releasing patches. Forexample, do you have a written process or do you make the deci-sion about how well to test based on your experience? Do youalways attach a release document? How is the patch distributed?(Framework extension 1, coded as Proc.)3.How
 do others get to know about the release decisions for thepatch? For example, do you log in a release log? (Frameworkextension 1, coded as Out.)4. Is the process the same for enhancements and defects? If not,tell us how these differ? (Framework extension 3, coded as N, Uand/or D.)5. Do you always do things this way? (Framework extension 2,coded as Same.)6.How
 well do you think this works—is what happens effective, orare there any problems? What are they? Why?ReferencesBach, J., 1995. Enough about process: what we need are heroes. IEEE Software 12,96–98.Basili, V.R., Caldiera, G., Rombach, H.D., 1994. The experience factory. In: Marciniak,J.J. (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Software Engineering, volume 1. John Wiley and Sons,Ltd..Baskerville, R., Pries-Heje, J., Madsen, S., 2011. Post-agility: what follows a decadeof agility? Information and Software Technology 53, 543–555.Beck, K., 2000. Extreme Programming Explained—Embrace Change. Addison-Wesley, United States of America.Cater-Steel, A., Toleman, M., Rout, T., 2004. After the assessment: actions and reac-tions of 22 small Australian ﬁrms. In: 4th International SPICE Conference onProcess Assessment and Improvement—SPICE 2004.Chrissis, M.B., Konrad, M., Shrum, S., 2007. CMMI Second Edition Guidelines forProcess Integration and Product Improvement. Addison-Wesley, Massachusetts,USA.Coleman, G., 2005. An empirical study of software process in practice. Hawaii Inter-national Conference on System Sciences 9, 315c.Cusumano, M., MacCormack, A., Kemerer, C., Crandall, B., 2003. Software develop-ment worldwide: the state of the practice. IEEE Software, 28–34.Dawson, R., Bones, P., Oates, B.J., Brereton, P., Azuma, M., Jackson, M.L., 2004. Empir-ical methodologies in software engineering. In: Proceedings of the EleventhAnnual International Workshop on Software Technology and Engineering Prac-tice, IEEE.Dutta, S., Lee, M., Van Wassenhove, L., 1999. Software engineering in Europe: a studyof best practices. IEEE Software 16, 82–90.Edwards, H.M., McDonald, S., Young, S.M., 2009. The repertory grid technique: itsplace in empirical software engineering research. Information and SoftwareTechnology 51, 785–798.El Emam, K., Garro, I., 2000. Estimating the extent of standards use: the case ofISO/IEC 15504. Journal of Systems Software 53, 137–143.Hoda, R., Noble, J., Marshall, S., 2011. The impact of inadequate customer collabo-ration on self-organizing agile teams. Information and Software Technology 53,521–534.IISO (International Standards Organisation), 2004-2006. ISO/IEC 15504: InformationTechnology—Process Assessment (Parts 1–5), ISO.Keller, D.K., 2006. The Tao of Statistics. Sage Publications Inc.Kirk, D., 2007. A Flexible Software Process Model, Ph.D. Thesis. University of Auck-land, Auckland, New Zealand.Kirk, D., MacDonell, S., Tempero, E., 2009. Modelling software processes—a focus onobjectives. In: Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGPLAN Conference Companion onObject Oriented Programming Systems Languages and Applications (OOPSLA),Session: Onward short papers, ACM Press, pp. 941–948.Kirk, D., Tempero, E., Sumbitted for publication. Using an Assessment Model forUnderstanding Practices in SMEs: An Experience Report.Kitchenham, B., Budgen, D., Brereton, P., Linkman, S., 2005. Realising evidence-basedsoftware engineering. In: in: Realising Evidence-Based Software EngineeringWorkshop 2005, Workshop Co-located with ICSE 2005, Keele University, St.Louis, Missouri.Laporte, C.Y., Alexandre, S., O’Connor, R.V., 2008. A Software Engineering Lifecy-cle Standard for Very Small Enterprises. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp.129-141 (volume 16 of Communications in Computer and Information Science(CCIS)).Livari, J., Livari, N., 2011. The relationship between organizational culture andthe deployment of agile methods. Information and Software Technology 53,509–520.MacCormack, A., Kemerer, C., Cusumano, Crandall, 2003. Trade-offs between pro-ductivity and quality in selecting sofware development practices. IEEE Software20, 86–93.McCaffery, F., Pikkarainen, M., Richardson, I., 2008. AHAA—Agile, hybrid assess-ment method for automative safety critical SMEs. In: Proceedings of the 30thInternational Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE’08), ACM Press, Leipzig,Germany, pp. 551–560.MMoRST (New Zealand Ministry of Research, Science and Technology), 2009. Knowl-edge Intensive Service Activities in the New Zealand Software Industry.Munch, J., 2005. Goal-oriented composition of software process patterns. In: Pro-ceedings of the 6th International Workshop on Software Process Simulationand Modeling (ProSim’05), Fraunhofer IRB, St. Louis, Missouri, pp. 164–168.Petterssen, F., Ivarsson, M., Gorschek, T., Ohman, P., 2008. A practitioner’s guide tolight weight software process assessment and improvement planning. Journalof Systems and Software 81, 972–995.Sison, R., Jarzabek, S., Hock, O.S., Rivepiboon, W., Hai, N.N., 2006. Software practicesin ﬁve Asean countries: an exploratory study. In: ICSE ’06: Proceedings of the28th International Conference on Software Engineering, ACM, New York, NY,USA, pp. 628–631.Staples, M., Niazi, M., Jeffery, R., Abrahams, A., Byatt, P., Murphy, R., 2007. Anexploratory study of why organizations do not adopt CMMI. Journal of Systemsand Software 80, 883–895.Tan, F., Hunter, M.G., 2002. The repertory grid technique: a method for the study ofcognition in information systems. MIS Quarterly 26, 39–57.Weaver, R., Despotou, G., Kelly, T., McDermid, J., 2005. Combining softwareevidence—arguments and assurance. In: Realising Evidence-Based SoftwareEngineering Workshop 2005, Workshop Co-located with ICSE 2005. Keele Uni-versity, St. Louis, Missouri. D. Kirk, E. Tempero / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 582– 595595Yin, R.K., 1994. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Sage Publications, Inc.,California, USA.Diana Kirk is a Research Fellow in the Department of Computer Science at The Uni-versity of Auckland. Diana was awarded a Masters in Computer Science from theUniversity of Edinburgh and a Doctorate from the University of Auckland in 2007.Her industry experience spans over twenty years and includes technical program-ming, co-directing an emerging company, project management, software qualitymanagement and consulting. Diana’s main interests relate to maximising effective-ness in the processes applied during software projects.Ewan Tempero is an Associate Professor in the Department of Computer Scienceat The University of Auckland, New Zealand. He graduated from the University ofOtago, New Zealand, with a B.Sc., (Honours) in Mathematics in 1983 and receivedhis Ph.D. in Computer Science from the University of Washington, USA, in 1990.He has published over 140 papers in journals and internationally-refereed confer-ences, mainly in the areas of software reuse, software tools, and software metrics.His current research is developing metrics for measuring the quality of softwaredesigns.