 The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
j our na l ho me page: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssWaste identiﬁcation as the means for improving communication inglobally distributed agile software developmentMikko Korkalaa,, Frank Maurerb,1aVTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Vuorimiehentie 3, 02150, Espoo, FinlandbDepartment of Computer Science, University of Calgary, 2500 University Drive NW, Calgary, AB, Canada T2N 1N4a r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 28 November 2012Received in revised form 26 March 2014Accepted 26 March 2014Available online 8 April 2014Keywords:
Distributed agile software developmentLean software developmentCommunicationa b s t r a c tAgile approaches highly values communication between team members to improve software devel-opment processes, even though, communication in globally distributed agile teams can be difﬁcult.Literature proposes solutions for mitigating the challenges encountered in these environments. Thesesolutions range from general-level recommendations and practices to the use of communication tools.However, an approach covering the whole development process for identifying challenges, and improv-ing communication in globally distributed agile development projects, is missing. In order to addressthis, we conducted a case study within a globally distributed agile software development project focusedon using the concept of waste as a lens for identifying non-value producing communication elements.In order to achieve this, we constructed a waste identiﬁcation approach through which we identiﬁedﬁve communication wastes, and solutions to mitigate them. These wastes can help companies identifycommunication issues that are present in their development efforts, while the presented waste identiﬁ-cation technique gives them a mechanism for waste identiﬁcation and mitigation. This work contributesto the scientiﬁc community by increasing the knowledge about communication in globally distributedagile development efforts.© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionAgile software development methods emerged during the late1990s and early 2000s as a response to the industry’s need forfaster and more lightweight development approaches. One of theessential aspects of agile development methods is the emphasis oninformal communication conducted preferably face-to-face (Beck,2000). Informal communication has been deﬁned by Kraut andStreeter (1995) as personal, peer-oriented and interactive. Fur-ther, Herbsleb and Grinter (1999) label informal communicationas something that happens outside the ofﬁcial reporting struc-ture of the project, and sometimes invoked without the knowledgeof management. Informal communication enables correcting mis-takes and ﬁlling in the required details fast (Herbsleb and Grinter,1999). Physical proximity is essential for participants to engagein informal communication (Kraut and Streeter, 1995) and it ishighly emphasized in agile literature. An agile development teamCorresponding author. Tel.: +358 40 514 1042.E-mail addresses: mikko.korkala@vtt.ﬁ, mikko.korkala@gmail.com (M. Korkala),frank.maurer@ucalgary.ca (F. Maurer).1Tel.: +1 403 220 3531.should be located in a shared workspace and the customer (i.e.someone who will actively steer the project) should be on site toprovide input and feedback (Beck, 2000). Close collaboration withthe customers in agile software development has proven useful.For example, Ceschi et al. (2005) state that managing a customerrelationship has proven easier in agile software development whencomparing to traditional2approaches. 50% of the companies usingtraditional software development methods suffered from problemsrelated to customer relationships. This is 40% higher than customerrelationship issues encountered when using an agile developmentapproach (Ceschi et al., 2005). Agile approaches are currently usedin globally distributed environments that cross signiﬁcant dis-tances over time and space. This in turn makes physical, as well astemporal, proximity between the participants difﬁcult to achieveand, hence, creates challenges for informal face-to-face communi-cations (Nöteberg et al., 2003).2In this work, traditional development is synonymous with plan-driven devel-opment. Plan-driven software development is an engineering approach in whichthe software is developed following speciﬁc processes, commencing at the require-ments gathering stage and ending with the ﬁnal code (Boehm and Turner, 2003).Perhaps the most well known plan-driven method is the Waterfall method (Royce,1970).http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2014.03.0800164-1212/© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140 123Effective communication is essential in globally distributedsoftware development regardless of the development approach(Herbsleb et al., 2001; Carmel and Agarwal, 2001; Mockusand Herbsleb, 2001). In contrast to agile methods, traditionalapproaches rely on formal communication which codiﬁes pro-cess and product knowledge into extensive documentation (Neruret al., 2005). Kraut and Streeter (1995) describe formal commu-nication as communication through structured meetings, writingand other relatively impersonal and non-interactive channels. Aglobally distributed context creates its own challenges that affectcommunication between distributed partners (e.g. Noll et al., 2010).According to the study made by Komi-Sirviö and Tihinen (2005),74% of the problems of distributed development were related tocommunication. They found that the lack of communication orpoor quality of it was often the root cause behind other problemsidentiﬁed in the study (Komi-Sirviö and Tihinen, 2005).In order to address the communication challenges, differentsolutions have emerged. These proposals focus on general-levelrecommendations to establish an environment that fosters mean-ingful communication (e.g. Layman et al., 2006; Korkala et al.,2010), and the use of individual communication tools (e.g. Kircheret al., 2001; Danait, 2005). These recommendations provide solu-tions to particular problems such as organizational challenges(Korkala et al., 2010) and means to maintain interactive commu-nication. In summary, there are no concrete approaches coveringthe entire development process to help companies analyze andimprove communication in their globally distributed agile develop-ment projects. In our study, we use the concept of waste to illustratecommunication speciﬁc bottlenecks. Waste is deﬁned as any humanactivity consuming resources but not providing value (Womack andJones, 1996) and this concept has also been applied in the contextof Lean software development (e.g. Poppendieck and Poppendieck,2007; Mandi´c et al., 2010). While these wastes are not limited to anyparticular aspect of software development, our study aims to iden-tify communication speciﬁc wastes. Hence, the motivation of thisstudy was to create an approach that covers the entire agile devel-opment process to identify communication speciﬁc waste and toclassify what those wastes are.We conducted a single case study within a North Americansoftware intensive company that was implementing a productin a globally distributed fashion. In the study, we applied theconstructed waste identiﬁcation approach and analyzed the com-munication between the involved stakeholders using the keyconcepts of Media Synchronicity Theory (MST) (Dennis et al., 2008).The communication wastes were extracted from the data and wepropose actions for mitigating the effects of the identiﬁed wastes.The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, we propose awaste identiﬁcation process through which the non-value pro-ducing communication elements can be identiﬁed. As a secondcontribution, we identiﬁed ﬁve types of waste related to com-munication; lack of involvement, lack of shared understanding,outdated information, restricted access to information and ﬁnallyscattered information. This study concludes that the proposedwaste identiﬁcation process can point out non-value producingelements from communication, after which, measures to mitigatethem can be identiﬁed.The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discussesbackground literature relevant to this study in order to provide thereader an understanding of communication in globally distributedenvironments. Section 2 also discusses the concept of waste in thecontext of software development and explains the communica-tion theory through which communication was analyzed. Section3 presents how the study was conducted and introduces the wasteidentiﬁcation approach. Section 4 presents the ﬁndings of thisstudy, and generalized descriptions of the wastes alongside pro-posals for mitigating them. Threats to validity are also discussedin this section. In Section 5 the ﬁndings are discussed along withfuture research opportunities. Finally, the conclusions are drawnwith more detailed description of how to apply the presented wasteidentiﬁcation approach.2. Related literatureIn this section, background literature relevant to the study is dis-cussed. First, we discuss communication in the context of globallydistributed software development from the perspectives of bothtraditional and agile software development, after which we intro-duce Media Synchronicity Theory. Finally, we address the conceptof waste. These elements provide the theoretical framework for ourstudy.2.1. Communication in globally distributed developmentenvironmentsGlobally distributed software development (GSD) is a commonapproach in software engineering (Damian and Moitra, 2006) andseveral factors have contributed to the growth of this phenomenon.Some of the most commonly cited beneﬁts include time-zone inde-pendent “follow the sun” development, access to well-educatedlabour, maturation of the technical infrastructure and reduced costsdue to different salary structures based on geographical regions(Komi-Sirviö and Tihinen, 2005; Ebert and De Neve, 2001; Gortonand Motwani, 1996; Battin et al., 2001). In order to achieve thesebeneﬁts, communication between the distributed parties must beeffective. However, there are several challenges that hinder com-munication in distributed contexts.Noll et al. (2010) have identiﬁed geographical, cultural andtemporal distances as the key barriers for communication and col-laboration in globally distributed environments. Holmström et al.(2006) state that it is the combination of these distances thatmakes globally distributed development complex. Table 1 presentschallenges found in these categories both from the general GSD lit-erature (not focusing on any particular development approach) andthose found in agile GSD literature.Several different approaches to address these challenges havebeen suggested. The reduced opportunities for synchronous andface-to-face communication from both geographical and temporalviewpoints can be mitigated by using interactive communi-cation tools, such as videoconferencing (Kircher et al., 2001;Sureshchandra and Shrinivasavadhani, 2008), whiteboard software(Layman et al., 2006), web conferencing and Instant Messag-ing tools (Danait, 2005). Asynchronous tools can also be used.According to Damian and Zowghi (2003), email is the dominantasynchronous media due to its important role as a means ofexchanging documents across temporal distances. The use of asyn-chronous media can, however, create challenges. Email messagescan be forgotten or lost which leads to unresolved issues, and thetime when a response to an email message will arrive is unsure(Damian and Zowghi, 2003). Carmel and Agarwal (2001) furtherstate that asynchronous media often delays problem resolution andmakes it more complicated. As an example, even simple issues cantake days of email discussion before resolving (Carmel and Agarwal,2001). In order to reduce communication overhead, strict com-munication policies are promoted if asynchronous communicationtools are used, such as, emails need to be replied within 12 businesshours as suggested in Vax and Michaud (2008).Communication tools themselves can create challenges. Soundquality of teleconferencing tools may be poor. This can createmisunderstanding and communication overhead can occur whenmessages need to be repeated several times (Williams and Stout,2008). Additionally, signiﬁcant amounts of time may be needed 124 M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140Table 1Challenges of GSD and agile GSD from the perspectives of temporal, geographical and cultural distances.Challenge area FindingsTemporal distanceGeneral GSD literatureOpportunities for synchronous communication are reduced (Ågerfalk and Fitzgerald, 2006).Communication needs to take place on unconventional times due to the lack of overlapping working hours and leads to overtime work.This is consuming and leads to communication overhead (Holmstrom et al., 2006; Conchúir et al., 2009; Sarker and Sahay, 2004).Possible unavailability of remote colleagues when help is needed can lead to delays. Asynchronous communication media used overtemporal distance increases response times (Ågerfalk, 2004).Agile GSD literatureUsing interactive media for efﬁcient communication can be very difﬁcult due to temporal distance (Korkala et al., 2010).Geographical distanceGeneral GSD literatureFace-to-face meetings are difﬁcult to arrange and informal communication is lacking (Ågerfalk and Fitzgerald, 2006). This inhibits ideasharing (Conchúir et al., 2009).Agile GSD literatureExplicit ﬁndings not found. However, the identiﬁed challenges can be seen valid in globally agile development as well.Cultural distanceGeneral GSD literatureMisunderstandings in communication stemming from cultural differences (Holmstrom et al., 2006; Ågerfalk and Fitzgerald, 2006;Conchúir et al., 2009).Agile GSD literatureMisunderstandings in communication stemming from cultural differences (Summers, 2008).Cultural differences may result into situations in which e.g. disagreements are not willingly expressed and negative issues are sharedreluctantly (Lee and Yong, 2010; Drummond and Francis, 2008).Language barriers can signiﬁcantly hinder communication (Layman et al., 2006; Uy and Ioannou, 2008; Kajko-Mattsson et al., 2010).Different work styles cause communication problems (Sutherland et al., 2007).to resolve technical issues with videoconferencing (Williams andStout, 2008). Poor technical communication infrastructure can cre-ate such challenges that meetings may even need to be rescheduleddue to poor sound/video quality (Therrien, 2008). Other times, itis not even possible to use videoconferencing tools (Paasivaaraet al., 2008; Herbsleb and Moitra, 2001). Considering the consum-ing nature of unconventional overlapping work hours that enablesynchronous communication, it is recommended that work shouldbe kept sustainable (Therrien, 2008).In order to overcome cultural hurdles there are several recom-mendations available. For example, experienced domain expertsshould communicate with distributed teams daily. This shouldmitigate communication risks emerging from cultural differencesby keeping the potential problems transparent (Summers, 2008).In addition, creation of speciﬁc roles has been proposed as anapproach for mitigating communication issues stemming from cul-tural differences. Layman et al. (2006) proposed the creation ofa role responsible for close collaboration between the developersand the management, in the event that they are separated. Korkalaand Abrahamsson (2007) studied the propositions of Layman et al.(2006) and concluded that they are worthwhile to consider in dis-tributed settings. Furthermore, they emphasize the importance ofdirect communication links between the participants. It should benoted however, that the distribution in the case project was not ona global scale (Korkala and Abrahamsson, 2007).Bureaucratic organization can create barriers for commu-nication in agile GSD projects. Bureaucratic organizations arecharacterized as hierarchical, procedural, regulated, established,structured, cautious and power-oriented (Wallach, 1983), and theyhave been identiﬁed as a difﬁcult environment for agile develop-ment projects (Berger, 2007). Korkala et al. (2010) found supportingevidence for this claim in their study focusing on analysing com-munication in a globally distributed agile development project thathad separate customer and vendor organizations involved. Theyfound that bureaucratic organizational culture created signiﬁcantchallenges for communication. One of the challenges was delib-erate information hiding, i.e. the customer organization did notgrant the vendor access to important information such as theircodebase. Further, the customer organization did not provide ade-quate information about the requirements for the vendor. The lackof domain knowledge at the vendor organization made their situ-ation even more challenging. In order to respond to these ﬁndings,the study concludes with a set of guidelines aiming at creating anenvironment that supports meaningful communication (Korkalaet al., 2010).The literature study made for the purposes of this workshows that communication challenges of GSD are many, and existregardless of the development approach. It also shows that themechanisms for mitigating these challenges are merely general-level recommendations and encouragements for using individualcommunication tools. This ﬁnding, combined with the pivotal roleof communication in agile development, further supports the pur-pose of this study to provide a concrete approach for companies toimprove communication in their agile GSD projects.2.2. Media Synchronicity TheoryCommunication theory and the processes through which com-munication was analyzed during the study are presented in thissection. An overview provides understanding of the main conceptsthat created the theoretical lenses of the study from the perspectiveof communication.Media Synchronicity Theory (MST) is an extension of MediaRichness Theory (MRT) (Daft and Lengel, 1986; Daft et al., 1987)and aims to predict the performance of communication and exam-ine communication media capabilities in various contexts of use(Dennis et al., 2008). MST deﬁnes two separate communicationprocesses, conveyance and convergence. In our study, we use theseprocesses to categorize and analyze the use of different communi-cation media in different phases of the case project.Conveyance is related to transmission of new information thatenables the receiver to create and revise a mental model of theinformation. In order to establish this understanding, as muchrelevant information as necessary is required. If information isinsufﬁcient (i.e. conveyance is defective), incorrect conclusionswill be reached. Convergence process aims towards a shared M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140 125Table 2The ability of different communication media to support synchronicity as deﬁnedin Dennis et al. (2008).Communication mediumAbility
 to supportsynchronicityFace-to-face HighVideo conference HighTeleconference MediumSynchronous instant messaging MediumEmail and asynchronous electronic communication LowVoice mailLow
Fax LowDocuments Lowunderstanding on the meaning of information, and the participantsneed to mutually agree that the mutual understanding is achievedor that it cannot be achieved (“agree to disagree”). Convergencecan require less information processing compared to conveyanceif it focuses on a smaller set of information, for example a partic-ular detail, than what was conveyed in the ﬁrst place. However,if large differences in individual understandings exist convergencemay require as much cognitive processing than conveyance. Defec-tive convergence prevents individuals moving forward to otheractivities since they lack a shared understanding (Dennis et al.,2008).Synchronicity is deﬁned in MST as “the ability to supportindividuals working together at the same time with a shared pat-tern of coordinated behaviour”. Further, media synchronicity isdeﬁned as “the extent to which the capabilities of a communica-tion medium enable individuals to achieve synchronicity” (Denniset al., 2008). Synchronicity is not always easy to achieve. Denniset al. (2008) postulate that synchronous communication is neces-sary to synchronicity, but it is not necessarily sufﬁcient consideringparticipants can lack a shared focus during communication. Theparticipants can for example, read their email during a meeting.Using media with lower synchronicity should increase per-formance for conveyance processes (i.e. sharing new complexinformation), while convergence processes (agreeing on details,for example) beneﬁt from using media with higher synchronicity(Dennis et al., 2008). In addition, a convergence process typicallyrequires rapid transmission of small quantities of pre-processedinformation back and forth between the participants (Dennis et al.,2008). Communication media vary in their properties to supportsynchronicity. Table 2 is a summary from Dennis et al. (2008)depicting media abilities to support synchronicity.According to Dennis et al. (2008), no single medium is inherentlybetter than another and successful completion of tasks requiresboth conveyance and convergence processes. Therefore, it is pro-posed to use different media either simultaneously or in succession.Dennis et al. (2008) further suggest that the situation in which amedium is used affects its suitability for particular communicationsituations. The communication processes, the individuals engagedin communication and the social context in which the communi-cation takes place all affect the medium’s suitability for the givensituation.Dennis et al. (2008) also discuss appropriation factors that inﬂu-ence how people use different media. These factors further proposethat when communicating participants’ familiarity with each otherincreases, the need for media that supports high synchronicity isreduced (Dennis et al., 2008). Thus, the need to use different com-munication media is not constant, but evolves in time. In addition,media that ﬁt the users’ needs are more likely to be appropriatedand used faithfully than those not meeting these needs (Denniset al., 2008).Considering the validity of MST, Niinimäki et al. (2010) stud-ied twelve distributed projects and found evidence that MST canbe used for selecting communication tools for projects operating inglobally distributed settings. The study concludes that even thoughthe tool use and decisions made on media choice were not alwaysfollowing suggestions of MST, the ideas presented in the theory areapplicable and useful in globally distributed development projects.The results of a laboratory experiment on the theoretical underpin-nings of MST are reported in Dennis et al. (1998). The study focusedon the impacts of different media on effectiveness of both con-veyance and convergence. The study provided preliminary supportfor MST. DeLuca and Valacich (2006) studied MST through sevenhypotheses and found support for MST. Further, Dennis et al. (2008)provide a list of studies whose ﬁndings they explain via MST. Orig-inally these studies applied MRT, whereas MST was able to answerto unexplained results of these works.2.3. The concept of wasteThe origins of waste can be traced back to the Japanese auto-mobile industry of the 1950s and more speciﬁcally to ToyotaProduction System (TPS) (Ohno, 1988). The literature discusses twokinds of waste: Type 1 waste involves non-value adding activitiesthat cannot be removed or mitigated from the current operatingenvironment while Type 2 waste is a non-value adding activity thatcan be removed or mitigated (Womack and Jones, 1996). While themanufacturing industry has its own deﬁned wastes, Poppendieckand Poppendieck (2007) have mapped these wastes to softwaredevelopment activities. These wastes, complemented with thoseidentiﬁed by Mandi´c et al. (2010) and their descriptions, are dis-cussed in Table 3.A case study reported by Ikonen et al. (2010) revealed thatthe wastes presented in Poppendieck and Poppendieck (2003)are relevant to software engineering. It was concluded that soft-ware development projects can be successful even though wasteexists and waste seems to be something that cannot be avoidedin software development projects (Ikonen, 2010). There seems tobe certain challenges in identifying waste in software develop-ment. Usually, in production and manufacturing the underlyingnature of waste is visible and generally well understood (Hicks,2007). In his work, Hicks (2007) argues that in the context ofinformation management, the situation is the opposite. Ikonenet al. (2010) share a similar understanding around softwaredevelopment.3. Research designIn this section, we describe how our study was conducted. Thecase study and its context are discussed along with the data col-lection and analysis techniques. In addition, we present the wasteidentiﬁcation process.Even though research in software engineering has a result-oriented, pragmatic view on research methodologies (Seaman,2002), the philosophical perspective on this study can be seen asan interpretative case study. Orlikowski and Baroudi (1991) claimthat an interpretive study attempts to understand a particularphenomenon (in this case, communication), through how the par-ticipants interpret their context. Hence these studies try to increasethe understanding of this phenomenon and use this knowledge toinform other settings.Case studies typically aim at answering “how” and “why” ques-tions (Benbasat et al., 1987). In this study, we formulated threeresearch questions. The main research question is:•RQ: How can waste identiﬁcation improve communication in glob-ally distributed agile software development? 126 M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140Table 3The wastes of software development and their descriptions based on Poppendieckand Poppendieck (2007) and Mandi´c et al. (2010).Waste DescriptionWastes and their descriptions identiﬁed by Poppendieck and Poppendieck(2007)Partially done work Something that is not completed. E.g. untestedcode, undocumented or not maintained businessdecisions.Extra features Something that is not really needed.Relearning E.g. forgetting decisions, re-trying solutionsalready tried and the inability to utilize theknowledge of other people.Handoffs Passing work to someone else, getting work fromsomeone else.Task switching How many other tasks the people need to do.Switching between tasks is distracting. Forexample, often switching between three or foursmaller tasks requires more time to re-orientate tothose tasks than to work on those. The timerequired to re-orientate to a task is waste.Delays Waiting for something.Defects Errors in program code.Wastes and their descriptions identiﬁed by Mandi´c et al. (2010)Avoidingdecision-makingThis waste is about avoiding decision-makingaltogether and it should not be confused with“Defer commitment” practice of lean softwaredevelopment (Poppendieck and Poppendieck,2007). The reasons behind this waste can varyfrom organizational issues, such as lack ofempowerment, to individual characteristics.Limited access toinformationThis waste is related to the existence ofinformation; it might not exist. Limited access torelevant information may result in harmfuldecisions.Noise orinformation
distortionFurther divided to the dimensions of time andspace. Time related distortion occurs wheninformation is not recorded, not updated or isforgotten. Space related distortion occurs becauseactors are distributed across different levels orunits of an organization and representing differentcontexts and sub-contexts. Space relatedinformation distortion is a phenomenon describedby Melnik and Maurer in (2004).Uncertainty A variable or choice can have multiple values oroptions. These increased values or options increasethe level of uncertainty.This main research question is further elaborated by the followingsub-questions:•SQ1: How can communication waste be identiﬁed in globally dis-tributed agile software development?•SQ2: What wastes can be found in communication in globally dis-tributed agile software development?In this study, we identify waste that is speciﬁc to communicationin globally distributed agile software development. We do not clas-sify previously identiﬁed waste as communication speciﬁc in spitethat they can be linked to communication in agile GSD. Similarly,we exclude well-known issues in GSD from being classiﬁed as com-munication waste.The unit of analysis in this study was a single globally distributedagile software development project within a medium-sized NorthAmerican software intensive company that implements interactiveproducts for education and business. This site was selected basedon the following criteria:1. The case organization had operated using agile approaches fora period of nearly three years at the time of the study and hadextensive experience working in a globally distributed context.2. The case organization provided extensive access to individuals atmultiple levels within the organization. These individuals wereable to describe the situation from different viewpoints.The project to we studied was suggested by the case company’smanagement since it was working clearly in a globally distributedfashion with different tasks allocated to various sites across conti-nents. In addition, management and the project personnel providedthe authors extensive access to relevant data that was gatheredusing several different data collection techniques. The discussionswith management and the project manager prior to the studyrevealed that they were, in general, satisﬁed with the project’sprogress. However, they identiﬁed the increased demands forcommunication with the offshore development organization as achallenge.The project developed an improved version of an existing prod-uct that had been implemented by the case organization over thelast 10 years. The software was divided into high-level units offunctionality labelled as themes by the case organization. Thesethemes contained different sets of functions that the product wassupposed to provide. The themes were allocated to three differ-ent sites, remaining as independent as possible from the themesthat were allocated to other locations, with the idea to minimizedependencies. Two of the sites were located in North America andwere part of the case company. One site was located in India. Thissite was an independent contractor organization. Fig. 1 depicts theproject organization along with temporal distances between thesites.Initial Product Backlog was created before the actual program-ming work began. This process is described later in the paper. Theprogramming work was not initiated at the same time in all sites.NorthAmerica 2 began development in September 2010. The pro-gramming work began at NorthAmerica 1 in June 2011 and in May2011 at India. The reason why NorthAmerica 2 started earlier thanthe others was that the largest themes from the Product Backlogwere assigned to them while the rest of the personnel allocatedto the project at other sites were fully committed to other efforts.India had been collaborating with the parent organization for thelast two years. NorthAmerica 1 was leading the development andcontained the personnel responsible for steering the developmentalong with the Product Owner. Before the implementation beganat NorthAmerica 1, their leading role focused on steering the devel-opment at other sites.3.1. Data collectionThe application of several data collection methods such asarchives, observations, interviews and questionnaires is often usedin case studies in order to increase their validity (Eisenhardt,1989; Yin, 1994; Stake, 1995). In our study, the data was collectedusing observations, informal discussions, documents provided bythe case organization, and semi-structured interviews with open-ended questions. This data was collected at different phases ofthe project. The timeline of the study is presented in Fig. 2. Thestudy had two main phases. The ﬁrst phase focused on obtaining asolid overview of the case project while the latter phase focused onacquiring detailed information from the participants in the form ofinterviews. The actions described in Fig. 2 in some instances over-lapped despite being presented in a linear fashion for the sake ofclarity. Data collection and analysis were conducted throughout theproject. The one-month gap between the phases is due to a vaca-tion. The timeline presents the research activities after site and caseproject selection. M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140 127Fig. 1. The project organization along with temporal distances between the sites.When the study was initiated all sites were involved in theproject. NorthAmerica 1 and India were in the process of clari-fying their individual requirements at the point when the studybegan. NorthAmerica 2 was implementing the product require-ments assigned to them.In order to ensure that the research data would be obtainedfrom all necessary viewpoints, the key stakeholders of the projectwere identiﬁed together with the project manager, and the casecompany management. Table 4 presents the interviewed projectstakeholders. In order to unambiguously identify stakeholders,their corresponding codes are preceded by the site name whenthere is a possibility of ambiguity in stakeholder location.The study participants at NorthAmerica 1, excluding the deve-lopers, were team members who in addition to their workresponsibilities worked as Product Owner intermediates for theteams relaying information from the Product Owner to the teamsand vice versa. In addition, these senior members supported theProduct Owner in decision-making on features to be implementedand provided direct feedback to the other sites.The initial understanding of the project and the product wasobtained during a total of 11 observation sessions taking placeeither onsite at NorthAmerica 1 or via telephone and screen shar-ing software. Field notes were taken during these sessions anda research diary was constantly updated during the study. Inaddition to observations, documentation about the requirementsgathering and analysis process, as well as informal discussions andemails served as the means of providing information. If informa-tion was ambiguous, clarifying questions were asked until mutualunderstanding was achieved. In these observations, communica-tion between NorthAmerica 1 and NorthAmerica 2 and betweenNorthAmerica 1 and India was studied.During the ﬁrst stage of data collection, one 70-minute inter-view focusing on the use of documentation and tools for sharingand storing it was conducted face-to-face at NorthAmerica 1. Thisinterview involved all NorthAmerica 1 participants excluding thedevelopers.Data collection in research phase 2 was conducted via inter-views. A total of 12 semi-structured interviews with open-endedquestions and probes were conducted. Each interview lasted from60 to 90 minutes and all participants were interviewed once. Theinterviews at NorthAmerica 1 were conducted face-to-face, whileSkype was used in interviews involving NorthAmerica 2 and India.Due to company policies at India and to help with language relatedissues India.ProjectManager participated in all the interviews con-ducted with India. All the interviews were recorded and transcribedverbatim. In addition, ﬁeld notes were taken and the research diarywas updated.3.2. Waste identiﬁcation processThe project’s development process contained two main phaseslabelled pre-development and development. As the names sug-gest, the pre-development phase included work conducted beforethe implementation begun. In this phase we focused on com-munication during the deﬁnition of the initial requirements andthe initial Product Backlog. The development phase followed aScrum approach (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002; Schwaber, 2004)with ﬁxed-length three week synchronized Sprints (i.e. all sitesbegan and ended at the same time). In this phase, we focusedon analysing communication during identiﬁed development steps.The analysis of documentation as a communication tool dur-ing the project was included in the waste identiﬁcation process.Fig. 3 describes the waste identiﬁcation process applied in thisstudy.The use of different communication channels used by key stake-holders during different process steps is analyzed and relatedcommunication wastes are extracted in this process. The improve-ment actions responding to these challenges are determined andapplied in the development process.In our study, the input for each analysis step was a set ofquestions used to obtain a holistic view of communication withineach phase. The questions focused on the steps belonging toPre-Development and Development phases were based on the fol-lowing main topics: (1) who was involved in communication duringthe step, (2) what media were used during the step, (3) what kind ofinformation was discussed during the step, (4) what were the beneﬁtsFig. 2. The timeline of the study along with research activities. 128 M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140Table 4The interviewed stakeholders at different sites along with the description of their main responsibilities and their code in this study.Role Description of main responsibilities CodeNorthAmerica 1Product OwnerResponsible
 for providing an overall strategy for the product. Identiﬁcation and prioritization ofnew features and steering of development.ProductOwnerProject Manager Project planning and defect monitoring. Responsible for timely delivery of the product that meetsboth quality and ﬁnancial requirements.ProjectManagerPersonnel Manager Responsible for coordinating people based on the demands of technical decisions, for example,supporting the growth of peoples’ technical competences and well-being.PersonnelManagerUser Experience SpecialistCreating
 user interface drafts, conducting usability testing and user research. Supportingdevelopment teams in usability aspects. Discussing user interface & usability topics with theProductOwner and the development teams.UserExperienceOverall Technical Lead Responsible for technical aspects of the whole project. Responsible for technical architecture ofthe product and communicating technical details of the requirements to all teams.MainTechLeadTwo Developers Responsible for developing the software at NorthAmerica 1. NorthAmerica 1.Dev1 andNorthAmerica 1.Dev2NorthAmerica 2Technical Lead Responsible for technical aspects of the product at NorthAmerica 2. NorthAmerica 2.TechLeadDeveloper and Tester Developer was responsible for developing the software at NorthAmerica 2 while Tester wasresponsible for creating automated test cases for the product and worked as a coordinatorbetween the testing services team and other teams working with the project.NorthAmerica 2.Dev andNorthAmerica 2.TesterIndiaProject Manager Responsible for delivering the decided contents of each Sprint at India. India.ProjectManagerQuality Assurance EngineerResponsible
 for the quality of the software developed at India.India.QualityAssurance
Two developersResponsible
 for developing the software at India. India.Dev1 and India.Dev2of the media when used during the step, and (5) what were the wastesin communication during the step.Questions related to Documentation involved the following top-ics: (1) what documents were produced during the development, (2)who was involved in the creation and updating of documents, (3) whatwere the beneﬁts and wastes of using documents as a communicationtool, and (4) how were the documents stored and what issues did thiscause. The output from each step was the general overview of com-munication during the steps (who participated, what was discussedand using what media), the beneﬁts of communication media usedFig. 3. The waste identiﬁcation process applied in the study. M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140 129in them, and the non-value producing elements of communicationfrom each step. Similar output was acquired from the perspectiveof documentation. Waste mitigation actions were deﬁned in thewaste mitigation actions process step.This approach is derived from a framework described inPikkarainen et al. (2008). Through their framework, Pikkarainenet al. (2008) analyzed whether the use of agile practices improvedor hindered communication between the stakeholders of the orga-nization. While communication hurdles are discussed in theirapproach, Pikkarainen et al. (2008) do not discuss communicationwaste. Further, their approach considers the whole organizationincluding management while our approach focuses entirely on thedevelopment project level.3.3. Data analysisAfter the interviews, the transcriptions were ﬁrst read and rel-evant topics were coded. Prior to the study a set of initial codes(“seed categories” (Miles and Huberman, 1994)) were created. Asin Thematic Analysis (Braun and Clarke, 2006), additional cate-gories were added when seen relevant. During the analysis a datareduction process (Miles and Huberman, 1994) was followed inorder to focus on the essential data. The notes from informal dis-cussions and observations were analyzed after the sessions fromwhich they were collected. After the coding the tagged questionsand resulting answers were grouped into a separate table forminga data display containing the compressed assembly of informa-tion, as proposed by Miles and Huberman (1994). The informationwas complemented with data available from ﬁeld notes, observa-tions and discussions. Wastes were extracted from the data. Wealso analyzed if the communication in each phase aimed towardsconveyance or convergence and if the used media was capable ofsupporting these processes. This enabled us to discuss our ﬁndingsfrom the perspective of MST.Our data analysis has similarities to Grounded Theory. Cruzesand Dybå (2011) summarize Grounded Theory from Glaser andStrauss (1967) and Corbin and Strauss (2008) as a researchapproach that describes methods for qualitative sampling, datacollection and data analysis. Grounded Theory includes simulta-neous data collection and analysis phases (which was also appliedin our study). However, Grounded Theory aims towards a genera-tion of new theories, which was not the aim of our work. Further, inGrounded Theory the codes through which the data are analyzedare not pre-deﬁned. Instead, they emerge from the data. Hence, thesimilarities between Grounded Theory and this study are limitedto overlapping data collection and analysis.4. FindingsThis section discusses the ﬁndings of the study categorizedby identiﬁed development process phases including the use ofdocumentation. The identiﬁed communication speciﬁc wastes aresummarized in each section. Further, we provide generalizeddescriptions of the identiﬁed waste as well as means to mitigatethem in this section. In addition, the ﬁndings are discussed fromthe perspective of MST and threats to validity are addressed.4.1. Pre-DevelopmentPrior to entering the actual development phase, the Produc-tOwner collected a set of product requirements from real end-users,through the feedback system built into the older version of theproduct as well as by analysing competitors and market trendsin the domain. In addition, internationalization needs affected therequirements. The collected requirements were further dividedinto 12 different themes that depicted functionalities at a high level.Table 5The communication media used during Pre-Development phase.Communication withinNorthAmerica 1Communicationbetween NorthAmerica1 and NorthAmerica 2Communicationbetween NorthAmerica1 and IndiaBacklog creation wasconducted inface-to-face sessionsat NorthAmerica 1.NorthAmerica 2 didnot participate in thebacklog creationprocess withNorthAmerica 1.However, theyprovided input forthemes allocated tothem via telephoneand screen sharing.Also email was used forexchanging
information.India did notparticipate in thebacklog creationprocess. They did notcommunicate withNorthAmerica 1 beforethe developmentbegan.These themes were split up between the three sites. Each site wasgiven the responsibility to reﬁne the themes to user stories withsupport from NorthAmerica 1. Table 5 depicts the usage of differentcommunication media during Pre-Development phase.4.1.1. Findings from NorthAmerica 1The initial Product Backlog was created in face-to-face brain-storming sessions at NorthAmerica 1. All the stakeholdersfrom NorthAmerica 1 participated in these sessions, excludingNorthAmerica 1.MainTechLead and UserExperience who were notworking for the project at the time when these sessions tookplace. During the backlog creation process the PersonnelManagerencountered problems in understanding one of the new productfeatures. This particular feature was described in the initial require-ments list in a very general way (PersonnelManager): “It was a veryhigh-level statement like containers will accept or reject objects”. Thiscaused the PersonnelManager to seek additional information inorder to provide accurate information to the ProductOwner aboutthe functionality:“I needed a little bit of coaching to help me understand what itreally was. I couldn’t see how somebody would really use thatunless it was simple to use and set up. You really have to under-stand the details in order to give a good detailed analysis of howsomething like that could be built.” (PersonnelManager)Also the ProductOwner saw similar challenges in the high levelrequirements: “Our requirements documents are sufﬁciently high-level that it leaves a lot open to interpretation, which has its beneﬁts butalso has its drawbacks in that it’s difﬁcult to deﬁne from the require-ments documents speciﬁcally what is the exact requirement. At thatpoint it’s not really broken down to the story level, sometimes it’s justa major theme.”The extra effort needed to acquire additional information aboutvaguely communicated requirements can be seen as wasteful.However, these ﬁndings are stemming from the inherent character-istics of agile development since deliberately vague requirementsare only clariﬁed as needed. Therefore, these ﬁndings are nottreated as waste in the context of this study.4.1.2. Findings from NorthAmerica 2NorthAmerica 2 did not participate in brainstorming ses-sions but they provided input for certain themes identiﬁed byNorthAmerica 1. These conversations took place via telephone andscreen sharing software. The information shared in these conver-sations was further converged (i.e. more details were provided) viaemail and telephone. The issues NorthAmerica 2 experienced inthis phase emerged from the requirements documentation. 130 M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140Table 6The identiﬁed communication related waste from Pre-development phase.Identiﬁed waste Description in the context of the phaseLack ofinvolvementThe lack of involvement from India to the initialbacklog creation process resulted in insufﬁcientunderstanding of real end user needs. This furthercaused extra features.“Some information in the documents that we received wasn’tcomplete. There wasn’t enough information in order for us todo the work. So not being co-located, it wasn’t as easy as justwalking over to someone, asking what did you mean by this.”(NorthAmerica 2.TechLead)The requirements were documented on a high level following agileapproaches, so the incompleteness of the information in this case issomething that can be expected. In a distributed context, difﬁcul-ties of engaging in informal discussions over geographical distanceare a known issue. Filling in the missing details (i.e. converging onthe details) was more laborious, but it did not cause any particularissues.“We tried to spend a little bit more time investigating, and thenwriting up emails or getting telephone calls to try to get thatinformation. It was just getting the information in order to dothe proper research. When it was missing it was just harder toget.” (NorthAmerica 2.TechLead)These ﬁndings indicate similar issues with conveyance as inNorthAmerica 1; the information provided for NorthAmerica 2 wasnot conveyed efﬁciently. However, NorthAmerica 2 was able tocompensate the lack of information by converging on the miss-ing details even though it was more laborious due to geographicaldistance.4.1.3. Findings from IndiaIndia did not participate in the backlog creation process andhad no communication with NorthAmerica 1 before they starteddeveloping the features assigned to them. India did not report anyspeciﬁc issues that had emerged from documenting requirementsat a high level. However, they experienced one particular issue dur-ing the development that stemmed from not participating in thebacklog creation process.“Sometimes it happens that we suggest some features whichmay be very good for a customer, and sometimes it is accepted.And sometimes it happens that they (NorthAmerica 1) say thatthe users basically don’t require or don’t like this feature. So, thisbasically is a gap because we don’t have a clear picture of whatthe end-user wants, what kind of features the user basicallyprefers.” (India.Developer)Therefore, there were extra features at India resulting from notparticipating in the initial backlog creation process. In this case,the waste behind the issues was lack of involvement stemmingfrom India’s absence during backlog creation process. A summaryof the communication related waste from this phase is describedin Table 6.The requirements were documented following agileapproaches, which, from the perspective of MST, rely on conver-gence instead of conveyance. At NorthAmerica 1, the initial backlogcreation process was conducted using media with high supportfor convergence. This approach was not free from problems.Considering the extra effort for understanding the requirements,this could have been mitigated by more efﬁcient conveyance,e.g. more detailed documentation, which on the other hand iscounterintuitive with the propositions of agile development.Table 7The communication media used during Sprint Planning phase.Communication withinNorthAmerica 1Communicationbetween NorthAmerica1 and NorthAmerica 2Communicationbetween NorthAmerica1 and IndiaFace-to-face meetings The decisionsconsidering the Sprintcontents were agreedvia telephone,supported by screensharing software.The decisionsconsidering the Sprintcontents were agreedvia telephone,supported by screensharing software.Defective conveyance due to vaguely deﬁned requirements wasencountered at NorthAmerica 2 as well, and they had to putmore effort in converging on details. In this particular case, moreeffective conveyance could have helped NorthAmerica 2 to graspthe details better.4.2. Sprint PlanningSprint Planning was divided into two separate phases. SprintPre-planning meetings were held a few days before the internalSprint Planning meetings that focused on implementation details.Internal Sprint Planning meetings were conducted independentlyat different sites without participation from others. The aim ofthe pre-planning sessions was to achieve a mutual understandingon what should be implemented in the forthcoming Sprint, simi-larly to Sprint Planning meetings of Scrum. Therefore, the meetingsaimed for converging on details of to-be-implemented features.Pre-planning meetings were arranged so that they would ﬁt in theProductOwner’s schedule. If the ProductOwner was not availablefor a scheduled meeting, the meeting would be rescheduled, if pos-sible, so that the ProductOwner was able to participate. Table 7indicates the communication media used between the sites duringthis phase.4.2.1. Findings from NorthAmerica 1Sprint Pre-planning meetings between NorthAmerica 1 andNorthAmerica 2 and NorthAmerica 1 and India were held sepa-rately via telephone and screen sharing software. These sessionslasted approximately one hour. The internal Sprint Pre-planningmeetings at NorthAmerica 1 lasted from ﬁve to ten minutes. As itwas agreed, the ProductOwner participated in Sprint Pre-planningmeetings but not in internal technically oriented planning sessions.“I’ve made a conscious decision not to be too involved in internalsprint planning and try to be more involved in high-level pre-planning. Primarily because I’m not spending enough time in themarket, I’m spending too much time with product development.But to be honest, where my strength lies is more in higher-levelfunctionality, what problems are we trying to solve.” (Produc-tOwner)The internal planning sessions at NorthAmerica 1 were run bythe MainTechLead who had extensive knowledge about technicaldetails of the product. The following comment made by MainTech-Lead indicates a need for extra communication stemming from theProductOwner’s absence in internal Sprint Planning meetings:“A lot of times when we were thinking about the tasks that wewere given, we come up with a bunch of different ways to do itin the sprint planning. And then we have to go to ProductOwnerand get feedback saying we could do it in half the time if we didit this way, is that okay?”Therefore, lack of involvement was identiﬁed as a source for thisadditional work. As proposed in agile approaches, this waste could M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140 131have been avoided by involving the ProductOwner in internalSprint Planning at NorthAmerica 1.4.2.2. Findings from NorthAmerica 2At NorthAmerica 2, there were challenges resulting from par-tially done work that realized in a form of missing acceptance tests3during Sprint Pre-planning meetings: “All the acceptance criteriashould already be done before pre-planning begins. That’s (deﬁningacceptance criteria) not something that should be in the pre-planningsession” (NorthAmerica 2.TechLead). In the case of such events,NorthAmerica 2 conducted Spikes and re-evaluated the unclearfeature. In the case that evaluating the unclear feature requireda Spike, either additional information was requested or the fea-ture was postponed to the next Sprint. If the feature could not bepostponed, additional effort was added to the estimate:“We spike it out and say, get the information from the productowner and we’ll work on it next sprint. If it’s something that hadto be done this sprint then sometimes we’d put a placeholderand say we’re gonna do the spike and then we’ll allocate ﬁvestory points to do the implementation.” (NorthAmerica 2.Tech-Lead)Earlier in the project, NorthAmerica 2 tried an approach of con-tacting NorthAmerica 1 via phone to sort out the problem thatway. This practice was discarded since it was not seen productive.(NorthAmerica 2.TechLead):“We did try to phone some people to try and get informa-tion either during our lunch when NorthAmerica 1 would beavailable. Sometimes we started planning late so it could beovernight and we’d go to the next day, then late at night we’dtry to get some information from them. When we did this at thebeginning we’d actually waste the time.”From the viewpoint of communication, the amount of informa-tion provided to NorthAmerica 2 was not enough to conduct thework without obtaining additional information that could havebeen provided in the planning meetings by NorthAmerica 1. In thecase of NorthAmerica 2, previously identiﬁed waste partially donework was identiﬁed as a waste. No communication-speciﬁc wasteemerged.4.2.3. Findings from IndiaFrom India, India.ProjectManager and India.Dev1 participated inthese meetings. Similarly to NorthAmerica 1, insufﬁcient time forcommunication was experienced during Sprint Pre-planning withIndia: “I found that we have a very limited time of backlog grooming(Sprint Pre-planning). And in that, sometimes it happens that someof the stories were not very clear, and we end up discussing thosethings for a long time, and then we get less time for each to discuss”(India.Dev1).The following provides insights why India saw ambigu-ity in their user stories. The MainTechLead saw challenges incommunication with India: “It’s (communication during SpringPre-planning) more challenging because, it’s the different team culturewhere it’s one person (India.ProjectManager) doing all the talking,there’s not really any conversations.” Communication with India dur-ing the Sprint Pre-planning meetings took extra effort due to theabovementioned:“We have to really explain the rationale behind everything sothey can understand where we’re coming from. But it’s harderbecause you’re not talking to the person who’s actually going tobe doing the work with India. A lot of times you’d ask them a3Acceptance criteria were the case organization’s term for acceptance tests.question and they’d just say, okay, sure, we’ll do that. And youdon’t know if they actually understood it. That’s why we haveto be very careful with them and spend more time in carefullydeﬁning not only our questions but all the acceptance criteria.”(MainTechLead)Cultural issues are widely recognized in the GSD literature as afactor affecting communication. In this case, India lacked in-depthknowledge on the technical as well as domain aspects of the projectand this was seen as a major issue: “We really, really strugglewith that” (ProjectManager). This resulted into challenges and thebiggest of them was:“How do we get them working on more complex features, morecomplex themes that we don’t need to deﬁne really in detail.Like for example (a particular theme). We actually had to spenda lot of time deﬁning that here ﬁrst and then give it to them andwe still have to really, really work with them.” (ProjectManager)Similar views to the lack of understanding were experienced alsoat India:“The (person at NorthAmerica 1), he doesn’t have any back-ground about the problem. So, he is not familiar or is not at thelevel of understanding that we have about the speciﬁc problem.So to explain the particular scenario or particular feature veryclearly is a challenge.” (India.QualityAssurance)Therefore, there was a lack of shared understanding betweenNorthAmerica 1 and India that set increased demands for com-munication and made it prone to misunderstandings. This in turnrequired a signiﬁcant communication effort in order to clarify them.The ProductOwner (or anybody else from NorthAmerica 1)did not participate in the internal Sprint Planning meetings atNorthAmerica 2 and India. NorthAmerica 2.TechLead saw that par-ticipation from NorthAmerica 1 was not worthwhile:“In order for someone to attend a meeting that’s four hours plus,in order to provide input for ten minutes, is not for me a good useof time. I don’t see it having as much of an advantage. I wouldn’texpect ProductOwner to be in there. ProductOwner’s alreadysaid this is what I want done, I’ve agreed, you guys determinehow it actually should be done. That’s why we have the pre-planning.”India, however, saw beneﬁts if someone from NorthAmerica 1would have participated in their internal Sprint Planning meetings.India.Dev1: “Deﬁnitely that will be beneﬁcial for us, because some-times it happens that we require more design or some clariﬁcationfrom (NorthAmerica 1), and then we, basically after the (internal)Sprint Planning we used to discuss those things in a tech call4(withNorthAmerica 1).” There were requirement-related challenges inIndia, but due to signiﬁcant time-zone difference, participationfrom NorthAmerica 1 was not reasonable.Issues with technical infrastructure are recognized challengesof GSD and they were encountered also in our study. The followingis not limited to this particular phase alone, but applies in all situa-tions and phases in which communication tools were used betweenNorthAmerica 1 and India. Occasionally, the voice quality was poorand this resulted in challenges: “(NorthAmerica 1) has had trou-ble understanding what we are talking about or we have had troubleunderstanding, in the sense that, because the voice quality is poor, weare not able to be sure what they have to say” (India.ProjectManager).Considering screen sharing software, especially over long dis-tances, the increased lag was seen as problematic and it wassometimes signiﬁcant.4Tech calls are discussed in more detail later in this study. 132 M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140Table 8The identiﬁed communication related waste from Sprint Planning phase.Identiﬁed waste Description in the context of the phaseLack of involvement The ProductOwner’s absence in internal SprintPlanning meetings caused extra work since themost suitable way to implement something had tobe agreed with the ProductOwner after themeeting.Lack of sharedunderstandingParticipants in NorthAmerica 1 and India did notshare similar understandings of features beingdiscussed. This resulted from the fact that Indialacked deep technical and domain knowledge ofthe project. Also, it was difﬁcult for India to explaintheir work clearly for NorthAmerica 1 sinceNorthAmerica 1 did not share their deepknowledge about the implementation of thefeatures.“Over long distances, the lag can be frustrating.” (Produc-tOwner)“We have got delays of up to 30 seconds to one minutebetween when I update a screen at my end and (NorthAmer-ica 1) is able to see the same screen. And similarly vice versa.”(India.ProjectManager)Further, the connection between the sites was unstable: “Sometimesconnection goes off, so that is also a limitation, while you reconnect,and again start a meeting. So it’s sometimes time-consuming also”(India.QualityAssurance). Despite the same communication toolsbeing used between NorthAmerica 1 and NorthAmerica 2, technicalissues were not reported. While it is unclear why communicationbetween these sites was smooth, it can be assumed that possibly abetter technical infrastructure and shorter distance between thesites could have contributed to this. The summary of identiﬁedcommunication related wastes is provided in Table 8.From MST’s viewpoint, the lack of shared understanding stemsfrom insufﬁcient conveyance since the information provided priorto pre-planning sessions was sometimes too vague. Similarly tothis, missing acceptance tests mentioned by NorthAmerica 2.Tech-Lead indicate defective conveyance. In the case of a lack of sharedunderstanding, the issues of lacking conveyance and also conver-gence emerged. From a theoretical perspective, mitigation requiresconveying information effectively (e.g. documenting acceptancetests properly before they are converged). In order to improve theunderstanding between the communicating participants, the fea-tures that are expected to be implemented should be conveyed (e.g.documented) in detail for the party with the lesser understanding.4.3. Sprints: communication media related wasteIn this section, the wastes related to communication media usedduring the development iterations are discussed. Table 9 depictsthe use of different media between sites. The discussion of com-munication media between different sites is divided based on theirability to support either conveyance or convergence.Table 9The communication media used during Sprints phase.Communication withinNorthAmerica 1Communicationbetween NorthAmerica1 and NorthAmerica 2Communicationbetween NorthAmerica1 and IndiaFace-to-face
communication,
instant messaging (IM),telephone and email.Telephone supportedby screen sharing.Email.Telephone supportedby screen sharing.Email.4.3.1. Media supporting conveyanceEmail was extensively used during development. Email wasseen as beneﬁcial for more formal decisions that require a “papertrail”, “Email is really nice, if you need something a little more for-mal” (PersonnelManager). Similarly to the PersonnelManager, theNorthAmerica 2.TechLead saw advantages in email: “To have asummary of results at the end of a meeting is always handy, so tohave something via email is something you can go back and refer to.”There were, however, waste in email communication. Email is notsupposed to be an effective medium for convergence, but in theproject it was used also for this purpose. According to the Person-nelManager there was handoff in emails: “Sometimes there’s severalfollow-up emails that say, did you really mean this. And you compoundthat with the delay for each time, it’s not as efﬁcient.”Other stakeholders recognized delay in email as an issue as well:“(the challenge is) the delay between sending it back and forth. Ifyou would be able to get someone on the phone it’s much faster toget some of your responses and explanations” (NorthAmerica 2.Tech-Lead). Also NorthAmerica 2.Tester mentioned delay as an issue inemail communication: “There’s a delay in replying.” The abovemen-tioned is in line with ﬁndings related to delayed and complicatedproblem solving via email. There were also other issues in usingemail communication in converging information resulting frommultiple and conﬂicting viewpoints presented in email discussions:“Somebody would ask him (the ProductOwner) something, butthere would be other people on the emails and they’d answeractually you can’t do that because technically you can’t do it. So,meanwhile, the ﬁrst email how would you (the ProductOwner)like us to do this. (The ProductOwner) will come back, yes, I’dlike you to do that. Meanwhile there’s another email that saysno, actually technically you can’t do it.” (ProjectManager)The ProductOwner did not answer to the latest email that had thenewest information, using outdated information as the basis ofmaking decisions. However, this waste was seen as a minor prob-lem and the discussion converged sooner or later either by email orduring a meeting. In this particular case, the reasons contributingto outdated information from the ProductOwner’s side stemmedfrom his very busy schedule: “His schedule is packed and I email the(ProductOwner) with a question, then I have no idea when I’ll hearback from him.” (UserExperience). Paradoxally, the ProductOwner’sbusy schedule was the reason why the majority of communicationwith him was conducted via email:“As a general rule, we’d send an email, because his (the Pro-ductOwner) schedule is always very busy.” (NorthAmerica2.TechLead)From India, communication with the ProductOwner was done viaintermediates (mainly MainTechLead) and this was seen as a com-munication challenge leading to a delay: “Since we don’t have directcommunication with the product owner, so that’s basically a lag forour development. So, it basically hampers the development speed”(India.Dev1). There was extensive email communication betweenthe sites. Time zone difference combined with the delay resultingfrom waiting for the answer from a relevant person was seen as achallenge within India.“Challenges (in email communication), the turnaround timethat we get for our queries. Owing to the time differences andhaving the people who decide what should be done, to answerour queries. So that basically leads to a delay by a day, becausewe have a time zone difference.”(India.Dev2)The MainTechLead saw challenges in emails sent by India.NorthAmerica 1 and India had agreed that India would prepare adaily email message explaining the current status of their workwith possible questions. This information was further discussed M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140 133and clariﬁed in a separate teleconference supported by screen shar-ing software: “A lot of times their initial email to me, it may not makesense to me. So then, in my morning call, I ask them to demonstrate it,and if I’m still confused I tell them OK, make a video” (MainTechLead).These daily calls, also referred as “Tech Calls” were held in orderto compensate for the problems caused by time zone differenceand limited overlapping work hours with India. These calls tookplace at approximately 7:30 am NorthAmerica 1 time and lastedfor approximately 30 minutes.The challenge experienced by the UserExperience in email com-munication provides insights to why the email communicationwith India was ambiguous: “There’s some time that I need to spendjust making sure I have the right idea of what they’re trying to com-municate. There have been some miscommunications about what theywere trying to get across. Just the way that the sentences are structured,it’s not clear what their meaning is, so you have to kind of guess.” Thislanguage barrier led to poor conveyance.Requirements-related communication during the Sprints withIndia took extra effort and was also seen as source of miscommu-nication (MainTechLead): “The one thing with India is the implicitrequirements that we need to be better at enumerating. This is thebiggest instance of miscommunication, they’re expecting everythingto be very explicit.” UserExperience stated a similar communica-tion problem with India considering the user interfaces. Everythingneeded to be speciﬁed in detail, since:“Otherwise they’ll give us something weird. Even if it’s just likean OK button, I still need to do a mock-up of that which takestime. Because otherwise it’ll be really squished, or the buttonswill be on the left side instead of the right side. It’s just com-pletely random.”The following comment by the PersonnelManager suggests that, tosome extent, the need to document everything explicitly for Indiaresulted from their lack of experience on the product: “We haveusability here, we have people that have worked with this product for-ever. We know the little nuances and idiosyncrasies of it and why we dothings, some history behind things. They don’t know that. We do thingsbased sometimes on history.” Therefore, there was a lack of sharedunderstanding within India that resulted in miscommunicationand increased demands for conveying information.4.3.2. Media supporting convergenceFace-to-face communication was used during the Sprints withinNorthAmerica 1. While it was seen as extremely beneﬁcial due toimmediate feedback (i.e. high synchronicity and support for con-vergence) there were also challenges.“You don’t have things written down. So you gotta be careful,you gotta take your notebook, write things down. MainTechLeadand I will say, I’m pretty sure the ProductOwner said that, butnow we gotta check, because we forgot to write it down, orneither of us can remember exactly what he said. It’s hard toremember.” (ProjectManager)In this case, relying on face-to-face communication and leavingdecisions undocumented led to relearning. Undocumented deci-sions themselves are a source of information distortion. According tothe UserExperience, face-to-face communication resulted in deci-sions that were made too fast without thorough understanding ofthe topic: “There’s no time to think about things, you just have todecide. You don’t get a chance to think about all the possible weirdcases that could happen.” The missing details were later convergedusing email or in PlayTime Sessions described later in this paper.Within NorthAmerica 1, there was occasional Sprint timecommunication with the ProductOwner via both telephone andinstant messaging. Their usage was, however, limited by theProductOwner’s availability. Instant messaging was used occasion-ally, for example, for quickly converging on details and to checkif the ProductOwner is at the ofﬁce; “We don’t use that a ton, justonce in a while when I just have a quick question or I need to knowif (ProductOwner) is there, then I’ll ask (ProductOwner) that” (User-Experience). Telephone was used for converging information thatwould have been more laborious to converge through email:“I wanna discuss it (email from India) more, and it’s too compli-cated to write. Or it would take a lot of effort to write an email,so that’s when I’ll see if he’s there and just ask him, what do youthink about this. It’s just easier.” (UserExperience)4.3.3. PlayTime sessionsThe PlayTime sessions were meetings during which the stake-holders of NorthAmerica 1 gathered together to use the latest buildof the product together with the ProductOwner for feedback. Thesesessions were held from two to three times per week and were seenas an essential factor for efﬁcient communication. India was notable to participate in these sessions due to the temporal distance.NorthAmerica 2 as well did not take part in these meetings. The rea-son for this was that the members of NorthAmerica 2 did not seevalue in participating due to the fact that the senior stakeholderssteering the development and relaying information to them werelocated at NorthAmerica 1:“What I see is that (NorthAmerica 1) has the usability team, andthe people who he’d (the ProductOwner) play with and try to getideas of are there. So long as you have representation there, thenthat’s ﬁne. So, right now I would believe that (MainTechLead)would be our representation in this project, and anything thatcomes up he’ll try to forward to us.” (NorthAmerica 2.TechLead)Similarly to relearning that emerged during face-to-face discussionsoutside PlayTime meetings, important details related to the feed-back received from the ProductOwner were sometimes lost duringPlayTime sessions:“It’s a very informal meeting, so there’s not someone takingmeeting minutes. Sometimes, (the ProductOwner) is using thesoftware and ideas are just spewing out there, and we don’t cap-ture them all, and we let them slip. We get the big things butthen a lot of the smaller little details we sometimes miss andthey come up in a different PlayTime. The second time we deﬁ-nitely write it down because we recognize it the second time.”(NorthAmerica 1.MainTechLead)This comment indicates that the information loss was not perma-nent due to efﬁcient convergence mechanism that was providedby the PlayTime sessions. The importance of these sessions is illus-trated by the comment from the ProductOwner: “I think it can savea lot of time for development. You know, save them from going downa wrong path if people are there for them to ask questions and, showfunctionality and ask questions.”The developers at NorthAmerica 1 did not see any communica-tion challenges in these meetings: “I could only think of beneﬁts, Icouldn’t think of any challenges” (NorthAmerica 1.Dev1).The waste identiﬁed from this phase is summarized in Table 10.From the perspective of MST, email was used to converge infor-mation within NorthAmerica 1. The ﬁndings of this study suggestthat convergence via email can cause other wastes than delay, suchas outdated information in the context of this study. However, thecircumstances of the project affected the use of email as a means forpassing, requesting and clarifying information between the partic-ipants. Also media with high synchronicity can cause waste if theinformation communicated is not documented anywhere. This can,however, be mitigated by efﬁcient convergence strategies, such asthe PlayTime sessions described in this study. Also, in situations 134 M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140Table 10The identiﬁed waste from Sprints phase.Identiﬁed waste Description in the context of the phaseOutdated information Email related ﬁnding. The ProductOwner did notalways make his decisions based on the latestinformation about the particular topic.Lack of sharedunderstandingIndia’s lack of similar understanding withNorthAmerica 1 considering software’s domainand design guidelines resulted in increaseddemands for documenting requirements assignedto them. Otherwise, the way India implementedtheir features was sometimes not what wasexpected by NorthAmerica 1.where participants do not share a similar understanding of theproduct, efﬁcient conveyance is required (as can be deducted fromthe tenets of MST). Efﬁcient convergence is required to sort outmisunderstandings.4.4. Sprint ReviewsTable 11 presents the communication media used in SprintReview sessions.Sprint Review meetings were held for two different audiences.The Sprint Review meetings focusing on the outcome of each iter-ation were held face-to-face at NorthAmerica 1 when there wassomething to be demonstrated to the ProductOwner. Similarly toSprint Planning and PlayTime meetings, ProductOwner’s partici-pation was mandatory and Sprint Reviews were rescheduled whennecessary based on the ProductOwner’s availability. However, ifthere was nothing to be demonstrated to the ProductOwner inNorthAmerica 1, Sprint Reviews were cancelled. The study partici-pants from NorthAmerica 1 Sprint Reviews identiﬁed no waste.The Sprint Reviews between NorthAmerica 1 and NorthAmer-ica 2 and NorthAmerica 1 and India were held via telephone andscreen sharing. Similarly to NorthAmerica 1, no waste was iden-tiﬁed. However, the challenges experienced with communicationinfrastructure during other phases were encountered during thesemeetings. From the ProductOwner’s side, there were no communi-cation issues since he was well aware of what was to be presentedin each meeting:“Typically I know before what’s been accomplished just becauseof my communication with the team. So I have a good under-standing as to what’s going to be presented.” (ProductOwner)In addition to team speciﬁc meetings, the project had joint Mas-ter Sprint Review meetings hosted at NorthAmerica 1 during whichall the teams presented their work to other teams. However, themain purpose of these meetings was to demonstrate the softwareto the representatives of the case company’s upper managementwho participated in these sessions in order to get the big picture ofthe project and provide their feedback. Aside from the challengesrelated to technical communication infrastructure, no waste wasidentiﬁed in these meetings.Sprint Reviews aim to verify whether the set goals for the Sprinthave been met. The demo held for the ProductOwner this sessionTable 11The communication media used during Sprint Reviews phase.Communication withinNorthAmerica 1Communicationbetween NorthAmerica1 and NorthAmerica 2Communicationbetween NorthAmerica1 and IndiaFace-to-face meetings. Held via telephonesupported by screensharing software.Held via telephonesupported by screensharing software.Table 12The communication media used during Retrospectives phase.Communication withinNorthAmerica 1Communicationbetween NorthAmerica1 and NorthAmerica 2Communicationbetween NorthAmerica1 and IndiaFace-to-face meetings. NorthAmerica 1participated viatelephone supportedby screen sharingsoftware.No involvement fromNorthAmerica 1. Theconclusions from IndiaRetrospectives weresent to NorthAmerica 1as an email.aimed towards convergence, considering the ProductOwner waswell aware of the contents to be presented. Interactive media wasused during all the Sprint Review sessions. This follows the sugges-tions of MST due to these medias strong support of synchronicityand, hence, convergence. No speciﬁc waste emerged from thisphase.4.5. RetrospectivesTable 12 summarizes the use of different communication mediawithin NorthAmerica 1 and between sites during Retrospectives.The teams held internal Retrospectives, but the ProductOwnerdid not participate in these. The reason for not participating wasthe ProductOwner’s limited time:“Mostly it’s just time. It’s just a function of my time is betterspent elsewhere. I’m assuming that if there’s things that theyneed me to do, to help with the effectiveness of the sprint, they’llfeed that back to me.” (ProductOwner)Instead, the MainTechLead was in charge of running the Retrospec-tives and participated in meetings taking place at NorthAmerica 1and NorthAmerica 2. Due to the signiﬁcant temporal distance toIndia, no one from NorthAmerica 1 participated in the India Retro-spectives. The Retrospectives were conducted face-to-face withinNorthAmerica 1.NorthAmerica 1 participated in Retrospectives conductedwithin NorthAmerica 2 via telephone and screen sharing. The par-ticipation from NorthAmerica 1 was seen as beneﬁcial:“It’s much more productive, because we will assign them actionitems. A lot of the things that we need help with are not nec-essarily things that we can ﬁx on our own, so we need productmanagement in some way to take an active role in it. So we doneed some sort of representation, just as long as somebody isthere, I think is important.” (NorthAmerica 2.TechLead)Even though the temporal distance prevented NorthAmerica 1’sparticipation in Retrospectives conducted in India, the potentialparticipation of NorthAmerica 1 was not seen as beneﬁcial, as wasmentioned by India.ProjectManager:“Would it be helpful for someone from NorthAmerica 1 to par-ticipate, perhaps, I mean, they’d be able to see what the teamthinks how the sprint went. But would it be greatly beneﬁcial, Idoubt it.”Relevant topics emerging from India Retrospectives were com-municated to NorthAmerica 1 after the meetings: “We preparethe document and send a mail to (NorthAmerica 1). They also lookat it, and they take appropriate action and decision based on it”(India.QualityAssurance). In summary, no waste was identiﬁedfrom Retrospectives phase at any site.Within NorthAmerica 1 and between NorthAmerica 1 andNorthAmerica 2, Retrospectives were conducted using interactivemedia. From the MST’s perspective, using media supporting con-vergence is in line with the propositions made in agile literature. M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140 135In the case of India, the discussions were conducted without par-ticipation from NorthAmerica 1 and action points were afterwardsconveyed to NorthAmerica 1. This information was then convergedlater.4.6. Waste found while discussing documentationDocumentation was used as a source of product related infor-mation. The initial themes and the user stories were stored in adedicated Product Backlog tool. In addition, a wiki was extensivelyused during the development and the project had a dedicated net-work drive in which, for example, user interface illustrations werestored. In the wiki, there were separate “sub-wikis” for differentteams. Based on the data, the following documentation-relatedwaste was identiﬁed.Keeping documentation up to date was seen difﬁcult: “The chal-lenges are keeping them up to date at all times” (MainTechLead). Inmany occasions, documentation was seen as a task of lesser prior-ity and it had to be done later, if at all: “The documentation usuallydoesn’t get done later. So that’s a big challenge. And it happens. We haveout-of-date documentation, no question” (PersonnelManager). Thiswas seen as common problem that created issues for the project.“An outdated document or incomplete document is always theproblem.” (NorthAmerica 1.Dev2)“If the information is out of date, then it’s not useful, or it mightmislead you to the wrong place.” (NorthAmerica 1.Dev1)Hence, there was outdated information and it was also found thatif documentation was done later, some of the important infor-mation was forgotten and not included in the documentation: “Ineed to complete that (development task) ﬁrst, then I create thedocument. So, sometimes it happens that you may miss some infor-mation or you may miss some knowledge to share in that document”(India.QualityAssurance). This is time related information distor-tion.In addition, restricted access to information was found for theproject wiki at India:“We don’t have overall access for all the pages. This limits usfor the pages which we are working at. If we need designsfrom other team’s page, we inform this to (MainTechLead),and (MainTechLead) sends our read-only access to that page5.”(India.Dev1)Relevant information was scattered across different documentsstored at the project wiki: “I can look on the wiki and I can show allsorts of implementation, design documents, detail design documents,functional specs, that sort of thing. But nowhere in one document areall these things concentrated in one spot” (PersonnelManager).This was seen as resulting from the fact that there was no uni-form approach to update the project wiki: “There’s no process thatsays you must do it (updating information) this way. If people don’tsort of look at it and follow that same form, you can get stuff in therethat gets lost” (PersonnelManager).This comment indicates that ﬁnding relevant information wasalso difﬁcult. The comment from NorthAmerica 2.Dev supportsthis: “The search feature is terrible. It’s almost unusable to search it, Iﬁnd, unless you actually can ﬁnd someone who can tell you where itis, it’s hard to ﬁnd documentation.” Information was sometimes alsofragmented. It was mentioned that information related to featuresthey were implementing was documented in the wikis related tothe earlier versions of the product, which in turn can make ﬁnding5This comment is an edited version of the original. Grammatical errors areremoved and the comment is edited for readability.Table 13The identiﬁed waste found while discussing documentation.Identiﬁed waste Description in the context of the phaseOutdated information The documentation was outdated and was missingrelevant information. This resulted in defectiveconveyance of information.Restricted access toinformationIndia did not have access to all information storedin project wiki. The access to relevant informationhad to be obtained via NorthAmerica 1. This wasteis different from limited access to information,which is related to the existence of information. Inthe case of this waste, the relevant informationexists, but is not available.Scattered information Relevant information was scattered across severaldocuments and it was difﬁcult to ﬁnd. Thisconsumed resources.the relevant information difﬁcult: “Some information is documentedin (the earlier version) wiki. For new people that join (the project),he doesn’t know where to search for the information” (NorthAmerica1.Dev1). Further, the organization of the wiki caused problems inform of limited visibility to interrelated features implemented bydifferent sites:“There’s the documentation for features which exist and theusability wiki pages, which are linked to ours, but we don’t nec-essarily see the changes that they’re doing on their wiki pages,so we don’t get that visibility. Something that may affect us maybe documented in another team’s wiki page, but you don’t knowto look there.” (NorthAmerica 2.TechLead)Therefore, the abovementioned issues can be considered as scat-tered information.Table 13 summarizes the communication waste found whilediscussing documentation.From the perspective of MST, documentation is an efﬁcientmedium for conveying information. In this case, the identiﬁed wasteindicates also defective conveyance. The ability of documents toconvey information would improve if they would be kept updated,made readily available for every participant, and stored cohesively.4.7. Proposed corrective actions to the identiﬁed wasteTable 14 discusses the solution proposals for the identiﬁedwaste in the context of this study. We provide generalized descrip-tions of the wastes and the corrective actions are derived fromboth empirical ﬁndings and existing recommendations found fromliterature. The actions stemming from literature are indicated byappropriate references.4.8. Threats to validityAccording to Yin (2003), validity of case studies can beapproached from the perspective of construct validity, internalvalidity, external validity and reliability. In the following, we dis-cuss the validity of our study based on this classiﬁcation.Construct validity: in order to improve construct validity, mul-tiple data sources were utilized during the study. In addition, everyaction related to the study was documented in a form of ﬁeld notesand a research diary, thus establishing a chain of evidence (Yin,1994). Finally, ambiguities in data were validated, when possible,with the informants as suggested in Yin (1994). We also appliedinvestigator triangulation proposed in Stake (1995) and discussedresults and interpretations with colleagues, in this case betweenthe researchers of this study, to prevent the problem of multiplerealities (Kaplan and Duchon, 1988; Goetz and LeCompte, 1984). 136 M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140Table 14Proposed corrective actions to the identiﬁed waste in the context of the case project.Waste Generalized description derived from the ﬁndings Proposed corrective actions for the case company in thecontext of the projectLack of involvement The absence of key stakeholders from the process phaseswhere their participation is essential to acquireinformation and provide input for the development and/orreceive feedback.Active collaboration and communication between allproject participants is emphasized (Beck, 2000). Therefore,all the teams should be involved in the developmentprocess from the beginning. In addition, the stakeholdersshould participate in activities requiring their presence.Lack of shared understandingThe
 communicating participants do not share similarunderstanding and expertise on the topic beingcommunicated. This creates increased demands forcommunication and makes it prone to misunderstandings.Considering the tenets of MST (Dennis et al., 2008), uncleartopics should be communicated in as much detail aspossible using media supporting conveyance. In thisparticular case, detailed speciﬁcations should be writtenfor India and the information should be convergedactively. Effective convergence strategy was applied withIndia by daily Tech Calls. This approach is in line with therecommendation of using domain experts communicatingdaily with distributed teams (Summers, 2008).Outdated informationThe
 topic that is being communicated or required is notbased on the latest information about it.In the context of email, this waste was a minor problem inthis study and the waste was mitigated either insubsequent emails or in a meeting, such as the PlayTimesession. In this case, the mechanisms for mitigating thiswaste were adequate.Considering documentation, ensuring that it remainsup-to-date should be paid attention. This could beachieved by adding documentation related aspects as apart of the acceptance criteria in order to complete a task.Restricted access to information Relevant information is not readily available for all partiesthat need it.Provide appropriate access rights to all participants fromthe beginning of the project.Scattered informationThe
 information related to the product or the project isdispersed in several locations which make it difﬁcult andtime-consuming to ﬁnd.Establish uniform policies to store and documentinformation and follow these guidelines.Internal validity: issues related to internal validity arise mainlywhen causal relations are examined. According to Robson (2002),causal relationships are often used as a tool in explanatory stud-ies when seeking an explanation of a situation or a problem. Casestudies are primarily used in exploratory studies, which aim tounderstand what is happening and seeking new insights (Robson,2002). However, due to limited time reserved for the study, theeffects of proposed solutions were not veriﬁed. Also, it could not beobserved if the solutions would have generated additional wastethemselves.External validity: the results are drawn from a particular con-text in which the Product Owner is collocated with senior projectmembers that work as intermediates with the distributed teams.Results can be valid only in this or similar contexts. However, thecontext itself is an important factor in case studies (e.g. Benbasatet al., 1987). In addition, interpretive case studies do not seek gen-eralizability (Orlikowski and Baroudi, 1991).Reliability: in order to improve reliability of the study, everyaction and item (e.g. codes and interview questions) related tothe study was documented and, if necessary, updated as the studyproceeded to form a chain of evidence.There were additional limitations. The waste mitigationapproach presented in this paper does not take into account againstwhat criteria the improvements should be measured. Metricssuch as defect rates, the amount of change requests, and perhapsthe most essential agile metric, Velocity (Schwaber, 2004), couldprovide some guidelines for assessing the impacts of the waste mit-igation actions. As mentioned earlier, waste identiﬁcation can beseen as a challenge in software development since waste is not sovisible, nor as well understood as in the manufacturing industry. Inaddition, the use of Media Synchronicity Theory was limited to con-veyance and convergence processes alone, and the use of differentmedia was observed through them. However, the purpose of thisstudy was not to study the theory itself, but use its main conceptsas the lens for analysing communication.Theoretical saturation of data is a measure that is reached afternew themes, insights or issues are not emerging from the data thatis being gathered (Strauss and Corbin, 1998). The lack of practi-cal guidelines that assist the estimation of sample sizes (e.g. theamount of people to be interviewed) has been criticized, e.g. inGuest et al. (2006). In order to answer to this critique, Guest et al.conducted a study in which they concluded that saturation wasreached during the ﬁrst twelve interviews they conducted withina homogenous sample, i.e. the participants were chosen accordingto common criteria. In our study, the participants were consideredhomogenous for all being software professionals that worked onthe same globally distributed agile software development project.A total of 14 people were interviewed during the study, so consider-ing the results presented in Guest et al. (2006), the data seems to besaturated. Whether saturation was achieved during data collectionis unknown, due to limited availability of the participants. However,convenience sampling is commonplace in software engineeringstudies due to limited stakeholder availability for interviewing(Lethbridge et al., 2005).5. Discussion and future workIn addition to the identiﬁed communication wastes, the issuespreviously encountered in globally distributed environments, alsoencountered in this study, can be considered wasteful. Challengeswith language barrier have been discussed in Layman et al. (2006),Uy and Ioannou (2008) and Kajko-Mattsson et al. (2010), andproblems with technical communication infrastructure in Ågerfalk(2004), Williams and Stout (2008) and Therrien (2008). Communi-cation delays resulting from temporal distance are widely reportedas challenges in distributed environments (e.g. Holmstrom et al., M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140 1372006; Ågerfalk and Fitzgerald, 2006; Conchúir et al., 2009; Sarkerand Sahay, 2004; Ågerfalk, 2004; Boland and Fitzgerald, 2004).We deliberately excluded these from being communication spe-ciﬁc waste, since these challenges are well-known issues in globalsoftware development. Also, some communication media areinherently wasteful. For example, email has a built-in delay result-ing from its asynchronous nature, where resolving even simplematters can take a signiﬁcant time converging when communi-cated via email (Carmel and Agarwal, 2001). Similar ﬁndings werepresent in our study as well. Despite these downsides, email is adominant communication tool in globally distributed settings andit was extensively used in this project as well. The Product Ownerhad a very busy schedule and this resulted in using email as themain communication media between him and the rest of the devel-opment organization. Hence, certain conditions may dictate the useof a medium that is not necessarily the best possible option giventhe communication requirements.This study indicated that some of the wastes presented inPoppendieck and Poppendieck (2007) and Mandi´c et al. (2010)were also found in this study. Considering the impacts of thesewastes and the wastes related to communication, their realizationdid not create any problems that would have seriously jeopardizedthe project. The only major challenge was the communication withIndia, but this caused only increased demands for conveying andconverging information. Since the case project had established anefﬁcient communication strategy with India in a form of daily calls,this mitigated the effects of waste identiﬁed from communicationwith them. Considering the ﬁndings of this study, they are in linewith the ﬁndings made by Ikonen et al. (2010) who concluded thatsoftware projects can be successful despite existing waste.For example, scattered information required more work toobtain the necessary, and available, information so that mis-understandings stemming from outdated information in emaildiscussions were corrected at some point during the development.Outdated information in the context of documentation was, how-ever, more permanent in nature. Even though seen as a challenge, itdid not create any enduring problems throughout the development.However, if documents are used to convey information and conver-gence on this information is defective, making decisions based onoutdated information can possibly have serious effects. Restrictedaccess to information did not create major problems since Indiawas able to obtain the information after requesting access to it.However, in the study reported in Korkala et al. (2010) the requiredinformation remained restricted from the organization needingit due to bureaucratic reasons. Therefore, even though the prob-lems in this study were minor, restricted access to informationcan have more severe impacts on the project. Lack of involvementwas encountered in two phases of the project. Within NorthAmer-ica 1 it caused communication overhead due to ProductOwner’sabsence in internal Sprint Planning sessions and with India itresulted in extra effort. India was not able to participate in Play-Time sessions due to temporal distance. From this viewpoint, lackof involvement was also a type 1 waste. Existing literature showsthat lack of involvement can have other effects as well. Korkalaet al. (2006) studied four agile development projects with varyingcustomer involvement during the development. The results showthat, while customer’s involvement during development decreasesthe amount of defects, these defects could have been avoided byincreased, regular customer feedback.The most signiﬁcant pattern related to waste was the communi-cation challenges between NorthAmerica 1 and India. Consideringthe interaction between NorthAmerica 1 and India, lack of sharedunderstanding emerged as the most signiﬁcant waste encounteredduring Sprint Pre-planning sessions and during the Sprints. Theincreased need for communication was identiﬁed by NorthAmerica1 representatives before the study was even initiated. In addition,a lack of involvement in the case of India could have contributedto lack of shared understanding since India was not properlyaware of end-user needs. A previous ﬁnding from Korkala et al.(2010) supports this: the lack of domain knowledge combined withunelaborated requirements provided by an uninvolved customerorganization caused problems. In addition to a signiﬁcant gap inknowledge of the domain and the knowledge related to the prod-uct itself, barriers in language and culture contributed to impactsof this waste by increasing the difﬁculty of communication. There-fore, our ﬁnding provides additional evidence on the importanceof understanding cultural distance (Noll et al., 2010). Further, theidentiﬁed waste can fall into both waste categories. As an example,restricted access to information can be a type 1 waste that cannotbe removed due to company policies. This further emphasizes thecontext-dependent nature of the mitigation strategies. Practicesfrom agile development methods, suggestions for MST, and morerigid policies for ensuring that documentation remains updated andinformation is readily available for all, can provide guidelines formitigating the effects of waste. While the policies are presentedas empirical solutions, they follow the suggestions of Boehm andTurner (2003) about balancing agility with more discipline whenseen necessary.In general, the project was able to maintain active communica-tion and followed the agile principle of face-to-face communicationwhen it was applicable. PlayTime sessions with mandatory Prod-uct Owner participation can be seen as a factor contributing to theagile principle of active customer involvement and fast feedbackand guidance from the customer side. Considering communicationin the project as a whole, it was active and involved all the partici-pating sites using interactive media when possible. This can be seenas a communication policy following the agile recommendationof interactive and active communication. In addition, the effectivecommunication strategy within the project helped to mitigate theeffects of identiﬁed wastes.There are several opportunities for future research. It would beuseful to evaluate if the communication wastes identiﬁed in thisstudy are valid and if other wastes can be identiﬁed. This could bestudied by applying the approach presented in this work in othercontexts as well. We believe that this would further help compa-nies to identify communication waste in their development effortsand to provide them tools to mitigate them. The proposed wasteidentiﬁcation process requires additional research as well. In thisparticular case, we applied the process in the context of a singledevelopment project. Applying this approach in the context of alarger development programme consisting of several developmentprojects would be a potent arena to test and further develop thewaste identiﬁcation process. In addition, identifying wastes and theways of mitigating them could potentially have signiﬁcant impactsfor both industry and research. It would be interesting to apply thepresented approach to identify wastes from areas outside commu-nication, such as requirements management and defect correction,or from other levels within an organization.Suitability of the mitigating process should be studied fur-ther since we were not able to verify the impacts of proposedimprovement suggestions. It would also be very interesting tostudy communication wastes in globally distributed environmentsthrough other processes and approaches as well, since this couldprovide additional evidence on the validity of the ﬁndings pre-sented in this work. Socio-technical congruence (Cataldo et al.,2006, 2008) could be used as such a process. According to Perryet al. (1994) the amount of communication developers engage induring the development is signiﬁcant and communication on itsbehalf is a central mechanism for coordination (Kraut and Streeter,1995). Socio-technical congruence focuses on the “ﬁt” between taskdependencies and the individuals’ coordination activities. From theperspective presented by Kraut and Streeter (1995) this translates 138 M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140to how and what people communicate. According to Cataldo et al.(2006), congruence reduces the time required to perform differ-ent tasks while the use of different communication channels arechosen to better ﬁt the task at hand. In addition, when there is aproper ﬁt between the ways of coordination and the needs for coor-dination, the time for resolving modiﬁcation needs is signiﬁcantlyreduced (Cataldo et al., 2008). Hence, socio-technical congruenceframework supports more effective communication, as does ourapproach. Therefore, applying socio-technical congruence couldprovide more insights to communication in globally distributedagile development and could perhaps validate whether the wasteidentiﬁed in this study are valid in software engineering.6. ConclusionsCommunication has been widely recognized as one of thekey elements contributing to the success or failure of a softwaredevelopment project. Nowadays, implementing software in a glob-ally distributed fashion is a common approach and this createsadditional challenges for communication. For example, tempo-ral, cultural and geographical distances (Noll et al., 2010) andtheir combination (Holmstrom et al., 2006) introduce challengesto the success of distributed efforts. More traditional plan-drivendevelopment approaches rely on formal communication (e.g.detailed extensive documentation) for conveying information,while agile development approaches emphasize informal com-munication relying on face-to-face interactions instead. Effectivecommunication is difﬁcult to achieve in distributed plan-drivenefforts alone and agile approaches create additional challengessince signiﬁcant geographical and temporal distances can preventface-to-face, or other interactive communication.Existing literature has approached this challenge by attemptingto create suggestions establishing and maintaining effective com-munication in globally distributed agile development projects (e.g.Layman et al., 2006; Kircher et al., 2001; Danait, 2005). Whilethey are valuable contributions to the topic, they do not providecompanies the means to analyze and improve communication intheir globally distributed agile efforts. To address this shortcom-ing, we conducted a case study within a North American softwareintensive company that was implementing a product across threesites in a globally distributed fashion. We constructed a wasteidentiﬁcation process through which communication between thekey stakeholders was analyzed, using the concept of waste fromlean manufacturing (Ohno, 1988) and Lean software development(Poppendieck and Poppendieck, 2007). In addition to ﬁnding wastealready identiﬁed in literature (Poppendieck and Poppendieck,2007; Mandi´c et al., 2010), we identiﬁed ﬁve wastes that werespeciﬁc to communication and presented the case company solu-tion proposals for tackling them in the context of their project.While the improvement actions are dependent on the context,these wastes can provide companies an idea of what could be thenon-value adding elements in communication within their globallydistributed agile projects.We deﬁned three research questions through which weapproached this work. The answer to the sub-research questionaiming to identify the waste in communication within globallydistributed agile development projects is the ﬁve wastes of com-munication. These wastes are lack of involvement, lack of sharedunderstanding, outdated information, restricted access to infor-mation and scattered information. The second sub-question aimedto identify means for identifying waste. The answer to this questionis provided in a form of the waste identiﬁcation approach describedin this work. Companies and researchers can use this approachby applying the same actions conducted in this study. Next, wedescribe how the waste identiﬁcation approach could be conductedbased on this study. The answer to the main research question willbe provided after this description.First, the project from which the communication waste is to beidentiﬁed and mitigated is selected. The next step is to identify thekey stakeholders that would participate in the waste identiﬁcationprocess. After this, the development approach taken in the cho-sen project and the key steps in which communication takes placeis identiﬁed. In this study the chosen development approach wasScrum and the all the key steps of this method (Sprint Planning,Sprint, Sprint Review and Retrospective) were present. In addition,we analyzed communication before the implementation phasebegun, with communication related to documentation includedin the analysis. Also appropriate inputs through which communi-cation is analyzed and waste is extracted should be identiﬁed. Inthis study, we used a set of questions to attain a cohesive view ofcommunication, including both positive and wasteful aspects. Inaddition, the documentation provided by the case company sup-ported us to understand the development approach. Hence, thecompanies or other instances should apply all the data seen rele-vant for understanding communication within the chosen project.Reaching saturation in the data collection (i.e. analysis of the datacollection did not reveal new information) was used as the measurefor obtaining all information necessary for understanding commu-nication and identifying waste. The main output from the stepsis the communication wastes. Finally, the measures for removingor mitigating the wastes should be identiﬁed and these measuresincorporated into the process. In our case, these measures wereeither empirical or derived from literature. This process should beconducted at regular intervals.The main research question of this study is to identify howwaste identiﬁcation can improve communication in globally dis-tributed agile software development. The answer to this question isthat waste identiﬁcation, when completed in a structured manner,can point to non-value producing communication elements andthe waste can then be mitigated. The results of this study providecompanies an idea of the potential wastes that may be present intheir globally distributed agile efforts, as well as a technique formitigating their effects.For the research community, this study contributes to the ﬁeld ofcommunication in globally distributed agile software developmentby presenting and discussing ﬁve wastes speciﬁc to communica-tion. Also, the presented waste identiﬁcation approach is the initialstep towards a systematically validated approach for analysing andimproving communication in a globally distributed agile develop-ment context.ReferencesÅgerfalk, P., Fitzgerald, B., 2006. Flexible and distributed software processes: oldpetunias in new bowls? Commun. ACM 49 (10), 10–27.Ågerfalk, P.J., 2004. Investigating actability dimensions: a language/action perspec-tive on criteria for information systems evaluation. Interact. Comput. 16 (5),957–988.Battin, R., Crocker, R., Kreidler, J., Subramanian, K., 2001. Leveraging resources inglobal software development. IEEE Softw. 18 (2), 70–77.Beck, K., 2000. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change. Addison-Wesley,Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA.Benbasat, I., Goldstein, D.K., Mead, M., 1987. The case research strategy in studies ofinformation systems. MIS Quart. 11 (3), 369–386.Berger, H., 2007. Agile development in a bureaucratic arena—a case study experi-ence. Int. J. Inform. Manage. 27 (6), 386–396.Boehm, B.W., Turner, R., 2003. Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide for thePerplexed. Addison-Wesley Professional, Boston, MA, USA.Boland, D., Fitzgerald, B., 2004. Transitioning from a co-located to a globally-distributed software development team: a case study at Analog Devices Inc.In: 3rd International Workshop on Global Software Development (ICSE2004),23–28 May 2004, Scotland, UK, pp. 4–7.Braun, V., Clarke, V., 2006. Using thematic analysis in psychology. Qual. Res. Psychol.3 (2), 77–101.Carmel, E., Agarwal, R., 2001. Tactical approaches for alleviating distance in globalsoftware development. IEEE Softw. 18 (2), 22–29. M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140 139Cataldo, M., Herbsleb, J.D., Carley, K.M., 2008. Socio-technical congruence: a frame-work for assessing the impact of technical and work dependencies on softwaredevelopment productivity. In: Proceedings of ESEM’08, 9–10 October 2008,Kaiserslautern, Germany, pp. 2–11.Cataldo, M., Wagstrom, P.A., Herbsleb, J.D., Carley, K.M., 2006. Identiﬁcation ofcoordination requirements: implications for the design of collaboration andawareness tools. In: Proceedings of CSCW’06, 4–8 November 2006, Banff,Alberta, Canada, pp. 353–362.Ceschi, M., Sillitti, A., Succi, G., De Panﬁlis, S., 2005. Project management in plan-based and agile companies. IEEE Softw. 22 (3), 21–27.Conchúir, E.Ó., Ågerfalk, P.J., Olsson, H.H., Fitzgerald, B., 2009. Global software devel-opment: where are the beneﬁts? Commun. ACM 52 (8), 127–131.Corbin, J., Strauss, A., 2008. Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Proce-dures for Developing Grounded Theory. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA,USA.Cruzes, D.S., Dybå, T., 2011. Research synthesis in software engineering: a tertiarystudy. Inform. Softw. Technol. 538 (5), 440–455.Daft, R.L., Lengel, R., Trevino, L.K., 1987. Message equivocality, media selection,and manager performance: implications for information support systems. MISQuart. 11 (3), 355–366.Daft, R.L., Lengel, R.J., 1986. Organizational information requirements, media rich-ness and structural design. Manage. Sci. 32 (5), 554–571.Damian, D., Moitra, D., 2006. Guest Editors’ introduction: Global software develop-ment: how far have we come? IEEE Softw. 23 (5), 17–19.Damian, D., Zowghi, D., 2003. Requirements engineering challenges in multi-sitesoftware development organizations. Requir. Eng. J. 8, 149–160.Danait, A., 2005. Agile offshore techniques—a case study. In: Proceedings of AgileDevelopment Conference (AGILE 2005), 24–29 July 2005, Denver, CO, USA, pp.214–217.DeLuca, D., Valacich, J.S., 2006. Virtual teams in and out of synchronicity. Inform.Technol. People 19 (4), 323–344.Dennis, A.R., Fuller, R.M., Valacich, J.S., 2008. Media, tasks, and communication pro-cesses: a theory of media synchronicity. MIS Quart. 32 (3), 575–600.Dennis, A.R., Valacich, J.S., Speier, C., Morris, M.G., 1998. Beyond media richness: anempirical test of media synchronicity theory. In: Proceedings of HICSS’98, 6–9January 1998, Kohala Coast, Hawaii, USA, pp. 48–57.Drummond, B.S., Francis, J., 2008. Yahoo! Distributed agile: notes from the worldover. In: Proceedings of Agile 2008, 4–8 August 2008, Toronto, ON, Canada, pp.315–321.Ebert, C., De Neve, P., 2001. Surviving global software development. IEEE Softw. 18(2), 62–69.Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989. Building theories from case study research. Acad. Manage.Rev. 14 (4), 532–550.Glaser, B., Strauss, A., 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies for Qual-itative Research. Aldine Publishing Company, New Jersey, NY, USA.Goetz, J.P., LeCompte, M.D., 1984. Ethnography and Qualitative Design in EducationalResearch. Academic Press, Orlando, FL, USA.Gorton, I., Motwani, S., 1996. Issues in co-operative software engineering usingglobally distributed teams. Inform. Softw. Technol. 38 (10), 647–655.Guest, G., Bunce, A., Johnson, L., 2006. How many interviews are enough? An exper-iment with data saturation and variability. Field Methods 18 (1), 59–82.Herbsleb, J.D., Mockus, A., Finholt, T.A., Grinter, R.E., 2001. An empirical study ofglobal software development: distance and speed. In: Proceedings of ICSE2001,12–19 May 2001, Toronto, ON, Canada, pp. 81–90.Herbsleb, J., Grinter, R., 1999. Splitting the organization and integrating the code:Conway’s Law revisited. In: Proceedings of ICSE’99, 16–22 May 1999, Los Ange-les, CA, USA, pp. 85–95.Herbsleb, J., Moitra, D., 2001. Global software development. IEEE Softw. 18 (2),16–20.Hicks, B.J., 2007. Lean information management: understanding and eliminatingwaste. Int. J. Inform. Manage. 27 (4), 233–249.Holmström, H., Conchuir, E.O., Agerfalk, P.J., Fitzgerald, B., 2006. Global softwaredevelopment challenges: A case study on temporal, geographical and socio-cultural distance. In: Proceedings of ICGSE’06, 16–19 October 2006, Costão doSantinho, Florianópolis, Brazil, pp. 3–11.Holmstrom, H., Fitzgerald, B., Ågerfalk, P.J., Conchuir, E.O., 2006. Agile practicesreduce distance in global software development. Inform. Syst. Dev. 23 (3), 7–18.Ikonen, M., 2010. Leadership in Kanban software development projects: a quasi-controlled experiment. In: Proceedings of LESS2010, 17–20 October 2010,Helsinki, Finland, pp. 85–98.Ikonen, M., Kettunen, P., Oza, N., Abrahamsson, P., 2010. Exploring the sources ofwaste in Kanban software development projects. In: Proceedings of EUROMI-CRO2010, 1–3 September 2010, Lille, France, pp. 376–381.Kajko-Mattsson, M., Azizyan, G., Magarian, M.K., 2010. Classes of distributed agiledevelopment problems. In: Proceedings of Agile 2010, 9–13 August 2010,Orlando, FL, USA, pp. 51–58.Kaplan, B., Duchon, D., 1988. Combining qualitative and quantitative methods ininformation systems research: a case study. MIS Quart. 12 (4), 571–586.Kircher, M., Jain, P., Corsaro, A., Levine, D., 2001. Distributed eXtreme programming.In: Proceedings of XP2001, 21–23 May 2001, Villasimius, Sardinia, Italy, pp.66–72.Komi-Sirviö, S., Tihinen, M., 2005. Lessons learned by participants of distributedsoftware development. Knowl. Process Manage. 12 (2), 108–122.Korkala, M., Pikkarainen, M., Conboy, K., 2010. Combining agile and traditional: cus-tomer communication in distributed environment. In: Ågerfalk, P.J, Smite, D.(Eds.), Agility Across Time and Space. Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp. 201–216.Korkala, M., Abrahamsson, P., 2007. Communication in distributed agile develop-ment: a case study. In: Proceedings of EUROMICRO2007, 28–31 August 2007,Lübeck, Germany, pp. 203–210.Korkala, M., Abrahamsson, P., Kyllönen, P., 2006. A case study on the impact of cus-tomer communication on defects in agile software development. In: Proceedingsof Agile 2006, 23–28 July 2006, Minneapolis, MN, USA, pp. 76–88.Kraut, R.E., Streeter, L.A., 1995. Coordination in software development. Commun.ACM 38 (3), 69–81.Layman, L., Williams, L., Damian, D., Bures, H., 2006. Essential communication prac-tices for Extreme Programming in a global software development team. Inform.Softw. Technol. 48 (9), 781–794.Lee, S., Yong, H.S., 2010. Distributed agile: project management in a global environ-ment. Empir. Softw. Eng. 15 (2), 204–217.Lethbridge, T.C., Sim, S.E., Singer, J., 2005. Studying software engineers: data collec-tion techniques for software ﬁeld studies. Empir. Softw. Eng. 10 (3), 311–341.Mandi´c, V., Oivo, M., Rodríguez, P., Kuvaja, P., Kaikkonen, H., Turhan, B., 2010. Whatis ﬂowing in lean software development? In: Proceedings of LESS2010, 17–20October 2010, Helsinki, Finland, pp. 72–84.Melnik, G., Maurer, F., 2004. Direct verbal communication as a catalyst of agileknowledge sharing. In: Proceedings of Agile 2004, 22–26 June 2004, Salt LakeCity, UT, USA, pp. 21–31.Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M., 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Source-book, 2nd ed. SAGE Publications Inc., Thousand Oaks, CA, USA.Mockus, A., Herbsleb, J., 2001. Challenges of global software development. In:Proceedings of METRICS 2001, 4–6 April, London, England, pp. 182–184.Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R.K., Mangalaraj, G., 2005. Challenges of migrating to agilemethodologies. Commun. ACM 48 (5), 72–78.Niinimäki, T., Piri, A., Lassenius, C., Paasivaara, M., 2010. Reﬂecting the choice andusage of communication tools in GSD projects with media synchronicity theory.In: Proceedings of ICGSE 2010, 23–26 August 2010, Princeton, NJ, USA, pp. 3–12.Noll, J., Beecham, S., Richardson, I., 2010. Global software development and collab-oration: barriers and solutions. ACM Inroads 1 (3), 66–78.Nöteberg, A., Benford, T.L., Hunton, J.E., 2003. Matching electronic communicationmedia and audit tasks. Int. J. Account. Inform. Syst. 4 (1), 27–55.Ohno, T., 1988. Toyota Production System: Beyond Large-scale Production. Produc-tivity Press, Cambridge, MA, USA.Orlikowski, W.J., Baroudi, J.J., 1991. Studying information technology in organiza-tions: research approaches and assumptions. Inform. Syst. Res. 2 (1), 1–28.Paasivaara, M., Durasiewicz, S., Lassenius, C., 2008. Distributed agile development:using scrum in a large project. In: Proceedings of ICGSE 2008, 17–20 August2008, Bangalore, India, pp. 87–95.Perry, D.E., Staudenmayer, N.A., Votta, L.G., 1994. People, organizations, and processimprovement. IEEE Softw. 11 (4), 36–45.Pikkarainen, M., Haikara, J., Salo, O., Abrahamsson, P., Still, J., 2008. The impact ofagile practices on communication in software development. Empir. Softw. Eng.13 (3), 303–337.Poppendieck, M., Poppendieck, T., 2007. Implementing Lean Software Development:From Concept to Cash. Addison-Wesley Professional, Boston, MA, USA.Poppendieck, M., Poppendieck, T., 2003. Lean Software Development: An AgileToolkit, 1st ed. Addison-Wesley, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA.Robson, C., 2002. Real World Research, 2nd ed. Blackwell, Oxford, UK.Royce, W.W., 1970. Managing the development of large software systems. In:Proceedings of IEEE Wescon, August 1970, Los Angeles, CA, USA.Sarker, S., Sahay, S., 2004. Implications of space and time for distributed work: aninterpretive study of US–Norwegian systems development teams. Eur. J. Inform.Syst. 13 (1), 3–20.Schwaber, K., 2004. Agile Project Management with Scrum. Microsoft Press, USA.Schwaber, K., Beedle, M., 2002. Agile Software Development with Scrum. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA.Seaman, C.B., 2002. Qualitative methods in empirical studies of software engineer-ing. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 25 (4), 557–572.Stake, R., 1995. The Art of Case Research. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, USA.Strauss, A., Corbin, J., 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded Theory Proce-dures and Techniques, 2nd ed. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks, CA, USA.Summers, M., 2008. Insights into an agile adventure with offshore partners. In:Proceedings of Agile 2008, 4–8 August 2008, Toronto, ON, Canada, pp. 333–338.Sureshchandra, K., Shrinivasavadhani, J., 2008. Adopting agile in distributed devel-opment. In: Proceedings of ICGSE 2008, 17–20 August 2008, Bangalore, India,pp. 217–221.Sutherland, J., Viktorov, A., Blount, J., Puntikov, N., 2007. Distributed scrum: agileproject management with outsourced development teams. In: Proceedings ofHICSS2007, 3–6 January 2007, Waikoloa, Big Island, HI, USA, p. 274.Therrien, E., 2008. Overcoming the challenges of building a distributed agile orga-nization. In: Proceedings of Agile 2008, 4–8 August 2008, Toronto, ON, Canada,pp. 358–372.Uy, E., Ioannou, N., 2008. Growing and sustaining an offshore Scrum engagement. In:Proceedings of Agile 2008, 4–8 August 2008, Toronto, ON, Canada, pp. 345–350.Vax, M., Michaud, S., 2008. Distributed agile: growing a practice together. In:Proceedings of Agile 2008, 4–8 August 2008, Toronto, ON, Canada, pp. 310–314.Wallach, E.J., 1983. Individuals and organizations: the cultural match. Train. Dev. J.37 (2), 29–36.Williams, W., Stout, M., 2008. Colossal, scattered, and chaotic (planning with a largedistributed team). In: Proceedings of Agile 2008, 4–8 August 2008, Toronto, ON,Canada, pp. 356–361.Womack, J.P., Jones, D.T., 1996. Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth inYour Corporation. Simon & Schuster, New York, NY, USA. 140 M. Korkala, F. Maurer / The Journal of Systems and Software 95 (2014) 122–140Yin, R.K., 2003. Case Study Research, Design and Methods, 3rd ed. Sage Publications,Beverly Hills, CA, USA.Yin, R.K., 1994. Case Study Research Design and Methods. Sage Publications, Thou-sand Oaks, CA, USA.Mikko Korkala works as a research scientist at VTT Technical Research Centre ofFinland. He has worked with agile methodologies since 2001 and is currently ﬁnaliz-ing his Ph.D on customer communication in distributed agile software development.Prior to joining VTT at 2007 he has worked in the University of Oulu, Finland as anassisting teacher and as a researcher. He has also worked as a software engineerin the industry. In addition to scientiﬁc research, he has provided agile trainingsfor over 400 software professionals and held talks about agile software develop-ment and lean software development in Finland and other countries. Further, he hasworked as an onsite agile coach and Scrum Master and has outlined agile processesfor companies. In addition to agile software development, his interests include leansoftware development, service development, and innovation in the context of soft-ware industry.Frank Maurer is a professor of computer science and associate vice-president(research) at the University of Calgary. His research interests include applicationengineering for digital surfaces, analytics & visualization and agile software method-ologies. Dr Maurer leads the NSERC SurfNet Strategic Research Network. SurfNet is aCanadian research alliance of academic researchers, industry partners, and govern-ment collaborators. The goal of SurfNet is to improve the development, performance,and usability of software applications for surface computing environments: non-traditional digital display surfaces including multi-touch screens, tabletops, andwall-sized displays.