 The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2921– 2928Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u rn al hom epage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssTechnology ﬂexibility as enabler of robust application development incommunity source: The case of Kuali and SakaiManlu Liua,, Harry Jiannan Wangb, J. Leon ZhaocaRochester Institute of Technology, United StatesbUniversity of Delaware, United StatescCity University of Hong Kong, Chinaa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 5 June 2010Received in revised form 4 June 2012Accepted 14 June 2012Available online 20 July 2012Keywords:
Technology ﬂexibilityOpen sourceCommunity sourceWorkﬂow technologyService oriented architectureAgile enterprisea b s t r a c tTechnology ﬂexibility has been an important topic in software engineering since the start of computer-ized business applications, which require frequent changes to system speciﬁcations due to ever changingbusiness requirements. Achieving a higher degree of technology ﬂexibility has been a long-running chal-lenge to software engineers and project managers. Recently, there has been a new software developmentapproach called “community source” consisting of numerous development partners that are also usersof the software. In community source, technology ﬂexibility is even more important than usual due tothe increase in complexity and uncertainty of software requirements by its many development partnersin the community. In this paper, we investigate two community source cases, i.e., Kuali and Sakai, andexamine how technology ﬂexibility is achieved in application software engineering. The principles gen-erated from this study should offer useful insights to the continuous efforts toward making more robustbusiness applications in support of agile enterprises.© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionTechnology ﬂexibility has been an important topic in softwareengineering since the start of computerized business applications,which require frequent changes to system requirements due toever changing business requirements (Zeng and Zhao, 2002). Infact, we still have trouble describing system requirements pre-cisely because of much uncertainty in business environments anduser requirements. As such, software speciﬁcations and the associ-ated code require frequent changes throughout their constructionand usage. Achieving a higher degree of technology ﬂexibility hasbeen a long-running challenge to software engineers and projectmanagers.Recently, there has been a new software development approachcalled “community source” consisting of numerous developmentpartners that are also users of the software. In communitysource, the community evolves over time, and so do the systemrequirements that depend on the collective application require-ments by the development partners. Consequently, in communitysource, technology ﬂexibility is even more important than usualdue to increased uncertainty in software requirements from thecommunity.Corresponding author.E-mail addresses: manluliu@saunders.rit.edu (M. Liu), hjwang@lerner.udel.edu(H.J. Wang), jlzhao@cityu.edu.hk (J. Leon Zhao).Community source has achieved initial success recently, as inthe cases of Kuali (www.kuali.org) and Sakai (www.sakai.org),which raises the question of how community source has been deal-ing with the technology ﬂexibility challenge. Understanding thisnew phenomenon should help alleviate this long-running chal-lenge to the software industry. To this end, we investigate issues oftechnology ﬂexibility in the context of community source since theextreme uncertainty in software requirements due to the evolvingand complex nature of the developer community makes technologyﬂexibility an intriguing phenomenon to study.The structure of the paper is as follows. First, we review therecent research in technology ﬂexibility, open source and com-munity source development. The Community Source Model isintroduced in Section 2. The related research methodology appliedin this study and two real world of cases—Kuali and Sakai are intro-duced in Section 3. Next we explain how Kuali and Sakai achieveﬂexibility via various software techniques in Sections 4 and 5,respectively. Then we discuss our research ﬁndings by means ofseveral principles stemming from the Kuali and Saikai cases obser-vation, document analysis in Section 6. Finally, several conclusionsare generalized from this study. Limitations and future researchdirections are discussed.2. Literature reviewIn this section, we summarize the recent thinking in the relatedresearch areas, including technology ﬂexibility, open source devel-opment, and community source development.0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2012.06.026 2922M. Liu et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2921– 29282.1. Technology ﬂexibilityFlexibility has become a key competitive factor in many businesssectors, such as manufacturing (Gupta and Somers, 1992; Ramaseshand Jayakumar, 1991), the high-tech industry (Evans, 1991),automation (Adler, 1998), ﬁnance (Mason, 1986), and informationsystems (Davenport and Linder, 1994). Flexibility in management isdeﬁned as the degree to which an organization possesses a varietyof actual and potential procedures, and the rapidness with which itcan implement these procedures to increase the control capabilityof the management and improve the controllability of the organiza-tion over its environment (De Leeuw and Volberda, 1996). Deiterset al. (2000) classify ﬂexibility into four dimensions: process ﬂex-ibility, inter-organizational ﬂexibility, ﬂexible management andknowledge, and ﬂexible task allocation.Technology ﬂexibility is deﬁned as “the ability to adapt to bothincremental and revolutionary change in the business or businessprocess with minimal penalty to current time, effort, cost, or per-formance” (Nelson et al., 1997). Nelson et al. (1997) proposed aframework to measure technology ﬂexibility using factors includ-ing modularity, change acceptance, consistency in the structuralﬂexibility dimension, and rate of response, expertise, and coordi-nation of actions in the process ﬂexibility dimension.Companies have been using emerging technologies to enableﬂexibility in the enterprise computing environment. Technologyﬂexibility in IT infrastructure, which has been studied by manyresearchers, enables an organization to develop new applicationsand modify existing applications more quickly and easily andis becoming a key to an organization’s sustainable competitiveadvantage. Research efforts have focused on the impact of ﬂexibletechnologies on organizations.Duncan (1995) described technical IT infrastructure ﬂexi-bility through the qualities of connectivity, compatibility, andmodularity. Recent innovations in information technology, suchas component-based and service-oriented software architec-tures (Bieberstein et al., 2006), Web services (Whiting, 2003),autonomous computing (Horn, 2001) and mobile applications(Keng et al., 2001), promise greater ﬂexibility than the mainframe,client/server, and non-mobile system. Kettinger et al. (2010) showshow to design enterprise IT architecture by applying IT innovationto optimize ﬂexibility so that the speciﬁc customers’ demands canbe met.2.2. Open source/community sourceOpen source has become an important software engineeringmethodology in which the source code of a system is made avail-able to its adopters (Ducheneanut, 2005). However, open source isa very complex concept because of variations on how it is devel-oped, marketed, and adopted. The most well-known example isthe Linux system that is developed and maintained by a global net-work of volunteers and distributed by some commercial companiessuch as Red Hat (www.redhat.com). Many versions of Linux are dis-tributed currently by these commercial companies who generaterevenue by adding new features and providing consulting services.Many other open source systems are developed with governmentfunding as output of a research project and offered online for freeadoption with or without technical support (www.sf.net).As a research domain, open source has received a lot of attentionfrom various researchers, particularly regarding communicationissues. Curtis et al. (1988) found that large projects have exten-sive communication and coordination needs that are not mitigatedproperly by documentation. These collaborative problems areexacerbated when the development team is geographically ororganizationally distributed, as is becoming increasingly common.More effort is required for more systematic interactions whenparticipants are distant and unfamiliar with each other’s work(Ocker and Fjermestad, 2000). Kraut and Streeter (1995) found thatthe formal and informal communication mechanisms for collabora-tive work on large-scale, complex software projects are importantfor sharing information and achieving collaboration in softwaredevelopment. Stewart and Gosain (2006) developed a framework ofthe main tenets of the open source software (OSS) ideology, whichimpacts team effectiveness in various ways. Recently, Fitzgerald(2006) found the ﬁeld of open source has undergone a majortransformation from its free software origins to a new form ofcommunity-based development and adoption.As a unique form of open source, community source devel-ops scalable and ﬂexible information systems (Liu et al., 2007,2010). Community-source application software for higher educa-tion appears to be the next arena for open source efforts (Wheeler,2004; Wang et al., 2010). Wheeler (2007) argued that developing acollaborative capability is not an option; it is a necessity for effec-tive college and IT organizations. Liu and Tu (2011) present variousresearch directions of community source. In this paper, we focus onstudying technology ﬂexibility issues in community source, whichare not well studied in the literature.3. The community source modelMost recently, a new approach to enterprise applicationsoftware development is community-based open source or “com-munity source” (Liu et al., 2007), which aims to help institutionsdevelop software collaboratively when they cannot ﬁnd suit-able commercial-off-the-shelf software. Collaborative softwaredevelopment is necessary because the overall cost of in-housedevelopment is much higher than that of buying commercial soft-ware (Perry and Quirk, 2007). Community source provides analternate solution by applying strategic alliance to the develop-ment of open source software. In other words, community sourceenables organizations to pool their resources to develop sharableenterprise applications at a fraction of the costs that each individualinstitution would have to bear.The community source approach is a unique form of open sourcesoftware development (Liu et al., 2007). First, community sourcerequires a formal collaboration among multiple institutions via avirtual organization. Second, many of the investments of develop-ers’ time, design, and project governance come from institutionalcontributions by colleges, universities, and some commercial ﬁrmsrather than from individuals (Wheeler, 2007). Third, the commu-nity source project requires signiﬁcant initial investments by thepartner institutions, while an ordinary open source project mightnot. Some of these three features might appear in other types ofopen source projects, but a community source project requires allof them.Community source is a complex endeavor because the com-munity must balance the various, sometimes even conﬂicting,requirements from all development partners. As such, communitysource is more challenging than an ordinary open source project orcommercial software for which variation in requirements is nota major issue. In our view, community source has more strin-gent requirements in ﬂexibility in order to deal with complexrequirement analysis and change management. Recently emergedtechnologies such as web services, service-oriented architectures,and workﬂow automation can help make a system more customiz-able. As we illustrate in the paper, community source takes notableadvantage of these emerging technologies to enable more tech-nology ﬂexibility. As such, how technology ﬂexibility is achievedthrough community source is a very interesting issue to study.In order to better understand community source, a comparison is M. Liu et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2921– 29282923Table 1Comparison among community source, ordinary open source and commercial software.Community source Ordinary open source Commercial softwareDeﬁnition The application developmentrequires initial investmentswhich are shared by thepartners; the result is opensource.The software is free foradopters; the developers arevolunteers.The users need to buy thesoftware; dedicatedinvestment is required todevelop the software.Builders Organized teams of formalemployees from multiplepartner institutionsLoosely connected volunteerdevelopersSystem developmentdepartments in softwarecompaniesUsersDevelopment
 partners,deployment members, andothersOrganizations or individualswho use the software for freeOrganizations or individualswho pay for the softwareCustomization The system is designed to meetthe requirements ofdevelopment partnersThe system is designed to meetsome generic requirementsStandard packageTechnology ﬂexibility requirements High Medium Lowmade among community source, ordinary open source and com-mercial software (Table 1).4. Research methodologyWe follow the case study method for this ﬁrst-cut study on theissue of technology ﬂexibility in community source (Eisenhardt,1989; Yin, 1994). The data we collected are qualitative data fromtwo real world cases—Kuali and Sakai. The propositions are observ-able in our case analysis.The case study method is especially appropriate for contem-porary phenomenon such as technology ﬂexibility in communitysource, where theory and research are still in their formative stages.Yin (1994) suggests that whenever there are two cases, a cross-caseanalysis of the ﬁndings is likely to be more robust when it resultsin conﬁrming, challenging, or extending the theory.4.1. The Kuali case—an administrative systemKuali is a consortium of universities that came together todevelop an open source ﬁnancial service system, starting with theconversion of the Indiana University’s Financial Information Sys-tem to the web in 2004 (www.kuali.org). The original motivationfor the project was that existing ﬁnancial systems used in the uni-versities are outdated and too difﬁcult to maintain. The commercialproducts are often too expensive and hard to customize; some insti-tutions paid tens of millions of dollars to companies for softwareand installation, but still need to build 15% of all the features theyneed themselves to handle speciﬁc ﬁnancial transaction require-ments. Some schools and colleges ﬁnd they must operate expensive“shadow systems” to provide needed features that are absent incurrently available ERP packages. The alternatives to buying off-the-shelf packaged ﬁnancial software are equally daunting and canbe considered by only the largest institutions. The Kuali projectprovides an attractive alternative to the “buy or build” dilemma.It pools institutional resources to develop an open source ﬁnancialsystem, thus dramatically reducing the cost of managing ﬁscal dataand processes in higher education.Indiana University and the University of Hawaii led the effort tobuild Kuali, which was launched in August 2004. In March 2005, theKuali project got an award of $2.5 M from the Andrew W. MellonFoundation. In the same year, four new partners, Cornell University,San Joaquin Delta College, Michigan State University, and the Uni-versity of Arizona, joined as core investors. In April 2006, the KualiProject announced the availability of the Kuali Test Drive, whichenables institutions to explore Kuali Financial Systems. In July 2006,the University of California joined Kuali. In October 2006, the Kualifoundation released Phase I. Phase IIa and Phase IIb was released inJuly 2007 and in July 2008, respectively.Kuali uses a community source approach to allow member uni-versities to share the cost and beneﬁts of system development.From Fig. 1, we can see that KFS is developed under a formaland complicated organization structure. The development partnerswork in a project organization. The Kuali Board is the ﬁnal decisionmaker during the development of Kuali. The Kuali functional coun-cil and Kuali technical council take care of the functional issues andtechnical issues of Kuali, respectively. The extended board, Kualiinvestors, Kuali functional council, Kuali technical council and theproject manager report to the Kuali board. The project managersupervises the project staff and development staff. We can also seethat the KFS organization is a virtual team. For example, the KualiBoard consists of ten persons who come from nine universities andwork in different locations and different time zones.There are three administrative projects in Kuali. Kuali FinancialSystem (KFS) is currently at the ﬁnal development stage. It expectsto expand the KFS into two new systems: the Kuali Coeus (KC),which is the research administration system, and Kuali Student(KS), which is the student service system. The KC and KS projectsare scheduled to be released after 2010. There are several projectssupporting the three administrative projects including Kuali Rice,Kuali Ole and Kuali Ready.The initial mission of the Kuali consortium was to develop abaseline system for ﬁnancial services and has now expanded toother systems such as research administration and student man-agement. In order to ensure ﬂexibility and extensibility, Kualiuses the most up-to-date approaches and technologies such asopen source, workﬂow, and service-oriented architecture. Fig. 2illustrates the Kuali system architecture and shows how the enter-prise service bus is used to support service-oriented architecture.The Kual
 i Board
Functi
 onal
  Counci
 l Tech
 nical
  Counci
 lProjec
 t Ma nager
Project
  Analyst
Quality 
Ass
 urance 
Manage
 rLead
  Business
  Analyst
Testin
 g Coordinator
Data  Architec
 tFig. 1. Kuali organizational chart. 2924M. Liu et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2921– 2928Fig. 2. Kuali rice system architecture (http://rice.kuali.org/).Currently, there are three main application modules includingﬁnancial services, research administration, and student system.4.2. The Sakai case—a learning and collaboration systemThe Sakai project is a community source software developmenteffort to design, build and deploy a new Collaboration and LearningEnvironment (CLE) for higher education (www.sakaiproject.org).Sakai’s development model is referred to as “community source”because many of the developers creating Sakai are drawn fromthe “community” of organizations that have adopted and are usingSakai. Sakai is an online collaboration and learning environmentthat provides a framework and pluggable tool modules for man-aging, delivering, and assessing student learning. It is designed tobring students and instructors together for knowledge sharing, dis-cussion, and shared learning.The Sakai Project began in 2004 as a collaboration of fouruniversities (the University of Michigan, Indiana University, Mas-sachusetts Institute of Technology, and Stanford University). Theexisting home-grown systems of the four universities were unsus-tainable in the long run although the current needs could be met.The goal of the Sakai project is to pool all the different home-grownsystems and create a core common code base that could address thesustainability issue.The four universities contributed US$4.4 million to the project.The Sakai project also received a $2.4 million grant from the MellonFoundation. Currently the Sakai project is run by the Sakai Foun-dation, which is a vibrant and growing community of more than100 members representing universities, colleges, and institutionsworldwide.The organizational structure of the Sakai Foundation is rela-tively simple compared to that of the Kuali Foundation. The Sakaiproject is supported by voluntary partner contributions. The SakaiFoundation member organizations elect the ten-member Board ofDirectors, which provides the strategic leadership for the SakaiFoundation.Sakai consists of two parts: the Sakai framework and Sakaitools (Farmer and Dolphin, 2005). The framework provides pre-sentation and common services to form a basic system, while toolsare designed for speciﬁc purposes such as chat room and discus-sion. Tools can be treated as components and can be plugged-inor removed from Sakai dynamically. Tools can make use of com-mon services such as retrieving current user information. SakaiFig. 3. Kuali forms and labels.provides generic collaboration tools such as announcement, chatroom, archive, as well as learning and teaching tools.5. How Kuali achieves technology ﬂexibilityKuali achieves technology ﬂexibility via Service Oriented Archi-tecture (SOA) and ﬁve levels of system customization. SOA playsan important role in developing new applications and modifyingexisting applications quickly and easily. The Kuali Rice System is anenterprise middleware suite of integrated products, which enablesagile application development and greatly simpliﬁes the deploy-ment and maintenance of all Kuali applications. Fig. 2 shows thekey components of the Kuali Rice System. More speciﬁcally, KualiRice System is designed and built with SOA concepts in mind,including several key services comprised of Kuali Service Bus (KSB),Kuali Nervous System (KNS), Kuali Enterprise Workﬂow (KEW),Kuali Enterprise Notiﬁcation (KEN), and Kuali Identity Manage-ment (KIM). Kuali Rice System represents a re-usable developmentframework that advocates a simpliﬁed approach to developingbusiness functionality as modular applications.As a community source project, Kuali must balance varyingrequirements from many universities. Thus, it is imperative to makethe Kuali system ﬂexible. Five levels of customization are enabledin Kuali to achieve ﬂexibility including label customization, modi-ﬁcation and addition of document types, workﬂow customization,code modiﬁcation, and addition of new modules as discussed indetail next.5.1. Level 1: label customizationAn important aspect of ﬂexibility is to enable the customiza-tion of the look and feel of the user interface. Speciﬁcally, Kualiallows its adopters to rename any label on all forms (Fig. 3) with-out the need to write code. Kuali supports label customization bymeans of its Data Dictionary, which can be speciﬁed using XML ﬁles.For example, account.xml (Table 2) holds various attributes abouta Business Object “Account Number”. This customizability allowsan institution to change the user interface to ﬁt its unique lingowithout changing the lower-level programs. M. Liu et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2921– 29282925Table 2Data dictionary attribute deﬁnition.<attribute name = “accountNumber” forceUppercase = “true”><label>Account Number</label> <shortLabel>Account</shortLabel><maxLength>7</maxLength><validationPattern> <alphaNumeric exactLength = “7”allowWhitespace = “false”allowUnderscore = “false”/ > < validationPattern><required>true</required> <control> <text size = “10”/ > < control><summary>Account Number</summary> <description>Identiﬁer for a poolof funds.</description></attribute>Table 3Kuali document type examples.Financial TransactionsBudget AdjustmentCash  Receipto Cash Receipto Credit Card Receipto Advance Deposito Cash ManagementDisbursement VoucherNon-Check DisbursementPre-Encumbrance
Internal BillingService Billingo o Issues5.2. Level 2: modiﬁcation and addition of document typesKuali organizes its ﬁnancial documents into a hierarchy of 139document types. Table 3 illustrates a number of document typesin the ﬁnancial transactions category. Document types are a crit-ical concept for Kuali since its business processes evolve aroundthe routing of documents. Kuali allows its adopters to modify andadd new document types via XML ﬁles. As shown in Table 4, theAccount Maintenance Document type is deﬁned via XML (only par-tially shown for simplicity). The components of a document typeinclude business rules, authorization, locking keys, and so on.5.3. Level 3: workﬂow customizationWorkﬂows in Kuali can be customized to suit the needs of dif-ferent universities. Essentially, Kuali workﬂow is document-basedand allows for modiﬁcation of document routing without writingany code. As shown in Fig. 4, the Kuali workﬂow engine speciﬁesthe generic actions on ﬁnancial documents including initial actions,approval actions, workﬂow processor, and post processor. Speciﬁcactions on each ﬁnancial document are speciﬁed within the doc-ument type itself such as document initiator, organizational unit,and document approver. The Kuali workﬂow uses XML-driven rout-ing capabilities, and routing rules can be deﬁned or modiﬁed withrespect to any document type without requiring a modiﬁcation tothe Kuali source code.5.4. Level 4: code modiﬁcationAs an open source system, Kuali is distributed according to theEducational Community License version 1.0, which allows its usersto: (1) freely access, install, and run the software for any pur-pose; (2) modify the original software; (3) redistribute copies ofthe original or modiﬁed programs; and (4) share modiﬁcationswith the community. It is worth noting that although Kuali is basedon many of the principles of open source development, its effortsrely more explicitly on deﬁned roles, responsibilities, and fundedcommitments by community members than some open sourcedevelopment models (http://www.kuali.org/faq/23).5.5. Level 5: addition of new modulesAs discussed in an earlier section, Kuali started as a ﬁnancialsystem and has evolved into an umbrella suite of administrativesystems for higher education. It accomplishes that function by pro-viding a common architecture that can be extended to incorporatenew applications. The Kuali framework improves productivity andconsistency across Kuali applications and creates a reusable devel-opment environment. The service-centric approach of Kuali makesit possible to develop once and use anywhere and on any platform.6. How Sakai achieves technology ﬂexibilityThe next generation of Sakai platform, named Sakai Open Aca-demic Environment (OAE), is built with technology ﬂexibility inmind. More speciﬁcally, Sakai OAE’s technology ﬂexibility is clas-siﬁed into two categories, (1) ﬂexibility-for-use, which measuresTable 4AccountMaintenanceDocument.xml.<dictionaryEntry><maintenanceDocument>. . .<businessRulesClass>org.kuali.module.chart.rules.AccountRule</businessRulesClass>
<documentAuthorizerClass>org.kuali.core.document.MaintenanceDocumentAuthorizerBase</documentAuthorizerClass>
<authorizations>
<authorization action = “initiate”><workgroups> <workgroup>kualiUniversalGroup</workgroup > < workgroups></authorization>
</authorizations>
<documentTypeName>KualiAccountMaintenanceDocument</documentTypeName>
<documentTypeCode>ACCT</documentTypeCode>
<label>Account Maintenance Document</label><shortLabel>AcctMaintDoc</shortLabel>
<summary>Account maintenance document</summary><description>Document used to create or update Account objects</description><lockingKeys> <ﬁeld attributeName = “chartOfAccountsCode”/> <ﬁeld attributeName = “accountNumber”/ > < lockingKeys>. . .</maintenanceDocument></dictionaryEntry> 2926M. Liu et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2921– 2928Fig. 4. Kuali workﬂow.how easily the system can be conﬁgured and personalized to sup-port various learning, teaching, and collaboration needs withoutprogramming and (2) ﬂexibility-for-development, which measureshow easily the system can be customized and extended to meetnew functional requirements.Sakai OAE’s service-oriented system architecture provides thefoundation to support the two aforementioned types of technologyﬂexibility. Sakai OAE is built on top of Apache Sling, which is a webframework that embeds an Open Services Gateway initiative (OSGi)framework (Apache Felix) to provide a dynamic runtime environ-ment and uses a Java Content Repository (Apache Jackrabbit) tostore and manage content. The OSGi framework enables variouscode bundles (Sakai services/widgets), such as contact list, recentmessages, discussion board, chat room, and blog, to be loaded,unloaded, and reconﬁgured at runtime (see Fig. 5a). Given the largenumber of partner institutions involved in the analysis, design anddevelopment of the Sakai system, the system requirements arehighly diverse and constantly changing.Although it may not be possible to satisfy every requirement ofthe community, the component-based ﬂexible architecture enablesthe Sakai community to focus on a core set of functionalitiesby developing and maintaining key code bundles centrally whileallowing community members to implement speciﬁc bundles tosatisfy their special needs. When the demand for those speciﬁc bun-dles becomes more dominant, they can be easily incorporated intothe Sakai core system and maintained by the community instead ofindividual institutions. The layout of the widgets can also be easilypersonalized by dragging and dropping widgets to the desired loca-tions as shown in Fig. 5b, leading to controllable user workspaceswith inﬁnite ﬂexibility.Sakai OAE provides rich feature sets in terms of different wid-gets to support most common needs for online teaching, learning,and collaboration. In addition, the best practices for interna-tionalization and localization have been followed in Sakai OAEdesign, so that the user interface can be easily conﬁgured todifferent languages. Another key service to facilitate ﬂexibility isthe integrated workﬂow and business rule engine named Drools(http://www.jboss.org/drools), which allows modeling of complexcross-functional workﬂows and business rules. In sum, the ﬂexibleOSGi framework in Sakai OAE provides great ﬂexibility for use byallowing organizations to choose the best set of features accordingto their speciﬁc needs without programming.The Java Content Repository (JCR) in Sakai OAE enables ﬂex-ible content authoring and sharing. Once speciﬁc content, suchas a page, a document, or a video, is created, the content cre-ator can deﬁne ﬁne-grain access control policies to specify howto share the content. In this way, the content can be easily reusedand shared across course, college, and institution boundaries. SakaiOAE is Learning Tools Interoperability (LTI) certiﬁed, which enablescontent exchange with other LTI certiﬁed systems. For example,courses created in Sakai OAE can be exported and then importedinto other LTI certiﬁed systems.Sakai OAE’s underlying infrastructure of services links the iso-lated user experiences in different courses and tools often found intraditional learning management systems. This infrastructure sup-ports two of Sakai OAE’s design goals: “Multiple options for and easeof software development and integration” and “Agile Sakai code basebuilt atop other reliable open source projects.”Sakai OAE core developers are employees of different partnerinstitutions and companies, are often geographically distributedand have diverse backgrounds. For such a dynamic developmentteam, Sakai OAE’s ﬂexible system architecture enables small groupsof team members to work on different Sakai services in parallelwithout high integration overhead. It also allows an agile develop-ment process to be followed to deliver small chunks of functionalityfrequently. For example, three three-week-long coding “sprints”have been conducted between November 2010 and January 2011to enhance/release over a dozen existing/new features. The ﬂexi-bility of Sakai OAE’s code base can also be illustrated via its supportof many scripting languages, such as Java scripts, PHP, Python, and M. Liu et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2921– 29282927Fig. 5. Sakai widgets as a means of technology ﬂexibility.Ruby. This ﬂexibility enables web developers with different exper-tise to join and contribute to the community.7. Principles of technology ﬂexibility in community sourceTechnology ﬂexibility in community source is a multi-dimensional subject matter, and understanding the associatedissues should be useful to understanding principles of softwareengineering. Based on our studies of the Kuali and Sakai cases, weﬁnd the following principles:•Principle 1: Community source focuses on enterprise applicationsrather than generic system-level software, and thus commu-nity source requires more technology ﬂexibility. As illustratedby the Kuali and Sakai cases, each participating organization isinterested in developing software tools that solve their busi-ness problems. In the case of Kuali, an application has to dowith automating a particular business process as in ﬁnancialapplications or research administration, and in the case of Sakai,an application is about some aspect of the course administra-tion process. This is very different from system-level softwaresuch as Linux since an organization would not be interested indevoting resources if the software is as generic as the Linuxoperating system. As such, this principle shows that communitysource requires more technology ﬂexibility than conventionalopen source.•Principle 2: User requirements in community source are verycomplex and volatile, thus requiring more technology ﬂexibil-ity. In the Kuali and Sakai cases, each community consists of tensor hundreds of participating organizations, each of which con-tributes human and ﬁnancial resources over a long period of timeas the community source is being developed and deployed. Giventhat business applications vary from organization to organiza-tion due to variations in business processes that are governed byorganizational orientations and regulations, the overall systemrequirements of all participating organizations are very com-plex. Further, partner organizations change signiﬁcantly over thecourse of system development, causing user requirements tovary. As such, the underlying technology and system infrastruc-ture must be ﬂexible and customizable.•Principle 3: The volatile developer composition in communitysource requires even more technology ﬂexibility. We found inour research with Kuali that developer instability is another rea-son for requiring more technology ﬂexibility (Liu et al., 2010).Three facts contribute to the problem of developers’ instabilityin community source. First, the turn-over rate of IS staff in thehome institution itself is high. Second, the development part-ners might assign the developer to other projects and replacehim with a new developer. Lastly, when the community sourceorganization is growing, new partners will join the communitysource project and a few old partners might drop out. Therefore,the community source needs to keep on training new developersto make sure that they get familiar with the work very quickly.The XML-based technology in Kuali and support of multiple pop-ular programming languages in Sakai make the training easier tonew developers. In a way, this is a feature of technology ﬂexibilityfrom the developer perspective.•Principle 4: Technology ﬂexibility in community source is neededto support more system transparency. The feature of collabora-tion states that the Kuali community’s success comes from themembers’ ability to collaborate, which entails a number of under-lying values including listening, introspection, objectivity, andthoughtful communication. The feature of transparency meansthat Kuali’s communication and collaboration infrastructure isopen to the public to a large degree. Although certain informa-tion may be protected for various reasons, Kuali strongly valuesmaking as much information publicly accessible as possible. Thishigh level of transparency can only be supported when userrequirements are well-speciﬁed and their changes are done sys-tematically, thus requiring more technology ﬂexibility.•Principle 5: Technology ﬂexibility in community source isachieved via modularization and customization. Communitysource requires highly ﬂexible software in order to meetthe needs of the community. Software modularization and 2928M. Liu et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2921– 2928customization enable better scalability, software distribution,and reusability. The feature of scalability means that Kuali andSakai produce software that can serve both small and large usergroups. The feature of distributed software states that softwarearchitecture of Kuali and Sakai is guided by the principle of dis-tribution, resulting in loosely coupled components that allow forﬂexibility and a rapid response to changes in business needs.The feature of reusability indicates that the Kuali and Sakaicommunities work hard to identify common needs between dif-ferent applications, and produce assets that can be easily reusedthroughout the communities.•Principle 6: Technology ﬂexibility in community source is furtherenabled by means of SOA, document-centric workﬂow, and rule-based modeling. SOA is one of the key components of communitysource system development, which enables the Kuali adoptersto extend existing system functionality by adding new appli-cation modules in a “plug-and-play” fashion. For instance, theauthentication system for the Kuali Student system is designedas services based on service contracts, allowing the leverage ofany contract-aware authentication system. Similarly, Sakai alsoleverages Apache Sling to achieve service-oriented system archi-tecture. The workﬂows and business rules supporting varioussystem functions should not be hardcoded into the program.Instead, workﬂow and business rule engines should be leveragedto support easy workﬂow and business rule design, customiza-tion, and execution.8. ConclusionsOur study of the community source phenomenon in the cases ofKuali and Sakai reveals that recent innovations in software tech-nologies include novel software engineering techniques such asSOA, document-based workﬂow, rule-based policies, and XML-based programming. A common thread of technical innovationamong these novel techniques is to enable high technology ﬂex-ibility. This issue of ﬂexibility is especially relevant to communitysource since it requires robust applications for an evolving andcomplex community of development partners. In this paper, ourstudy of two community source cases, i.e., Kuali and Sakai, showsthat the technology ﬂexibility principles depend on an interwovenrelationship between technological constraints and organizationalfactors.We believe that the collection of principles generated from thetwo real world cases in this paper is unique to community sourcebecause of several reasons. First, community source is a specialform of open source that focuses on enterprise applications ratherthan generic systems. This makes the software more speciﬁc to theinstitutional needs. Second, the community source is also a vir-tual organization consisting of varying partner institutions. Thisorganizational volatility is not found in other forms of softwaredevelopment. Third, the ﬁrst two reasons lead to special solutionsto technology ﬂexibility found in the paper. This ﬁnding is quiteinsightful since few similar ﬁndings are found in the literature. All inall, this unique set of observed principles should lead to more excit-ing research in technology ﬂexibility, a very important but difﬁcultsubject to study in software development.We hope that our case study results have instructional valuein other forms of software development although they are morepronounced in community source that requires more ﬂexibility dueto their complex requirements from multiple partner developers.There are two limitations in this paper. First, the cases weregenerated from the higher education sector. Because universitiesare quite different from commercial companies, the research resultmay not be directly applicable to other industries. Accordingly, onefuture research direction is to study community source projectsoutside the higher education sector as they become available. Sec-ond, the six principles are derived based on observing the twocommunity source cases but require more empirical validation. Infuture research, we will monitor the development and deploymentof Kuali and Sakai systems presented in this paper. A survey as wellas interviews has been planned among partner institutions in Kuali.Empirical data will be collected to validate the principles.ReferencesAdler, P., 1998. Automation, skill and the future of capitalism. Berkeley Journal ofSociology.Bieberstein, N., Bose, S., Fiammante, M., Jones, K., Shah, R., 2006. Service-OrientedArchitecture Compass.Curtis, B., Krasner, H., Iscoe, N., 1988. A ﬁeld study of the software design process forlarge systems. Communications of the ACM 31 (November (11)), 1268–1287.Davenport, T., Linder, J., 1994. Information management infrastructure: the newcompetitive weapon. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Seventh Hawaii Interna-tional Conference on System Sciences, vol. IV.De Leeuw, A.C.J., Volberda, H.W., 1996. On the concept of ﬂexibility: a dual controlperspective. Omega: International Journal Management Science 24 (2), 121–219.Deiters, W., Goesmann, T., Loffeler, T., 2000. Flexibility in workﬂow management:dimensions and solutions.Ducheneanut, N., 2005. Socialization in an open source software community: asocio-technical analysis. Computer Supported Cooperative Work 14, 323–368.Duncan, N.B., 1995. Capturing ﬂexibility of information technology infrastructure:a study of resource characteristics and their measure. Journal of ManagementInformation Systems 12 (2), 37–57.Eisenhardt, K., 1989. Building theories from case study research. Academy of Man-agement Review 14 (4), 532–550.Evans, J.S., 1991. Strategic ﬂexibility for high technology maneuvers: a conceptualframework. Journal of Management Studies 28 (1), 69–89.Farmer, J., Dolphin, I., 2005. Sakai: eLearning and more. In: Proceedings of the 11thEuropean University Information Systems, Manchester, UK.Fitzgerald, B., 2006. The transformation of open source software. MIS Quarterly 30(September (3)), 587–598.Gupta, Y.P., Somers, T.M., 1992. The measurement of manufacturing ﬂexibility. Euro-pean Journal of Operational Research 60 (2), 166–182.Keng, S., Ee-Peng, L., Zixing, S., 2001. Mobile commerce: promises, challenges, andresearch agenda. Journal of Database Management 12 (3), 4.Kettinger, W.J., Marchand, D.A., Davis, J.M., 2010. Designing enterprise IT archi-tectures to optimize ﬂexibility and standardization in global business. MISQuarterly Executive 9 (June (2)).Kraut, R.E., Streeter, L., 1995. Coordination in software development. Communica-tions of the ACM 38 (March (3)), 69–81.Liu, M., Tu, Q., 2011. Community-based open source: the phenomenon and researchopportunities. In: Proceedings of the 13th International Conference on Enter-prise Information Systems.Liu, M., Wang, H.J., Zhao, J.L., 2007. Achieving ﬂexibility via service-centric commu-nity source: the case of Kuali. In: Proceedings of the Americas Conference onInformation Systems, August 9–12, 2007.Liu, M., Wu, X., Zhao, J.L., Zhu, L., 2010. Outsourcing of community source: identifyingmotivations and beneﬁts. Journal of Global Information Management 18 (4).Mason, S.P., 1986. Valuing Financial Flexibility. National Bureau of EconomicResearch Project Report Series. University of Chicago Press, Chicago/London.Nelson, K.M., Nelson, H.J., Ghods, M., 1997. Technology ﬂexibility: conceptualization,validation, and measurement. In: Proceedings of the 30th Hawaii InternationalConference on System Sciences.Ocker, R.J., Fjermestad, J., 2000. High versus low performing virtual design teams:a preliminary analysis of communication. In: Proceedings of the 33rd AnnualHawaii International Conference on System Sciences, vol. 1, p. 9.Horn, P., 2001. Autonomic Computing: IBM’s Perspective on the State of InformationTechnology.Perry, R., Quirk, K., 2007. An evaluation of build versus buy for portal solutions. IDCWhite Paper. Sponsored by IBM.Ramasesh, R.V., Jayakumar, M.D., 1991. Measurement of manufacturing ﬂexibility:a value based approach. Journal of Operations Management 10 (4), 446–468.Stewart, K.J., Gosain, S., 2006. The impact of ideology effectiveness in open sourcesoftware development teams. MIS Quarterly 30 (June (2)), 291–314.Wang, H.J., Blue, J., Plourde, M., 2010. Community source software in higher educa-tion. IT Professional 12 (6), 31–37.Wheeler, B., 2004. The open source parade. EDUCAUSE Review, 68–69.Wheeler, B., 2007. Open source 2010: reﬂections on 2007. EDUCAUSE Review 42 (1),49–52.Whiting, R., 2003. A win–win combination? Informationweek 931, 57–58.Yin, R., 1994. Case Study Research. Design and Methods. Sage Publications, ThousandOaks.Zeng, D.D., Zhao, J.L., 2002. Achieving software ﬂexibility via intelligent workﬂowtechniques. In: Proceedings of the 35th Hawaii International Conference onSystem Sciences, January 7–10, 2002.