 The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2086– 2095Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
j ourna l ho me page: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssOn using planning poker for estimating user storiesViljan Mahniˇc,Toma
ˇz HoveljaUniversity of Ljubljana, Faculty of Computer and Information Science, Trˇzaˇska 25, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Sloveniaa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 23 September 2011Received in revised form 6 February 2012Accepted 3 April 2012Available online 10 April 2012Keywords:
Agile software developmentEffort estimationUser storyPlanning pokerExpert judgmentScruma b s t r a c tWhile most studies in psychology and forecasting stress the possible hazards of group processes whenpredicting effort and schedule, agile software development methods recommend the use of a groupestimation technique called planning poker for estimating the size of user stories and developing releaseand iteration plans. It is assumed that the group discussion through planning poker helps in identifyingactivities that individual estimators could overlook, thus providing more accurate estimates and reducingthe over-optimism that is typical for expert judgment-based methods. In spite of the widespread use ofagile methods, there is little empirical evidence regarding the accuracy of planning poker estimates.In order to ﬁll this gap a study was conducted requiring 13 student teams to develop a Web-basedstudent records information system. All teams were given the same set of user stories which had to beimplemented in three Sprints. Each team estimated the stories using planning poker and the estimatesprovided by each team member during the ﬁrst round were averaged to obtain the statistical combinationfor further comparison. In the same way the stories were estimated by a group of experts. The studyrevealed that students’ estimates were over-optimistic and that planning poker additionally increasedthe over-optimism. On the other hand, the experts’ estimates obtained through planning poker weremuch closer to actual effort spent and tended to be more accurate than the statistical combination of theirindividual estimates. The results indicate that the optimism bias caused by group discussion diminishesor even disappears as the expertise of the people involved in the group estimation process increases.© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionPoor estimation performance is an important concern in thesoftware industry. A review of surveys on software effort esti-mation (Moløkken and Jørgensen, 2003) has shown that mostprojects (60–80%) encounter effort and/or schedule overruns, andthat the estimation methods in most frequent use are expertjudgment-based (Hughes, 1996). A further study dealing withexpert estimation (Jørgensen, 2004) has revealed that there isno substantial evidence in favor of using estimation models, andthat there are situations where we can expect expert estimates tobe more accurate than formal estimation models. The study hasalso found that expert judgment-based estimates tend to be over-optimistic, especially when estimators estimate their own work.Therefore, it was recommended to continue with research on howto reduce the over-optimism bias and how to select and combine aset of expert estimates.In order to provide a basis for the improvement of softwareestimation research a systematic review of software developmentCorresponding author. Tel.: +386 1 4768447; fax: +386 1 4264647.E-mail addresses: viljan.mahnic@fri.uni-lj.si (V. Mahniˇc),tomaz.hovelja@fri.uni-lj.si (T. Hovelja).cost studies (Jørgensen and Shepperd, 2007) identiﬁed 304 jour-nal papers describing research on software development effort orcost estimation, 61% of them dealing with the introduction andevaluation of estimation methods. The review revealed that expertjudgment-based approaches are discussed in only 15% of the papersin spite of the fact that expert judgment-based approaches are, byfar, the most commonly used approaches by the software indus-try. Additionally, the review identiﬁed a lack of in depth studies ofthe actual use of estimation methods and real-life evaluations. Nostudy containing an in-depth data collection and analysis of howestimation methods were actually applied was discovered. Con-sequently, one of the clear ﬁndings was that the coverage of theresearch area should be increased by conducting more studies onestimation methods commonly used by the software industry.A recent debate on software development effort estimation(Jørgensen and Boehm, 2009) revealed several reasons for focus-ing research on judgment-based methods, which (according toJørgensen) the software industry is much more willing to acceptand properly use than formal estimation models. Therefore, thesoftware engineering discipline should become evidence-basedand concentrate on improving those processes for which the evi-dence suggests that improvements will more likely occur.Planning poker (Grenning, 2002) is one of the recent expertjudgment-based estimation techniques that is widely used in agile0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2012.04.005 V. Mahniˇc, T. Hovelja / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2086– 20952087methods for software development, especially Scrum (Schwaberand Beedle, 2002; Schwaber, 2004) and Extreme Programming(Beck and Andres, 2005). In both methods, a user story (Cohn, 2004)is the unit of which software features are estimated and developed.Each user story consists of three parts: a written description (usedfor planning and as a reminder), conversations about the story (toﬂesh out the details), and acceptance tests (to determine when astory is “done”). A story description is formulated in the language ofthe customer and is intentionally short enough to be hand-writtenon a paper note card. It serves merely as a reminder for conver-sations with the customer in order to clarify the story details anddocument the expectations of the project’s users in the form ofacceptance tests.Strictly following Scrum, user stories are deﬁned by the ProductOwner (i.e., the customer representative responsible for maintain-ing and prioritizing all user stories that are currently known), whilethe estimates are made by the Scrum Team (i.e., the group of devel-opers responsible for user stories implementation). Using planningpoker, the Team allocates each story a number of story points rep-resenting the effort required for its implementation. A story pointusually (although not necessarily) corresponds to an ideal day ofwork and often only a predeﬁned set of possible values is used, e.g.,0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 13, 20, 40 and 100 (Cohn, 2004, 2005).Estimates are used during Release and Sprint planning meetingsin order to create Release and Sprint plans, respectively. The Releaseplan is created by allocating stories to Sprints strictly consideringtheir priority and the Team’s estimated velocity, i.e., the number ofstory points that the team can implement during a Sprint. At thebeginning of each Sprint the Team re-estimates its velocity and theremaining user stories in order to obtain a more realistic plan forsubsequent iterations. During the Sprint, the team further decom-poses each story into constituent tasks that must be performed todeliver required functionality by the end of the Sprint. The tasksemerge as the Sprint evolves and are divided so that each takesroughly 4–16 h to ﬁnish (Schwaber, 2004).Planning poker is assumed to provide better estimates than indi-vidual experts by ensuring that all developers participate equallyin the estimation process, regardless of whether they are amongthe loudest or most inﬂuential people in the Team. According toMoløkken-Østvold and Jørgensen (2004) participation of peoplewith different backgrounds helps in reducing the over-optimismof expert judgment-based estimates by identifying more issuesaffecting implementation, and alleviating the problems of anchor-ing and strong personalities. On the other hand, evidence fromother research communities (e.g., Armstrong, 2006; Brown, 2000;Buehler et al., 2005) points out the dangers of group processes,arguing that individuals are inherently optimistic and this opti-mism bias is increased by group interaction.In order to contribute to the research of group estimationtechniques we conducted a study on using planning poker forestimating user stories in a Scrum project requiring 13 studentteams to develop a Web-based student records information sys-tem. The study was part of the capstone software engineeringcourse that students take in their last (eighth) semester and lasts15 weeks (Mahnic, 2012). All teams were given the same set ofuser stories that had to be implemented in three Sprints. At thebeginning of the project each team had to estimate the storiesusing planning poker and prepare the Release plan. The statisti-cal combination of individual estimates was computed simply asthe average of the estimates provided by each team member inthe ﬁrst round of planning poker. During the course the amount ofwork spent was recorded in order to compare the actual effort toinitial estimates. The same stories were also estimated by a groupof experienced professionals, thus giving the possibility to com-pare estimation capabilities of beginners and experienced softwaredevelopers.The reminder of the paper is organized as follows: Section2 describes related work and the relationship between planningpoker and other group estimation techniques. In Sections 3 and 4,respectively, research questions and study design are described.The results are presented in Section 5 and discussed in Section 6.Section 7 provides a conclusion.2. Planning poker and related group estimation techniquesPlanning poker belongs to a set of group estimation tech-niques (Furulund, 2007; Moløkken-Østvold and Jørgensen, 2004)that build on the principle that more heads are better than one.User stories are estimated at an estimating session by members ofthe development team responsible for implementation. For eachstory, the Product Owner begins by explaining its requirements.In turn, the team discusses the work involved, posing questions tothe Product Owner as needed. When the story has been fully dis-cussed, each estimator privately estimates the required effort bywriting the corresponding number of story points on a paper notecard or choosing a card with the corresponding predeﬁned value.All cards are revealed simultaneously in order to assure the inde-pendence between the different group members. If the estimatesdiffer too much the estimators discuss their estimates. The highand low estimators should especially share their reasons. After dis-cussion, the group revotes on their estimates by revealing again allcards at the same time. The process is repeated until consensus isachieved.Planning poker is not completely new, but represents a variantof the Delphi technique (Brown, 1968; Dalkey, 1969; Linstone andTuroff, 1975), which was devised by the RAND corporation in the1950s as a method of eliciting and reﬁning group judgments. TheDelphi technique has three features (Dalkey, 1969): (1) anonymousresponse, (2) iteration and controlled feedback, and (3) statisti-cal group response. Estimates are obtained by anonymous expertinteraction through several iterations, supervised by a moderatoruntil an appropriate aggregate of individual opinions is obtained.Rowe and Wright (1999) provided a systematic review of empir-ical studies looking at the effectiveness of the Delphi techniqueand a critique of this research. Their ﬁndings suggest that Del-phi groups outperform statistical groups and standard interactinggroups, although the technique has shown no clear advantages overother structured procedures.Boehm (1981) proposed a modiﬁcation of the Delphi techniquecalled Wideband Delphi. Wideband Delphi includes more groupinteraction, and reduces complexity and overhead of the originalmethod. The experts provide their estimates anonymously, butmeet to discuss (and possibly revise) them in the context of otherestimates. The cycle repeats until the group decides that the aver-age is representative and satisfactory. Wideband Delphi has beenproposed as an estimation method in several books (e.g., Fentonand Pﬂeeger, 1997; McConnell, 2006; Stellman and Greene, 2005)and professional articles (e.g., Wiegers, 2000). McConnell (2006)reports his experience with the use of Wideband Delphi suggest-ing that it cuts estimation error by an average of approximately 40%compared to the initial group average.Moløkken-Østvold et al. (2008) classiﬁed group estimation tech-niques with regard to (1) their structure (the level of formality,amount of learning requirements, and degree of rigidity), (2) level ofanonymity (whether the estimators are anonymous to each other),(3) amount of interaction among estimators, and (4) overhead(extra amount of effort spent on estimating). According to this clas-siﬁcation the Delphi technique is the most complex, having heavystructure and major overhead. On the other hand, it assures fullanonymity and no interaction among estimators, thus preventingpotential undesired effects of group interaction. Wideband Delphi 2088V. Mahniˇc, T. Hovelja / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2086– 2095reduces complexity of the Delphi technique and includes moregroup interaction. Its structure and overhead are moderate andoffer limited anonymity and interaction. Planning poker is consid-ered a light-weight technique with face-to-face interaction, limitedoverhead and no anonymity.Furulund (2007) further discusses the aforementioned tech-niques from the viewpoint of preempting potential undesiredeffects of group interaction stating that all group processes encom-pass a trade-off between (1) exploiting advantages of combiningestimates in groups, (2) preempting undesired group effects, and(3) minimizing the amount of overhead. Through anonymity onehopes that the different group members will provide their ownopinion without being inﬂuenced by political, social or otherconsiderations. The Delphi technique enables full anonymity,while Wideband Delphi and planning poker represent a com-promise between protecting the independence of estimators andallowing face-to-face communication. Wideband Delphi does itthrough making the initial estimates anonymous, while in plan-ning poker it is done through the simultaneous revealing ofestimates.Planning poker has been, to the best of our knowledge, thesubject of only three published empirical studies. Haugen (2006)compared planning poker to unstructured group estimation andfound that planning poker produced more accurate estimates thanunstructured combination for familiar tasks, but increased estima-tion error when the team lacked experience with estimation ofsimilar tasks.The second and third studies (Moløkken-Østvold and Haugen,2007; Moløkken-Østvold et al., 2008) concentrated on compari-son between group consensus estimates obtained through planningpoker and the statistical combination (the mean) of individualexpert estimates. It was found that: (1) group consensus estimateswere less optimistic than the statistical combination of individualestimates of the same tasks and (2) group consensus estimates weremore accurate than the statistical combination of individual esti-mates of the same tasks. However, the authors themselves pointedout two possible limitations of their studies: (1) only one projectteam was studied and (2) planning poker was not used for esti-mating user stories, but for estimating tasks, which were muchsmaller than user stories and consequently easier to estimate. Addi-tionally, the study started after the project team studied had beenworking on the project for several months; therefore, the tasks didnot require implementation of requested features from scratch, butreferred to changes of the system requested by the client. For allthese reasons it was suggested that future studies might seek tocomplement the aforementioned ﬁndings by investigating projectswith different constraints, and using planning poker for estimatinguser stories.3. Research questionsThere is no common agreement whether group estimation tech-niques reduce bias of expert judgment-based estimates towardoptimism and provide more realistic estimates. Many studies ongroup decision making from other research communities suggestjust the reverse: that an initially optimistic decision can be ren-dered even more optimistic by group discussion. For example, a setof studies by Buehler et al. (2005) requiring participants to predictwhen they would complete upcoming group projects found an opti-mism bias for both individual and group predictions. Predictionsgenerated through group discussion were more optimistic thanthose generated individually since the group discussion heightenedparticipants’ tendency to focus primarily on factors promoting suc-cessful task completion, and this selective focus on “planning forsuccess” enhanced their optimistic outlook.Armstrong (2006) argues that face-to-face meetings harm fore-casting and decision making, suggesting that other methods ofaggregating individual opinions, such as using the average of aset of independent judgments or the Delphi technique providemore accurate estimates. According to him, there is not enoughevidence for the claim that face-to-face interaction is beneﬁ-cial in certain contexts, such as when it is important to gaincommitment. Even some software management textbooks (e.g.,Boehm, 1981; DeMarco, 1982; Fenton and Pﬂeeger, 1997) fre-quently warn about the possibility that group pressure couldinﬂuence group decisions unreasonably, but omit valuable groupwork aspects such as motivation and information sharing whendescribing the separate estimating groups and group estimationtechniques.On the other hand, recent research on group processes in soft-ware estimation by Moløkken-Østvold and Jørgensen (2004) andMoløkken-Østvold et al. (2008) have shown that estimating soft-ware projects is a type of task that is suitable for group discussion.They stress the difference between ad hoc groups estimating tasksof which kind the participants might have little experience andgroups of experienced professionals who are motivated to performin a professional manner.It can be argued that the planning poker estimation techniquepossesses several characteristics that to a great extent exploit thebeneﬁts of group work and face-to-face interaction: (1) estimatesare determined by developers that will be responsible for imple-mentation of the project, thus increasing their stake in the projectand commitment to act professionally; (2) everybody’s opinion isheard, thus avoiding the inﬂuence of dominant or most inﬂuentialpeople; (3) all estimates are shown at the same time, thus avoidingthe problem of anchoring; and (4) arguments for and against thehighest and lowest estimate are discussed, thus providing oppor-tunity to ﬁnd as many issues that affect the implementation aspossible. However, due to limited number of empirical studies fur-ther evidence is needed to conﬁrm or refute hypotheses regardingits beneﬁts in practical use.In order to ﬁll this gap we conducted a study similar toMoløkken-Østvold et al. (2008), but with some important differ-ences: (1) the basic unit of estimation was a user story (not a task);(2) all user stories were estimated at the beginning of the projectin order to deﬁne the Release plan (not in the middle of the projectwhen developers have much more experience); and (3) the studyinvolved 13 teams working on the same project, thus giving thepossibility to compare estimates of different teams and obtain sta-tistically relevant results.For practical reasons the teams were composed of Computer Sci-ence students (since it is almost impossible to ﬁnd several teamsdeveloping the same set of user stories in an industrial environ-ment) who took the capstone course in software engineering intheir last (eighth) semester, thus blurring the difference betweenstudents and young professionals.The aim of the study was to answer the following research ques-tions:RQ1: How do planning poker estimates provided by studentteams differ from the statistical combination of their individualestimates:•RQ1.1: Are the planning poker estimates less optimistic than thestatistical combination of individual estimates?•RQ1.2: Are the planning poker estimates more accurate than thestatistical combination of individual estimates?RQ2: How do planning poker estimates provided by experiencedprofessionals differ from the statistical combination of their indi-vidual estimates: V. Mahniˇc, T. Hovelja / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2086– 20952089•RQ2.1: Are the planning poker estimates less optimistic than thestatistical combination of individual estimates?•RQ2.2: Are the planning poker estimates more accurate than thestatistical combination of individual estimates?RQ3: How do students’ estimates differ from estimates made byexperienced professionals?•RQ3.1: Is the statistical combination of individual estimatesprovided by experienced professionals more accurate than thestatistical combination of estimates provided by students?•RQ3.2: Are the planning poker estimates provided by experiencedprofessionals more accurate than the planning poker estimatesprovided by students?The statistical combination of individual estimates, whichthe planning poker estimates were compared to, was obtainedby simply averaging (for each team separately) the individualestimates obtained during the ﬁrst round of planning pokerconsidering the recommendation from Jørgensen (2005) that asimple average often works as the best method for combiningestimates.The ﬁrst two research questions were similar to the researchquestions in Moløkken-Østvold et al. (2008), and our assumptionwas that we would be able to conﬁrm their results, i.e., that planningpoker reduces optimism and provides better results than the statis-tical combination of individual estimates. Therefore, with regard toresearch question RQ1 we expected the planning poker estimatesprovided by student teams to be less optimistic and more accu-rate than the statistical combination of their individual estimates.Similarly, with regard to research question RQ2 we expected theplanning poker estimates provided by experienced professionalsto be less optimistic and more accurate than the statistical combi-nation of their individual estimates.The aim of the third question was to explore differences betweenstudents and experienced professionals. It was expected that bothkinds of estimates provided by experienced professionals (planningpoker and statistical combination) would be less optimistic andmore accurate than those of the students.By answering these questions we wanted to obtain a moredetailed insight into the planning poker process and ﬁndout whether the group discussion in the follow-up roundsduring planning poker sessions contributes to better effortestimates.4. Study design4.1. Project settingThe study required 13 student teams to develop a Web-basedstudent records information system covering enrollment, exami-nation applications, examination records, some statistical surveys,and a special module for the maintenance of all data required forthe proper functioning of the system (i.e., the maintenance of var-ious code tables, lists of required and optional courses, data aboutteachers of each course, etc.). Each team consisted of four stu-dents and acted as a self-organizing and self-managing Scrum Teamcollectively responsible for the implementation of the requiredfunctionality.The project lasted 15 weeks and was divided into four Sprints.The ﬁrst Sprint, Sprint 0, was a preparatory Sprint during whichstudents received formal training on Scrum, user stories, and agileestimation and planning techniques (Step A; Table 1). At theend of Sprint 0 all teams were presented with the same initialProduct Backlog consisting of 60 user stories (Step B). 55 storiesTable 1Study overview.A Sprint 0 Formal training on Scrum and user storiesB Initial Product Backlog presentedC User stories estimated using planning pokerC.1User
 story requirements presented by theProduct OwnerC.2 The work involved discussed by each teamC.3 Individual estimates from the ﬁrst roundrecordedC.4Group
 consensus estimate recordedD Expert estimates obtained using planning pokerD.1User
 story requirements presented by theProduct OwnerD.2 The work involved discussed by the team ofexpertsD.3Individual
 expert estimates from the ﬁrstround recordedD.4Group
 consensus expert estimate recordedE Velocity of each team estimatedFRelease
 plan of each team deﬁnedG Sprints 1, 2, and 3 Sprint planning meetingG.1 New (and remaining) stories estimatedG.2 Sprint Backlog deﬁnedG.3 User stories decomposed into constituent tasksG.4Tasks
 assigned to team membersG.5 Tasks estimatedHDaily
 Scrum meetingsH.1 Effort spent on each task recordedH.2 Amount of work remaining on each taskrecordedI Sprint review meetingI.1User
 story implementation evaluated by theProduct OwnerI.2A
 new story deﬁned for eachuncompleted/rejected user storyJ End of study Actual effort computed on the basis of effortspent recorded at the Daily Scrum meetingsdescribed the required functionality for four different user roles(student records administrative staff, students, teachers, and dataadministrator), whereas ﬁve stories described constraints that hadto be obeyed (e.g., the system had to enable remote access to datathrough the Internet, all outputs should also be printable, and soon).The initial Product Backlog was prepared by a teacher whohad considerable experience in developing university informationsystems, thus being able to provide realistic user requirementsand play the role of Product Owner. Each story contained a shortdescription and a set of acceptance tests that had to be used todemonstrate that the story had been correctly and fully coded. Thestories were divided into four groups on the basis of priority. Amongthe 55 stories describing the required functionality there were 21“must have”, 4 “should have”, 3 “could have”, and 27 “won’t havethis time” stories. The teams were asked to implement at least all“must have” and as many as possible “should have” stories for theﬁrst release. If they planned to be more productive they could alsoinclude the “could have” and even some of the “won’t have thistime” stories. However, the “won’t have this time” stories werespeciﬁed merely to illustrate the desired functionality for the nextrelease.In order to prepare the Release plan each team was required toestimate the “must have”, “should have”, and “could have” storiesin story points, using the planning poker technique. The estimateswere constrained to speciﬁc predeﬁned values of 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 5, 8,13, and 20, representing the number of ideal working days neededto fully implement each story. Since there were no epics (i.e., largestories that should have been split into smaller ones) only estimatesin the range between 0.5 and 8 were expected. Nevertheless, thevalues of 13 and 20 were also allowed if a team considered a storymore complex and difﬁcult to implement. 2090V. Mahniˇc, T. Hovelja / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2086– 2095All participants in the study were especially instructed to con-sider an ideal working day to be equal to 6 h of effective work inorder to be able to convert hours actually worked back to storypoints and compare the estimates with actual effort spent. The con-version factor of 6 was chosen for two reasons: (1) because withinthe Agilo for Scrum project management tool, which all teams usedfor maintaining project data, an ideal working day is by default 6 hand (2) because the company studied in Moløkken-Østvold et al.(2008) also deemed a full day of work to be 6 h.Estimation (Step C) took place at a special meeting at which,in turn, the Product Owner presented the requirements of eachstory (Step C.1), and the teams discussed the work involved infully implementing and testing the story until they believed thatthey have enough information to estimate the effort (Step C.2).Each team member then privately and independently estimated theeffort. All estimates were revealed simultaneously and recorded tocompute the statistical combination (the mean) of individual esti-mates for further comparison with the planning poker estimates(Step C.3). In case of disagreement, the team members with the low-est and highest estimate were required to explain their estimatesto the team and a discussion ensued until the group was readyto revote on their estimates. If necessary, more estimation roundstook place until the teams came to a consensus on the estimate(Step C.4).In order to compare students’ estimates to expert estimatesthe same stories were also estimated by a group of four expertsconsisting of instructors and developers that had been involved indevelopment of the University of Ljubljana student records infor-mation system (Step D). Again, the individual estimates of the ﬁrstround (Step D.3) and the ﬁnal planning poker estimate of each story(Step D.4) were recorded for the needs of the study.The rest of the study consisted of three regular Scrum Sprints. Itwas assumed that the ﬁrst release would be completed by the end ofSprint 3. Before Sprint 1 each team had to estimate its velocity (StepE) and develop its own Release plan (Step F) by allocating the storiesinto three Sprints so that the sum of story points ﬁt within thecapacity determined by the velocity estimate. At the beginning ofeach Sprint (Step G) the teams had to deﬁne the Sprint Backlog (StepG.2) by further decomposing user stories into constituent tasks andassigning responsibility for each task (Steps G.3 and G.4). Each teammember individually estimated how many hours it would take toaccomplish each task he/she had accepted (Step G.5).For the purpose of the study, the teams had to meet regularlyat Daily Scrum meetings (Step H) and collect data about the effortspent. At the Daily Scrum meeting each team member had to recordthe number of hours spent (Step H.1) and the amount of workremaining for each task he/she was responsible for (Step H.2). Sinceit was impossible to expect students to work on the project everyday, two Daily Scrum meetings per week were prescribed, one onMonday and the other on Thursday.When a team ﬁnished a story (or at latest at the Sprint reviewmeeting), the Product Owner was asked to evaluate its implemen-tation (Step I.1). The Product Owner strictly enforced the conceptof “done”, rejecting all stories that did not conform to user require-ments. If a story was not “done” by the end of the Sprint a newstory was deﬁned in the Product Backlog requiring the completionof the missing features in one of the remaining Sprints (Step I.2).The newly deﬁned stories were treated in the same way as theoriginal stories from the initial Product Backlog. They were esti-mated using planning poker and considered for implementationin the next Sprint (Step G.1). Effort spent on each such story wasrecorded at the Daily Scrum meetings and added to effort spent onthe original story from which it was derived.Data relevant to the study were collected in Steps C.3, C.4, D.3,D.4, and H.1. At the end of the course the total number of hoursspent on all tasks belonging to each story was converted into storypoints (Step J), considering an ideal day of work to be 6 h as agreedbefore estimation took place in Step C.4.2. Calculation of estimation accuracyTo calculate estimation accuracy the balanced measure of rela-tive error (BRE) was employed, which is calculated as:BRE =|actual effort − estimated effort|min(actual effort, estimated effort)The decision to use BRE as our key measure arose from the factthat during the last decade the measure traditionally used tomeasure the accuracy of effort estimations in software engineer-ing, the magnitude of relative error of the estimate (MRE = |actualeffort − estimated effort|/actual effort), came under sharp criti-cism by several researchers (Foss et al., 2003; Jørgensen, 2007;Kitchenham et al., 2001; Miyazaki et al., 1991; Shepperd et al.,2000). The main concern in our case was the fact that the use of MREwould cause uneven treatment of overestimated and underesti-mated stories, with underestimation being weighted insufﬁciently.BRE is a more balanced measure, evenly balancing overestimationand underestimation. Another reason for using BRE was com-patibility with previous related research. Many recent studieson software effort estimation use BRE as the key measure (e.g.,Moløkken-Østvold and Jørgensen, 2005; Moløkken-Østvold andFurulund, 2007), including related studies of planning poker byMoløkken-Østvold and Haugen (2007) and Moløkken-Østvold et al.(2008). The decision to use BRE made it possible to directly com-pare our results to the results of previous research of the planningpoker technique.In order to measure the bias toward optimism or pessimism,the BREbias was calculated, which measures both the size and thedirection of the estimation error:BREbias =(actual effort− estimated effort)min(actual effort, estimated effort)Because our BRE and BREbias values exhibited deviations from nor-mality in terms of skewness (larger then ±1) and kurtosis (largerthen +2) we did not analyze our data with parametric t-tests aswas done in the comparable research by Moløkken-Østvold et al.(2008), but used the most appropriate non-parametric alterna-tive on the non-transformed data (Darlington, 2011; Lowry, 2011).Research questions RQ1 and RQ2 required the before-after analysisof a single sample, while research question RQ3 required the anal-ysis of two independent samples. Therefore, the non-parametricWilcoxon singed-rank test (Wilcoxon, 1945) was used to answerRQ1 and RQ2, and the Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon test (Mann andWhitney, 1947) to answer RQ3. A two tailed p-value of 0.05 orless had to be reached in order to demonstrate that the distri-butions of the two tested variables differ signiﬁcantly from eachother.Since the expert group did not develop the system, the BRE andBREbias values of expert group were computed for each story sep-arately by comparing the experts’ estimate (of that story) to thearithmetic mean of the actual effort spent by the student teams (onthat story). We found this decision reasonable because the expertswere not able to provide their estimates for each team separately,but could only estimate the most likely effort of an average studentteam since they were unfamiliar with the characteristics of eachparticular team at the time of estimation. The actual effort spent byan average student team is therefore best represented by averag-ing the effort spent by all teams participating in the study for eachstory separately.In contrast to Moløkken-Østvold et al. (2008), we did notuse Cohen’s size of effect measure (d) (Cohen, 1988) to expressthe effect size of the difference between tested variables since V. Mahniˇc, T. Hovelja / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2086– 20952091it is sensitive to the presumption of normality which in ourcase was violated. Instead, we chose the non-parametric measureof the effect size Cliff’s delta (ı) (Cliff, 1996), which is consid-ered a robust and intuitive alternative to Cohen’s d in situationswhere data are either non-normal, or are ordinal and thereforehave reduced variance (Hess and Kromrey, 2004; Ledesma et al.,2009).5. ResultsIn total, 28 user stories describing functionalities of differentcomplexity were estimated at the beginning of the study by 13 stu-dent teams and a group of four experts. The teams were asked toimplement at least 21 “must have” stories, and as many as pos-sible of the 4 “should have” stories for the ﬁrst release. However,some teams did not fulﬁll their release plans completely by theend of the course. Two teams were behind the plan because someof the part-time students were not able to work on the projectconsistently due to their job commitments. Additionally, a cou-ple of stories developed in the last Sprint by some other teamswere rejected by the Product Owner for not being completely“done”, resulting in another team that implemented less than 20stories.In order to obtain a homogeneous sample for statistical analysisconsisting of the same 20 stories being successfully implementedby all teams we excluded the three aforementioned teams andproceeded with the analysis of 20 stories that were successfullydeveloped by all of the remaining 10 teams.Basic descriptive statistics for the ﬁnal student teams sampleand the experts sample are presented in Table 2.5.1. RQ1: How do planning poker estimates provided by studentteams differ from the statistical combination of their individualestimates?Table 3 presents results of Wilcoxon signed-rank tests that weperformed in order to answer the research question RQ1. For eachtest all data reported by SPSS are shown as well as the effect-sizemeasure Cliff’s delta.In order to answer RQ1.1 we ﬁrst tested both methods for biastoward optimism or pessimism and then analyzed the differencebetween the BREbias statistics.Bias toward optimism/pessimism was analyzed by comparingthe BREbias of the statistical combination of individual esti-mates and the BREbias of the planning poker estimates to ahypothetical unbiased BREbias distribution using Wilcoxon signed-rank test. The results are presented in the ﬁrst two rows ofTable 3. The BREbias medians of both kinds of estimates pointedto over-optimism (median BREbias of the statistical combinationof individual estimates = 0.0519, median BREbias of the planningpoker estimates = 0.0833); however, a statistically signiﬁcant biastoward optimism was only conﬁrmed for the planning poker esti-mates (p = 0.034). Even though the planning poker distributiondiffered statistically signiﬁcantly from the hypothetical unbiaseddistribution, Cliff’s delta of the tested difference was very small(−0.095).Wilcoxon signed-rank test was also used to compare the BREbiasof both kinds of estimates. Results are presented in the third row ofTable 3 and indicate that planning poker did not reduce the opti-mism of initial individual estimates. On the contrary, if we turnedthe research question around and asked ourselves whether theplanning poker estimates were more optimistic than the statisticalcombination of individual estimates, the answer would be afﬁr-mative since the single-sided Wilcoxon signed-rank test p-valuewould be 0.0315. Cliff’s delta of the tested difference is howeververy small (0.039).In order to answer RQ1.2 another Wilcoxon signed-rank testwas performed that compared the BRE of planning poker estimatesto the BRE of the statistical combination of students’ individualestimates (see the fourth row in Table 3). The results revealedstatistically signiﬁcant differences between the distributions ofthe planning poker estimates (median BRE = 0.6667) and the sta-tistical combination of individual estimates (median BRE = 0.600).Thus, based on the p-value of 0.008 we can conclude that theplanning poker estimates were less accurate than the statisticalcombination. However, the size of effect was again very small(0.0329).5.2. RQ2: How do planning poker estimates provided byexperienced professionals differ from the statistical combinationof their individual estimates?The results pertaining to research question RQ2 were obtainedin the same way. First, the planning poker estimates and the sta-tistical combination of individual experts’ estimates were testedfor bias toward optimism or pessimism; then, the BREbias and BREstatistics of both kinds of estimates were compared. The resultsof the corresponding Wilcoxon signed-rank tests are presented inTable 4.It is interesting that the experts over-estimated the effortthat was actually needed for the implementation. Statistical testsshowed that the over-estimation was not statistically signiﬁcant (p-values 0.086 and 0.173), but quite substantial (Cliff’s delta 0.50 and0.20). There are several possible explanations of this unexpectedphenomenon. It seems that the experts – not estimating their owneffort, but trying to adapt the estimates to students’ abilities –increased the estimates too much. However, it can also be arguedthat the experts’ estimates were quite realistic, since solutions pro-vided by some teams – although formally offering the requiredfunctionality – lacked professional polish and would need addi-tional effort to bring the code up to a useful, real-world level, whichcould survive an encounter with end users. Another, although lessplausible explanation is that some teams reported less effort thanwas actually spent.The planning poker estimates (median BREbias = −0.2231) wereless pessimistic than the statistical combination of individual esti-mates (median BREbias = −0.2445) and more accurate (medianBRE = 0.3260 vs. median BRE = 0.3835). However, statistical testsfound these differences neither statistically signiﬁcant nor havinga substantial effect-size.5.3. RQ3: How do students’ estimates differ from estimates madeby experienced professionals?In order to analyze how students’ estimates differ from esti-mates made by experienced professionals two Mann–Whitney–Wilcoxon tests were performed. The ﬁrst one compared estimatesobtained by statistical combination, while the second one referredto estimates obtained through planning poker. Results are pre-sented in Table 5.Both tests have shown a statistically signiﬁcant differencebetween students and experts for both kinds of estimates (p-values0.041 and 0.013). The effect-size of the difference can be consideredmedium (Cliff’s delta 0.277 and 0.335). These ﬁndings –together
with results of research questions RQ1 and RQ2 – indicate that thereis an important difference in the way that planning poker affectsestimates of experienced professionals in comparison to inexperi-enced beginners. 2092V. Mahniˇc, T. Hovelja / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2086– 2095Table 2Statistics.BRE studentsstatistical
combinationBRE studentsplanning
pokerBREbias studentsstatistical
combinationBREbiasstudents
planning pokerBRE expertsstatistical
combinationBRE expertsplanning
pokerBREbias expertsstatistical
combinationBREbiasexperts
planning pokerTestvalue = 0NUser stories(students)200 200 200 200 200 200 200 200 200User stories(experts)20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20Mean1.02251.1074.0778.1802.4210.4286
 −.1511 −.1424 .0000Median.6000.6667
 .0519 .0833 .3835 .3260 −.2445 −.2231 .0000Std. deviation1.29359
 1.38715 1.64867 1.76752 .33084 .39649 .52153 .57381 .00000Skewness 3.459 3.026 −1.138 −1.096 1.630 1.694 1.482 .532Std. error ofskewness.172 .172 .172 .172 .512 .512 .512 .512 .172Kurtosis19.18314.02011.4329.2153.7422.6663.4922.722
Std. error ofkurtosis.342 .342 .342 .342 .992 .992 .992 .992 .342Range 11.00 11.00 17.52 17.00 1.41 1.40 2.38 2.86 .00Table 3RQ1 results.N Mean rank Sum of ranks Z P-value (2-tailed) Cliff’s deltaTest value = 0 − BREbias statistical combinationNegative ranks 104 96.85 10,072−1.1820.237−0.085Positive ranks 87 94.99 8264Ties 9Total200
Test value = 0 − BREbias planning pokerNegative ranks 102 99.48 10,146.5−2.1170.034−0.095Positive ranks83
 85.04 7058.5Ties 15Total 200BREbias planning poker − BREbias statistical combinationNegative ranks 68 62.14 4225.50−1.8590.063 0.039Positive ranks 75 80.94 6070.50Ties57

Total 200BRE planning poker −BRE statistical combinationNegative ranks 58 66.16 3837−2.6420.008 0.0329Positive ranks85
 75.99 6459Ties 57Total 200Table 4RQ2 results.N Mean rank Sum of ranks Z P-value (2-tailed) Cliff’s deltaTest value = 0 − BREbias statistical combinationNegative ranks 5 29,526 59−1.7170.086 0.50Positive ranks 15 40,734 151Ties 0Total 20Test value = 0 − BREbias planning pokerNegative ranks 8 20,668 68.5−1.3630.173 0.20Positive ranks 12 29,160 141.5Ties 0Total 20BREbias planning poker −BREBias statistical combinationNegative ranks55.00
 25.00−0.2550.799 0.0575Positive ranks 5 6.00 30.00Ties 10Total 20BRE planning poker − BRE statistical combinationNegative ranks529,342
 29−0.1530.878−0.052Positive ranks 5 43,952 26Ties10

Total 20 V. Mahniˇc, T. Hovelja / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2086– 20952093Table 5RQ3 results.N Mean rank Sum of ranks Mann–Whitney U Wilcoxon W Z P-value (2-tailed) Cliff’s deltaBRE students statistical combination − BRE experts statistical combinationStudents200113.28
 22,6551,445,000
 1,655,000 −2.045 0.041 0.277Experts20
 82.75 1655Total 220BRE students planning poker − BRE experts planning pokerStudents 200 113.86 22,772.5 1,327,500 1,537,500 −2.480 0.013 0.335Experts 20 76.88 1537.5Total220
6. Discussion6.1. RQ1: How do planning poker estimates provided by studentteams differ from the statistical combination of their individualestimates?With regard to RQ1, statistical tests presented in Table 3 indi-cate that (1) the statistical combination of individual estimatesprovided by student teams is less optimistic than the planningpoker estimates and (2) that the statistical combination of indi-vidual estimates provided by student teams is more accurate thanthe planning poker estimates. However, the size of effect is verysmall.From this point of view, the results concerning student teamsare in line with ﬁndings reported by Buehler et al. (2005) that bothindividual and group predictions have an optimism bias which isfurther accentuated by group discussion.The results are also in line with Jørgensen’s claim (Jørgensen,2005) that taking a simple average often works as the best methodfor combining estimates. Although the estimates obtained by com-puting a simple average of individual students’ estimates alsotended to be optimistic, they appeared to be more accurate than theestimates that the student teams provided using planning poker.On the other hand, the results of statistical tests in Table 3 arein contrast with the ﬁndings of Moløkken-Østvold et al. (2008) thatgroup discussion through planning poker can reduce optimism insoftware development projects. It seems that in spite of the factthat a typical software estimation task differs from tasks studied inother research areas, factors that promote the successful comple-tion of tasks identiﬁed by Buehler et al. (2005) prevail when lessexperienced software developers are used as estimators.Another possible reason for less accurate planning poker esti-mates provided by student teams lies in the fact that the teamsconsisted of members with the same background and knowledge,thus having a limited ability of exploiting group discussion asa means of identifying forgotten tasks that were not taken intoaccount in initial estimates.A possible explanation of less accurate planning poker estimatesmight also be that Computer Science students treat administra-tive tasks like estimating and planning as less important than othermore technical activities. Consequently, they possibly did not putenough effort in group discussion. In a survey about the importanceof twelve typical Scrum practices for a successful software devel-opment project that we conducted among students at the end ofthe study, the accuracy of planning poker estimates was rankedeleventh, i.e., next to last (Mahnic, 2011).6.2. RQ2: How do planning poker estimates provided byexperienced professionals differ from the statistical combinationof their individual estimates?The planning poker estimates provided by a group of expertstended to be less pessimistic and more accurate than the statisticalcombination of individual estimates. However, the size of effectwas very small and statistical tests found no signiﬁcant differencebetween both kinds of estimates.Although we agree with Moløkken-Østvold et al. (2008) thatgroup discussion through planning poker can identify forgottentasks and increase the initial estimates, the study has shown thatthe lowest and the highest estimates provided during the ﬁrstround of planning poker act as strong anchors representing thelower and the upper boundary of the interval within which thegroup consensus is sought. We found no story having the ﬁnal plan-ning poker estimate outside these boundaries. These ﬁndings leadto the hypothesis that in most cases we cannot expect a signiﬁcantdifference between the planning poker estimates and the statisti-cal combination of individual estimates. However, this hypothesisshould be conﬁrmed or refuted through a larger set of studies.On the other hand, results of statistical tests also disagree withArmstrong’s claim that face-to-face meetings are harmful for deci-sion making (Armstrong, 2006). Considering the fact that planningpoker estimates tended to be slightly better than the statisticalcombination, it seems reasonable to continue the research on groupprocesses in software estimation started by Moløkken-Østvold andJørgensen (2004) and Moløkken-Østvold et al. (2008) and seek spe-cial contexts in which the advantages of planning poker prevail.In order to compare the planning poker estimates to the statis-tical combination of individual estimates more exactly we suggestnot constraining planning poker estimates to speciﬁc predeﬁnedvalues, but allowing an arbitrary integer value representing hoursinstead of ideal days to be assigned to each story. Constrain-ing planning poker estimates to speciﬁc predeﬁned values canincrease the estimation error and skew the comparison betweenboth approaches.6.3. RQ3: How do students’ estimates differ from estimates madeby experienced professionals?Statistical tests revealed a statistically signiﬁcant difference ofmedium effect-size between estimates provided by students andestimates provided by experienced professionals. Both kinds ofestimates provided by the group of experts were statistically signif-icantly more accurate than their counterparts provided by students.Comparison between students and experienced professionalshelped us to explain the mixed results of previous studies analyz-ing the effects of group discussion on estimation accuracy. Resultsof our study indicate that the optimism bias caused by group dis-cussion diminishes or disappears by increasing the expertise ofpeople involved in the group estimation process. It seems that inex-perienced software developers behave similarly to ad hoc groupsperforming estimates of tasks they are not familiar with (like instudies conducted by Buehler et al., 2005), while highly motivatedprofessionals with different project experiences and knowledge areable to take advantages of group discussion to analyze the problemfrom different perspectives, thus increasing both the possibilityto identify forgotten tasks, and awareness that activities may bemore complicated than initially thought (like in study conductedby Moløkken-Østvold et al., 2008). 2094V. Mahniˇc, T. Hovelja / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2086– 20956.4. Study validityThe conclusions of our study are based on the results of sta-tistical tests which (1) exposed statistically signiﬁcant differencesbetween different treatments and (2) measured the size of effect.Non-parametric tests were used since the data did not support thepresumption of a normal distribution. With regard to students theresults have shown statistically signiﬁcant over-optimism of theirplanning poker estimates indicating a shift toward increased opti-mism after the group discussion. However, the magnitude of theshift measured by the effect size was very small. With regard toexperts the statistical analysis has conﬁrmed that their estimates(planning poker and statistical combination) are signiﬁcantly moreaccurate than those provided by students. The size of effect of thedifference was medium (planning poker Cliff’s delta 0.335, statisti-cal combination Cliff’s delta 0.277).In order to assess the impact of possible confounding factors,Grimstad and Jørgensen’s framework for analyzing the accuracyof software estimation (Grimstad and Jørgensen, 2006) was used,which provides a checklist for identifying factors with a potentialimpact on the measured estimation error. The factors are dividedinto three categories: (1) estimation ability factors (expert judg-ment skills, accuracy of an estimation model, skills in selectionof estimation method, skills in the use of a formal estimationmodel), (2) estimation complexity factors (project managementcost control ability, project member skill, client and sub-contractorperformance, completeness and certainty of information, inher-ent project execution complexity, project priorities, ﬂexibility inproduct and process execution), and (3) measurement process fac-tors (inconsistent use of terminology, logging problems, differencebetween planned and actual output/process, measurement selec-tion bias).Considering research questions RQ1 and RQ2 in isolation we canconclude that none of the factors in the checklist, except the esti-mation method used (i.e., the factor we wanted to study), affectedthe results of our study. On the other hand, with regard to researchquestion RQ3 the checklist indicates that besides the expert judg-ment skills (i.e., the factor we wanted to study), the project memberskills and logging problems are the factors that could have affectedthe difference between students’ and experts’ estimates.With regard to the project member skills, Grimstad andJørgensen’s checklist says that it is usually easier to estimate theeffort of skilled developers, while the effort of unskilled develop-ers is less predictable. In our study, this factor possibly decreasedthe accuracy of estimates provided by the group of experts whenestimating the effort of student teams, which resulted in over-pessimistic estimates. However, it did not affect the conclusionsderived from the results of statistical tests. The tests have shownthat the experts’ estimates were still signiﬁcantly more accuratewith medium effect-size than the estimates provided by studentteams (in spite of the possibly decreased accuracy). It can be arguedthat the experts’ estimates would have been even more accuratehad they estimated the effort of skilled project members.With regard to logging problems one might argue that some stu-dent teams did not record their effort conscientiously enough, thusrepresenting less effort than actually spent. However, this prob-lem also did not affect the ﬁnal conclusions. On the contrary, theassumption that the amount of effort actually spent was greaterthan recorded additionally emphasizes the over-optimism of stu-dents’ estimates and reduces the error of experts’ estimates.In order to increase construct validity, ten teams were studiedworking on the same problem. All teams estimated the same set ofuser stories; therefore, their estimates are directly comparable. Apossible inconsistency of estimates in case of multiple estimations(Grimstad and Jørgensen, 2007) was eliminated by assuring thateach story was estimated only once using planning poker, while thestatistical combination was computed automatically as a mean ofindividual estimates given in the ﬁrst round. Additionally, in con-trast to Moløkken-Østvold et al. (2008) planning poker was usedfor estimating user stories for which it is most commonly recom-mended (Cohn, 2005). The size of user stories was appropriate forestimation, ranging from 0.5 to 8 story points.In spite of the fact that the study was conducted within theframework of a capstone software project, every effort was madeto increase its external validity by simulating an industrial environ-ment as closely as possible. User stories were deﬁned on the basis ofthe student records information system that is actually used at theUniversity of Ljubljana and the students were required to producefully tested code that could survive the encounter with end users.Nevertheless, the main threat to external validity remains that onlyone project was used and only one group of experts studied. Theexperts did not estimate their own work, but the most likely effortof student teams. On the basis of statistical analysis, the results canbe generalized only to students of the last year of Computer Scienceworking on similar projects that require the development of admin-istrative information systems, while more studies are needed onreal projects of different size and complexity in order to generalizethe ﬁndings to industry.Since the planning poker estimation technique – as proposedby Grenning (2002) and Cohn (2005) –requires
 the developmentteam to estimate their own effort, additional factors regarding theteam composition should be considered. It is important to takeinto account not only motivation (Brown, 2000) and diversity ofknowledge (Surowiecki, 2004), but also how the mix of experiencedand inexperienced team members working on the same projectaffects the accuracy of estimates. Does the over-optimism of inex-perienced developers prevail or does the knowledge and ability ofexperienced ones to discuss all the implications, identify forgot-ten tasks, and expose different alternatives lead to more realisticestimates? It would also be interesting to further investigate howthe lowest and highest estimates provided during the ﬁrst round ofplanning poker affect the interval within which group consensus issought.Our study provides a reasonable explanation of mixed results ofprevious research on group estimation processes, indicating thatplanning poker can be useful when used by experienced profes-sionals who are able to take advantages of the follow-up roundswithin planning poker sessions for discussing issues that affectthe estimate of the most likely effort. Considering the aforemen-tioned limitations, the results of our study can be used togetherwith other studies as a stepping stone to further research, narrow-ing the focus to more experienced expert groups and searching forcontexts where planning poker improves estimating accuracy byincreasing commitment, sharing estimating expertise, promotingteam growth, and reﬁning solution understanding.7. ConclusionsIn spite of the fact that planning poker is widely used for estimat-ing user stories in agile software development methods, there arealmost no empirical studies investigating this technique in moredetail. We wanted to ﬁll this gap by conducting a study similarto that of Moløkken-Østvold et al. (2008), but involving severalteams working on the same project and using user stories (nottasks) as the basic estimation unit. Additionally, the study designallowed for the possibility of comparing the estimates providedby students to estimates provided by experienced professionals,thus making it possible to clarify contradictory results of previ-ous studies dealing with the impact of group discussion on theaccuracy of effort estimates. While Buehler et al. (2005) found thatgroup discussion made individual optimistic estimates even more V. Mahniˇc, T. Hovelja / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 2086– 20952095optimistic, Moløkken-Østvold et al. (2008) tried to prove that theuse of planning poker in estimating software development effortreduces over-optimism and provides more accurate estimates thanthe statistical combination of individual experts’ estimates.The results of our study clarify ﬁndings of both aforementionedstudies by showing that the optimism bias caused by group dis-cussion diminishes or disappears by increasing the expertise ofpeople involved in the group estimation process. Student teamsexhibited similar behavior as the ad hoc groups studied by Buehleret al. (2005), providing planning poker estimates that were statisti-cally signiﬁcantly more optimistic than the statistical combinationof their individual estimates. On the other hand, the analysis ofexperts’ estimates yielded similar results as Moløkken-Østvoldet al. (2008). The bias toward over-optimism disappeared and theplanning poker estimates tended to be more accurate then the sta-tistical combination. Although it was not statistically conﬁrmedthat planning poker estimates are more accurate, it seems reason-able to continue research on group processes in software estimationin order to ﬁnd contexts in which the advantages of planning pokerprevail over the statistical combination of individual estimates.ReferencesArmstrong, J.S., 2006. How to make better forecasts and decisions: avoid face-to-facemeetings. The International Journal of Applied Forecasting 5, 3–15.Beck, K., Andres, C., 2005. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change, sec-ond ed. Addison-Wesley.Boehm, B.W., 1981. Software Engineering Economics. Prentice-Hall.Brown, B.B., 1968. Delphi Process: A Methodology Used for the Elicitation of Opinionsof Experts, P-3925. The RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.Brown, R., 2000. Group Processes, second ed. Blackwell Publishing.Buehler, R., Messervey, D., Grifﬁn, D., 2005. Collaborative planning and prediction:does group discussion affect optimistic biases in time estimation? Organiza-tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes 97, 47–63.Cliff, N., 1996. Ordinal Methods for Behavioral Data Analysis. Lawrence ErlbaumAssociates.Cohen, J., 1988. Statistical Power Analysis for the Behavioral Sciences, second ed.Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.Cohn, M., 2004. User Stories Applied for Agile Software Development. Addison-Wesley.Cohn, M., 2005. Agile Estimating and Planning. Prentice Hall PTR.Dalkey, N.C., 1969. The Delphi Method: An Experimental Study of Group Opinion,RM-5888-PR. The RAND Corporation, Santa Monica, CA.Darlington, R.B., 2011. Tests on the center of a distribution; The Wilcoxon signed-ranks test. <http://comp9.psych.cornell.edu/Darlington/index.htm#center>(last accessed 21.09.11).DeMarco, T., 1982. Controlling Software Projects. Yourdon Press.Fenton, N.E., Pﬂeeger, S.L., 1997. Software Metrics. PWS Publishing Company.Foss, T., Stensrud, E., Kitchenham, B., Myrtveit, I., 2003. A simulation study of themodel evaluation criterion MMRE. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering29 (11), 985–995.Furulund, K.M., 2007. Empirical research on software effort estimation accuracy.Master Thesis. University of Oslo, Department of Informatics.Grenning, J., 2002. Planning poker or how to avoid analysis paralysis while releaseplanning. <http://www.renaissancesoftware.net/ﬁles/articles/PlanningPoker-v1.1.pdf> (last accessed 21.09.11).Grimstad, S., Jørgensen, M., 2006. A framework for the analysis of software costestimation accuracy. In: ISESE’06, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, pp. 58–65.Grimstad, S., Jørgensen, M., 2007. Inconsistency of expert judgment-based estimatesof software development effort. Journal of Systems and Software 80, 1770–1777.Haugen, N.C., 2006. An empirical study of using planning poker for user story esti-mation. In: Proceedings of AGILE 2006 Conference (AGILE’06), Minneapolis, MN,USA, pp. 23–34.Hess, M.R., Kromrey, J.D., 2004. Robust conﬁdence intervals for effect sizes: acomparative study of Cohen’s d and Cliff’s delta under non-normality andheterogeneous variances. In: Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of theAmerican Educational Research Association, San Diego, April 12–16, 2004,< http://www.coedu.usf.edu/main/departments/me/documents/cohen.pdf, >(last accessed 25.01.12).Hughes, R., 1996. Expert judgment as an estimating method. Information and Soft-ware Technology 38, 67–75.Jørgensen, M., 2004. A review of studies on expert estimation of software develop-ment effort. Journal of Systems and Software 70, 37–60.Jørgensen, M., 2005. Practical guidelines for expert-judgment-based software effortestimation. IEEE Software 22, 57–63.Jørgensen, M., 2007. A critique of how we measure and interpret the accuracy ofsoftware development effort estimation. In: Keung, J. (Ed.), 1st InternationalWorkshop on Software Productivity Analysis and Cost Estimation. InformationProcessing Society of Japan, pp. 15–22.Jørgensen, M., Boehm, B., 2009. Software development effort estimation: formalmodels or expert judgement? IEEE Software 26, 14–19.Jørgensen, M., Shepperd, M., 2007. A systematic review of software developmentcost estimation studies. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 33 (1),33–53.Kitchenham, B.A., Pickard, L.M., MacDonell, S.G., Shepperd, M.J., 2001. What accuracystatistics really measure. IEE Proceedings – Software 148 (3), 81–85.Ledesma, R.D., Macbeth, G., Cortada de Kohan, N., 2009. Computing effect size mea-sures with ViSta – the visual statistics system. Tutorials in Quantitative Methodsfor Psychology 5 (1), 25–34.Linstone, H.A., Turoff, M., 1975. The Delphi Method: Techniques and Application.Addison-Wesley.Lowry, R., 2011. Concepts and applications of inferential statistics.<http://faculty.vassar.edu/lowry/webtext.html> (last accessed 21.09.11).Mahnic, V., 2011. A case study on agile estimating and planning using Scrum. Elec-tronics and Electrical Engineering 5 (111), 123–128.Mahnic, V., 2012. A capstone course on agile software development using Scrum.IEEE Transactions on Education 55 (1), 99–106.Mann, H.B., Whitney, D.R., 1947. On a test of whether one of two random variablesis stochastically larger than the other. Annals of Mathematical Statistics 18 (1),50–60.McConnell, S., 2006. Software Estimation: Demistifying the Black Art. MicrosoftPress.Miyazaki, Y., Takanou, A., Nozaki, H., Nakagawa, N., Okada, K., 1991. Method to esti-mate parameter values in software prediction models. Information and SoftwareTechnology 33, 239–243.Moløkken, K., Jørgensen, M., 2003. A review of surveys on software effort estimation.In: Proceedings of the 2003 International Symposium on Empirical SoftwareEngineering (ISESE’03), Roman Castles (Rome), Italy, pp. 223–230.Moløkken-Østvold, K., Jørgensen, M., 2004. Group processes in software effort esti-mation. Empirical Software Engineering 9, 315–334.Moløkken-Østvold, K., Jørgensen, M., 2005. A comparison of software projectoverruns – ﬂexible vs. sequential development models. IEEE Transactions onSoftware Engineering 31, 754–766.Moløkken-Østvold, K., Furulund, K.M., 2007. The relationship between customercollaboration and software project overruns. In: Proceedings of the Agile 2007Conference, Washington, DC, USA, pp. 72–83.Moløkken-Østvold, K., Haugen, N.C., 2007. Combining estimates with planning poker– an empirical study. In: Proceedings of the 2007 Australian Software Engineer-ing Conference (ASWEC’07), Melbourne, Australia, pp. 349–358.Moløkken-Østvold, K., Haugen, N.C., Benestad, H.C., 2008. Using planning pokerfor combining expert estimates in software projects. Journal of Systems andSoftware 81, 2106–2117.Rowe, G., Wright, G., 1999. The Delphi technique as a forecasting tool: issues andanalysis. International Journal of Forecasting 15, 353–375.Shepperd, M., Cartwright, M., Kadoda, G., 2000. On building prediction systems forsoftware engineers. Empirical Software Engineering 5 (3), 175–182.Schwaber, K., Beedle, M., 2002. Agile Software Development with Scrum. PrenticeHall.Schwaber, K., 2004. Agile Project Management with Scrum. Microsoft Press.Stellman, A., Greene, J., 2005. Applied Software Project Management. O’Reilly.Surowiecki, J., 2004. The Wisdom of Crowds. Doubleday.Wiegers, K.E., 2000. Stop promising miracles. Software Development Magazine 8(2).Wilcoxon, F., 1945. Individual comparisons by ranking methods. Biometrics Bulletin1 (6), 80–83.Viljan Mahniˇc received the BSc, MSc, and PhD degrees in computer science fromthe University of Ljubljana, Slovenia, in 1978, 1981, and 1990, respectively. He isan Associate Professor of Computer Science and Head of the Software EngineeringLaboratory, Faculty of Computer and Information Science, University of Ljubljana.His teaching and research interests include agile software development methods,software process improvement, empirical software engineering, and software mea-surement.Tomaˇz Hovelja received the BSc, MSc, and PhD degrees from the Faculty of Eco-nomics, University of Ljubljana, Slovenia. He is employed as a teaching assistant atthe Faculty of Computer and Information Science at the University of Ljubljana. Hisresearch areas are social, economic and organizational factors of IT deployment inenterprises and IT projects success criteria.