 The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u rn al hom epage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssCollaborative prioritization of architectural concernsLars Paretoa,,Anna
 Börjesson Sandbergb,1,Peter
 Erikssonb,1,Staffan
 Ehnebomb,1aChalmers University of Technology and University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg SE-412 96, SwedenbEricsson AB, Stockholm 164 83, Swedena r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 10 January 2012Received in revised form 18 April 2012Accepted 23 April 2012Available online 6 May 2012Keywords:
Requirement prioritizationSoftware architecture documentationSoftware architecture evolutiona b s t r a c tEfﬁcient architecture work involves balancing the degree of architecture documentation with attentionto needs, costs, agility and other factors. This paper presents a method for prioritizing architectural con-cerns in the presence of heterogeneous stakeholder groups in large organizations that need to evolveexisting architecture. The method involves enquiry, analysis, and deliberation using collaborative andanalytical techniques. Method outcomes are action principles directed to managers, and assessment ofuser needs directed to architects, along with evidence. The method results from 4 years of action researchat Ericsson AB with the purpose of adding missing views to architecture documentation and removingsuperﬂuous ones. It is illustrated on a case where 29 senior engineers and managers within Ericssonprioritized 37 architectural concerns areas to arrive at 8 action principles, 5 prioritized improvementareas, and 24 improvement suggestions. Feedback from the organization is that the method has beeneffective in prioritizing architectural concerns, that data collection and analysis is more extensive com-pared to traditional prioritization practices, but that extensive analysis seems inevitable in architectureimprovement work.© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionArchitecture documentation in large product developmentprojects is, to an increasing degree, playing the role as a boundaryobject – a shared information resources used in different ways bydifferent communities (Star and Griesemer, 1989). With contem-porary practices, architecture documentation not only supportsthe daily work of architects and designers, but of requirementengineers, developers, testers, certiﬁcation authorities, project-,product-, quality-managers and other roles whose work dependson architecture knowledge. Ideally, architecture documentationidentiﬁes the speciﬁc information needs of all of its users and pro-vides architectural views that speak to each user community, sothat overall work efﬁciency is optimized. In practice, being a taxingactivity, architecture documentation is conﬁned to the informa-tion needs most important – typically those with highest impacton project risk and cost (Fairbanks, 2010). Lower ranked needs areinstead covered by informal coded communication (e.g., auxiliarydesign documents, source code, wikis, minutes, and correspon-dence) or uncoded communication (e.g., meetings, and phone calls),with the underlying – and quite plausible – assumption that, inCorresponding author. Tel.: +46 31 772 6040.E-mail addresses: pareto@chalmers.se (L. Pareto), anna.sandberg@ericsson.com(A.B. Sandberg), peter.r.eriksson@ericsson.com (P. Eriksson),staffan.ehnebom@ericsson.com (S. Ehnebom).1Tel.: +46 31 719 0000.many cases, informal or uncoded communication is good enough,and sometimes even more cost effective than formal, coded com-munication.However, prioritizing information needs with respect to impor-tance is a non-trivial problem. First of all, information needs changethroughout a product’s lifecycle: some artefacts are critical in earlyphases, but lose importance in later phases, e.g., analysis models;information needs also change as new technologies, platforms, andprocesses come and go during a product’s lifecycle. Secondly, infor-mation needs in large product development projects are so plentifuland heterogeneous that no single individual can comprehend allspeciﬁc needs; for instance, telecom equipment projects involvehardware-, software-, mechanical-, and systems-engineering dis-ciplines, each of which has several sub-disciplines, e.g., signalprocessing, multicore computing, fault tolerance and so on. In thethird place, the degree to which speciﬁc roles contribute to theproject’s overall success, i.e., the economic importance of speciﬁcroles, is in most organizations not well understood and not easilyquantiﬁable.The objective of the research presented in this paper is amethod for prioritization of architectural concerns held by archi-tectural description stakeholders within enterprise-scale productdeveloping organizations. By stakeholders, we mean, in thiscontext, individuals with interests in architecture knowledge. Byconcerns we mean speciﬁc interests rooted in needs associatedwith a stakeholders role; by architectural descriptions, we meanarchitecture documentation composed out of models providingviews from several viewpoints By enterprise-scale, we mean that0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2012.04.054 1972L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994a large number of distinct communities (typically more than 50)are involved in product development.The research is rooted in a situation within Ericsson’s businessunit for telecom network equipment. In 2008, one of its design unitsexperienced a need for stronger methods for viewpoint engineering– systematic application of engineering methods (e.g. requirementsengineering, iterative prototyping, end-user validation, and man-aged evolution) to assure the ﬁtness for purpose of architecturedocumentation in its usage situations. Viewpoint engineering hadalready been applied for several years, but the methods applied didnot quite scale to the size of the supported organization, and theteam responsible for the architecture documentation design hadran into several challenges, such as attending to the needs of allcommunities, communicating intended ways of working, gettingacceptance from all stakeholder groups, and managing the evolu-tion of the architecture documentation.The root cause of these challenges ﬁrst appeared to be the dif-ﬁculty of eliciting all needs, but once that problem was solved,prioritization stood out as the paramount challenge. When con-cerns were documented, and put next to each other on paper,they just appeared as vast pool of good ideas (Armour, 2011),many of which would require research to realize, and of unclearrelative importance. The problem was, essentially, a requirementsprioritization problem (i.e., selection of which elicited candidaterequirements that should be included in a product’s requirements)with the architecture documentation, including infrastructure andprocesses for working with it, as the speciﬁed product.Even though requirements prioritization is as a well-studiedproblem, supported by a wealth of methods (Berander, 2007), con-cern prioritization has turned out to have special characteristicscalling for a new method: concern prioritization is an instance ofrequirements prioritization from the technical perspective, but notfrom the business and organizational perspectives. From a busi-ness perspective, the two problems differ considerably: traditionalrequirements prioritization methods consider business criticalproduct requirements held by paying customers, whereas concernprioritization considers requirements on internal documentationheld by internal, non-paying customers. From an organizationalperspective, the problems differ too: development of innovativeproducts with attention to customer or market needs is a coreactivity with high inﬂuence on organization; software architecturedocumentation, however, is a subsidiary activity that, if recognizedat all by upper management, has little bearing on a company’s orga-nization and strategic investments. In other words, attention tointernal efﬁciency, timeliness, and product quality is important fora company’s business, but not as important as attention to marketneeds – which the histories of Motorola, Nokia and other companiessadly tell. This difference in business importance has far reachingconsequences on how much process support, resources, and man-agement attention the concern prioritization problem may get inan organization and in the end on how concern prioritization canbe organized.Established prioritization methods can be divided into quantita-tive analytical methods, e.g., AHP (Saaty, 1990), qualitative analyticalmethods, e.g., grouping (Berander and Andrews, 2005) and collabo-rative methods (Karydas and Gifun, 2006; Regnell et al., 2001). Meth-ods differ with respect to degree of rationality, formality, granular-ity, ease of use, stakeholder involvement, scalability, duration, andother factors (Berander, 2007), thus choice of prioritization methodis a contingency problem, where each method has its sweet zone.Choice of method inevitably involves trade-offs with respect to cost,validity, completeness, accuracy and other factors. The methodsought in this paper is a pragmatic method that is feasible, yetgood enough, for concern prioritization in large product developingorganizations. The method presented is a mixed methods methodthat combines qualitative, quantitative, and analytical techniquesqualitative- and quantitative analytical techniques with collabo-rative techniques to improve architecture documentation in thedirection of an overall business goal, with a balance between cost,completeness and other factors, adequate in an industrial context.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: we intro-duce a theoretical framework (Section 2) and our research design(Section 3); we present our out results which include a concerninventorying method (Section 4), a concern prioritization method(Section 6), and examples of applications of these methods in anindustrial context (Sections 5 and 7). We then discuss validity ofthe results (Section 8), the method and its qualities (Section 9),related work (Section 10), and future work (Section 11). The paperends with our conclusions (Section 12).2. Theoretical frameworkMethods research is served by a characterization of what prob-lem the method solves, the context in which the method willbe applied, and desirable qualities of the method. The followingsections address these needs: Section 2.1 deﬁnes the concern pri-oritization problem; Section 2.2 describes a conceptual model forthe prioritization method’s context; Section 2.3 presents a qualitymodel for prioritization methods.2.1. Concern prioritizationOur view of architecture documentation is the one deﬁnedby IEEE 1471 – ISO 42010 (ANSI/IEEE Std, 2007); this standardfor architectural descriptions recognizes relationships between asystem, its stakeholders, its architecture, the description of thearchitecture, and a few auxiliary entities (environment, mission,and rationale). More importantly for this paper, it deﬁnes archi-tectural descriptions, concerns, views, and the notion of coverage. Inessence: an architectural description is a collection of products todocument architecture; concerns are those interests which pertainto the system’s development, its operation or any other aspects thatare critical or otherwise important to one or more stakeholders; aview is a representation of a whole system from the perspective ofa related set of concerns; a model is a formal structure that mayparticipate in one or more views.An architectural description is by nature selective: its viewscover some concerns, but ignores other. What the architecture doc-umentation covers depends on its purposes, what can be feasiblymodeled, what is already present in other models, what is clearlyvisible in system’s realization anyway, the costs of modeling, andon the beneﬁts that modeling brings.Concern prioritization is the act by which an organization selectswhich concerns the views of an architectural description shouldcover. For instance, consider the concern algorithm modeling. Someprojects applying concern prioritization will ﬁnd modeling of thisconcern un-necessary, as program code in a high level languageis regarded a sufﬁciently abstract description of algorithms; otherprojects will ﬁnd modeling of algorithms essentials, as incorrectbehaviors may have disastrous effects (such as in automatedtrading).2.2. Concern prioritization contextFactors inﬂuential to our concern prioritization method aregiven by the conceptual framework in Fig. 1. (See for exampleMiles and Huberman (1994) for an introduction to conceptualframeworks.) The central improvement object is the architecturaldescription (AD). The AD provides views that do or do not coverarchitectural concerns important to stakeholders using it. Chiefarchitects are stakeholders with technical power to deﬁne what L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 19941973Stakeholders ¥ conc erns
Architectural Description ¥ views Chief architects ¥ technical  pow er 
¥ conc erns 
Specifies Uses Regulates Regulates Uses Managers ¥econo
 mic power 
¥ organizati onal power 
RegulatesFig. 1. The prioritization method’s context.Key: Conceptual framework notation (Miles and Huberman, 1994).views the AD should contain, and that specify this. Managers reg-ulate the ways in which AD is used by stakeholders, and have theeconomic and organizational power to evolve the AD and its asso-ciated ways of working.2.3. Prioritization method qualitiesQuality attributes of concern prioritization methods, of rele-vance to our design, include the following: cost is how resourcedemanding the application of the method is; involvement is thedegree to which the method involves the stakeholders best pre-pared to make decisions; interference is the degree to which themethod disturbs and taxes the organization; prerequisites is thedegree to which the method requires special training in statistics,or other ﬁelds; accessibility is the degree to which method out-comes are accessible to decision makers; rationality is the degreeto which decision making relies on rational judgment; intuitivity isthe degree to which decision making relies on intuitive judgment;correctness is the degree to which the resulting prioritization canbe trusted; validity is the degree to which method outcomes reﬂectthe ideal prioritization.A method’s qualities vary with the situation. For instance, quan-titative prioritization techniques excel on validity in situationswhere all factors of relevance to the prioritization, as well as theirrelative importance and dependencies, can be modeled and mea-sured; they may lead to invalid results – and false conﬁdencethanks to their scientiﬁc appeal – in situations where factors andrelationships are not clearly understood or accurately measurable.Collaborative methods have high correctness if the parties havedeep understanding of the domain, necessary social skills, and arecommitted to a common prioritization objective; they have lowcorrectness in situations with uninitiated members, hidden agen-das, or battles of prestige.3. Research designWe approached our method design problem through actionresearch: during a period of four years, the authors explored howdiscovery and prioritization of architectural concerns could be,feasibly, organized in a large product developing organization.The following sections motivate the choice of action research, asresearch strategy (Section 3.1), present the research site (Section3.2), and outline the activities that led us to our proposed method(Section 3.3).3.1. Motivation of action research as strategyAction research (Lewin, 1946) is a research strategy in whichthe researchers are themselves involved in the context of theinvestigation (rather than being passive observers). Our choice ofaction research was due to the organizational context of our study.Engagement of the studied site was conditioned on continuousalignment with local improvement goals and impact before the-ory building. The context of the study was complex, and learningabout the context and the problem part of the research. The actionresearch strategy is designed to support improvement under suchconditions (Susman and Evered, 1978) and has proved itself efﬁ-cient for software architecture improvement before (Christensenet al., 2008). At the site, action research was a preferred strat-egy with a good track record (Borjesson and Mathiassen, 2004;Sandberg et al., 2011).3.2. Research siteOur research site was a software design division within EricssonAB, a major supplier of telecommunication infrastructure equip-ment and services on several international markets. To motivatethe need for our method, we will describe this division from thebusiness, architecture, process and organizational perspectives (asof the BAPO model (Linden et al., 2007)) and its challenges.3.2.1. BusinessThe division is responsible for the software part of a base sta-tion subsystem. Base stations are essential parts of mobile networkswith thousands of units being needed to cover a country. (See e.g.Kaaranen (2005) for an introduction to mobile communication net-works.) The operational lifetime of a base station is 15 years ormore. Throughout a base station’s lifecycle, customers (telecomoperators or service providers) expect continuous product evo-lution, including new software features, hardware upgrades, andcompatibility with evolving telecom standards. Change requestsand trouble reports are frequent, and must be responded topromptly by any actor on the market. Frequent software upgradesare expected. Annual downtime must not exceed a few minutes, orpenalties apply.3.2.2. ArchitectureThe division studied uses model driven development (MDD).Ericsson has a long tradition in this: the company’s use of soft-ware models dates back to 1967 and the AKE switch project(Jacobson, 1992). Ericsson contributed to development of SDL(Rockstrom, 1982) during the 1970s, and applied SDL extensivelyduring the 1980s; use-case modeling was pioneered by Ericssonin the 1980s (Jacson, 1987); in the 1990s, Ericsson was an earlyadopter of RUP (Börjesson, 2006). Over the last decade, manyprojects have implemented model based software engineering andmodel driven development. Model based practices have graduallyreplaced document based practices which means that architecturedocumentation consist of blends of architecture descriptions andinformal technical documentation (i.e. architecture documentationnot relying on models).The software developed by the division is embedded soft-ware, subject to real-time constraints (response time, throughput,and space bounds), compatibility constraints (with respect to realtime operating systems and in-house developed platforms), andspecial run-time requirements (monitoring, conﬁguration, upgrad-ing, and rollbacks). The software runs on an in-house developed,multi-processor platform, which involves hardware (digital signalprocessors, ﬁeld programmable gate arrays, and ordinary proces-sors) as well as software (operating systems, protocol stacks, anddevice drivers).The architecture documentation consists of a system modeland several design models. The system model integrates softwarerequirement-, design-, and implementation models and also arte-facts on other forms such as informal diagrams, text documents, 1974L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994spreadsheets, and text-based formal speciﬁcations. Integration ofthe system model and the design models is restricted to interfaces:software subsystems must adhere to interfaces formally speciﬁedby the system model, but may be realized with any MDD tool.(This is because not all MDD tools support digital signal proces-sors, multicore processors, and other kinds of special hardwareused in base stations, so variety is needed.) Hardware models arenot integrated in the system model; rather, the system modelincludes descriptive models of hardware aspects relevant for soft-ware design. The system model is developed with due attention tothe division’s many processes (e.g., design-, development-, testing-, maintenance-, project management, and product documentationprocesses) and attention to needs to communicate with other divi-sions involved in the product development. Each division has theirown design models, which must be held consistent with the systemmodel.Other kinds of models are used by units working within otherengineering disciplines: in-house notations and domain speciﬁcnotations of the kind prevalent in telecom standards are used bysystem engineers to deﬁne telecom networks, telecom nodes, andservices; block diagrams and Mealy/Moore state machines are usedby hardware engineers for design, implementation and descriptionof hardware.3.2.3. ProcessIn the division, requirements and design work proceeds alongthe lines of RUP, while implementation is done primarily usingMDD, with occasional use of code centric development. Textual usecases and supplementary requirement speciﬁcations are used forsoftware requirements modeling. UML is used for system design,system architecture work, software architecture work, detailedsoftware design, software implementation, software testing, andsystems testing. Where UML is used, it is often complementedwith text based formal notations (e.g., signal and protocol speciﬁca-tions), with informal text-based documents (for aspects not easilyexpressed in standard UML such as non-functional requirements),and with tabular speciﬁcations (typically used for conﬁgurationinformation).3.2.4. OrganizationThe studied division belongs to Ericsson’s research and devel-opment (R&D) organization which, in addition to base stations,develops message routers, and various support nodes for severalgenerations of mobile networks (2G, 3G, and 4G). The division isresponsible for both software and hardware design, although thelatter is restricted to special purpose boards. The hardware platform(a general purpose cabinet with boards and associated software) isnot owned by the division, but developed and produced by a sep-arate division, and used by the studied division and several otherdivisions: the platform must satisfy the needs of all divisions usingit, i.e., not only the needs of the one considered in this study.The division has a matrix organization in which, roughly,verticals are responsible for knowledge related to a speciﬁcproduct generation, and horizontals responsible for delivering andmaintaining speciﬁc products. The design unit has approximately100 engineers situated on a single location; the division is muchlarger and distributed over several locations. Roles with stake inarchitecture documentation include system engineers, systemarchitects, chief architects, software architects, designers, interfaceresponsible, product responsible, developers, and product doc-umentation responsible, unit testers, integration testers, systemtesters, team leaders, division managers and several other roles.3.2.5. ChallengesIn 2008, one project within the division, experienced consis-tency problems between the system model and their design modeldue to lack of architectural views at the subsystem level. AlthoughUML-based architecture- and implementation design models wereused by the unit, these were insufﬁciently aligned with the systemmodel, which caused an abstraction gap left to designers to bridge;this was done in ad hoc ways and resulted in consistency andproject predictability problems. A parallel project with longstand-ing documentation challenges (Pareto Boquist, 2006) reported onsimilar experiences. The shared experience of these two projectsled to research on concern coverage (Pareto et al., 2009, 2011), andon the requirements on architecture descriptions serving as bound-ary objects between designers and system engineers (Pareto et al.,2010). These works recognized the importance of facilitating view-point engineering.In 2009, a 3rd project implemented streamline development(Tomaszewski et al., 2008) – an in-house process for lean and agilesoftware development in the large. Despite major modernizationsto design documentation practices, this project experienced that“lack of a clear architecture” added signiﬁcant lead time to projects,in particular for legacy systems. Methods for prioritizing architec-tural concerns – with the objective of removing superﬂuous onesand retaining only those most important for speed and throughput– was seen as a promising complement to streamline develop-ment, and led to the work described in this paper. In particular,the hope was that the method would helpful in increasing speed bypinpointing cases of over documentation.3.3. Action research cyclesFive action research cycles concerned with viewpoint engi-neering were carried out (Fig. 2): one concerned with concerninventorying (Cycle0); four with prioritization (Cycle1–4). Cyclesfollowed the canonical steps of action research described byDickens and Watkins (1999): diagnosing, planning acting, andreﬂecting. Two cycles (Cycle2and Cycle3) occurred in parallel, astwo researchers focussed on different questions during the period.The durations of and questions addressed by each cycle are shownin Fig. 2, while activities and results of these are outlined in Table 1.4. Results – concern inventorying methodOur concern prioritization method depends on availability ofsite speciﬁc taxonomy of architectural concerns. This sectiondescribes a method for construction of such taxonomy, which werefer to as concern inventorying. The method is an abridgement ofthe activities carried out in action research Cycle0described inTable 1. We ﬁrst give an outline of the method (Section 4.1) andthen proceed to speciﬁc techniques therein (Sections 4.2–4.7).Cycle4tCycle12011  2010  Cycle0Cycl e2|3
Concern Inventorying Concern Prioritization 200 8   20
 09  May                   Jan                      Sep 
              Dec       Jan
Q0  What con
 cerns
  are important to
  AD users
 ?  Q1  How strong
  ar
 e the
  force
 s among
  AD
  users
  to
  inc
 rease
 /decr
 ease 
document
 ation
  in each area
  of conce
 rn?  
Q2  What area
 s sho
 uld  we r
 eco
 mmend
  manag
 ers to improve?
  Q3  What improve
 ments shou
 ld we
  reco
 mmend fo
 r thes e area
 s? 
Q4  How shou
 ld we
  com
 municat
 e recommendatio
 ns to  managers? 
Fig. 2. Action research cycles (left) and the questions addressed in each cycle (right). L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 19941975Table 1Action research cycles and the steps taken in each cycle.Step Cycle0– concern inventoryingDiagnosingNeed
 to add missing views to AD.PlanningPlanned
 interview study to compare “mental views” among key stakeholders with the views provided by current AD.Acting Interviewed 16 stakeholders (architects, designers, testers) about missing views. Identiﬁed 142 concerns; structured these in taxonomy with 8 mainareas and 37 sub areas. Assessed coverage of current AD; found it to be 26% of the concerns identiﬁed.Reﬂecting The set of concerns important to designers is vast and many faceted. What concerns AD should cover is controversial. Some roles suffer fromunder-documented concerns, while other produce documentation not used. Systematic viewpoint engineering (to identify, prioritize, and realizeviews for concerns) is needed. What business drivers that should drive prioritization are unclear: is it quality, cost, efﬁciency, automation,maintainability or some weighted combination of indicators?Step Cycle1– concern prioritizationDiagnosingNeed
 to understand what concerns to increase and decrease documentation for, to improve speed.Planning Planned and piloted a survey study to assess current AD-coverage of stakeholder concerns and whether concerns are perceived as under- orover-documented, given that the success indicator is speed. The pilot revealed several challenges in survey design: in limiting concern descriptions to“a few pages”; in keeping questions few and simple; in probing for concrete suggestions.ActingExecuted
 survey. Invited 50 senior R&D engineers (architects, designers, line managers, project managers, and process engineers), out of which 29responded: 68% from a >1000 person base station software project; 12% and 4% from two >100 person telecom support node projects; 12% and 4%from corporate concern and other functions. The survey was announced as difﬁcult, but rewarding; respondents reported spending ½ a day on it.Analyzed survey answers using graphical statistical techniques. Studied change forces across projects only to ﬁnd occasional differences. Inferred 37hypothetical inferences from statistics. Presented statistics and inferences in a neutral way to respondents for feedback in a ½ day workshop.Documented responses in the form of reﬂections and observations. In the workshop, 35 out of 37 inferences were approved (after minor changes).Reﬂecting The survey and the workshop worked well in triggering reﬂections on current ways of working, in eliciting improvement ideas, and in prioritizingareas in need for improvement. To the dissatisfaction of some informants, the survey did not work so well in recognizing cases of overdocumentation: in the statistics, cases of over-documentation drowned in a generally positive attitude towards increasing documentation. Werealized that our term “increase documentation” captured all kinds of changes to design documentation: improved documentation, differentdocumentation, and even removal of redundancy from documentation.A surprising observation during data collection was hesitance among architects to take the survey: while designers contributed rich amounts of data,several architects found questions “difﬁcult to make anything meaningful out of”. In the end, also the hesitant architects expressed interests inparticipating in analysis and deliberation activities, thus partly acknowledged the approach. A possible explanation is that of Farenhorst (2009):architects, in general, do not like the act of codiﬁcation of architectural knowledge, while codiﬁed knowledge ranks #1 on their wish lists.Step Cycle2– concern prioritizationDiagnosing Need to better understand what kinds of increases/decreases and other changes the informants had in mind. Need for a theory to analyze, compare,and discuss different kinds of changes to AD.Planning Planned a qualitative analysis of the answers to the open survey questions. These had been included to enquiry concrete improvement suggestions,but answers now stood out as a rich data source for theory building.Acting Coded and categorized survey answers to arrive at 144 concrete suggestions on how AD should be changed to increase speed. Structured suggestedchanges in a taxonomy recognizing 13 kinds of increases and 9 kinds of decreases. Observed that increase categories and decrease categories weredifferent, and that taking averages of increase and decrease forces is misleading. Updated statistics to distinguish increases from decreasesaccordingly.Reﬂecting Increase- and decrease-forces among informants are of different nature, and should not be set against each other. Concern prioritization is an actwithout ﬁrm boundaries: one may bring out concerns in most (and least) need of attention, but to deﬁne precise thresholds of what to attend or notattend to is beyond what can be feasibly modeled in this context. The techniques employed are intuitive, do not require special training in statistics,and should be amenable to most managers.Step Cycle3– concern prioritizationDiagnosing Need to cluster concerns in groups to make results communicable to upper managers.PlanningPlanned
 a qualitative study of commonalities of concern areas subject to high (or low) change forces.Acting Explored several notions for grouping concern areas in statistical plots. Developed a model recognizing both high and low forces to increase ordecrease documentation. Deﬁned a valuation function, and used it to deﬁne zones. Mapped concern areas to zones. Iteratively validated displays withinsiders, and adjusted zones until a suitably large list of prioritized areas was found.Reﬂecting For results to lead to action, desired changes to AD need to be articulated at “executive level”: options should be few, concise, free from technicaldetail, and factual.Step Cycle4– concern prioritizationDiagnosing Need to explain prioritization results to upper managers at a higher level of abstraction to make impact.Planning Identiﬁed variables that managers have intuition for; showed relationships between these and desired improvements.Acting Hypothesized 5 variables plausibly correlated to prioritized areas. Assessed variables using a survey sent to two key informants. Studied correlationbetween these variables and forces to increase or decrease documentation; found 3 out of 5 variables to be correlated. Formulated action principleson the basis of ﬁndings.Reﬂecting To be effective, all prioritization-activities and -results need to be stakeholder oriented. To engage designers, architects, and managers inimprovement work, we need to express ourselves using different forms: designers are comfortable with domain vocabulary and statistical plots;architects expect and appreciate highly structured, reﬁned, and traceable knowledge; upper managers are more likely to react to knowledgepresented in the form of action principles. Engagement of all roles is needed: designers to give input on the needs; architects to select and realize orremove views; managers to make (the right) economic decisions and to approve change projects.4.1. Concern inventorying overviewThe concern inventorying method is outlined in Fig. 3. Concerninventorying addresses the fundamental question of what archi-tectural concerns are important to the users of AD (Q0). Its goalis a site-speciﬁc taxonomy of architectural concern: a hierarchi-cal classiﬁcation scheme that names and deﬁnes all architecturalconcerns important to the project using the site’s vocabulary. Thephase proceeds by iterative enquiry, analysis, and deliberation toconstruct and improve the taxonomy and ends with dissemina-tion of results; it is ideally carried out by a small team of seniorarchitects, engineers, and managers with complementary views onthe organization, and with experience from analysis work (whichindividuals in these roles typically have).Speciﬁc techniques used for these activities are literaturereview, semi structured interviews, artefact collection (forenquiry), coding and categorization (for analysis), team- andinformant workshops (for deliberation), which we now proceed todeﬁne.4.2. Literature reviewConcern inventorying is ideally done on the basis of existingtaxonomies, thus a literature review is a natural ﬁrst step in 1976L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994Q0What concernsar
 e  o ADusers?
LiteratureReviewSemi-structured 
Inte rviewArtefactCollectionCoding andCatego
 rizati onEnquiryAnalysis Techniques ActivitiesQuestionTeamWorksho
 pInformant
Worksho
 pOutcome Taxono my of Architectu ralConce
 rnsDeliberationDissemination
Fig. 3. Concern inventorying method.inventorying. Sources to consider include industry standards,company internal glossaries, academic publications, and softwarearchitecture literature in general.Qualities to consider when selecting taxonomies are theirdomain (business domain and product type), organizational assump-tions (software processes, and tools used), granularity (level ofdetails in the breakdown, level of detail in deﬁnitions), and scope(i.e., whether concerns also outside the area immediately “underthe technology lamppost” (Medvidovic et al., 2007) are covered).Because most sources tend to have a focus on either technical, ororganizational, or business concerns, synthesis of taxonomy fromseveral sources is inevitable. The more representative, reﬁned, andmany-faceted the taxonomy is in the end, the more value it willbring to the prioritization process.4.3. Semi structured interviewsExisting concern taxonomies are useful starting points inconcern inventorying, but not effective theories: concerns aresituational, and important concerns are not necessarily coveredby available taxonomies. Semi-structured interviews (i.e., faceto face inquiry about needs around open-ended questions) helpLogica
 lConcu
 r-renc
 yPhy-

sicalCross-
cuttingFig. 4. Circular taxonomy tree from the Ericsson study.discovering and articulating new concerns not found during theliterature review.4.4. Artefact collectionSite speciﬁc concerns already covered by architecture documen-tation are best extracted from existing architecture documentation.Where interviews are effective instruments for recognizing con-cerns not addressed – frustrated individuals eagerly elaborate onthese – they are less appropriate for recognizing concerns in place.These are readily available in the architecture documentation: inADs, in AD-related documents, and in auxiliary design documents.Artefact collection is the act of gathering and selecting represen-tative such data sources, by the help of stakeholders to obtainreferences.Of particular importance, in gathering as well as selection, isattention to pictures of views and informal diagrams. Large productdevelopment projects can involve thousands of formal and informaldiagrams, some of which are only available in modeling tools, otherof which are only available in reports, presentations, educationalmaterials, and other auxiliary sources. A broad scan for picturesin such sources, and selection of a representative subset of thesepictures should be part of the artefact collection activity.Of importance is also inclusion of non-pictorial formal artefacts,e.g., mathematical models, tabular models, tree-oriented models,metamodels, XML models, rules in textual, high-level, notations, orthe kinds of textual models associated with formal methods. Thedegree to which AD is expressed using pictorial or non-pictorialformalisms varies from project to project, but no matter whichmodeling paradigm is the dominant one in a project, a team car-rying out artefact collection should be cautious to consider alsoformalisms used less frequently.Artefact collection does, however, not include gathering andselection of source code. Even though source code can be viewedas one form of architecture documentation, it encodes so manyaspects other than architectural concerns (detailed design, datarepresentation, algorithms, realization of fault handling, controlﬂows, and platform details) on so many formats (programming,scripting, transformation, and testing languages), and is of such alarge volume (millions of lines of code) that recognition of con-cerns in these source, at least with the analysis techniques of theproposed method, is infeasible.4.5. Coding and categorizationAnalysis, in concern inventorying, proceeds by the followingsteps. Inductive coding (Strauss and Corbin, 1998) of interviewtranscripts, wiki pages, design documentation, models, or writ-ten sources is used to reveal concerns that may otherwise beoverlooked. Deductive coding (Strauss and Corbin, 1998) is usedto see whether concerns of existing taxonomies are present ornot. Categorization is used to organize concerns in a hierarchyof categories at increasing levels of abstraction from severalperspectives.Challenges in coding and categorization are the complexity ofthe domain analyzed, and that many concerns are crosscutting.Analysts must be able interpret sources from many engineeringdisciplines (requirements engineering, testing, product documen-tation, and so on), from many technical domains (radio signaling,internet protocols, power systems, and so on), as well as sourcesrelated to business-, process-, and organizational aspects. Furtheradding to the challenge, many concerns are crosscutting and natu-rally belong to several categories.Although deﬁnition of ontology instead of taxonomy (i.e. mod-eling of not only concern category membership, but concernrelationships in general) may appear tempting in such a situation, L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 19941977our method does not involve ontology deﬁnition: ﬁrst and foremostbecause it would manifold the resource demands and calendar timeof a concerns inventorying project (and thus make it more difﬁcultto get management approval for); secondly because, for purposeof concern prioritization, taxonomy is good enough (because, inthe end, informants will look inside category deﬁnitions, at speciﬁcconcerns, when quantifying their needs).More feasible than ontology deﬁnition, is to apply the followingstrategy:1. recognize cross-cutting concerns in the uppermost level of thehierarchy, next to other areas of concerns;2. place concerns in the categories with their strongest home-base;3. if no natural home-base can be found, revisit data sources to seeif the concern recognized by the analyst can be split into severalconcerns that better ﬁt the emerging taxonomy.Concern taxonomy should be built with a tool that supportsannotation and organization of pieces of text and pictures, wherethe support for pictures is needed to analyze models. Tool featuresand properties that have shown to be of particular importance arecoding support (possibility to associate pieces of texts, or regions indiagrams, with the concerns they represent); categorization support(possibility to construct easily navigable hierarchies of concerns);drill-down support (possibility to navigate from a concern, to theraw data motivating its existence). Modern data analysis tools pro-vide these features, but are – to their disadvantage – not widelyknown in engineering organizations, and assume specialist knowl-edge not held by typical managers and engineers. In such situations,semantic wikis (de Boer and van Vilet, 2011), which also satisfy therequirements above, may serve as an alternative.4.6. Team and informant workshopsTeam and informant workshops are deliberation activities, inwhich participants meet to carefully discuss all considerations ofthe emerging concern taxonomy: “Are all concerns there?”, “Haveany important areas been missed?”, “Are all concerns relevant tothe organization?”, “Are concerns expressed in a way that speaks toarchitects, managers, and developers in the organization?”, “Shouldconcerns be renamed?”, “Are concern categories sensible?”, “Areconcerns too ﬁne grained, or coarse grained?”, “Are the concerns archi-tectural concerns or something else”, “Does concern classiﬁcation makesense?”. A series of such sessions, interleaved with additional datacollection and analysis work, to resolve issues found, eventuallyresults in a taxonomy that the organization can accept as a validmodel of the project’s all concerns.Team and informant workshops also serve as a supplementarydata collection technique. The deliberation sessions are recorded,and meeting notes and transcripts included as data sources. This hasturned out to be a very effective technique, as deliberation involvesin-depth discussions about the organization’s needs, the ways inwhich the AD serves these needs, the challenges or costs of realizingthe needs, and the consequences of leaving the needs un-addressed.In addition, team and informant workshops serve as ethno-graphic encounters, in which analysts assimilate the project’ssituation, and what the root causes, underlying expressed needs,may be. The analysts’ understanding of the project’s processes,business situation, technical context, and organizational con-straints have high impact on the analysis outcomes. Workshops,and reﬂections on such, are effective techniques to quickly buildthis understanding.Finally, team and informant workshops are effective means ofdissemination knowledge in the organization. During workshops,both team members and informants get ideas and inspiration forwork they already do or could do. In a practice, when concernprioritization eventually points at a problem needed to be solved,the improvement work may already have started, or the need evenbeen resolved.Team and informant workshops differ primarily in their orga-nization. Team workshop are frequent (weekly), conducted by asmall group that knows the goals and are accustomed to workingtogether, and who invite special stakeholders as needed. Infor-mant workshops are restricted to a few (2–3) bigger occasions, andinvolve more carefully prepared discussion materials (to communi-cate concerns effectively), advance planning (to involve important,but busy stakeholders), and stronger facilitation techniques (tomanage the larger group, and risks associated with varying organi-zational powers among stakeholders and other social phenomena).What workshop organization is most suitable depends oncompany culture. Proven organizations for informant workshopsinclude the Delphi method or small-group group work. With theDelphi method, each participant prepares on the basis on a givenset of questions; the prepared answers are presented in two ormore rounds, and other participants are allowed to comment. Askilled and initiated meeting facilitator is needed to block non-constructive or diverging or irrelevant discussions, while allowingdiscussion that indeed reveal problems with the taxonomy dis-cussed. In small-group group work, participants split to discuss andconsolidate their preparations in thematic teams, then reunite fora bigger discussion.In summary: recurrently feeding analysis results back to theorganization through workshops reveals new areas and datasources previously overlooked, aligns terminology with vocabularymeaningful inside the organization, validates (or refutes) interpre-tations, and stimulates improvement work. Informant workshopscan either be organized using the Delphi method or as small-groupgroup work.4.7. Taxonomy of architectural concernsThe outcome of the concern inventorying activity is, besidepositive side effects on informants and analysts, the taxonomy.Canonical, generic deliverables (that take different forms andcompositions depending on the tools used and organizationalrequirements) include the following:4.7.1. Concerns catalogueThe concerns catalogue is a report listing and deﬁning allarchitectural concerns, for the purpose of dissemination and datacollection activities of later phases. An advantage of a plain, tax-onomy free, listing of concerns and their deﬁnitions is that itdraws the reader’s attention to the essentials – the set of forelying concerns – rather than the organization of these concerns,which many engineers tend to give more attention than the con-cerns themselves. Concern prioritization is a pragmatic method,and the ambition of concerns inventorying to ﬁnd taxonomy thatgives enough structure to support prioritization of concerns. Manyengineers (in particular those with research training) are, how-ever, obsessed with perfection, and are quick to reject a report,or even the whole approach, if they ﬁnd dissonances in the mate-rials. Separation of concerns deﬁnitions and taxonomy thus makesacceptance building in the organization easier.4.7.2. Category systemThe category system report presents the category system ontree- or table form, deﬁnes all categories, and lists the concernsin each category (with reference to the catalogue). The purpose ofto the category system is to help stakeholders and analysts in nav-igating the concern set (by bundling similar concerns together intoareas of concerns) and to provide stakeholders with contexts inwhich the typically brief concern names can be understood. 1978L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994Table 2Examples of concern deﬁnitions from the Ericsson study.Concern 8: application decompositionThe base station considered provides two layered views of its resources thatare externally visible for remote applications: the Operation andMaintenance (O&M) view; the Trafﬁc Control viewConcern 9: approval statusTeam leaders want better integration of information, in the system model, ofwhat components have been approved to which degree.Concern 112: upgradeNew versions of base station software are released frequently and remoteupgrades common. Upgrades must be done with as little interference aspossible (as downtime is very expensive for operators) and with support forrollback (should the upgrade go wrong). To support this, base stations haveextensive upgrade architecture involving upgrade packages that bundle newsoftware ﬁrmware- and description-modules for a node with an updatescript, and an upgrade engine that executes upgrade packages and monitorsthe upgrade process.4.7.3. Circular taxonomy treeThe circular taxonomy tree is a pictorial presentation of the cat-egory system in the form of a circular taxonomy tree (which is awell-known display in biology). Although choice of display mayappear as a trivial detail at ﬁrst, it has methodological implica-tions: inappropriate displays lead to large and complex displaysthat do not effectively communicate the results; large and com-plex displays scare stakeholders and decision makers (managersand chief architects) rather than triggering their curiosity; prioriti-zation information will eventually be superimposed on the display,and some displays are more appropriate for this than others.4.7.4. Knowledge baseThe knowledge base consists of the coded data sources (tran-scripts, documents, and pictures), the category system, the analysts’memos (Strauss and Corbin, 1998), and tool speciﬁc data (queriesand report generation templates). The knowledge base is inputto the concerns prioritization activity as authoritative reference,and platform for evolving the taxonomy, should any concerns beunclear or controversial, or new concerns be discovered.5. Example: concern inventorying outcomes of study atEricssonTo make the method’s objectives more concrete, the followingsection gives examples, from the study at Ericsson, of the concerninventorying outcomes. Notice that outcomes are inﬂuenced byparticular choices of analysis tools and presentation formats, i.e.,other instances of the method are likely to result in differently look-ing deliverables. We start by a description of the concerns catalogue(Section 5.1), and the concerns taxonomy on tabular (Section 5.2)as well as tabular form (Section 5.3). We also present the organiza-tion of the knowledge based resulting from concern prioritization,which becomes part of the evidence in an improvement recom-mendation.5.1. Concerns catalogueAt the time of the prioritization study, the concerns catalogueconsisted of 146 concerns, three of which are given in Table 2. Werefer readers interested in the full set of concerns to our previ-ous publications on these (Pareto et al., 2011; Pareto, 2010), whichpresent an evolution of the catalogue of this paper with fewer con-cerns (114) and concern areas (25) but which covers the sameconcepts.5.2. Category systemTable 3 is an excerpt of the category system: segments aremajor areas of concern (logical concerns, etc.); boxes are areas ofconcern (overview, etc.); list items are speciﬁc concerns. Categoriesemerged from inductive categorization of concerns with attentionto categories in Kruchten (1995). We refer readers to our pastworks (Pareto et al., 2011; Pareto, 2010) for details.5.3. Circular taxonomy treeFig. 6 shows the circular taxonomy tree used in communicationwith stakeholders. For brevity, only the topmost categories wereincluded, whereas stakeholders were referred to the concern cat-alogue for further details. Rendered versions of this display wereused in several research project presentations and posters at theunit- and corporate level; they were extensively discussed by theunit’s managers, when they ﬁrst appeared, and became a trademarkfor the project.5.4. Knowledge baseThe essential elements of the knowledge base that resultedfrom concern inventorying are shown in Fig. 5. In addition to thedata source described in Section 4 it includes text quotations andpicture regions associated with codes, categories and subcate-gories of codes, set theoretic category queries, and memos. It alsohas functionality to export query results, category deﬁnitions, andcode deﬁnitions on various data formats. Post processing of suchexports (manual, automatic, and semi-automatic) was used toproduce all displays in Sections 5.1–5.3. The tool used was ATLAS.ti(ATLAS, 2012), but any qualitative data analysis tool would haveserved.6. Results – concerns prioritization methodThe purpose of concern prioritization is to quantify stakeholderneeds, collect improvement ideas, and to codify this informationonto forms that managers and architects can relate to. This sectiondescribes a method for how this can be effectively done. Themethod is an abridgment of activities carried out in action researchcycles Cycle1−4. We start by explaining the rationale of the method(Section 6.1), and by giving an overview (Section 6.2) after whichwe proceed to describe the speciﬁc techniques used (Sections6.3–6.13).6.1. Concern prioritization methods rationaleThe rationale of our concerns prioritization method (see Fig. 6)is to improve feedback from AD stakeholders to those with theeconomic, organizational, and technical power to improve it (man-agers and chief architects). Because of differences in perceptionsand action repertoires, we must present this feedback differentlyto managers, who are more business and organizationally inclinedand act through funds, priorities and missions, than to architects,who are more technically inclined and act through improvementsof AD’s, design processes, educations and tools. To architects, wewant to present codiﬁed, traceable information on current needsand priorities; to managers we want to present actions they maytake to improve architecture documentation along with evidencethat recommendations can be trusted. By improving the feedbackin this way, stakeholders will obtain better support for their tasks,which in turn results in increased business value.6.2. Concern prioritization methods overviewOur concern prioritization method, which realizes this feedbackloop, is outlined in Fig. 7. It is an abridgment of the action researchCycle1–4outlined in Section 3.3; it proceeds by iteration overthe same generic actions used for concern inventorying (enquiry, L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 19941979Table 3Examples of concern categories from the Ericsson study.Logical concernsOverview Services- Complementary side perspectives - RBS variables (parameters with Ericsson terminology)- Capability anatomy- Capabilities- Functional areas - Capability group ﬁltering- Major subsystems - Capability realization anatomy- Overviews - Logical resources- Tier dimensions and layers - System servicesPrecisionData- Overviews- Class and capsule instantiation- Clean and precise visualization of requirements and behavior - Data – what’s static, dynamic, or persistent- Locality (of reference)Decomposition System boundary- Application decomposition - Actors and use cases- Capability decomposition-
 Usage scenarios- Decomposition of functionality into technical subsystems-
 External triggers- Load module structureInterface abstraction- Platform as layer vs. platform as component - Signal grouping and bundling- Process/subprocess decomposition-
 Allocation independent client-server interaction- Service anatomy - Information ﬂow routing between boards- System/subsystem decompositionDesign quality Protocol abstraction- Clean and precise visualization of requirements and behavior-
 Peer-to-peer signaling- Coupling and cohesion among service realizations and capability realizations - Communication paths between abstract ports- System traces and system model consistency-
 External interface layering- Internal interface layering- Process interface inheritanceControl ﬂow Protocol realization- Alternatives, conditions, and iterations in scenarios-
 Layer-to-layer signaling- Basic and alternate ﬂows - Data – coding of parameters sent in signals- Call graph- Data – formal parameters in signals- Component behavior - Interaction between technical subsystemsProtocol viewpoints- Service or use case realization- Allocation protocols- Protocols between technical subsystemsOrganizational concernsProject Quality- Baselines- Approval status- Deliverables - Protocol exemption (in behavioral descriptions)- Division of work - Test coverage- Planning- Veriﬁability- ResponsibilityProduct- Corporate basic standard for information assetsDomain speciﬁc concernsSystem domain speciﬁc Mode and phase speciﬁc- Baseband use- Board conﬁguration (main processors, device boards, auxiliary units)- Climate - Board loading- Managed object (MAO/FRO/RO) domain - Connection establishment- Power supply and distribution - Hardware start/restart (equipment restart)- RBS resource handling - Startup- Redundancy- Upgrade- Synchronization- Trafﬁc control- Transaction handlinganalysis, deliberation, and dissemination) and a new interpretationactivity. All techniques employed are different, except for thedeliberation activities which have the same form.Another difference is that several questions are incrementallyaddressed: the method sets out to assess the improvement forcesamong AD users (Q1), introduces additional questions each itera-tion (Q2–4) while reﬁning the answers to questions of precedingiterations as knowledge grows. The techniques are described in thefollowing.6.3. Concern coverage surveyThe concern coverage survey serves three purposes: it collectsviews on the current degree of documentation in speciﬁc areas; itcollects opinions on whether to increase or decrease documenta-tion in these areas; it collects suggestions of what to change therein.The use of surveys, rather than interviews, for data collection hasseveral advantages: surveys reach out to larger populations; theyare comparably quick and inexpensive; they support collection of 1980L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994QKnowledgebaseQuoteExpo rtText  sou
 rce**1Que ry**1**ReportConcerns  catalogu
 eCategory system****** *1Catego ryCodeTranscri pt Desig n doc .Informal 
 diag.Picture source
Formal
diag*Region****gyy*Circ. taxono my tree
Memo
1**1Formaldia
 g.Qualitative data analysis toolPost processingFig. 5. Concern inventorying knowledge base (notation: UML).Fig. 6. Method rationale: improved feedback from AD users, to AD owners and maintainers.quantitative as well as qualitative data; managers and developersare accustomed to surveys. The disadvantages of surveys over inter-views – surveys are not as congenial and interactive as interviewsmay be – are, in our method, partly compensated for by informantworkshops.Generic survey questions and answering options are given inTable 4. The survey starts with enquiry about role and context. Itscore part is a set of questions for each area of concern, followed byquestions for each major area for concern. The survey ends withreﬂection questions on the situation as a whole. Notice the rela-tionships between the questions and the taxonomy’s structure:questions relate to areas of concerns rather than speciﬁc concerns;for each area, respondents can elaborate on, or provide additional,speciﬁc concerns using open text input, which can also be done forConcern taxonomyAnalysis
ActivitiesTechniquesEnquiryQ1Q2Q3Q4Concern coveragesurve yKey facto rsurve yConcernZoneImprov
 e-FactorQ1How stron g are
 the force
 s amon
 g ADus
 ers to increa
 se/
 decrease
documentatio
 n ineac
 hare
 a ofconcern?
Q2What
 area sshoul
 d we reco mmen
 d manage
 rs to improve
 ?Q3Wha
timprove ment
 s shoul d we recomm
 end fortheseareas?
QuestionsAnalysis
DeliberationInterpretationConcernplotti ngZon emappin
 gmen
 tanalysisFactorcorrelati on Inference
makin
 gInferenc
 e making
Triangulatio nInformant
worksho pTeamwo rksho
 pQ3pQ4How sho uld we communicat
 e recomm
 endati ons to manage
 rs?Dissemination
AD User FeedbackActionprinciple sEvidenc eNeed
 sPriorities
ManagersArchitectsFig. 7. Concerns prioritization activities, techniques, questions and outcomes. L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 19941981Table 4Generic survey questions to be asked for ach concern area A, major area M, for theoverall business goal G.Questions about the informant OptionsWhat is your main role? Manager | developer | otherWhich product family do youprimarily work with?P1| . . . | PnWhich project will you use as casewhen answering the questions?Open text inputQuestions for each area A OptionsHow would you classify the presentsupport in area A?Not documented | weaklydocumented | scantily documented |sufﬁciently documented | welldocumented | strongly documented |don’t understandHow should the support change if Gis to be improved?Essential to decrease | desirable todecrease | slightly advantageous todecrease | slightly advantageous toincrease | desirable to increase |essential to increase | no intuitionWhat kind of increases/decreases ofinformation would you like to seein area A? (For instance: more orless formality; more or lessinformation content; addition of X;removal of Y; other changes.)Open text inputAnything you would like to add inthe area A as a whole?Open text inputQuestions for each major area M OptionsAny further comments of the majorarea M as a whole?Open text inputAdditional reﬂections on concerncoverage regarding what is donewell, and urgent improvementneeds?Open text inputConcluding reﬂection questions OptionsConsidering architectural concernsand G, what do you think we dowell within the company today?Open text inputWhat do you think we urgently needto improve?Open text inputI would also like to add the followingregarding architecture and G:Open text inputeach major area and for architecture documentation in general. Alsonotice the implications of the taxonomy’s structure on the ques-tions: wide and few concern areas make the questions difﬁcult toanswer; narrow and plentiful areas make the survey unwieldy toanswer. The Ericsson survey had 37 areas, and several informantsreported on spending 4 h completing all questions; so 25–50 areasshould be considered as practical limits.Central to prioritization are the questions “How should the sup-port [for area A] change if G is to be improved?”, where A is a concernarea, and G is a business goal such as increased quality, reduceddevelopment costs, quicker time to market for new products, orincreased development efﬁciency. Probing for improvement in thedirection of a speciﬁc goal is important, because what supports ful-ﬁlment of one goal, may be a counterforce for the fulﬁlment ofother, e.g., increased quality typically leads to either longer devel-opment time or additional costs. Without a clear goal, we willcollect disparate improvement ideas aiming at possibly obsoletebusiness goals. The business goal should be presented in an acces-sible way, and such that it cannot be missed: in the invitation, onthe survey’s ﬁrst page, in the survey questions and in a separatesurvey guide.The survey guide is a written document that includes anintroduction to the survey and its purpose, a clear deﬁnition ofthe business goal, the taxonomy, and instructions for answeringthe questions. Conciseness of the survey guide is critical (max. 10pages as a rule of thumb), as large volumes of texts and lengthydeﬁnitions have a repelling effects on informants. Leaving out theconcerns catalogue (i.e. the most detailed level of the taxonomy)A1Current degree of documentation A1A2Increase forceA2Decrease forceFig. 8. A concern plot showing the increase- and decrease-forces and the currentdegrees of documentations for two areas of concern.while providing a reference to a technical report describing it, is aneffective strategy to compactness. This strategy works, because ina concerns catalogue relying on local terminology, carefully craftedconcern names speak for themselves without lengthy deﬁnitions.The concern coverage survey should be sent developers,managers and other stakeholders in architecture documenta-tion, e.g. those involved with speciﬁcation, design, realization,design documentation, product documentation, testing, certiﬁ-cation, maintenance, evolution. Depending on business context,stakeholders may be internal or external. Informants should besenior, have longstanding experiences from architecture documen-tation work, from associated processes, and from the organizationas a whole.Surveys should be distributed and collected with a system sup-porting response tracking at the level of individuals. As most surveyresearchers have experienced, making informants to commit to andto actually deliver on long questionnaires, takes several reminders,negotiations, and social maneuvers (such as group pressure orappeal to everyone’s best). Support for book-keeping of responses,directed notiﬁcations, and the opportunity to follow up with phonecalls and visits is essential for the feasibility of the method. Sev-eral software packages and hosted services with such support areavailable on the market.6.4. Concern plottingA concern plot is a statistical display for visual comparison ofthree variables: the current degree of documentation of an area ofconcern A, the force to increase-, and the force to decrease doc-umentation of A. It consists of an overlay of two scatter plots:one comparing current degree of documentation with decreaseforces (shown along its leftwards pointing horizontal axis); anothercomparing current degree of documentation with increase forces(shown along its rightwards pointing horizontal axis). For instance,in the concern plot in Fig. 8 for the two areas A1and A2, we canobserve the following: A1is perceived as more documented thanA2; there are no strong forces to increase, neither to decrease thedocumentation of A1; area A2is regarded as weakly documented;there is a strong force to increase documentation of A2, but almostno force to decrease it. All in all, we see that any improvementefforts should prioritize A2over A1as A2is comparably under doc-umented, and as there is almost consensus that documentation ofA2should be increased. 1982L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994The rationale behind concern plots is that prioritization deci-sions should take not only change forces into account, but also thecurrent documentation maturity. This is for two reasons. The ﬁrstreason is the likelihood of reward: improvement efforts for under-attended areas are likely to be more rewarding than for areas withlongstanding attention. Scatter plots help managers and analysts inmaking such judgments. The second reason is that a psychologicaleffect, documentation greediness, is at play: in the studied organiza-tion, we observed that concerns globally recognized as important inthe organization, attracted attention even though their documen-tation was up to standard. Two-variable plots bring this effect, too,into the picture.The rationale behind separating increase forces from decreaseforces (rather than taking an average) is that the underlyingphenomena quantiﬁed by these variables are not counterforces.Qualitative analysis of the suggestions in the survey’s open ques-tions has shown that suggestions to increase documentation in anarea, and the suggestions to decrease documentation in the samearea consider different matters, or sometimes the same matterphrased with a different polarity. For instance, what one informantexpressed as “increased overview”, other expressed as “decreaseddegree of detail”. This implies that taking an average of all forces isa meaningless operation: strong forces to increase documentationin an area, and equally strong forces to decrease documentationof the same area do not imply that the situation is ﬁne. On thecontrary, this implies that design documentation in this area isunder-engineered and deserves a closer look: the information thatinformants would like to see in the documentation is not there, butinstead information that is not needed. By looking for large dis-tance between increase and decrease forces, analysts can quicklyspot areas in need for further attention, while at the same time judg-ing whether the needed improvement would involve adding newinformation (which is comparably easy) or removing information(which is comparably difﬁcult in projects of the studied kind), orwhether documentation in the area needs major redesign (whichis difﬁcult, but sometimes necessary).The variables used in a concern plot have the following deﬁni-tions. Let C1, C2and C3be the number of respondents that ﬁnd thedocumentation sufﬁciently-, well- or strongly documented in somearea A; let C−1, C−2, and C−3be the numbers of those that ﬁnd itscantily-, weakly-, or un-documented; further, let n be the total num-ber of responses including “don’t understand” answers. The currentdegree of documentation in area A, CA, is deﬁned as the followinglinear combination:CA=1n·3i=−3i · CiThe decrease force for area A, DAand the increase force for areafor area A, IA, are deﬁned similarly. Let D1, D2, D3be the number ofrespondents ﬁnding A slightly advantageous-, desirable- or essentialto decrease; let I1, I2, I3be the number of respondents ﬁnding Aslightly advantageous-, desirable-, or essential to increase; let n bethe number of respondents for the area, including “no intuition”answers, thenDA=1n·3i=1i · Di, IA=1n·3i=1i · Ii6.5. Inference making (Q1–4)Inference making is a technique to turn data displays (concernplots and conventional statistical displays) or qualitative raw datainto verbal hypotheses about the current situation, for the purposeof communicating the situation to managers, chief architects, andthe development organization as a whole. Although statistics mayspeak to initiated analyst teams and survey respondents, statis-tics is not sufﬁciently succinct and accessible for others, hence theneed for verbalization. Inference making proceeds by collaborativehypothesis generation around statistical displays, qualitative datadisplays, or transcripts. Useful statistical displays are pie-charts,bar-charts, and histograms showing•the understanding of concern areas among informants;•non-understanding of concerns per role•desires for change across roles;•distribution of answers for each area of concern;•distribution of informant roles, and•population of analysis categories.An example inference is given in Fig. 9. Recognizing that man-agers are fewer than developers among informants, while beingover-represented among those not understanding the concerns A1,. . ., A11, we may plausibly assume that managers ﬁnd this class ofconcerns difﬁcult to understand (compared to developers and otherroles, most of which understand them).6.6. Informant workshop (Q1)The purpose of the informant workshop of the Q1iteration isto validate the statistical displays, validate inferences made fromthese, and to generate further hypotheses. It involves the analy-sis team (as presenters, discussion facilitators, and data collectors)and is open to all survey respondents. (In the Ericsson case, 50%of the informants were able to attend.) The workshop has twosessions. In the interpretation session, the statistical displays (dis-tributed to informants in advance) are presented in an unbiasedway, and discussed by the informants, while analysts take notes;analysts should be careful, during this session, not to inject opinion.In the validation session, analysts present their own hypotheses andtheir evidence while informants collectively comment, criticize,approve, or refute the hypotheses or the evidence. Notes-takingby the analysts, is used to document the response. By encouraginginformants to make their own interpretations before presentinghypotheses, misinterpretations are more likely to be discovered.The outcome of the informant workshop is data supporting thevalidity of some displays and some inferences made, and a listof issues for the others. These are fed into next iteration for fur-ther analysis and resolution. Because participating informants havestrong intuitions about the problem, have studied the survey guidein detail, and spent several hours on thinking about the questions,the data collected in the workshop is (if the workshops is con-ducted well) of high quality and becomes a valuable data sourcefor evidence building.6.7. Zone mapping (Q2)Zone mapping is a supplementary graphical technique thathelps analysts to derive improvement priorities from concern plots.A zone map (see Fig. 10) is a graphical representation of a functionthat maps point in the concern plot to the priorities DEC−−, DEC−,DEC, OK, INC, INC+, INC++, where DEC−− denotes “strong reasonsto decrease”, etcetera.The zone map is divided in three basic zones: one for areaswith an appropriate degree of documentation (OK zone); one forareas deserving increased documentation (INC zone), and anotherfor areas deserving decreased documentation (DEC zone). Theincrease- and decrease zones further contain sub-zones recogniz-ing priority (INC++  INC+  INC and DEC−−  DEC−  DEC).Zone borders denote “height curves” of a surface deﬁned by atwo-variable function f(x, y) with certain properties: f should be L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 19941983Fig. 9. Example inference from two displays.continuous, strictly monotonic, and increasing in x and y; if x, y isin the OK zone, then f(x, y) should be 0. Intuitively, functions withthese properties deﬁne a valley of adequately documented con-cerns surrounded by the slopes of concern increase- and decrease:the higher the altitude, the more attention the point deserves.Notice the curved form of the INC zone, which is due to the phenom-ena discussed in Section 6.4: the INC zone is tilted right because ofthe likelihood of reward effect; it bends off to the right to downplaydocumentation greediness. Similarly, the slope of the DEC zone istilted because decreasing over documented concerns is better thanfurther decreasing under documented ones; the DEC zone bendsoff to the left to “protect” weakly documented concerns from notbeing documented at all (which extreme agilism, the dual of docu-mentation greediness, may lead to).Also notice that the distance to the INC zone from the origin islarger than the distance to the DEC zone. This, too, is to compensatefor documentation greediness. In the Ericsson study, recognizedopportunities to increase documentation outnumbered recognizedopportunities to decrease documentation, which results in weakerforces on the decrease side of the concern plot that on the increaseside. This motivates a “handicap” for concerns in need for decrease,which the closeness of the zone gives.Zone mapping is in itself straightforward. We give a concernarea high attention if it falls either in an INC+(+) or DEC−(−) zone,and moderate attention if it falls either in and INC or DEC zone, andno attention if it falls within an OK zone. This can be done simplyby placing a transparent electronic image on top of the concernplots and then read off the priorities; mores sophisticated is theuse of a statistics software tool which allows coding of the sur-face and automated classiﬁcation and ranking with respect to thefunction f.6.8. Triangulation (Q2–4)Triangulation is the use of several methods to double check theresults. In our method, it is an implicit technique, yet with stronginﬂuence on results. As analysts work iteratively, with multiple datasources and methods, ﬁndings from later iterations will sometimesconﬁrm and sometimes contradict the ﬁndings of earlier iterations.This forces analysts to revisit the data sources and the inferencesdrawn from these, or – if the contradiction cannot be resolved – towithdraw their hypotheses.6.9. Team workshopsTeam workshops are organized deliberation activities, in whichanalysts meet to critically discuss analysis outcomes so far. GuestsFig. 10. Example of a zone map. 1984L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994Table 5Generic improvement actions for architectural descriptions. (Actions are empiricallygrounded.)Kinds of decreases of AD Kinds of increases of ADRemove views not usedAdd
 missing viewsReduce component granularity Cover more cases with existing viewsReduce bureaucracy and formalitiesaround documentationDocument more architecture layerswith existing viewsFactor out details Make views more specializedRemove details not usedMake
 views more abstractRemove details that are redundantExtend
 views with informationRemove details that may beautomatedClean up viewsDocument details in code instead Make views more formalAdd more details to viewsWrite better guidelines for viewsMake views easier to accessAutomate view generationare invited as needed. Discussion outcomes are documented asissues to be resolved in succeeding analysis activities.6.10. Improvement analysis (Q3)Improvement analysis is the analysis of a concern survey’s quali-tative answers, with the objective of explicating what increases anddecreases informants would like to see. It complements concernplotting and zone mapping which prioritize needs, but say littleabout what to change. Improvement analysis proceeds by codingand categorization (cf., coding and categorization of concerns inSection 4.5), with the generic AD improvement categories of Table 5as starting point. The categories emerged from the analysis activ-ity in the Ericsson case; they capture (without going into detailsabout speciﬁc formalisms, views, and information elements) whatkinds of AD changes developers liked to see, hence also the actionspace in AD improvement. Decrease and increase categories rep-resent the concrete suggestions that informants expressing a needfor decrease and increase, respectively, have provided. (Notice thatTable 5 shows categories of changes rather than concrete changes.)To allow queries, survey answers are also coded with respect tothe area to which they belong, whether they represent a suggestedincrease or decrease, what kind of informant that made the sugges-tion, the project for which the suggestions was made. This coding isentirely mechanical and can be automated in many modern survey-and data analysis tools.Queries are used to produce the improvement analysis report(see Fig. 5). The report lists the concrete suggestions of the infor-mants on condensed and organized form. It has a three-levelstructure: area of concern at the topmost level, kinds of increasesand decreases at the level underneath, and the concrete needs(along with project- and informant information) on the lowermostlevel. The report is used both during decision making, where it pro-vides details about what the “spots” in the concern plots stand for,and during improvement where it provides information on whatthe needs are and whom to interview for further details about theneed.Improvement analysis should be done by the analysts them-selves (rather than being outsourced). Exposure to the actual needs,and the reﬂections triggered by the coding process, deepens theanalysts’ understanding on what lies underneath the statistics,which in turn improves the quality of the prioritization outcomes.6.11. Key factor survey (Q4)Key factor survey is a technique to identify and assess factorswith inﬂuence on architecture documentation practices that man-agers can relate to and are empowered and motivated to handle.They Key factors are used to explain why the situation is as it is,and what managers can do to change the situation. Without atten-tion to this problem, the actions proposed to managers and chiefarchitects – the very outcome of our prioritization method – risksbeing perceived as “just another good idea” (Armour, 2011). Thefocus question is, thus, how architecture improvement proposalsare best presented to management.A key factor survey involves survey design and survey execu-tion. Survey design proceeds by collaborative sessions around datadisplays; it results in a set of key factors and scales for assessingthese. Survey design should involve software process improvementspecialists and managers knowledgeable with improvement workwithin the organization. Discussions start with the generic factorsand scales in Table 6 as input; it should include recognition andformulation of additional site-speciﬁc key factors, suggested bythe study’s ﬁndings so far. Concern plots are useful in this, as theyexhibit patterns in data suggesting that certain forces are at play.For instance, exposed to the concern plot of the area of logicalconcerns (see Fig. 12) and similar concern plots for other areas, asoftware process improvement specialist at Ericsson observed thatconcern areas with high degrees of documentation tended to bethose important to project managers, while those with the lowestdegree of documentation were those that project managers neverhad to deal with (the MSA factor in Table 6). Another observation inthe plots were that concerns prevalent also in hardware had higherdegree of documentation than those only present in software (lead-ing to the HER and RES factors). It was observed that many of theconcerns with weak support were difﬁcult to model whereas areaswith high degrees of documentation were often straightforward tomodel (the factor SIM). For some concerns, in particular in the areaof concurrency, it was evident that the desired modeling notationswere not supported by the modeling tools in use or that even thenotation was an open question (the T&S factor).Survey execution proceeds by the usual steps: informant selec-tion, data collection, and statistical analysis. The survey shouldbe sent to architects, technical managers, and other senior engi-neers in a position to understand the concern areas themselves,and with enough experience from the organization to be able assessmanagement support and attention, heritage, qualities of modelingnotations and tools, and practices in other disciplines than the own.For large organization, this may mean 15 years of engineering expe-rience or more. Data collection simply means asking informants“How would you rate you organization is fulﬁllment of F” for all keyfactors in Table 6 (MSA, etc.), and “What are your reﬂections on thesescales?” Statistics analysis involves generation of histograms andapplication of statistical tests to see if a reliable conclusion of thesituation in the organization can be made on from the survey input.6.12. Factor correlationThe factor correlation activity studies the relationships betweenkey factors and the prioritization outcomes. The purpose is to com-municate to managers that current architecture documentationpractices are due to factors that mangers can control – and shouldcontrol if architecture documentation practices are to be improved.It proceeds by cross comparison of the key factor assessments foreach area of concern, and the prioritization outcomes for these (i.e.,whether their documentation should be increased, decreased, orleft as it is).An example for such a cross comparison is given by Fig. 11. Here,we see that areas desirable (INC) or important (INC+) to increase areassociated with non-attention (MS0, 15 + 3) or lack of knowledge(MS−, 3 + 1): 23 (3 + 1 + 15 + 3) out of 24 (23 + 1) concerns in needfor increase has not received management attention. Further, wesee that 3 out of 5 (3 + 1 + 1), i.e. 60% of the concerns areas thatdo get high management attention (MS+) are over-documented L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 19941985Table 6Key factors that speak to decision makers, with scales to assess these.MSA HER SIM T&S RESManagement support and attention Heritage Simplicity Tools and standards ResemblanceDegree to which managers care (orhave cared) about these concerns:For how long we have been workingwith these (or similar concerns):Degree to which concerns are easy toarticulate (regardless of tool, e.g. onpaper):Degree to which tools and standardssupport modeling of these concerns:Degree to which SW documentationpractices resemble those in otherengineering disciplines:MS+ = Some concerns in this area has(had) high attention and supportfrom management, e.g., they occur inchecklists, in priority lists, have beenaddressed by internal improvementactivities, e.g., studies, focussedworkgroups, new tool features,improvement projects, orpre-development.HER+ = We have been documentingconcerns in this are for decades, andhave a longstanding tradition indocumenting this.SIM+ = These concerns are reasonablyeasy to understand: most engineerscan relate to them and model them.Working with the views covering theseconcerns does not require specialtraining. (This is not to say that thework in which the views are used issimple.)TS+ = Concern in this area arerecognized by and supported by themodeling tools available to theorganization.RES+ = This area is similar to what wealso have in other engineeringdisciplines (e.g., hardware-,mechanical- or systems-engineering-concerns are documentedsimilarly).MS0 = Concerns in this area do not getmuch attention from managers. Theyare known by management, to somedegree, but not considered importantenough to spend money or time on.HER0 = We have been documentingthis in at least one project (>1 year) andthe concerns are clearly visibly indocumentation,SIM0 = Work with concerns in this arearequires specialist knowledge in someengineering domain: education insome theory or in the use of specialtools, and many years of domainexperience.TS0 = Concerns in this area have beenexpressed with contemporary tools,but this has required in- housecustomization such as non-standarduses of notations, additional proﬁles, oraddition of tool features.RES0 = This area of concern resemblesconcerns in other engineeringdisciplines, but views are entirelydifferent.MS− = Most managers are probably notaware of concerns in this area, ortheir importance in SWdevelopment.HER− = We have no tradition indocumenting these concerns, at leastnot to the degree that it has affecteddownstream projects.SIM− = Concerns in this area are verydifﬁcult to deal with: (at most) a handfulof engineers within the project knowhow to work with these concerns well.TS− = Concerns in this areas are notrecognized by contemporary modelingtools and standards and do not quiteseem to ﬁt the UML paradigm.RES− = This area of concern is softwarespeciﬁc: it does not havecorresponding concerns in otherengineering disciplines.(DEC). Together, these results suggest that managers should bemore careful when directing the resources to architecture docu-mentation work, i.e., they further motivate the research presentedin this paper. They also suggest that efforts in moving manage-ment’s attention away from what the organization is focusing ontoday, to make the organization actively look for concerns over-looked, would be an effective strategy in improving AD.The factor correlation should also include statistical test to provecorrelation. For instance, a standard correlation test on these datashowed a signiﬁcant negative correlation ( = −0.46) between man-agement support (vertical axis in Fig. 11) and the importance ofincreasing documentation (horizontal axis in Fig. 11).6.13. Inference making (Q4)The inference making activity of the last (Q4) iteration ver-balizes the ﬁndings from the factor correlation study using avocabulary accessible to managers. The purpose is to express theneeded improvements at a level that managers is accustomed to,while giving evidence that suggested improvement actions willimprove architecture documentation in desired ways. The activityis carried out by the analysis team with involvement of managers,and proceeds by a case by case consideration of key factors. Eachfactor is turned in an action that will move fulﬁllment of the factorin the direction associated with documentation improvement.Other sources than correlations may also be used, such as surveydata statistics.The result is a set of action principles for management: suc-cinct, empirically grounded sentences on active form that capturethe essence of what manages should do to improve architecturedocumentation practice. For instance, the established relationshipbetween management support and the importance of increasingdocumentation, along with survey statistics showing that manymanagers have weak intuitions about many concerns importantto improve, led to formulation of the following action principles:•Educate managers about architectural concernsAvoid unconscious prioritizations due to lack of knowledge.•Spend time on prioritizing concernsConcerns are not equally important.To be effective, the action principles should be compact enoughto ﬁt on a page, along with a reference to a report with the evidencethat they are valid.7. Example: concern prioritization outcomes of study atEricssonThe following sections exemplify some of the outcomes of theconcern prioritization activities of the Ericsson study. Again, out-comes are inﬂuenced by particular choices of analysis tools andpresentation formats, and not a prescriptive part of the method.The business goal, G, in the prioritization was to increase speed i.e.,to increase the organizations overall throughput, and to reduce thelead-time, for new features and change requests.7.1. Concern plots (needs)Concern plots were produced for each major area of concern (seeFig. 6). Fig. 12 shows the concern plot for the major area of logicalconcerns. The dots in the diagram represent concern areas whosedeﬁnitions can be found in a technical report (Pareto, 2010); anoutline of these areas and the speciﬁc concerns therein can be foundin Table 3. We have chosen the logical concern area, for presentationin this paper, as it is the most richly populated, area and thus makesa good case for explaining our approach to prioritization. 1986L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994Fig. 11. A comparison between the degree of management support for architectural concerns (MS), and the importance of decreasing (DEC) or increasing (INC) thedocumentation of these.Interpretation of statistical displays, in general, does not lenditself well to operationalization. It is a reasoning activity in whichdata interacts with the analyst’s understanding of the phenom-ena underlying the statistics; it depends on the analyst’s reasoningskills and experience with statistics; it may, as a result, lead toseveral conclusions. This said, there are several routine compar-isons that any interpretation should include: overall comparisonof increase and decrease forces; point wise comparison of increaseand decrease forces; consideration of extremes. We present, in thefollowing, how Fig. 12 can be interpreted. The presentation followsthe line of reasoning used in the Ericsson case.7.1.1. Center of gravityAn overall eyeball comparisons of increase forces with decreaseforces show that, increase forces are much stronger than decreaseforces: the center of gravity of all points, except one (protocol real-ization), is clearly on the increase side of the diagram. Thus, asfar as the informants’ overall opinions go, we should increase thedocumentation of logical concerns to increase speed.7.1.2. ConsensusPoint-wise comparison of increase and decrease forces showsconsensus for one area only (Overview): here, nearly everyonewants to see increased documentation. For most other areas, thereis a minority in favor of a decrease, except for Protocol realiza-tion, where the majority favors a decrease. Whatever prioritizationwe make, the areas with high consensus should be recognized andconsidered.7.1.3. DistancesThe distances between increase and decrease points (in thehorizontal direction) indicate improvement need: high distancessuggest a high need for improvement. Distance based ranking ofFig. 12. Concern plot for the major area of logical concerns. L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 19941987Table 7Side by side comparison of Rankings (top), and the ﬁve areas most important toimprove (bottom).ConsensusOverview
 (1)DistancesOverview
 (1), data (2), decomposition (3b)Under documentation Overview (1), data (2), decomposition (3b)Extremes Overview (1), system boundary (3c), data (2),protocol realization (3a)Over documentation Protocol realization (3a), control ﬂow (4),system boundary (3c)Top 5 improvement areasOverview, data, protocol realization,decomposition, system boundarythe concerns in our diagram results in (1) overview-, (2) data-, (3)decomposition, as improvement candidates.7.1.4. ExtremesExtremes along all axes point at areas in need for attention.Along the increase axis, we ﬁnd Overview concerns to have thestrongest increase force; along the decrease axis, we ﬁnd Protocolabstraction to have the strongest decrease force; along the cur-rent degree of documentation, we see that data concerns have thelowest- and system boundary the highest values along the currentdegree of documentation axis. These four areas: (1) overview, (2)system boundary, (3) data, and (4) protocol realization should beconsidered for improvement, and looked into in greater depth.7.1.5. Under-documentationLow to moderate degrees of documentation combined withstrong increase forces suggests that that an area is under docu-mented and should be recommended for improvement. This resultsin (1) overview-, (2) data- and (3) decomposition to be consideredfor improvement.7.1.6. Over-documentationSymmetrically, moderate to high degrees of documentationcombined with strong decrease forces should be given attention.This gives (1) protocol realization, (2) control ﬂow, and (3) systemboundary as improvement candidates.A side-by-side comparison of our inferred rankings (see Table 7)allows prioritization. Overview concerns stand out as the mostimportant area to improve: it appears as no. 1 in four out of ﬁvefour rankings; data concerns are the next most important area,and appears among top 3 in three rankings; protocol realization,decomposition, system boundary are of roughly same importance.That is, the top 5 areas to improve are (1) overview, (2) data, (3)protocol realization, (4) decomposition, and (5) system boundary(possibly with permutation of items 3–5).7.2. Improvements (needs)The kinds and relative frequency of the suggested improvementare given in Fig. 13. Outstanding is the need for additional views,followed by more learning materials (introductions, etc.). Thebiggest class of suggestions to decrease documentation (formality-organizational) was not to decrease the documentation itself, butthe bureaucracy surrounding it, such as approvals. Even this needwas outnumbered by seven classes of suggestions for increasedarchitecture documentation.Some of the concrete suggestions for prioritized areas are givenin Table 8.7.3. Zone maps (priorities)The prioritization resulting from zone mapping is given inFig. 14. The areas most important to attend to are increased docu-mentation for overview and data concerns (which are classiﬁed asTable 8Examples of architecture documentation improvements proposed by informants.Area Suggested improvementsOverview
(logical concerns)1. Architectural principle motivations.2. More abstract views.3. High level architecture overview.4. Partitioning principles in different dimensions.5. A clear overview.6. Architectural description HowTo’s.Data(logical concerns)1. Information on data.2. Visibility of data propagation.3. Data dependency diagrams.Linkage(development
concerns)1. Traceability.2. Automated traceability.3. Design rules for build process.4. Breakdown of requirements and traceabilitybetween black-box and white-box perspectives.5. Relation between realization of managed objectsand resource objects.6. Dependencies and connections between data andprotocols.
7. Traceable interaction from managed objects, toresource objects, to other parts.Mode and phasespeciﬁc concerns(domain concerns)1. Guiding principles for mode and phase speciﬁcconcerns.
2. Overview documentation for modes and phasescovering multiple system levels.3. Improved description of update and upgradeprocedures.
4. Distinct separation of mode and phase speciﬁcconcerns.
5. Informal documentation on mode and phase speciﬁcconcerns when reasoning between disciplines.6. Mode and phase speciﬁc overview information.7. View of system restart.8. Increased precision in description of mode andphase speciﬁc concerns.INC+). Three concerns can advantageously be decreased (classiﬁedas DEC). Closest to the INC++ zone is in the zone map is overview,followed by data. Closest to the INC−zone is protocol realization.In this, we have given the areas on the decrease zap a “handicap”worth one zone.A top 3 recommendation to management would thus be to fundimprovement projects with the primary goal to improve documen-tation for overview (INC+), data (INC+), protocol realization (DEC).A top 5 recommendation would add system boundary (DEC) andcontrol ﬂow concerns (DEC) to the list.7.4. Action principles (action)The action principles (Table 8) are inferred from our datasources, supported by traceable inference making, and validatedin a team workshop (Table 9).7.5. Priority dashboard (action)A statistical display particularly useful in communicating prior-ities to managers is the priority dashboard, which consists on thecircular taxonomy (Fig. 4) but with priorities superimposed (seeFig. 15). Concern areas to the right in each major area (in the clock-wise direction) are those most important to increase; concern areasto the left are those most important to decrease. Concern areas inthe middle are OK, and do not need any attention.7.6. Evidence (evidence)Evidence for the action principles and improvement proposalsis built from the hypotheses and processed data (statistical plots, 1988L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994Fig. 13. Distribution of improvements found.taxonomies, and tables) which in turn are built from raw data(survey answers, workshop notes, and transcripts). The evidencedata in the Ericsson case amounts to roughly 100 pages, whereasraw data amounts to 300 pages. Data sources for the taxonomy aremuch larger: 43,000 words of transcripts from 16 h of interviews,1440 pages of informal documentation, 217 screenshots, and 30pictures of whiteboard drawings (Pareto et al., 2009).8. Validity of resultsOur methods are valid only if they can be effectively applied ina large organization, and produce results useful to and appreciatedby the organization. This section describes the measures taken toproduce a method that is valid (Sections 8.1 and 8.2), and the feed-back from the studied organization on our method (Section 8.3) andon its outcomes (Section 8.4).8.1. Validity through action researchThe prioritization method was developed by an action researchteam consisting of three Ericsson insiders (a manager with aresearch background in software process improvement, a seniorsoftware specialist, and a senior software architect) and an out-sider (a University researcher) situated at Ericsson during the wholeproject (2 days per week on average). Researchers were situated inthe heart of the studied division, and had, in addition to the for-mal research activities, frequent informal contact with designers,architects, managers, and other roles in the division.Logical concern areasDecIncPriorityAtt
System boundaryDECOKDEC
Control flowDECOKDEC
ServicesOKOKOK
InterfaceabstractionOKINCINC
Protocol realizationDECOKDEC
Protocol viewpointsOKINCINC
OverviewOKINC+INC+
ProtocolasbtractionOKINCINC
DecompositionOKINCINC
PrecisionOKINCINC
Design qualityOKINCINC
DataOKINC+INC+
Fig. 14. The use of a zone map (left) to prioritize areas of concern (right) for the major area of logical concerns. L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 19941989Table 9Action principles for managers.Target of change ActionDesigners• Encourage designers to share knowledgeDesigners know the needs: make sure to learn andshare their views.Architects• Encourage architects to learn and shareArchitects must be willing to react on architectureimprovement advice.• Move beyond out-of-the box modelingDon’t be content with weak notations: utilize toolsand extend.• Challenge the heritageThe way you documented in the past is not the bestway now.• Avoid the simplicity trapDon’t prioritize concern areas just because they aresimple.Managers• Educate managers about architectural concernsAvoid unconscious prioritizations due to lack ofknowledge.• Reach beyond managers needs• Don’t over-document in areas supporting managers’interests.• Spend time on prioritizing concernsConcerns are not equally important.The division was extensively involved during data collection, inthe informant workshops, in the team workshops, in the surveydesign, in the concerns catalogue formulation, in the concerns tax-onomy formulation, in review meetings, and in the research writingprocesses. It provided access to more than 50 informants, manyof which spent several days of engagement in interviews, in teammeetings, as reviewers, in workshops, and as audience in projectpresentations.Because the project involved several years of on-site work,and because researches spent extensive time on site, researchersdeveloped understanding of the key forces and challenges in theorganization. This adds to the validity of the analysis, compared toan off-line analysis.8.2. Validity through a grounded approachThe project followed a grounded theory approach (Strauss andCorbin, 1998). All artefacts in the method (concern catalogue, tax-onomy, concern plots, and improvement list) are grounded in userdata, with traceable connections that can be checked. Although thisdoes not eliminate analyst bias, it reduces its inﬂuence.8.3. Feedback on the method from the divisionThe method and its many parts received the following feedbackfrom the division:-Feedback
 on the concern prioritization method, from a senior spe-cialist in software process improvement, was that data collectionand analysis is more extensive compared to traditional prioriti-zation practices, but that extensive analysis seems inevitable inarchitecture improvement work.- Feedback on the concern survey by informants was that it was dif-ﬁcult, but that answering it lead to reﬂection on (and questioningof) current ways of working.- Feedback on the concerns catalogue by informant workshop par-ticipants was that the concerns catalogue was a valuable checklistthat would beneﬁt from company-wide standardization, and thatconcern plots captured the needs well and were good for collec-tive discussions of needs.- Feedback on the concern prioritization method’s informant work-shop itself was that it led to reﬂection, and that it was veryinteresting to see and hear that individual reﬂections were con-sistent with those of peers.- Feedback on the action principles was that although it is clear thatmore insight in some concern areas is needed, it is also clear thatmanagers should not have to understand concerns to the samedegree as designers do.Logica
 lConcu
 r-renc
 yPhy-

sicalDesign quality
Cross -cuttingIncrease
 (    )Add, sp ecializ
 eor
  clarify
viewsand details
in thi
 sarea
  ofconc
 ern
Decreas e (    )Reduce,
  remov
 eor
  mov
 edetail
 sand
  bur
 eacr
 acy
in thi
 sar
 ea ofconc
 ern
Fig. 15. Concern area priority dashboards. 1990L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994- Feedback on the concern plots by a chief architect was that thesewere “highly useful”.- Feedback on the concern plots by another chief architect was that“no one is doing this kind of user experience gathering” and thatthe architecture documentation, in much, is “open control” whereit is actually very difﬁcult for a chief architect to know if and howand to what degree architecture documentation is used.8.4. Feedback on method outcomes (AD user feedback) from achief architectWhen exposed to the most prioritized increase, Overview, achief architect approved that this improvement was indeed veryimportant. The architect could immediately explain several causesof the problem: (1) that the modeling tool in use had a hierar-chical process tree as dominating perspective; (2) that the toolhad a high learning barrier and (3) that overview artefacts (infor-mal diagrams) were not integrated with the modeling tool, i.e.,pictures existed but could not easily be viewed from inside themodeling tool. The architect also had clear ideas about their res-olution: to make AD reports as ﬁrst class citizens in the softwaredevelopment processes; to implement viewpoint “ﬁlters” wherea metamodel deﬁnes what the view should show, and where theactual overview is generated from the underlying more detailedmodel.When exposed to the topmost need to decrease, Control ﬂow, thearchitect reacted similarly: by immediately explaining what theunderlying problem was (sequence diagrams used prescriptivelyrather than for elaboration, Statecharts underused in speciﬁcations,and resistance to throw away sequence diagrams) and how theycould be resolved (distilling Statecharts from sequence diagrams,and throwing away sequence diagrams).The architect’s reactions to these recommendations make it evi-dent that the most prioritized problems, that our method produced,indeed were longstanding issues in the unit. It also showed that thearchitect knew how to solve these issues, but that he was either notempowered to implement the required changes or underfacilitatedby his managers.Together, this shows that our prioritization method’s approach,i.e., connecting user feedback to not only Chief architects, but alsoto upper managers that can facilitate Chief architects, is motivated.It also shows that the information provided to architects is com-prehensible and useful.9. Discussion of the method and its qualities9.1. Prioritization towards a single business goalThe method relies on prioritization of documentation towardsachieving a single business goal. It assumes that prioritization ofbusiness goals has already been resolved by upper managementand that the organization is to realize this goal – a common situationin large product developing organizations. In the case presentedin this paper, the business goal was increased speed, but it couldhave been any high level goal, such as increased quality, inno-vation, or efﬁciency. Optimization towards speed was an explicitrequirement from Ericsson as optimization for, say, correctnesscould result in counterproductive improvements from the perspec-tive of speed.The method, as it stands, does not include techniques for nego-tiation of business goals, neither for establishing consensus aroundrecommendations in case of conﬂicting interests among stake-holder groups. The method’s rationale is to support decision makingthrough increased feedback and codiﬁcation of current needs in theform of areas in most need for improvement (see Fig. 6). Methodsfor decision making on the basis of this information is beyond thescope of the current paper, although such methods are needed too.The method can straightforwardly be extended to include collabo-rative business goal negotiation as a pre-activity and collaborativedecision making of improvement projects as a post activity if thatwould be desired by an organization. It can also be used in (and isdesigned to support) centralized decision making on the basis of acollaboratively constructed recommendation.9.2. Zone mapping versus inference making from concern plotsThe zone map is primarily a communication device, as the rank-ings resulting from zone mapping, can easily be inferred directlyfrom the concern plot and a few principles. We recall from Sec-tion 7.1 that such interpretation resulted in recognition of overview,data, protocol realization, decomposition, system boundary as areasto improve, which was the very same ranking that zone mappingresulted in. This is natural as the zone map relies on the sameprinciples as our interpretations.However, for the purpose of communicating results, the simplic-ity of zone maps makes them superior. The many reasoning stepsinvolved in an interpretation of a concern plot may be difﬁcult tofollow, whereas it is easy to judge which point is closest to the curvefor the next higher zone on a map. Using zone maps, it is also clear,that selection involves some degree of arbitrariness and that otherfactors should be allowed to inﬂuence recommendations made.Thus zone maps are helpful, in supporting the recommenda-tions made, and in communicating recommendation conﬁdence.For instance, in the Ericsson case, overview concerns were out-standingly most important, followed by data concerns, whereasthe internal order between protocol realization-, decomposition,and system boundary concerns was more arbitrary. Conﬁdence inthe ﬁrst recommendation was also the highest.9.3. Variability in tools usedAlthough the method description makes certain commitmentsto tools used (qualitative data analysis tools, survey software, andspreadsheets), tools should be considered as variation point in themethod. More important than what tools are being used is that theorganization is accustomed to them, e.g., a wiki can serve as dataanalysis tool.9.4. Qualities of concern prioritizationA rating of our proposed method, with respect to the qualitymodel for concern prioritization methods deﬁned in Section 2, isgiven in Table 10. The rating is based on reﬂections on our experi-ences with the method and literature based comparison with otherapproaches to prioritization. We can see that the method scoreswell for most of the desirable qualities (involvement, interference,prerequisites, and accessibility), but not for cost.9.5. Summary of experiencesWhen the project started, viewpoint engineering was carriedout by a small team of senior architects that designed architecturedocumentations towards their (and their immediate networks)perceptions of the organization’s needs. Architects where, how-ever, challenged by the problems of attending to the special needsof all communities, and consequently of getting acceptance forarchitecture descriptions and their principles across all stakeholdergroups. Architects did actively listen to stakeholders, but the needsof designers, in particular, did not get the same degree of attentionas they, from an economic perspective, would deserve. L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 19941991Table 10The degree to which the proposed concern prioritization exhibits qualities desirablefor concern prioritization methods.QualityRating
Cost Moderate to High. Inventorying involves extensiveanalysis work over a prolonged period of time, givinghigh costs for establishment of taxonomy.Prioritization involves each informants spending atleast one day on taking the survey and on workshops,as well as analysis work, and recurrent meeting for ananalysis team Costs for taxonomy may however beamortized over several replications of prioritization.Involvement High. Key stake holders are involved in the datacollection as well as in decision making. The use ofsurveys allows involvement of hundreds ofstakeholders.InterferenceLow. During inventorying, informants are onlydisturbed by a 1 h interview, and a workshop. Duringprioritization, informants are disturbed for ½ a day fortaking the survey, and another ½ day for the informantworkshop. Most of the work is done by a small analysisteam, with occasional infrequent involvement ofexperts from within the organization.Prerequisites Low. The activities involved resemble everydaymanagement activities, and do not involve techniquesrequiring special training in statistics, or certainstatistics or analysis tools. Ordinary ofﬁce tools(spread-sheet software, survey collection systems, andwikis) are sufﬁcient for all activities, includingtaxonomy building.Accessibility High. The design of decision materials for managersand chief architects is user oriented. Materials arepresented at a level of abstraction and on a form thatthese roles are accustomed to. The use of site speciﬁcvocabulary in the taxonomy and the recommendationsmakes decision support materials easy to comprehend.Rationality Moderate. Statistical displays and inference principlesmake the approach more rational than intuitivedecision making; the interpretation of displaysinvolves elements of intuitive reasoning, thus theapproach is less rational than purely quantitativeapproaches.Correctness High. The method has extensive involvement ofstakeholders as informants, in the informantworkshop, giving recurrent opportunities forvalidation; data points in concern plots that do notappeal to intuitions of the informants receive strongcritique, as do erroneous rankings.Intuitivity High. Decision making is done by interpretation ofcomplementary data sources, rather than by statisticaltests.Validity Moderate to high. Properly executed, the method hashigh validity. Thanks to many manual coding andreporting activities, it is however sensitive to humanerror. Member checking in informant sessions detectsuch errors, but there are no guarantees for this.Experiences from our project are that codiﬁcation of user expe-riences, although somewhat costly, can have important effects onways of working. One effect of the study was awareness aboutthe division being subject to “the tyranny of the dominating per-spective” described by Ossher and Tarr (2001). What had beenappropriate views in earlier phases of the product’s lifecycle hadturned into a burden. The tyranny was caused by a UML 1.3 gen-eration MDD tool, which led to an over-emphasis of hierarchicalprocesses networks, state machines, and sequence diagrams. Manyof the problems with the AD could be traced back to limitations ofthis tool. This awareness, in turn, triggered the start of an architec-ture deﬁnition project that, using an object model as main view,obtained much better support for the Overview concern. It alsoaccelerated replacement of the tool with more modern technology.A third effect was recruitment of a full time position responsiblefor developing architectural views for concurrency concerns, whichour concern prioritization methods pointed out as in need for majorimprovement.Another important experience is the appreciation of documen-tation. In times of Agile software development, we were surprisedto ﬁnd that a majority of the engineers held increased documen-tation as a way to increased speed. Speed is tightly associatedwith agile software development, which in turn is associated withreduced emphasis on documentation, see e.g., the Agile Manifesto(Beck et al, 2001). Apparently, the very informants asked (seniordesigners, architects, and managers, most of which had extensiveexperience with UML and all of which had long experience withsoftware development in the large) were of the opinion that theroad to enhanced speed was to increase rather than decrease thedegree of architecture documentation.10. Related workMost works on prioritization in software engineering are con-cerned with product- or software requirements within a productdevelopment process (Berander, 2007; Berander and Andrews,2005; Regnell et al., 1998, 2001; Chatzipetrou, 2010). Concernprioritization is different to classical requirements prioritization,because AD is not engineered in the same way as products are:processes for AD evolution are typically implicit; there is no orga-nized elicitation of stakeholder needs, and decision procedures andeconomical frames are not as explicit. Requirement prioritizationtechniques address some challenges of concern prioritization, butdo not provide a whole solution.An early taxonomy for architectural concerns was Zachmansframework for Enterprise Architecture (Zachman, 1987); a rangeof enterprise architecture frameworks has been developed since,e.g., TEAF, EAP, C4ISR, DoD Products Map, DoDAF, NIST Enterprise,DOE AR. Our taxonomy for base station concerns (Pareto et al., 2009,2011) was inﬂuenced by the taxonomies of architectural concernsdeveloped by Kruchten (1995) for software development in gen-eral, and Rozanski and Woods (2005) taxonomy for enteprise ITsystems.Medvidovic has studied concern coverage of architecturedescription languages (Medvidovic et al., 2007) with respect toneeds.A method with explicit focus on prioritization of architecturalconcerns has been presented by Clements et al. (2010); they presenta three step method that involves a catalogue of architectural viewstypically needed by stakeholders, stakeholder workshops, internal-ization of informant needs by the architect, decision making by thearchitect, and feedback on decision making from informants. Ourapproach differs in its higher emphasis on analytical techniques andevidence building, its use of scalable enquiry instruments, and itsrecognition of economical decision makers as stakeholders in archi-tecture improvement work. Other differences are that our methodemphasizes improvement of existing AD on the basis of user experi-ences, whereas Clements et al. emphasize prioritization of concernsin the AD construction phases on the basis of generic best prac-tices. Where Clements et al. emphasize prioritization of concernsin the AD construction phases; our method emphasizes evolutionof existing AD. Our method also differs in its focus on organizationof prioritization work, and in being goal agnostic.Fairbanks (2010) proposes a risk driven approach to architec-ture, where risk perceived by designers, is used to prioritize whatarchitecture is needed. Our method differs in its focus on how largescale, multiple stakeholder prioritization work may be organized.The improvement goal in Fairbanks’ method is good architecture (alocal technical goal), whereas the improvement goal in our methodis a global business goal, e.g., increased speed.Koning and Vliet (2006) explore an alternative approach toarchitecture documentation improvement, where the stakeholder 1992L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994relevance of the existing architecture documentation elements areassessed, and where improvement proceeds by refactoring AD intosmaller stakeholder oriented chunks. The approach is different asit does not address prioritization per se, and through a more trans-formative than formative approach.Poort and Vliet (2011) present a method based on architect-ing as a risk and cost management discipline. Core activities arerisk- and cost-assessment during architectural analysis, cost andrisk based ordering of concerns, concerns inventorying, empha-sis on risk and cost in stakeholder communication, and cost- andrisk oriented objectives. The method has been validated in severalmajor industrial studies. The major difference to our approach isthe emphasis on risks rather than stakeholder needs, and that theanalysis is centralized rather than collaborative. Establishment offeedback loops is not part of the approach. Their method also relieson risk assessment as a critical skill that architects must possesswhereas our approach is needs driven, and does not depend onsuch competence.Closest to our approach, from a process perspective, is thedistributed prioritization method of Regnell et al. (2001), targetedat market driven product development. This method is iterative,driven by a small team that enquires disparate social worldsusing survey’s, analyses the feedback using graphical statisticaltechniques, involves informant feedback, and arrives at highlevel requirements. It does however rely on internalization ofthe prioritization problem by the deciding managers, whereas, inour method, a team of analysts provides managers with decisionsupport.Another similar approach, from a process perspective, is theinfrastructure renewal method of Karydas and Gifun (2006). Themethod is collaborative and proceeds by thematic group work ses-sions and extensive deliberation. This method, too, assumes thatdecision makers are extensively engaged in the prioritization activ-ities over a prolonged time, whereas, in our method, analysts ratherthan decision makers do most of the work.11. Future workAt the time of writing, ﬁndings from the study have led toimplementation of model-based support for interface speciﬁca-tions (interface abstraction) and new design rules (design quality).Decisions have partly been based on the architecture advice andpartly on factors not present in the prioritization. Future workinvolves comparing advice fed to the organization with actualevolution and to identify factors with inﬂuence on the decisions.Studies of the psychology behind preferences towards improve-ment by adding (rather than improvement by removal) and behindwanting more of what is there, i.e. documentation greediness,would allow for more precise surfaces of zone functions. Bettercalibration of the zones in the zone map so that the handicapis not needed would be an improvement. Quantiﬁcation of theeffect of greediness on answers would then have to be taken intoaccount.Another direction of research would be a compositional anal-ysis of our method: what the qualities of the involved techniquesare, with respect to the quality model of our conceptual framework,and how the qualities of the technique contribute to the qualitiesof the approach as a whole. This in turn could lead to introduc-tion of stronger techniques for some activities. In the long run, thiswould lead to variation points for the method, allowing a companyto make tradeoff between qualities through choice between simple(but inaccurate) or sophisticated (but more taxing) techniques, andsimilar tradeoffs.An interesting phenomenon to study is why change sometimesdoes not happen even when it is clearly important.On the technical side, algebraic formulation of the zone functionwould allow automated ranking and interactive adjustment of zoneboundaries. Templates for inference making in various situationswould make the approach simpler to apply.Extending the method to involve also external stakeholdersin AD (such as regulatory/standard certiﬁcation agents and inte-grators), brings further challenges that may require additionalactivities for enquiry and deliberation. Other extensions would beto bring in techniques for requirements negotiation in the formu-lation of the business goal of the improvement, and in the decisionmaking of which of the prioritized areas to actually start improve-ment projects for.Effective viewpoint engineering must not only involve Inven-torying and prioritization methods, but also methods formanagement of AD related decision, similarly to approaches in Soft-ware Architecture design decision management, e.g., that of Jansenet al. (2008) and Software Architecture knowledge management,e.g., that of Vliet (2008) and Farenhorst and Boer (2009).It seems plausible that generalization of our method could beapplied to prioritization problems in other domains than softwarearchitecture.12. ConclusionsEvolving architecture documentation requires engagement atseveral levels of the organization: designers must articulate theirconcerns; architects must specify needed views; managers mustprovide economic resources and appropriate organization to man-age the whole lifecycle of views. Core challenges in this areinventorying and prioritization of concerns, and effective commu-nication of stakeholder needs to chief architects and managers.We have presented a new method for concern prioritization forthe purpose of viewpoint engineering in the context of architec-ture documentation evolution in product developing organizations.The method combines collaborative and analytical techniques, andengages multiple stakeholder groups to produce grounded rec-ommendations of what areas of architecture documentation toimprove, and what to improve in these areas.The method is the result of three years of action research in adivision of Ericsson developing base station software. The methodhas been developed to meet needs as they arise in a real situa-tion; the outcome of the method has been incrementally validatedthroughout its development. Recommendations have been wellreceived by the organization studied.Major characteristics, compared to the other methods areuser-need based (rather than risk-based) prioritization, a transfor-mative rather formative approach to architecture documentationimprovement, the use of collaborative decision making, andemphasis on feedback loops.The objective of the research presented in this paper is amethod for prioritization of architectural concerns held by architec-tural documentation stakeholders within enterprise-scale productdeveloping organizations. Conventional approaches to require-ments prioritization are not suited to the problem, as the entityspeciﬁed (architecture documentation) as well as its role in theproduct developing organization, and the processes surrounding it,are different. Desirable qualities of a concern prioritization methodare low cost, high involvement of stakeholders, low interferencewith the daily work, high accessibility of method outcomes, highrationality in resulting priorities, high degrees of intuitive decisionmaking, high correctness, and high validity. The method presentedexhibits most of these qualities; the method’s weakest area is cost,at the level of 3 man-months per year, and stakeholder involvementat the same level. The method is an important step in viewpointengineering –the
 systematic application of engineering methodsto assure the ﬁtness for purpose of architecture documentation in L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 19941993all usage situations. However, in large product developing orga-nizations, such as those of Ericsson, where several hundreds ofdeveloper depend on architecture documentation in their dailywork, the savings that can be made from improved architecturedocumentation are clearly large enough to outweigh the costs forviewpoint engineering, which, with appropriate methods and peo-ple, only involves a handful of engineers.AcknowledgementsResearch supported by Ericsson Software Research throughEricsson’s Software Architecture and Quality Centre (SAQC). Thanksto the many informants at Ericsson that engaged in the study, andthe anonymous reviewers for insightful critique of earlier versionsof this paper.ReferencesANSI/IEEE Std 1471:: ISO/IEC 42010 – Systems and Software Engineering – Recom-mended Practice for Architectural Description of Software-Intensive Systems,2007.Armour, P.G., 2011. Don’t bring me a good idea. Communications of the ACM 54 (1),27–29.ATLAS.ti Scientiﬁc Software Development GmbH, 2012. Atlas.ti – Qualitative DataAnalysis. Available from: http://www.atlasti.com.Beck, K., et al., 2001. Manifesto for Agile Software Development, Available from:http://agilemanifesto.org/.Berander, P.,2007. Evolving prioritization for software product management. In:Department of Systems and Software Engineering School of Engineering.Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden, Blekinge.Berander, P., Andrews, A.,2005. Requirements prioritization. In: Engineering andManaging Software Requirements. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.Börjesson, A., 2006. Making Software Process Improvement Happen. Department ofApplied IT, IT University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg.Borjesson, A., Mathiassen, L., 2004. Successful process implementation. IEEE Soft-ware 21 (4), 36–44.Chatzipetrou, P., et al.,2010. Prioritization of issues and requirements by cumulativevoting: a compositional data analysis framework. In: 36th EUROMICRO Con-ference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applications. IEEE ComputerSociety.Christensen, H.B., Hansen, K.M., Schougaard, K.R., 2008. Ready! set! go! An actionresearch agenda for software architecture research. In: Seventh WorkingIEEE/IFIP Conference on Software Architecture, pp. 257–260.Clements, P., et al., 2010. Documenting Software Architecture – Views and Beyond.SEI Series in Software Engineering, 2nd ed. Addison Wesley, Boston, MA.de Boer, R., van Vliet, H.,2011. Experiences with semantic wikis for architecturalknowledge management. In: Working IEEE/IFIP Conference on Software Archi-tecture (WICSA). IEEE Computer Society, pp. 32–41.Dickens, L., Watkins, K., 1999. Action Research: Rethinking Lewin,pp. 127–140.Fairbanks, G., 2010. Just Enough Software Architecture – A Risk Driven Approach.Marshal and Brainerd, Boulder, CO.Farenhorst, R., et al.,2009. The Lonesome Architect. In: Proceedings Joint IEEE/IFIPWorking Conference on Software Architecture & European Conference on Soft-ware Architecture (WICSA/ECSA 2009). IEEE Computer Society, pp. 61–70.Farenhorst, R., de Boer, R.C., 2009. Knowledge management in software architecture:state of the art. Software Architecture Knowledge Management: Theory andPractice, 21–38.Jacobson, I., 1992. Object Oriented Software Engineering: A Use Case DrivenApproach. Addison-Wesley.Jacobson, I., 1987. Object-oriented development in an industrial environment. ACMSIGPLAN Notices 22 (12), 183–191.Jansen, A., Bosch, J., Avgeriou, P., 2008. Documenting after the fact: recover-ing architectural design decisions. Journal of Systems and Software 81 (4),536–557.Kaaranen, H., 2005. UMTS Networks: Architecture, Mobility, and Services. New York,Wiley.Karydas, D.M., Gifun, J.F., 2006. A method for the efﬁcient prioritization of infras-tructure renewal projects. Reliability Engineering & System Safety 91 (1),84–99.Koning, H., Vliet, v.H., 2006. Real-life IT architecture design reports and their relationto IEEE Std 1471 stakeholders and concerns. Automatic Software Engineering 13,201–223.Kruchten, P., 1995. Architectural blueprints – the “4 + 1” view model of softwarearchitecture. IEEE Software 12 (6), 42–50.Lewin, K., 1946. Action research and minority problems. Journal of Social Issues 2(4), 34–46.Linden, F.v.d., Schmid, K., Rommes, E., 2007. Software Product Lines in Action: TheBest Industrial Practice in Product Line Engineering. Springer, Berlin, New York,xx, 333 pp.Medvidovic, M., Dashofy, E.M., Taylor, R.N., 2007. Moving architectural descriptionfrom under the technology lamppost. Information and Software Technology 49(1), 12–31.Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M., 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis – An Expanded Source-book. SAGE Publications, Inc.Ossher, H., Tarr, P., 2001. Using multidimensional separation of concernsto (Re)shape evolving software. Communications of the ACM 44 (10),43–50.Pareto, L.,2010. Architectural concerns in base station development. In: ResearchReports in Software Engineering and Management. University of Gothenburg,Gothenburg.Pareto, L., Boquist, U.,2006. A quality model for design documentation in model-centric projects. In: Proceedings of the 3rd International Workshop on SoftwareQuality Assurance. ACM, Portland, Oregon.Pareto, L., Eriksson, P., Ehnebom, S.,2009. Concern visibility in base stationdevelopment: an empirical investigation. In: 12th Intl. Conference on ModeDriven Engineering Languages and Systems (MODELS 2009). Springer, Denver,CO, USA.Pareto, L., Eriksson, P., Ehnebom, S., 2010. Architectural descriptions as boundaryobjects in system and design work. In: Model Driven Engineering Languagesand Systems, Pt II, pp. 406–419.Pareto, L., Eriksson, P., Ehnebom, S., 2011. Concern coverage in base stationdevelopment: an empirical investigation. Software and Systems Modeling,http://dx.doi.org/10.1007/s10270-010-0188-2.Poort, E., Vliet, H.v.,2011. Architecting as a risk- and cost management discipline.In: 9th Working IEEE/IFIP Conference on Software Architecture (WICSA). IEEEComputer Society, pp. 2–11.Regnell, B., Beremark, P., Eklundh, O., 1998. A market-driven requirements engi-neering process: results from an industrial process improvement programme.Requirements Engineering 3 (2), 121–129.Regnell, B., et al., 2001. An industrial case study on distributed prioritisation inmarket-driven requirements engineering for packaged software. RequirementsEngineering 6 (1), 51–62.Rockstrom, A.S., 1982. SDL-CCITT speciﬁcation and description language. IEEE Trans-actions on Communications 30 (6), 1310–1318.Rozanski, N., Woods, E., 2005. Software Systems Architecture: Working with Stake-holders Using Viewpoints and Perspectives. Addison-Wesley, Upper SaddleRiver, New Jersey.Saaty, T.L., 1990. How to make a decision: the analytic hierarchy process. EuropeanJournal of Operational Research 48 (1), 9–26.Sandberg, A., Pareto, L., Arts, T., 2011. Agile collaborative research: action principlesfor industry-academia collaboration. IEEE Software 28 (4), 74–83.Star, S., Griesemer, J.J., 1989. Institutional ecology, ‘translations’ and boundaryobjects: amateurs and professionals in Berkeley’s Museum of Vertebrate Zool-ogy, 1907–39. Social Studies of Science 19 (3), 387–420.Strauss, A., Corbin, J., 1998. Basics of Qualitative Research: Techniques and Proce-dures for Developing Grounded Theory. SAGE Publications Inc., Thousand Oaks,CA.Susman, G.I., Evered, R.D., 1978. An assessment of the scientiﬁc merits of actionresearch. Administrative Science Quarterly 23 (4), 582–603.Tomaszewski, P., Berander, P., Damm, L.O., 2008. From traditional to streamlinedevelopment –opportunities
 and challenges. Software Process: Improvementand Practice 13 (2), 195–212.van Vliet, H., 2008. Software architecture knowledge management. In: Aswec2008: 19th Australian Software Engineering Conference, Proceedings,pp. 24–31.Zachman, J.A., 1987. A framework for information-systems architecture. IBM Sys-tems Journal 26 (3), 276–292.Lars Pareto is senior lecturer in software engineeringand management in the department of computer scienceand engineering at Chalmers – University of Gothenburg.Lars received a M.Sc. in Computer Science and Engineer-ing in 1992 and a Ph.D. in Computing Science in 2001from Chalmers. Lars has conducted collaborative researchwith Ericsson AB since 2006 and published several stud-ies related to modeling based software engineering. Larsteaches in model driven development, object orientedanalysis and design, and model driven engineering, at theSoftware engineering programs in Gothenburg. He is amember of the ACM.Anna Börjesson Sandberg is the head of process, meth-ods, and tools for Ericsson AB’s Design Unit for InternetProtocols and Broadband group. Her research interestsinclude lean and agile ways of working, software processimprovement, and collaborative practice research. Sand-berg received a Ph.D. in applied IT from the IT Universityof Gothenburg, in 2006. She has published several studieson software process improvement activities at EricssonAB. Anna is a member of IEEE and the ACM. 1994L. Pareto et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1971– 1994Peter Eriksson is a senior specialist in software architec-ture and real-time distributed systems, at Ericsson AB.Peter received his M.Sc. in electrical engineering fromChalmers University of technology in 1981, and has beenafﬁliated with Ericsson AB since then. Peter has over25 years experience of software development as pro-grammer, designer, architect and process engineer, in thecontext of real-time systems for radio base stations. Petercontributed to the introduction of model driven develop-ment in this context, and is engaged in Ericsson’s long termstrategic work for software architecture, modeling, andtool development.Staffan Ehnebom is a senior specialist in software mod-eling at Ericsson AB. He received a Master in electricalengineering from Chalmers in 1975, and has been afﬁl-iated with Ericsson since then. Staffan has 30 yearsexperience as programmer, designer, architect and pro-cess engineer in the areas of real-time systems andinformation systems. He was a key contributor to Eric-sson’s TMOS SDPM – one of the ﬁrst process models tocomprise iterative & incremental software development.Staffan is acknowledged in Jacobson, Object-oriented Soft-ware Engineering –A Use case Driven Approach (1992), andJacobsson, Griss, Jonsson, Software Reuse (1997).