 The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u r n al homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssThe lean gap: A review of lean approaches to large-scale softwaresystems developmentJ. Pernståla,, R. Feldtb, T. GorschekcaVolvo Car Corporation, SE-405 31 Göteborg, SwedenbDepartment of Computer Science and Engineering, Chalmers University of Technology, SE-412 96 Göteborg, SwedencBlekinge Institute of Technology, Karlskrona SE-372 25, Swedena r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 16 February 2013Received in revised form 17 June 2013Accepted 17 June 2013Available online 26 June 2013Keywords:
Systematic mapping studySoftware engineeringLean product developmentLean software developmentAgile software developmentAutomotive software developmenta b s t r a c tLean approaches to product development (LPD) have had a strong inﬂuence on many industries and inrecent years there have been many proponents for lean in software development as it can support theincreasing industry need of scaling agile software development. With it’s roots in industrial manufac-turing and, later, industrial product development, it would seem natural that LPD would adapt well tolarge-scale development projects of increasingly software-intensive products, such as in the automotiveindustry. However, it is not clear what kind of experience and results have been reported on the actualuse of lean principles and practices in software development for such large-scale industrial contexts. Thiswas the motivation for this study as the context was an ongoing industry process improvement projectat Volvo Car Corporation and Volvo Truck Corporation.The objectives of this study are to identify and classify state of the art in large-scale software develop-ment inﬂuenced by LPD approaches and use this established knowledge to support industrial partnersin decisions on a software process improvement (SPI) project, and to reveal research gaps and proposedextensions to LPD in relation to its well-known principles and practices.For locating relevant state of the art we conducted a systematic mapping study, and the industrialapplicability and relevance of results and said extensions to LPD were further analyzed in the context ofan actual, industrial case.A total of 10,230 papers were found in database searches, of which 38 papers were found relevant.Of these, only 42 percent clearly addressed large-scale development. Furthermore, a majority of papers(76 percent) were non-empirical and many lacked information about study design, context and/or lim-itations. Most of the identiﬁed results focused on eliminating waste and creating ﬂow in the softwaredevelopment process, but there was a lack of results for other LPD principles and practices.Overall, it can be concluded that research in the much hyped ﬁeld of lean software development isin its nascent state when it comes to large scale development. There is very little support availablefor practitioners who want to apply lean approaches for improving large-scale software development,especially when it comes to inter-departmental interactions during development. This paper explicitlymaps the area, qualiﬁes available research, and identiﬁes gaps, as well as suggests extensions to leanprinciples relevant for large scale development of software intensive systems.© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionSoftware is rapidly becoming a substantial component and seenas the main driver and source of innovations in a number oftraditionally hardware-focused industries, (e.g., automotive andaerospace) (Vekantesh Prasad et al., 2010; Broy et al., 2007). Forexample, the worldwide value of automotive software-intensiveCorresponding author. Tel.: +46313250242.E-mail addresses: jpernsta@volvocars.com (J. Pernstål), robert.feldt@chalmers.se(R. Feldt), tony.gorschek@bth.se (T. Gorschek).systems is expected to rise from 127 billion Euros in 2002 to 316billion Euros in 2015 (Dannenberg and Kleinhans, 2004). In theseorganizations, but generally in large organizations, the software-intensive systems are commonly developed in the context oflarge-scale development (i.e., systems of systems development),where software constitutes only one, but important, part of thewhole (Nihtilä, 1999; Broy et al., 2007). This context is of partic-ular interest in this study where one of the key challenges is tointegrate the software development into the overall and multidisci-plinary development of the complete product (Nihtilä, 1999). This isa challenge at Volvo Car Corporation (VCC) and Volvo Truck Corpo-ration (VTC), where the advancement of software has increased the0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2013.06.035 2798J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821uncertainty due to its changeable nature and the interdependencesbetween development tasks and artifacts, elevating the complexityof their organizational structure and leading to communication andcoordination problems across departments (inter-departmental).To avoid, or counter, large overhead, and enabling being highlyresponsive to change, software development organizations haveturned to agile software development over the past years, yield-ing some good results (e.g., Mannaro et al., 2004; Layman et al.,2004; Svensson and Höst, 2005), but also leaving questions unan-swered (e.g., Abrahamsson et al., 2003; Boehm, 2002; Conboy,2009; Wellington et al., 2005), ranging from scalability in largeorganizations to actual productivity and quality issues. Thus sim-ply applying agile (e.g., Scrum (Schwaber and Beedle, 2001)) as astand-alone solution to coordination and communication problemsin such large and complex organization as VCC and VTC would notwork. Hibbs et al. (2009) and Petersen (2010) claim that lean prac-tices and principles, building on lean product development (LPD),in contrast to agile, can be applied to any scope, and is a prerequisitefor scaling agile due to the unique focus on the whole.For all its beneﬁts, LPD stems from the Toyota Product Devel-opment System (TPDS) (Morgan and Liker, 2006) for managinghardware development, and that was not originally designed fordevelopment of software-intensive systems. Rather, it has primar-ily evolved, and been applied to development of products that havetraditionally been highly modular (e.g., vehicles) enabling indepen-dent development and manufacturing (Morgan and Liker, 2006).However, these products are now becoming more large and com-plex, integrated systems due to the increased amount of interactingsoftware-intensive systems (e.g., central locking and engine con-trol in a car) (Broy et al., 2007). Even though Poppendieck andPoppendieck (2003) have looked into how lean principles and prac-tices can be used in software engineering (SE) and presented leansoftware development (LSD), it is unclear what empirical evidenceexists that lean principles and practices can be successfully appliedfor software development in large-scale development projects ofsoftware-intensive products. It is therefore relevant to review pre-vious work and collect evidence of the feasibility of applying leanto such industrial contexts from both an industrial and an academicperspective.The study presented in this paper was primarily motivated by anindustry need of locating and evaluating state of the art that couldbe contributing for solving a number of key improvement issuesidentiﬁed in a previous case study (Pernstal et al., 2012). The casestudy is part of an SPI project, assessing the inter-departmentalinteraction between Product development (PD) and Manufactur-ing (Man) in the context of large-scale software-intensive systemsdevelopment at two Swedish automotive companies, namely VolvoCar Corporation (VCC) and Volvo Truck Corporation (VTC). Sinceboth companies have implemented lean manufacturing and areadopting LPD, they expressed a need of identifying the state of theart in large-scale software development building on lean princi-ples and practices. Consequently, the main objective of the studypresented in this paper is to evaluate and summarize such stateof the art for ensuring that this knowledge is not omitted whendeveloping solution for the identiﬁed issues in the companies.In addition, we also aim to identify needs and opportunities forfuture research—in essence ﬁguring out what new challenges andinadequacies might be present given the context of the case. Forthis we conducted an extensive systematic mapping study (SMS)(Petersen et al., 2008) as our initial searches in database showedthat there were relative few relevant and high-quality studies onthe topic of interest. Primarily because the case companies areadopting the well-established LPD principles originating from TPDSand described in Morgan and Liker (2006), we structure the mainpart of the analysis of the results according to these principlesin order to identify lean gaps in large-scale software-intensivedevelopment. Furthermore, we could have used the principles forLSD, but we wanted to take a broader view, as such developmentcovers different departments and engineering disciplines and is notlimited to software development. The LPD principles constitute thecore of, and serve as comprehensive guidelines for companies intheir efforts to achieve LPD where one of the key challenges is toobtain LPD across the whole company—not only within the devel-opment organization, but also in other surrounding organizationssuch as marketing, product planning, purchasing and manufactur-ing. In addition, industries developing software-intensive systemshave implemented lean manufacturing principles originating fromthe Toyota Production System (TPS) (Liker, 2004; Ohno, 1988). Inorder to minimize waste in their lean manufacturing processes,a well-known trend among these industries is also to improvetheir development processes by implementing related LPD princi-ples (Morgan and Liker, 2006)—but it is unclear how the principlesaddress the fact that software as an artifact, and software engi-neering as a discipline, are becoming a central component in theproducts developed.The paper maps the area, identiﬁes relevant work and qualiﬁesit in terms of quality, and reveals knowledge gaps. This is then dis-cussed and reﬂected upon based upon previous observation fromneeds identiﬁed at the case companies VCC and VTC, with the pur-pose of helping the case companies in their decisions of adoptinglean principles and practices as well as showing the challenges indoing so. In addition, based on the ﬁndings and industrial needs wepropose extensions to the lean principles in the running analysis.The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2gives a brief background and summarizes the related work. Section3 provides an outline of the research methodology used in the SMS.The results of the study are presented together with analysis inSection 4. Finally conclusions and future research directions arepresented in Section 5.2. Background and related workThis section describes large-scale software development,presents related work on LPD and summarizes previous most rel-evant reviews of studies reporting experiences, and best practiceswithin, or close to, the scope of this SMS. Finally, motivations andobjectives are given.2.1. Large-scale software-intensive systems developmentChallenges in software development are often related to scaling-up software-intensive systems as the complexity increases morethan linear with the size (Brooks, 1988; Curtis et al., 1988; Kraut andStreeter, 1995). Many industries develop large software systemsthat are embedded in their products (e.g., vehicles and avionics)where the complexity becomes even more manifested (VekanteshPrasad et al., 2010; Broy et al., 2007). This because such productsare typically built of functions, systems, and sub-systems includ-ing various hardware components and running on a large amountof interacting software, requiring precise coordination and inte-gration of development tasks across multiple departments andengineering disciplines (Broy et al., 2007). For example, the log-ics of the central locking system (CLS) is controlled by softwaredistributed over different sub-systems of the complete vehicle(e.g., door modules and alarm system), involving mechanical engi-neering (e.g., door locks), electrical engineering (e.g., lock motors.sensors and cable harnesses) and SE (e.g., controlling of the lock-ing function logics). In addition, manufacturing engineering mustbe involved in order to secure that the system ﬁt the manufactur-ing processes—how shall, for example, the CLS be conﬁgured andquality assured in manufacturing? Moreover, in these industries, J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 28212799many of the systems are safety critical (e.g., airbag and anti-lockingbraking systems in a vehicle) where the development is governedby safety standards (e.g., ISO 26262), incorporating such as the V-model (ABG, 1997) and including, for example, hazard analysis,safety analysis and veriﬁcation). For managing the rapidly increas-ing share of software in these products, it has been acknowledgedin research that the role of SE needs to be better integrated into thePD as a whole (Nihtilä, 1999).2.2. Lean product developmentBased on several studies on the automobile industry byresearchers at the International Motor Vehicle Program (IMVP) atthe Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Womack et al.(1990) introduced the LPD concept. This concept is building on TPDSunder the heading of the broader concept of lean production. Theyconcluded that there were differences between mass and Japaneselean producers not only in the manufacturing processes, but alsoin the PD processes in terms of practices regarding strong lead-ership, teamwork, early communication and coordination acrossdepartments, and concurrent development.Many companies developing large software-intensive systemshave implemented lean manufacturing, but to make full use ofthis competitive weapon – squeezing out more waste of leanmanufacturing processes – lean needs also to be extended to thePD processes (Morgan and Liker, 2006). To increase the effec-tiveness in the PD processes, several companies have started toimplement some inherent principles and practices of LPD. Con-tinuous improvement (Kaizen), Kanban, concurrent engineering,customers and suppliers’ involvement, visual management, groupwork and cross-functional teams emerge as some of the practicesused to reach the purpose of LPD (Karlsson and Åhlström, 1996;Morgan and Liker, 2006; Sobek et al., 1999; Wang et al., 2012).However, deploying only a few of the practices is not enoughfor achieving LPD. Womack and Jones (2003) claim that lean is away of thinking that must be adopted throughout the whole enter-prise. They conceptualize lean thinking into ﬁve categories: value,value stream, ﬂow, pull, and perfection. Value deﬁnes the use thata product offers a customer, and works backward to build busi-ness processes. A value stream describes each step in processesand categorizes them with regard to the value added (e.g., valueadding, necessary non-value adding and non-value adding steps).Flow organizes processes so products move smoothly through thevalue-creating steps. Pull involves each customer calling outputfrom the previous step, on demand. Finally, perfection entails con-tinuous improvement of processes for meeting customer needs andwith zero defects.Literature speciﬁcally addressing LPD, are typically referring tostudies on TPDS (Karlsson and Åhlström, 1996; Morgan and Liker,2006; Kennedy et al., 2008). Morgan and Liker (2006) present acomprehensive work on LPD. Using the Sociotechnical SystemsTheory (STS) (e.g., Miller and Rice, 1967) and the principles andpractices of TPDS, they describe the core and essence of LPD in amodel called Lean Product Development System (LPDS). LPDS isbased on the idea that LPD is a philosophy being adopted through-out the whole enterprise rather than superﬁcial applications of afew lean principles and practices to parts of an organization. TheLPDS model contains three primary sub-systems: (1) process, (2)skilled people and (3) tools and technology. These are described bymeans of 13 principles, see Fig. 1.Whereas LPD principles are viewed as a platform for implemen-ting lean approaches to PD on an enterprise-level, LSD is commonlyseen as a method for applying lean in the software developmentdiscipline and referred to the work presented by Poppendieckand Poppendieck (2003). Their adaptation of lean principles intoseven software development principles is the main source forinterpreting lean principles in the context of SE. These princi-ples are:(1) eliminate waste—doing only what adds customervalue without delays, (2) amplify learning—using frequent feed-back loops, (3) delay commitment—deciding as late as possible, (4)deliver as fast as possible—minimizing the time from receiving cus-tomers’ needs to delivery, (5) empower the team—fostering respectfor people among leaders and staff and building expert technicalworkforce, (6) build integrity in—establishing product quality asearly as possible for avoiding defects in late phases, and (7) see thewhole—for avoiding sub-optimizations, the whole software devel-opment process is considered.LSD has been associated with agile methods, such as XP (Beck,2004) and Scrum (Schwaber and Beedle, 2001), and is often seenas just another agile method (Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2008; Highsmith,2002). However, the deﬁnitions of the terms agile and lean are oftenambiguous and inconsistent in the software development literature(Conboy, 2009). This makes it difﬁcult to identify differences andoverlaps between them, but in recent literature LSD is acknowledgeas being a method category with its own identity and even claimedto be the next evolutionary step from agile towards lean approachesin software development (Hiranabe, 2008; Wang et al., 2012).Poppendieck and Poppendieck (2003) advocate that lean is a plat-form upon which to build agile software development practices,and view lean principles as the theoretical foundation behind agilesoftware development. Furthermore, Hibbs et al. (2009) claims thatlean principles can be applied to the whole enterprise where soft-ware development constitute one part of large-scale PD processes,while agile methods mainly focus on team levels activities and spe-ciﬁc practices for developing software and usually do not concernthe surrounding business context in which software developmenttake place. Others argue that even though there are differences,but also overlaps, between agile and lean principles, they comple-ment each other, and in particular, the unique focus on the whole inLSD supports the expanding industry need of scaling agile softwaredevelopment (Coplien and Bjornwig, 2010; Petersen, 2010; Wanget al., 2012). Similarly, it is commonly claimed that agile methodshave their shortcomings in large-scale development, where it isrecommended to mix the best features of traditional plan-drivenand agile methods (e.g., Boehm, 2002; Conboy, 2009; Karlström andRunesson, 2005; Sommerville, 2007).In summary, earlier work on lean and agile in SE indicates thatadoption of lean principles in software development is beneﬁcialespecially when it comes to large software systems development.Even though lean and agile methods are inﬂuencing also more tra-ditional industries, such as the automotive one, the transition tolean and agile methods have only started and is not yet widespreadin the context of large-scale software development (Dybå andDingsøyr, 2008; Wang et al., 2012).2.3. Summary of related reviewsFor locating related literature reviews, we searched the scien-tiﬁc databases ACM Digital Library, IEEE Xplore, Inspec, ISI Web ofScience, Scopus, and Google Scholar. The search string was basedon the synonyms for systematic review deﬁned by de AlmeidaBiolchini et al. (2007). Reviews covering the area focused on in thispaper could not be found. However, studies reviewing literatureon lean and agile methods focusing on the SE ﬁeld were found. Thefollowing presents the most relevant ones.Dybå and Dingsøyr (2008) conducted a systematic literaturereview (SLR) of empirical studies of agile software developmentand LSD up to 2005, and identiﬁed 36 relevant empirical studies.Of those, only one reported on applying lean practices to softwaredevelopment. Other main ﬁndings were that most of the empiricalstudies focus on a single development method (e.g., XP) and studieson agile), and implementations are mainly carried out on smaller 2800J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821LeanProduct
DevelopmentSystem
(LPDS)SkilledPeo
ple1. Establish Customer-Defined Value to Separate Value-Added Activity from Waste2. Front-Load the Product Development Process While There Is Maximum Design Space to ExploreAlternativeSolutionsThoroughly
3.CreateaLeveledProductDevelopmentProcessFlow
4. Utilize Rigorous Standardization to Reduce Variation, and Create Flexibility and PredictableOutcomes11.AdaptTechnologytoFitYourPeopleandProcesses
12.AlignyourOrganizationthroughSimple,VisualCommunication

13. Use Powerful Tools for Standardization and Organizational Learning5. Develop a Chief Engineer System to IntegrateDevelopment from Start to Finish6. Organize to Balance Functional Expertise and Cross-Functional Integration7.DevelopToweringTechnicalCompetenceinAll

Engineers8. Fully Integrate Suppliers into the Product DevelopmentSystem
9.BuildinLearningandContinuousImprovement

10.BuildaCulturetoSupportExcellenceandRelentless

ImprovementProcessTools&
TechnologyFig. 1. LPDS model adapted from Morgan and Liker (2006).scale (only three of the papers investigated settings with more than50 people).Cawley et al. (2010) performed an SLR investigating to whatextent lean and agile software development methods have beenadopted in regulated safety critical systems development. Most ofthe studies identiﬁed were based on agile practices (XP and Scrum)combined with traditional plan-driven development methods, butthey found no studies where LSD had been used. However, theybelieve that LSD has a potential of improving the developmentof safety-critical systems, and thus, point out the need of furtherinvestigations in this area.Wang et al. (2012) reviewed 30 experience reports published inagile conferences in which lean principles and practices had beenapplied to agile software development. They divided the reportsinto six categories of lean applications in agile software develop-ment. One of those concerned applications of lean approaches forimproving the interaction with other units that had already imple-mented lean principles and practices established in the overall PDprocess while keeping the agile software development processesinternally. Furthermore, they found that several recently publishedpapers reporting on mature agile organizations show that theseorganizations have a tendency to move from time-boxed agile pro-cesses to more ﬂow-based lean processes. The growing interestin LSD is also reﬂected by the fact that special issue on lean hasrecently been published in Lean Software Development (2012).2.4. Motivations and objectives of this SMSThere are three main rationales for carrying out the SMS pre-sented in this paper: (1) To the best of our knowledge, there are nosystematic mapping studies locating the state of the art buildingon LPD with a focus on large-scale software development, (2) anindustrial need of evaluating the strength of evidence and poten-tial industrial value of such state of the art, and (3) gaps and needsfor future research in the area are unclear.The SMS presented in this paper differs from previous reviews.Dybå and Dingsøyr (2008) included LSD and had a clear focus onagile methods, while Wang et al. (2012) limited their review tostate of the art using lean applications in agile software develop-ment. Our main focus is on lean application to large-scale softwareintensive systems development, mainly because agile methodshave primarily been applied to and studied in small-scale soft-ware development projects (Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2008), which is aproblem for large-scale development. Lean approaches on the otherhand seem to scale better than agile (Wang et al., 2012), which iswhy we use lean and lean principles as the base for our study andanalysis. We analyze our results from a broad lean perspective byusing LPD principles applicable to the whole enterprise and not theLSD principles primarily adapted for software development as themain focus here is on software developed in the context of largersystems in a multidisciplinary setting (e.g., software controlling theengine or the CLS system in a vehicle).Assessing the methodological quality and the strength of evi-dence in order to assist practitioners in the case companies toevaluate the potential beneﬁts and risks, and decision supportprior to adopting the state of the art is another main reason forperforming the SMS. For this we reﬂect on our results from theviewpoint of inter-departmental interaction by building on the col-lected data and ﬁndings in an industrial case study reported inPernstal et al. (2012). The study examines the interface betweenPD and Man in large-scale development of software-intensive sys-tems at VCC and VTC. PD is concerned with design and developmentof software-intensive automotive systems (e.g., development ofpower train and chassis control systems for vehicles). Man is con-cerned with managing these systems when producing vehicles(e.g., vehicle manufacturing operations affected by power trainand chassis control systems). The case was chosen mainly becauseinter-departmental coordination and communication is a key chal-lenge in large-scale software projects (Kraut and Streeter, 1995)and the interaction between PD and Man has been identiﬁed ascritical, both in the case companies and in literature (Morgan andLiker, 2006; Pernstal et al., 2012; Wheelwright and Clark, 1994;Nihtilä, 1999). Furthermore, the researchers involved in the studypresented in this paper have access to rich and detailed informationabout the case, allowing better possibilities to judge the industrialapplicability and relevance of the results. In addition, we assessedthe quality of the selected papers by using an evaluation modelproposed by Ivarsson and Gorschek (2009, 2011) for gauging rigorand industrial relevance of studies.Another main reason for conducting the SMS is to identify gapsand opportunities for future research (Kitchenham and Charters,2007). LPD has primarily evolved and been adopted in tradition-ally hardware-focused industrial sectors (e.g., automotives (Ward,2007)) and aerospace (Lean Aerospace Initiative (LAI) (Murman,2004)), while the empirical evidence for the applicability of leanand agile software development methods to such large-scale indus-trial contexts is unclear (Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2008). However,software is increasingly becoming an important component inthese sectors, and unlike much hardware development and man-ufacturing, software development is a nonroutine activity and J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 28212801Table 1Research questions.Research question DescriptionRQ1: What is the state ofthe art in large-scalesoftware developmentprimarily based on leanprinciples and practices?Investigating if there are researchcontributions based on lean principles andpractices in large scale development ofsoftware-intensive systems. In this study, weimpose no limitations with regard to the levelof evaluation of the state of the artRQ2: What are thecharacteristics of theidentiﬁed state of theart?Structuring and analyzing the maincontributions of the publications by combiningthe properties included in the sub-questionsRQ2.1, RQ2.2, RQ2.3 and RQ2.4.RQ2.1: What type ofresearch is commonlyconducted?Reﬂecting the research approaches used in thepublications independent from the speciﬁcfocus areaRQ2.2: What is therelevance of the state ofthe art?Assessing the quality of the results reported byexamining the level of the industrial relevanceRQ2.3: What is the rigor ofthe state of the art?Assessing the quality of the results reported byexamining the level of the rigor (e.g.,descriptions of study design and context).RQ2.4: What topics in SEdoes state-of-the-artexplicitly and clearlytarget?Capturing the topics covered and identifyingresearch gaps in the ﬁeld of SERQ3: What relationshipsare there between stateof the art and theprinciples of LPD?Ordering and analyzing of the state of the artreported in relation to the LPD principles. Theobjectives are to identify research gaps andneeded extensions in LPD for large-scalesoftware development, and evaluate theapplicability of the state of the art, giving theindustrial partners support in decisions on theSPI projectthe “material” itself is intangible, changeable, and unpredictable(Brooks, 1987; Kraut and Streeter, 1995). Furthermore, to identifyand suggest areas for further studies addressing LPD in software-intensive industrial sectors, we give an overall picture and an indepth analysis of how the state of the art in large-scale softwaredevelopment based on lean principles and practices are related toLPD. In addition, to outline research needs from an SE perspective,the identiﬁed state of the art is mapped to the different knowl-edge areas (KA) as deﬁned by SWEBOK (Abran et al., 2004). Wechose SWEBOK as a way to structure the paper as it is well knownand established framework sponsored by IEEE. Although not per-fect or seen as optimal by all (Kaner, 2003)—we considered it tobe adequate for our purposes, and any framework used have bothproponents and opposers.3. Research methodologyThe process for the SMS presented in this paper follows theguidelines by Kitchenham and Charters (2007). It consists of thefour main steps: (1) deﬁnition of research questions, (2) genera-tion of search strategy, (3) study selection, and (4) data extractionand quality assessment. Three researchers were involved in thisSMS. In order to enhance the validity and reliability, we have con-tinuously documented and updated the research procedures in areview protocol, which is summarized below.3.1. Research questionsThe research questions posed in the SMS presented in this paperare shown in Table 1.3.2. Search strategyThe SMS was limited to peer-reviewed conference papers orjournal articles written in English language, published betweenTable 2Search string and keywords.Population AND Interventionsoftware AND (developmentOR engineering ORembedded system* ORelectronic*)Lean* OR Kanban OR Kaizen OR‘continuous improvement’ OR‘cross* functional’ OR‘concurrent engineering’ OR‘integrated productdevelopment’1990 to 2010, since the term ‘lean’ was ﬁrst coined by Womack et al.(1990). Furthermore, in order to reduce the number of irrelevantresults, the search was only applied to the title, keywords andabstract (Dybå et al., 2007).The search string was generated on the basis of the scope ofthis SMS and is composed of two groups of search terms, popula-tion AND intervention. Population includes alternative keywordsrepresenting creation of software-intensive systems or products.Keywords covering common concepts, principles and practicesrelated to lean are embedded in intervention primarily based on(Morgan and Liker, 2006; Karlsson and Åhlström, 1996; Sobek et al.,1999; Wang et al., 2012). As inter-departmental interaction is oneof the most critical challenges in large-scale software development(Kraut and Streeter, 1995), principles and practices that we couldrelate to this were speciﬁcally considered. In order to identify rele-vant keywords and balance the comprehensiveness and precision,the search string evolved over several pilot searches in the Sco-pus database. These searches showed that terms not speciﬁc forlean, such as “integrated product development”, was used in pub-lications that could be relevant (e.g., Negroni and Trabasso, 2009).However, these studies were excluded during selection process,primarily because they did not focus on software development. Toensure the reliability and relevancy of the searches and to evalu-ate the search strings, emerging key publications were listed andcompared to the trial search.In the ﬁrst trial search, population targeted large-scale softwaredevelopment. However, the search showed that there was a lackof relevant publications in this speciﬁc area (less than ﬁve). Toprogress the review, we decided to extend the scope of the SMSso population covered development of software-intensive systemsin general. The relevance of the located state of the art for large-scale software development was then assessed during the dataextraction step.With regard to the quality of the studies, it would have beeneffective to use keywords that limit the publications to studieswhere the state of the art has been evaluated in some way (e.g.,empirical, experience, lesson learned etc.) or in terms of a speciﬁcresearch method (e.g., experiment, case study etc.). However, trialsearches with such restrictions on the search string showed thatthere was a high risk of missing relevant papers, resulting in anincomplete overview of the reviewed area. As a consequence, thisdelimitation was not imposed. Moreover, the keywords for some ofthe practices commonly used in lean, such as pull and problem solv-ing, were too general, generating many irrelevant hits, and werethus discarded. The ﬁnal search string’s keywords used for popula-tion and intervention and the Boolean expression are presented inTable 2.The search string was applied to ﬁve electronic databases in theSE ﬁeld. The list of selected databases and the dates of the electronicsearch are provided in Table 3.The search in the databases yielded in a total of 13,984 hits. Afterremoving duplicates 10,230 publications remained to be furtherinvestigated. Due to large amount of publications, the referencemanagement application Mendeley (http://www.mendeley.com)was used. 2802J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821Table 3Searched databases.Databases Search dateACM Digital Library 2011-02-05IEEE Xplore2011-02-05
Inspec 2011-02-05ISI Web of Science 2011-02-05Scopus (comprises Compendex) 2011-02-053.3. Study selectionThe selection of relevant studies that are within the scope andrelate to the research questions posed in this SMS was based on anumber of criteria for including publications. The purpose of thecriteria is to ensure inclusion of studies on large-scale softwaredevelopment and any kind of lean development. In Table 4, theselection question and inclusion criteria are speciﬁed and brieﬂyexplained.The process for study selection began with selecting relevantpublications based on screening the titles, keywords, and abstractsof the papers.As shown in Fig. 2, the screening process consists of two mainsteps. First, the title and keywords are screened. Depending onwhether the main focus of the study is relevant, the paper isincluded. If there are uncertainties about the main focus of thestudy, the abstract is read in the second step where the paper isonly included if the main focus is clearly relevant.The three researchers elaborated a manual containing the pro-cess and selection criteria. To enhance the quality of the manualand establish a uniﬁed understanding and interpretation of thecriteria and the process, we piloted and computed the inter-rateragreement. In the ﬁrst pilot, we assessed 100 randomly selectedpublications from the search performed in the databases. The Fleiss’Kappa (Fleiss, 1971) value showed a moderate agreement (0.5)according to Landis and Koch (1977). We scrutinized the resultsof the pilot and reﬁned the manual. In particular, the deﬁnitions ofthe selection criteria were perceived too implicit, and hence theywere further detailed, speciﬁed and clariﬁed by adding explana-tions. Then we performed a second pilot on 30 randomly selectedpublications, yielding a substantial agreement (0.74) (Landis andKoch, 1977), and one of the researchers used the agreed manual onthe remaining papers selected for the screening.After the screening, one of the researchers also applied the inclu-sion criteria to the conclusion and introduction sections of theremaining set of papers. Papers that were difﬁcult to judge (e.g.,unclear focus on lean approaches to software development) wereclassiﬁed as “unsure”. A full-text reading of these papers was con-ducted by the three researchers, and then further evaluated anddiscussed based on the inclusion criteria (see Table 4) in a consen-Table 4Criteria for study selection.Selection question Inclusion criteria ExplanationIs the main focus ofthe study relevant?The paper clearly statesthat it focuses ondevelopment ofsoftware or softwareintensive products orsystems AND includesany kind of leandevelopmentSoftware-intensive systemsor products consist ofintegrated software andhardware solutions, e.g.,automobiles, aircrafts,mobile phones, etc.Lean development involvesmethods such as, Kanban,Kaizen (continuousimprovement), concurrentdevelopment etc.Table 5Overview of extracted data.Property Description Research
question(s)Main focus Lean in large-scale softwaredevelopmentRQ1Development phasesMethods and practices used (e.g.,Kanban, Kaizen, and concurrentdevelopment etc.).Type of contribution (e.g., model,framework, process, method, practice,metrics etc.)Context Domain (e.g., automotive, aerospace,telecommunication, web etc.)RQ1Project type (e.g., size, duration,complexity)
Product type (e.g., system, softwareapplication, service complexity)Type of research Categorization of the research typeused in the papers based on theexisting classiﬁcation scheme providedin Wieringa et al. (2006)RQ2.1Relevance and rigor Quality assessment of the papers byevaluating rigor and relevance basedon the method used by Ivarsson andGorschek (2009, 2011)RQ2.2,
RQ2.3Topic in SEMapping
 of the main contributions ofthe papers to topic(s) in the SE ﬁeldaccording to the KAs in SWEBOK(Abran et al., 2004)RQ2.4LPD principles Mapping of the main contributions ofthe papers to the LPD principles in theLPDS model (Morgan and Liker, 2006)RQ3sus meeting, yielding a ﬁnal set of agreed papers for data extraction.Fig. 3 shows the overall study selection process and the statisticsfor how the publications from the selection based on the search indatabases were reduced to a ﬁnal set of studies accepted for dataextraction and quality assessment.The search string generated 13,984 published studies between1990 and 2011 written in English. Of those, 3754 were iden-tiﬁed as duplicates by listing titles and authors alphabeticallyin Mendeley, which resulted in leaving 10,230 publications forthe screening. After applying the inclusion criteria on the titles,keywords, and abstracts, 10,176 papers were found irrelevant,reducing the remaining number of publications to 54. Many ofthe excluded papers reported on engineering of computer-aidedsoftware applications and tools applied to virtual developmentof mechanical parts (e.g., CAD/CAM), automation in production,and lean manufacturing. Finally, 16 papers were excluded becauseeither a copy of the full text was not available; the results of thestudy were reported multiple times, or there was an unclear focuson software development. Hence, a total of 38 publications wereleft for the subsequent quality assessment and data extraction (seeAppendix A).3.4. Data extraction and quality assessmentWe developed a data extraction form on the basis of theresearch questions posed in Section 3.1. The construction of theform aimed to gather data needed for the data synthesis so thatthe research questions could be answered. This was primarilydone quantitatively by classifying the selected studies into a num-ber of representative properties (systematic mapping) (Petersenet al., 2008), but also qualitatively through in-depth analysis of thedata (systematic review) (Kitchenham and Charters, 2007). Table 5describes the properties used in the extraction form and their map-ping to the research questions. J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 28212803StartStep 1 Screen title and keywordsIs the main focus relevant?Step 2 Read abstractIs the main focus relevant?Exclude paper(It is clear that the paper does NOT focus ondevelopmentofsoftwareANDlean.)
NoNoInclude
paper
Include
paper
Unsure
Unsure
Yes
Yes
Exclude paper(It is NOT clear that the paper focuses ondevelopment of software AND lean.)Exclude paper(It is clear that the paper does NOT focus ondevelopment of software AND lean.)Fig. 2. Process for study selection based on screening the titles, keywords, and abstracts.For a deeper analysis, data was enriched by extracting qual-itative data including descriptions of the study context and thecontributions, reported success factors and limitations, and theobjectives of the study.To mitigate any misinterpretation of the study results due to lowstudy quality, the extraction form also included a quality assess-ment that was performed for each of the studies. For estimatingthe study quality, the studies were assigned scores for rigor andrelevance according to the evaluation method provided in Ivarssonand Gorschek (2009, 2011).In order to enhance the precision and consistency of the dataextraction, and a common understanding and interpretation of theproperties among the researchers, we piloted the data extractionform two times on a limited number of papers. After each pilot,the results were compared and any disagreements between theresearchers were resolved through further discussions until con-sensus was reached. For example, clariﬁcations of the knowledgeareas and research types were needed, and it was necessary todivide the level of relationship between the contributions of thepapers and the LPD-principles into the three scores of ‘no’, ‘weak’and ‘strong’ relationship. A ‘strong’ relationship entails that it isclearly and explicitly stated while a ‘weak’ relationship means thatit is only possible to deduce it.The piloted data extraction form was then used by one of theresearchers, who performed the further data extraction. Whiledoing the data extraction, the form was continuously discussed andupdated (e.g., adding, splitting and reformulating categories). Theﬁnal data extraction form is provided in Appendix B. The extracteddata of each paper was ﬁlled out and documented in an MS Excelsheet. Furthermore, a short rationale was added explaining whythe paper should be in a certain category (e.g., why the paper wasattributed to a speciﬁc research type). From the entered data, wecalculated the frequencies of publications in each category, andused qualitative data coding for scrutinizing and categorizing theextracted quotes (e.g., shared results, claims and recommenda-tions).4. Results and analysisIn this section, we present the results of the SMS derived fromthe 38 papers ﬁnally selected according to the research questionsspeciﬁed in Section 3.1. Of these, 16 studies addressed large-scalesoftware development. The 38 included papers (S1-S38) are listedin Appendix A.4.1. Quality assessment (RQ2.2 and RQ2.3)We performed the quality assessment by evaluating the rigorand relevance of the studies based on the aspects included in themodel presented by Ivarsson and Gorschek (2011). The level of theindustrial relevance of the reported results is estimated with regardto the realism of the research setting and the applicability of theresearch method for investigating phenomena in the real world.The level of rigor is estimated through examination of to whatextent and detail the context and research method are presented,Fig. 3. Overall study selection process and statistics. 2804J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821and the validity of the results is discussed. The maximum score forrigor is three, while relevance has a maximum of four.Fig. 4 shows the distribution of rigor and relevance of theselected studies, using a bubble graph (Petersen et al., 2008). Thesize of the bubbles is proportional to the number of papers thatare in the pair of scores for relevance and rigor corresponding tothe bubble coordinates (the number of papers addressing large-scale software development is placed in brackets). The graph showsthat 12 studies have zero relevance (32 percent) and of these ninestudies (24 percent) have both zero rigor and relevance wheretwo studies address large-scale software projects. Typically, the 12studies include descriptions of solutions that were evaluated byusing small examples (6 out of 12), or relying on the view of theauthor(s) (4 out of 12). However, this does not mean that thesestudies are out of scope of this review and thus should be excluded.The purpose of the model is to give an overall picture in the ﬁeldbeing reviewed by approximating the potential industrial relevanceand its progress, rather than providing precise and detailed crite-ria for an exact classiﬁcation of each individual study (Ivarsson andGorschek, 2011). Furthermore, our main objective of the SMS is toestablish knowledge about state of the art, being helpful for the casecompanies in the search for solutions to the key issues identiﬁedin the SPI project. State of the art deemed as irrelevant accordingto the model can be relevant for the case companies as there maybe other factors inﬂuencing the evaluation of the relevance thanthose based on the actual use in industry. This makes it difﬁcult todistinguish relevant studies from irrelevant ones. For example, thelikelihood of introducing subjective bias when assessing the valueof research is high in both what to assess (e.g., what constitutesvalue and quality), and reviewers’ competence to assess it (Dybået al., 2007). Also the time perspective needs to be considered as ittakes in the order of 15–20 years before state of the art has maturedso it can be implemented in industry (Dybå et al., 2005). However,drawing conclusion merely based on these 12 studies should notbe done as the model indicates they have low quality.On the other hand, 24 studies have relevance equal to threeor more than three. Furthermore, 14 out of the 16 studies onlarge-scale software development have relevance equal to four. Therelatively high values of relevance are explained by that many stud-ies are reporting on experiences of applying lean approaches to realindustrial settings. However, most of the studies are located in thelower left and right quadrant, where 28 studies have a rigor equalto one or less than one and 11 of these studies are on large-scalesoftware development. Insufﬁcient information about the studydesign and lacking discussion of the validity are the main reasonsfor the low values of rigor. For example, 16 studies did not evenbrieﬂy describe the study design, and only one provided a detaileddiscussion of the validity. Omitting to report how the study was per-formed (e.g., sampling, data collection and analysis), where (in whatcontext), and any limitations of the results (e.g., generalizability andreliability) make it difﬁcult to replicate the study and evaluate theresults (Dybå et al., 2005; Ivarsson and Gorschek, 2011).To summarize, even though the quality assessment shows thatthe relevance of the studies is relatively high, the lack of rigorreduces the possibility to judge the capability of the state of theart to be contributing for practitioners seeking to adopt new bestpractices, and limits replications of the studies.4.2. Current state of the art (RQ1)In total 38 studies dealt with state of the art in software devel-opment built on lean principles and practices. The studies wereperformed in contexts ranging from large and complex projectsin multi-national companies to student projects in academia.Of these, 42 percent (16 out of 38) clearly dealt with soft-ware development in large-scale settings in different industrialsectors, such as aerospace, avionics, telecommunication and indus-trial automation.For all the selected studies, we identiﬁed and categorized theused lean practices. Each study was then classiﬁed into a singlecategory. However, in some studies lean practices were applied incombination with agile methods (hybrids) and in many studies itwas unclear which lean or agile method that had been used. There-fore, studies not focusing on speciﬁc methods and practices (e.g.,studies only mentioning or only implicitly related to a practice)were classiﬁed as generic lean or generic lean and agile.In Fig. 5, the number of studies per category of lean and agilemethods is presented. For each category the total number of stud-ies and studies addressing large-scale development are given. Forexample, the total number of studies classiﬁed as generic lean is14 where nine of these studies are addressing large-scale devel-opment. For all the studies, 66 percent (25 out of 38) reported onsolely lean, while 34 percent (13 out of 38) reported on lean andagile hybrids. Almost the same relationships can be seen for stud-ies on large-scale development, where 69 percent (11 out of 16)reported on lean and 31 percent (5 out of 16) on hybrids. It is notablethat publications reporting on combinations of lean or hybrids oflean and agile, and plan-driven development (e.g., waterfall, RUP,and V-model) could not be found, since such combinations havebeen recommended for large-scale software development (Boehm,2002; Karlström and Runesson, 2005; Sommerville, 2007).Looking at the diagram, most of the studies (24 out of 38) donot focus on any speciﬁc lean practice; 14 studies report on genericlean, eight on generic lean and agile, one on generic lean and agilemodel driven development, and one on generic lean and XP. PullSystem (Kanban software development) is the most frequentlyreported lean practice (six studies), but it can also be observed thatthis practice has not been reported in large-scale software systemsdevelopment. Furthermore, 12 out of the 14 studies reporting ona speciﬁc lean practice have been published recently (2006–2010).This is much in line with Wang et al. (2012), who saw a trend ofadopting more and more concrete lean practices, and in particular,Kanban software development. With regard to studies on large-scale development, 81 percent (13 out of 16) are classiﬁed intogeneric lean (nine studies), generic lean and agile (three studies),and generic lean and agile model driven development (one study).Value stream mapping (two studies) and visual management (onestudy) are the only speciﬁc types of lean practices that are clearlyfocused on and reported.4.3. Type of research (RQ2.1)To obtain an overview of the research type used in the studies,they were classiﬁed according to the classes provided in Wieringaet al. (2006). The diagram in Fig. 6 shows the distribution of theresearch types for all the selected studies (black bars), and the16 studies on large-scale development (black and white bars). Forexample, in total 17 studies are classiﬁed as experienced stud-ies and of these 10 are studies on large-scale development. It canbe observed that the most common research type used is experi-ence papers (45 percent of all studies and 62 percent of studies onlarge-scale development) in which practitioners have reportedtheir own experiences, followed by evaluation research (21 per-cent of all studies and 25 percent of the studies on large-scaledevelopment). Furthermore, a majority of the publications are non-empirical (76 percent), since only 24 percent (9 out of 38) can beclassiﬁed as evaluation research and validation research. Of thosefour studies on large-scale development are empirical. This indi-cates that the reviewed area in this SMS is not yet mature. Onereason for this can be that the lean and agile principles and practiceshave been introduced relatively recently in the ﬁeld of SE (e.g., Beck,2004; Poppendieck and Poppendieck, 2003; Schwaber and Beedle, J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 28212805Fig. 4. Distribution of rigor and relevance of selected studies (number of studies on large-scale are placed in brackets).Fig. 5. Practices and methodologies reported and their frequencies.2001). Another reason could be that although LPD has been used formany years by Japanese automakers and Western companies in, forexample, the automotive and aerospace industry (Murman, 2004;Ward, 2007), it is not until recent years that software has becomean important component in these traditionally hardware-focusedindustrial sectors (Venkatesh Prasad et al., 2010; Broy et al., 2007).Nevertheless, in order to increase the maturity, there is a need formore validation and evaluation research efforts, involving rigorousresearch methods (see also Section 4.1). These include case stud-ies on large-scale software development projects in real industrialsettings, where data is collected and analyzed systematically andthe validity of the results are scrutinized (Ivarsson and Gorschek,2009, 2011).4.4. Topics in SE (RQ2.4)We mapped the main contributions of the papers to topic(s) inthe SE ﬁeld according to the KAs in SWEBOK (Abran et al., 2004) inorder to obtain an overview of the coverage of the studies in the SEdomain. Each study could be mapped to multiple KAs. The diagramin Fig. 7 shows the proportion of all studies (black bars) and studieson large-scale software development (black and white bars) per KA.For example, the proportion of all studies in the KA of engineeringtools and methods is 16 percent and the proportion of studies onlarge scale development in this KA is 10 percent.It can be observed that most of the studies could be classi-ﬁed into the KAs of engineering management (32 percent) and 2806J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821Fig. 6. Research type distribution of all studies (black bars) and studies on large-scale software development (black and white bars).engineering process (24 percent), whereas there are few studiesclearly addressing the KAs of conﬁguration management (2 per-cent), maintenance (2 percent) design (2 percent) and quality (3percent). The proportions of the studies on large-scale softwaredevelopment show a similar pattern. The largest proportions ofthese studies are mapped to the KAs of engineering management(30 percent) and engineering process (33 percent), and there areno studies classiﬁed into the KAs of conﬁguration management,maintenance, design, and quality. An explanation for this is thebroadness of the KAs of engineering management and engineeringprocess spanning over the other KAs, which makes it easier to clas-sify the studies into these two KAs. Many studies that did not clearlyspecify which KA they addressed, usually dealt with SPI. In orderto primarily reducing lead times and enhance quality, these stud-ies involved different ways of tackling issues of general softwaredevelopment management based on lean management principles(e.g., deﬁning customer value and eliminating waste). This indicatesthat the reviewed area of interest is immature, since most of thestudies provide implicit state of the art without detailed and prac-tical guidance for adapting it to different situations and problemswithin a speciﬁc KA. Lacoste (S15) and Linecar and Preston (S16),for example, only articulate that Kaizen (continuous improvement)management is a beneﬁcial approach when improving the softwarelife cycle processes. Another example is Perera and Fernando (S24),who conducted an experiment involving 10 student projects andfound that a hybrid process of lean and agile produces more linesof code than an agile process, but they do not provide a detaileddescription of how the processes differ and which practices areused.Along with the lack of rigor, this makes it difﬁcult for prac-titioners to understand the applicability of the state of the artreported. For example, four studies on large-scale software devel-opment could be mapped to the KA of requirements and of theseonly two had a rigor of more than one, namely Ippolito andMurman (S11) and Petersen and Wohlin (S25). Ippolito and Mur-man (S11) conducted three detailed case studies and 128 surveys.With the goal of improving the software upgrade value streamin development of large-scale software-intensive systems, theysought to identify effective lean practices for eliciting softwarerequirements from aerospace system level requirements. How-ever, the reported ﬁndings and recommendations only formed ahigh-level basis for developing a framework that would increasethe value-added contribution of the software requirement process.Petersen and Wohlin (S25), on the other hand, provide examplesof actual uses of a method inﬂuenced by the quality improvementparadigm (QIP) (Basili, 1985) called software process improvementthrough lean measurement (SPI-LEAM). SPI-LEAM was designedfor improving the ﬂow in software development and applied inlarge-scale industrial setting for measuring inventories of softwarerequirements.Fig. 7. Proportions of studies per KA— all studies (black bars) and studies on large-scale software development (black and white bars). J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 282128074.5. Relationships between the state of the art and LPD principles(RQ3)To answer RQ3, we identiﬁed relationships between the maincontributions of the selected studies and the principles in LPDS.Each study could have multiple relationships. Table 6 describes theprinciples, lists all the selected studies, and shows the number ofthem for each principle. Relationships to studies on large-scale soft-ware development are also shown and their frequencies are placedin brackets. Furthermore, only the strong relationships identiﬁed(see Section 3.4) are given in Table 6 (Appendix C shows both thestrong and weak relationships). For example, there are nine studieswith strong relationships to Principle 1, and of these four studies(S11, S13, S20, and S27) are on large-scale software projects.Looking at Table 6 and how the strong relationships identiﬁedfor all studies were scattered over the sub-systems in LPDS, 42 rela-tionships could be attributed to process, 15 to skilled people and11 to tools and technology. The number of relationships betweenstudies on large-scale development and the sub-systems are 16 forprocess, seven for skilled people, and six for tools and technology.Thus, a majority of the studies have a process-oriented focus. Eventhough the importance of skilled people has been acknowledgeas a major factor for success in software projects (Brooks, 1987;Kraut and Streeter, 1995), this indicates that there is still a strongbelief that the processes must be changed for effectively producingsoftware-intensive systems.Both for all studies and those on large-scale software devel-opment, Principle 3 has the highest number of relationships (25and 11, respectively), followed by Principle 12 (10 and 5, respec-tively) and Principle 1 (9 and 4, respectively). Apparently, the mainareas of interest in the studies are lean principles and practicesfor deﬁning customer value, reducing waste, creating ﬂow in thePD process, and visual management. Moreover, none of the studieshave a strong relationship to Principles 5, 8 and 13, which indicatesan overall lack of research on the role of product manager, integra-tion of suppliers, and tools for standardization and organizationallearning in lean approaches to development of software. It can alsobe seen that there are no strong relationships between Principle 10and studies on large-scale software development.In the following, this section presents a deeper analysis of thestrong relationships between the principles and the studies onlarge-scale software development. Thus, Principles 5, 8, 13 and10 are not further analyzed. In order to assist the case companiesto evaluate the potential value of the results prior to deciding onadopting the state of the art, practical implications are analyzedand reﬂected upon based on the data extracted from the reviewedpapers and on previous observations in the case study by Pernstalet al. (2012). In addition, potential gaps and implications for futureresearch are discussed.Principle 1—Establish Customer Deﬁned Value: To suppress theoccurrence of waste, lean organizations emphasize elicitation anddissemination of deﬁned customer values throughout the organi-zation to all involved teams by breaking down the overall goals tomeaningful objectives on all levels of the organization. This leads toincreased understanding in downstream activities of what createsvalue for the customer.Kettunen (S13) presents a research model for investigating andevaluating the performance of process improvements based on leanand agile principles and practices in software development orga-nizations. Specifying customer value is central in the model as theperformance on enterprise level is expected to be based on contin-uous delivery of high product value. In a case study by Middletonet al. (S20), they claim that customer value is the most impor-tant issue to initially focus on in software development. To deﬁnecustomer value, the development team they studied, thereforeiteratively elicited and reﬁned requirements in close cooperationwith the customer, yielding a list of prioritized features. Whenprioritizing the requirements, the Kano (1996) model describingthe relationship between customer satisfaction and quality andcategorizing customer needs into three types, was found useful.However, Ippolito and Murman (S11) found that eliciting the cus-tomer value of software changes in large systems is complex asthey are dependent upon multiple, interacting values associatedwith other changes to the whole system (e.g., sensors, certiﬁca-tions, hardware, and supporting equipment). Consequently, thiscreates multiple value streams where the development of softwareincludes just one part of identiﬁed customer values of the completeset of values for developing the total system.Dissemination of deﬁned customer values throughout the orga-nization to all involved teams leads to increased understanding indownstream activities of what creates value for the customer. Mid-dleton et al. (S20) and Rudolf and Paulish (S27) report on usingdesign structure matrix (DSM) (Eppinger et al., 1994) for breakingdown deﬁned customer requirements in order to transform theminto design requirements that are deployed to further the PD pro-cess, and ensure value-adding requirements on lower abstractionlevels.All four studies on large-scale development mapped to this prin-ciple address how customer value is identiﬁed and broken downfor the design of software-intensive systems, but not for other func-tions of a development organization. Referring to our case, there areno studies on how to transfer customer value to Man and breakingit down to best practices that create most value for the customer ofthese systems in the manufacturing operations. For example, oneobservation was difﬁculties in determining the types of software-intensive systems in vehicles that are most beneﬁcial to conﬁgurein the manufacturing processes and how this should be performedeffectively (e.g., conﬁguration by assembly plant software down-load or parameter setting of pre-loaded software). Thus, for a betterunderstanding of how to create customer value concerning designand manufacturing aspects of large software-intensive systems,there is a need of more studies, which in turn can provide spe-ciﬁc knowledge and best practices that can be added to LPD forlarge-scale development of software-intensive systems.Principle 2—Front-load the PD process: Front-loading encom-passes clariﬁcations and trade-offs of different aspects andrequirements in early phases of the PD process in order to obtainmore robust and optimized systems. This reduces the risk forrework in late development phases. Rudolf and Paulish (S27) wasthe only study on large-scale software development that had astrong relationship to this principle. To achieve early problem-solving, they used root cause analysis based on A3s and 5Whys.However, the study merely report on what to do on a high level,but not how the actual implementation should look like. Further-more, evidence for the applicability of the presented state of the artis unclear as Rudolf and Paulish (S27) only give brief descriptionsand experiences of applying problem-solving in the case company.Active involvement of manufacturing engineers in early phasesis recognized in research as one of the most critical factors inPD, since it reduces the risk of pushing through manufacturingprerequisites in late phases, which often leads to costly changesand jeopardizes the launch of the product (Sobek et al., 1999;Wheelwright and Clark, 1994).Difﬁculties in attaining early and pro-active manufacturinginvolvement was one of the main issues identiﬁed at the casecompanies. The primary reasons for this were that software-intensive systems are intangible and are often described in writtenrequirements speciﬁcations implying a high abstraction level to beinterpreted and understood. In addition, the manufacturing pro-cesses and tools that are affected by in-vehicle software are oftenrecognized as complex, since they incorporate both vehicle com-munication technologies and interaction with other IT systems that 2808J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821Table 6Relationships between lean principles in LPDS (Morgan and Liker, 2006) and selected studies.Sub-system Principle Description Strong relationshipTotal Large-scale Freq.Process 1. Establish customer-deﬁned value toseparate value-added activity from wasteTo create a lean PD process, it is important to establish a customer deﬁned value asa ﬁrst step. Once these values have been identiﬁed, diffused and understoodthroughout the whole organization, it is possible eliminate wasteS7, S11, S13, S14, S20,S21, S26, S27, S33S11, S13, S20, S27 9 (4)2. Front-load the PD process while there ismaximum design space to explorealternative thoroughlyInvolves problem-solving at root cause level in early project phases. The aim is toeliminate late engineering changes like ‘quick ﬁxes’ and patches that rarely resultin increased product or process performanceS7,S8,S12,S18,S26,S27,S33S27 7 (1)3. Create a leveled PD process ﬂow. Involves eliminating waste (everything that does not contribute to the value forthe customer) and establishing ﬂow (regular pace) in the PD process. The total PDvalue stream is examined with the aim to eliminate non-value adding activitiesthat occur between development steps such as unnecessary handovers ofdocuments and reinvention instead of standardization of components. Flow iscreated by incremental development where work is broken down into suitabletasksS3, S6, S7, S8, S9, S10,S11, S12, S13, S14, S15,S17, S18, S19, S20, S22,S23, S25, S28, S29, S30,S32, S34, S37, S38S3, S11, S13, S20, S22,S23, S25, S28, S30, S32,S3725 (11)4. Utilize rigorous standardization toreduce variation, and create ﬂexibility andpredictable outcomesStandardization has a large inﬂuence on PD since it reduces variation that enablesincreased ﬂexibility and predictable outcomes. There are three categories ofstandardization: design standardization, process standardization, and engineeringskill-set standardizationS32 S32 1 (1)Skilled people 5. Develop a chief engineer system tointegrate development from start to ﬁnishThe top management appoints a chief engineer immediately after a new programhas been decided upon. The chief engineer is considered to be the owner of theproduct and is responsible for the whole development process from concepts tolaunch06. Organize to balance functional expertiseand cross-functional integrationCreating efﬁcient PD organizations by combining the beneﬁts of product andfunctional focused structures in a matrix organization. This allows simultaneousattention to functional and program demandsS36 S36 1 (1)7. Develop towering technical competencein all engineersThe necessity to use a rigorous recruitment process, mentoring andon-the-job-training (OJT) in a structured way. For example, in order to have thecapability to technically challenge design engineers, the recruitment and trainingof manufacturing engineers should be equally comprehensiveS11, S16, S23, S29 S11, S23 4 (2)8. Fully integrate suppliers into the ProductDevelopment System.Comprises a high degree of supplier involvement. This implies early involvementof suppliers in PD, a rigorous selection of suppliers, and that suppliers arecommitted to continuously maintain and develop their engineering andmanufacturing capabilities in order to meet the demands of the orderingcompany, i.e., original engineering manufacturer (OEM)09. Build in learning and continuousimprovementTo achieve continuous improvement (Kaizen) of products or processes, it isimportant to recognize and encourage learning and understanding of technologiesand processes where both tacit and explicit knowledge are developed, diffusedand maintained in the organization nS3, S13, S15, S16, S22,S26, S27, S35S3, S13, S22, S27 8 (4)10. Build a culture to support excellenceand relentless improvementThe culture embraces a fairly stable set of assumptions that are taken-for-granted,shared beliefs, meanings, and values in an organization that govern the members’operations and enables the organization to rely less on formal lean control systemsS16, S19 2 (0)Tools & Technology 11. Adapt technology to ﬁt your people andprocesses.Tools and technology must be customized based on organizational needs. Thismeans that the integration of new technologies facilitating incorporation withexisting systems or tools and adaptation to established processes should beseamless, and not vice versaS31 S31 1 (1)12. Align your organization through simplevisual communicationDeals with the organization’s capability of effectively coordinating complexcommunication such as requirements, test results, project status reports andmanufacturing constraints between teams and across functions in the PD processS6, S8,S11, S14, S19,S20, S25, S28, S31, S38S11, S20, S25, S28, S31 10 (5)13. Use powerful tools for standardizationand organizational learningTo build learning organizations, it is necessary to deploy tools that supportdevelopment, diffusion and preservation of both explicit and tacit knowledge, onwhich evolving standards are based0 J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 28212809integrate PD and Man (such as product data management sys-tems and factory systems). Being able to understand and foreseethe impact of software-intensive systems on the manufacturingprocesses in early phases is therefore often highly dependent ondeep knowledge and a great deal of experience among both man-ufacturing and design engineers. For example, designing the audiosystems in a vehicle without foreseeing required failure diagnosticsfor the loudspeakers and buttons, can make it difﬁcult and costlyto secure the quality of the system in the manufacturing processes(for example, manual intervention is needed). Integrated problem-solving (Wheelwright and Clark, 1994) and set based concurrentengineering (SBCE) (Sobek et al., 1999) are lean practices that ele-vate active cross-departmental development work, but they do notconsider speciﬁc contextual needs. Thus, there is a need for futureresearch giving a better understanding of early and active commu-nication and balancing of demands on products and manufacturingoperations in large-scale development of software-intensive sys-tems, on which speciﬁc methods and practices can be developedand effectively applied, and suggested as add-ons to this LPDprinciple.Principle 3—Eliminate waste and create ﬂow: Identifying andeliminating sources of waste in a value stream by using valuestream mapping (VSM) (Womack and Jones, 2003) are central inPrinciple 3. When using VSM in PD, the available and requiredresources from a holistic view of the PD system are mapped out,enabling increased understanding of waste and the sources of wastein a PD value stream (Morgan and Liker, 2006; Poppendieck andPoppendieck, 2003). Based on the seven wastes of manufactur-ing (Ohno, 1988), Morgan and Liker (2006) provide correspondingsources of waste in PD, and Poppendieck and Poppendieck (2003)speciﬁcally interpret them to suit the SE domain.For a considerable amount (25, equaling 66 percent) of the total38 studies, we could identify a strong relationship to Principle 3. Ofthese, eleven studies addressed large-scale software developmentwhere six of them dealt with elimination of waste. Table 7 gives anoverview of what type of waste each of these six studies focused on,and gives a description of each waste in PD and examples relatedto SE.Table 7 shows that four studies can be attributed to the wastecaused by inventories. An underlying reason for this may be thewell-known just-in-time approach adopted in manufacturing aim-ing to eliminate inventories, and that research on general PDrecognizes that inventory inﬂuences other types of waste nega-tively (Morgan and Liker, 2006). For example, Middleton et al. (S20)claim that minimizing inventories of unveriﬁed code and large vol-umes of requirements fosters the development teams to uncoverhidden defects earlier in the PD ﬂow, which reduces rework inlate phases. Peterson and Wohlin (S25) claim that inventories alsoincrease waiting times, the number of developed extra featureswithout customer value, and uncompleted tasks. For measuring dif-ferent types of inventories in software development, they presentthe SPI-LEAM method. SPI-LEAM was applied to a real case, wherethe inventory of requirements were measured on the overall pro-cess life-cycle. This led to a number of suggested improvements. Forexample, to deal with overload situations in the development team,the team pulled prioritized requirements from a buffer instead ofpushing requirements into development.The only study that could be related to all types of waste wasSekimura and Maruyama (S28), who introduced and applied TPS tolarge-scale development of business application software. Insteadof focusing on one type of waste, they emphasize the importance ofidentifying and eliminating all seven types of waste. For example,work allotments were changed for reducing waste in processing,recurrence of defects were prevented by analyzing and taking cor-rective actions based on software defect reports, and inventorieswere eliminated in terms of answer rates within 24 h.Although VSM is a central practice in lean, only two studiesreport on using VSM in developing software-intensive systems. Ina case study by Mujtuba et al. (S22), VSM was applied to a softwareproduct customization process. On the basis of a static validationthey conclude that VSM was useful and its beneﬁts can be con-veyed to more general SPI efforts. They identiﬁed waste related towaiting (e.g., delays for customer sign-offs and system integration),processes (e.g., extra processes for design) and motion (e.g., motionof requirements). Similarly, Pernell-Klabo (S23) experienced thatVSM is a helpful practice when introducing and transitioningtowards agile software development where motion was the mostprevalent type of waste identiﬁed, followed by processing and over-production.In addition to eliminating waste, lean organizations endeavor toestablish a ﬂow (i.e., regular pace) of material and/or information. Insoftware development, software concepts of object-oriented pro-gramming and modular design stress the need to decompose thework packages into the smallest units possible, because there is acomplexity explosion and the chances of having a defect and thecost of ﬁnding it goes up exponentially with the size of the build(Hoffman and Weiss, 2001).Accordingly, to establish and maintain ﬂow, most of the studiessuggest incremental development where previously large projecttasks are divided into smaller chunks (Aoyama (S3); Middleton(S20); Sutton et al. (S32); Vodde (S37)). For example, Aoyama(S3) introduces and applies a model for managing developmentof large-scale software systems in a concurrent manner, namedconcurrent development system (CDS). CDS is the ancestor to theagile software process model (ASP) (Aoyama, 1997). The tasks weredivided into so-called minor and major enhancements dependingon the possibilities to decouple the parts of the systems developed.To facilitate release planning and enable a smooth developmentﬂow, the development time of major enhancements was set to amultiple of minor enhancement. In this study, the major enhance-ments were six months and the minor three months. Furthermore,the development process was divided into an upper sub-processincluding requirements analysis, design, and implementation, anda lower sub-process involving integration and system tests. Eachsub-process had to be completed within a ﬁxed cycle time (herethree months) with a ﬁxed number of developers, and iteratedover multiple releases (cf. sprints in Scrum (Schwaber and Beedle,2001)). Applying the CDS resulted in a shorter development cycletime (from one year to three months), and reduced ﬂuctuations indevelopment sizes and build-up of inventories, improving the uti-lization ratio of workload. Similarly, Middleton et al. (S20) balancethe workload by breaking down projects into manageable chunks ofwork, termed ‘kits’ (batches of requirements are decomposed into‘stories’), which in turn enable the setting of a cycle time. Further-more, they observed that staff with multiple skills has a positiveimpact on reducing ﬂuctuations and in workload.Overall, when creating ﬂow and eliminating waste in large scalesoftware development, there is little research and evidence of thebeneﬁts and limitations of lean practices or tools. For example, dif-ferent types of waste seem to occur depending on the degree ofexploration and focus in the research. This indicates that solelyfocusing on one certain type of waste, may imply a risk of factorsoutside this waste area being left out of the analysis in the efforts ofeliminating waste. For example, despite that it was well motivatedto develop a method for measuring inventories in Peterson andWohlin (S25), it can be questioned whether inventories is the mostinﬂuencing and prevalent type of waste in a software developmentﬂow.An observation in the case study was that the types of wastein the PD and Man interface are multifaceted. For example, mostsoftware-related issues (e.g., inadequate vehicle diagnostics imple-mentation) come to light in the pre-production evaluation phase 2810J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821Table 7Seven wastes.Seven wastes Description Studies on large-scale1. Overproduction-producing more or earlierthan the next process needs.* When completing design tasks before the next development step in the PD valuestream ﬂow, there is a need to process the tasks (e.g., ﬁnish coding before testing)S28* Carrying out unnecessary activities that are not required for the next step ordeveloping extra features without customer value (e.g., developing software forfunctionality that does not provide value to the customer).2. Waiting-waiting for materials, information,or decisions.Development engineers often have to wait for reviews, decisions, permissions orinformation before they can perform dedicated key activities in the PD process (e.g.,handshaking and sign-offs of software requirements speciﬁcations).S22, S283. Conveyance-moving material or informationfrom place to place.Making unnecessary transfers between activities such as exchange of informationbetween actors and diffusion of decisions throughout the development team leads toloss of momentum, information and accountability in the PD process (e.g., manyhandovers of written code and results of system integration or veriﬁcation).S284. Processing-doing unnecessary processing ontasks or an unnecessary task.Unnecessary or incorrect engineering, such as designing from scratch instead of usingcarry-over or standardized components (e.g., refactoring of working code is omitted),or developing of unique manufacturing processes to ﬁt a speciﬁc system or vehicleprogram instead of striving for standards and commonality.S20, S22, S285. Inventory-a build-up of material orinformation that is not being used.*Information waiting in queues to be processed by the next step where informationgets lost (e.g., designers cannot manage large batches of approved softwarerequirements speciﬁcations, creating a risk of omitting important information).S3, S20, S25, S28*Tasks that are partially done or transferred too late to where it is needed (e.g., code iswritten, but not integrated in the system).6. Motion-excess motion or activity during taskexecution.*Development engineers may attend unnecessary meetings (e.g., redundant reviewmeetings for status reports on coding, system integration or test results).S20, S22, S23, S28*Unnecessary distances between program members (e.g., suppliers, designers andmanufacturing engineers, may create inefﬁcient transfers of information orknowledge, leading to inappropriate design decisions).7. Correction-ﬁxing problems. *Any additional work for ﬁxing problems that could have been prevented earlier in theproduct development (e.g., late and expensive in-vehicle software changes due toinsufﬁcient adaptation to manufacturing processes affected by the software oroccurrence of bugs). Thus, planned development activities, such as Poka-yoke (e.g.,checklists, standards, and detailed test plans), for catching and preventing errors inproduct development, cannot be directly referred to this type of waste.S20, S28peaking somewhere in the middle of this stage. Consequently, thiscauses unplanned and costly design loop backs of both in-vehiclesoftware and affected manufacturing processes in the ﬁnal part ofthe project.Another example is managing the large interface betweenPD and Man usually also entails a comprehensive meet-ing structure causing unnecessary meetings and overwhelminginter-departmental transferring of information. In addition, thedevelopment of increasingly software-intensive automotive sys-tems creates more complex interdependencies between previouslydecoupled and modular systems in vehicles (e.g., the CLS systemas described in Section 2.1). This makes it even more important toensure cross departmental information transfer whilst not inﬂatingthe meeting structure and efforts to deliver information. It is, how-ever, rarely an option to dedicate more resources for integratingthese systems and the manufacturing processes in highly com-petitive businesses, such as automotives. This will probably alsodiminishing the true needs of interaction and thereby hinder thepossibilities to uncover and reduce waste.Principle 4—Utilize a rigorous standardization: Standardization isimportant as it reduces variation, which enables increased respon-siveness to change and ﬂexibility and predictable outcome. Morganand Liker (2006) classify standardization into three categories,design, process, and engineering skill set. However, reducing vari-ability in PD is complicated as there are good and bad variability(Reinertsen, 2009). Good variability adds value and should beexploited while bad variability (e.g., sloppiness and repeating mis-takes) should be eliminated, but it is often difﬁcult to distinguishbetween them. Consequently, to accomplish the required responsein PD to rapid changes without reducing productivity and sys-tem quality, it is necessary to pursue standardization of processesand design and to achieve process discipline among employeeswithout suppressing variability that increases an organization’ssuccess.One of the future key challenges in SE is that development ofsoftware must be responsive to rapid changes without compro-mising system quality (Sommerville, 2007). However, only one ofthe large-scale studies is concerned with standardization in leandevelopment. For spreading lean throughout the aerospace indus-try, Sutton (S32) reports on the experiences from using the LAIprogram (Murman, 2004), which was initiated by the U.S. Air Forcein 1992. Responsiveness to change is one of the meta-principlesin LAI, emphasizing standardization through domain engineering.This implies that requirements and architecture are structuredalong domain lines, which provide a standardized and stable basisfor variants. The LAI practices and principles were applied to a soft-ware project, and overall, Sutton concluded that it was a success asit reduced cost and risk. However, the impact of standardization isnot explicitly discussed.Reﬂecting on this principle in relation to our case, the software-intensive systems entail an increase of variants being dealt within the automotive industry. A premium car typically has about 80electronic ﬁttings that interact on several networks in the car, andcan be ordered depending on, for example, the country etc.(Broyet al., 2007). Simple yes or no decisions for each function yield apossible maximum of roughly 280variants to be ordered and pro-duced for a car. In addition, differences between production unitsin terms of available processes, assembly sequences, and tools leadto excessive work for adapting the variabilities in design and manu-facturing. For example, adapting variants of networks (e.g., CAN andFlexRay), and diagnostics and software download concepts (e.g., ISO14229-1, 2006) in the vehicles, and different tools for communi-cating with the vehicles in manufacturing, increase the complexityand effort of managing software-intensive systems in production.Although partnerships such as Automotive Open System Architec-ture (Autosar, 2009) aim to standardize software-intensive systemsin the automotive domain, the SMS presented in this paper showsthat there is a lack of research providing better understanding and J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 28212811advice, and helping the standardization of design, processes andcompetences across engineering disciplines and departments in thecontext of large-scale software-intensive systems development.Principle 7—Develop towering technical competence: This con-cerns the importance of having comprehensive recruitment,structured and sophisticated training, and mentoring programs inorder to obtain necessary skills needed to perform ones work, butalso sufﬁcient understanding of others work.Two of the studies addressing large-scale software developmentare concerned with Principle 7. When introducing and chang-ing from traditional to lean approaches in software development,Pernell-Klabo (S23) experienced the importance of informing andtraining the staff. After the use of training workshops and pilotprojects, the staff became more motivated for change, and pos-itive results were achieved. For example, 40 percent of the leadtime was reduced. Ippolito and Murman (S11) found that the sur-vey respondents believed that on-the-job training (OJT) is the mostwidespread method and the only effective training method whileformal training is less effective. This view is emphasized in leancompanies, which are aware of the necessity of OJT as new engi-neers can develop their own working procedures if they are throwninto projects without proper guidance, leading to increased vari-ability in the product development system (Morgan and Liker,2006).This principle relates to one issue found in the case study show-ing that there was a lack of mutual understanding of the workdone by design and manufacturing engineers. For example, theknowledge and experience of manufacturing operations affectedby in-vehicle software among design engineers, and the level ofSE competence within manufacturing. In related earlier work, lowunderstanding of each other’s work has been found as a major causefor gaps in software requirements communication (Bjarnason et al.,2009), but also a critical factor in the PD and Man interface fora successful production start (Lakemond et al., 2007; Vandeveldeand Van Dierdonk, 2003). This can be improved by encouragingthe staff to experience different functions (e.g., job rotation), andcomprehensive and thorough recruitment of, for example, man-ufacturing engineers in order to give them a better capability tounderstand and technically challenge design engineers (Carlsson,1991; Morgan and Liker, 2006; Nihtilä, 1999).Developing necessary skills and mutual understanding of eachother’s work across departments in large-scale software develop-ment seems to be important, but the results of the SMS presentedhere shows that research addressing this LPD principle is scarce.Principle 9—Build in learning and continuous improvement: Estab-lishing, maintaining, and capitalizing on continuous improvementare dependent on organizations’ capability of building learningorganizations where development, diffusion, and maintenance oforganizational know-how, are natural tasks in daily work (Takeuchiand Nonaka, 1986). Similarly, for SPI there are software processmaturity models such as the capability maturity model integra-tion (CMMI) (CMMI, 2010) and automotive SPICE (Automotive SIG,2010). However, these are high level frameworks that do not detailhow the actual implementation should look like in the actual indus-trial setting as they adopt one-size-ﬁts-all view across companiesand projects (Fayad and Laitnen, 1997; Kuilboer and Ashraﬁ, 2000;Zahran, 1998).Four of the studies on large-scale software development payattention to Principle 9. To accomplish continuous improvementsacross a company, Rudolf and Paulish (S27) established a cross-business unit community. The community has regular meetingswhere general improvement frameworks and practices are sharedand reﬁned, so they can be adopted and standardized across thecompany. Furthermore, the improvements must be based on anunderstanding of the actual situation, which is best obtained byengaging people close to the identiﬁed problems and actually doingTable 8Sub-principles of Principle 11.Sub-principle Description1. Technologies must beseamlessly integratedIntroducing and implementing newtechnologies must allow a smoothintegration of them and existing systemsand technologies2. Technologies should supportthe process—not drive itNew technologies must be adopted toestablished processes and not vice versa.3. Technologies shouldenhance people—not replacethemInstead of motivating investments in newtools and technology by downsizing, it ismore important to value and use thepersonnel’s technical experience, skills,and expertise4. Speciﬁc solutionoriented—not a silver bulletThere are no magic tools or methods thatcan replace hard work by skilled personnel.5. The right size—not king size Technologies providing the bestperformance are rarely the ones that aremost effective for improving PDthe work. Similarly, Aoyama (S3) established a central project SEteam (PSET) coordinating feedback from developers and suppor-ting management for achieving continuous improvement of thedevelopment processes. In addition, Kettunen (S13) suggests thatlean-related process improvements do not only involve learningfrom incremental SPI, but also learning from more radical shifts ofthe business processes, which can be managed by organizationaldevelopment programs.In the case study we found that there are particular difﬁculties inspecifying manufacturing requirements to be understandable andconvertible to measurable parameters for developers of software-intensive systems. In line with Almefelt et al. (2006), the mainreason for this was that they were often experienced-based ratherthan being speciﬁcations of purposes and goals, and that theydescribe expected results (i.e., tacit knowledge). For example,the designs of software-intensive systems are expected to alloweffective conﬁguration and quality assurance of the systems inmanufacturing. In large-scale software projects, Kraut and Streeter(1995) stress the value of combining both formal communication(e.g., written and transferred speciﬁcations and structured meet-ings) and informal communication (e.g., unscheduled face-to-facemeetings and e-mail or phone conversations) across organizationalboundaries. Furthermore, it is well-known that much informationin software development is tacit and never written down (1995).Consequently, only focusing on improving the quality of the Manand PD speciﬁcations of explicit know-how and the formal pro-cesses for transferring them, is not enough in order to effectivelyaccomplish continuous improvement.Even though the LPD principle of continuous improvement hasbeen widely promoted and adopted in industry, there are very fewstudies on how organizations developing large-scale software man-age to accomplish this, and evidence of the beneﬁts and limitationsin such organizations is unclear.Principle 11—Adapt technology to ﬁt people and processes: Thisprinciple concerns the necessity of customizing tools and technol-ogy to achieve LPD. For this, ﬁve sub-principles are given in LPDS.They are presented in Table 8.Staron et al. (S31) was the only study on large-scale softwaredevelopment that had a strong relationship to Principle 11. Theyconducted an action research project in close cooperation withindustry, where prediction methods for forecasting a defect backlogin large streamline software development projects were devel-oped and evaluated. When assessing different prediction models,an important ﬁnding in their study was that too complex meth-ods are very vulnerable to changes in the ways of working atcompanies, which means that they are reluctant to adopt them.This is in line with Weber and Weisbrod (2003), who report on 2812J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821challenges and experiences of RE in development of software-intensive automotives systems. They particularly emphasize thenecessity of developing adaptable tools and methods that supportengineers in their daily tasks, since there is otherwise a signiﬁ-cant risk of users rejecting the tools. For example, they experiencedthat introduced tools and methods for consolidating RE and model-based development (MBD) were often discarded after a while afterbeing used in projects.In the case study, both case companies expressed a need of MBDtools for enabling earlier and more frequent prototyping loops ofautomotive software-intensive systems, which can support earlyveriﬁcation of manufacturing operations affected by these systems.Like today’s virtual build events (VBE) for securing the assembly ofmechanical parts, the goal is to enable the export of digital modelsof software-intensive automotive systems from the systems usedfor MBD to the manufacturing systems, or vice versa.When developing such MBD technologies, the ﬁve sub-principles of Principle 11 should be considered. For example,manufacturing engineers should be involved in the further devel-opment of modeling tools and working procedures, and it ispreferred that this development is an evolving process rather thana big bang. In effect, it may start with an elaboration of work proce-dures comprising analyses based on observations of computerizedvisualizations of the software-intensive systems on an appropriateabstraction level (e.g., the functional level), and by using cross-functional techniques such as FMEA together with checklists andrequirements containing manufacturing prerequisites. In the end,the tools and methods allow fully automized VBEs, where thecomplete vehicle can be modeled and validated in virtual repre-sentations of the manufacturing processes.However, available know-how and support in LPD and earlierwork for actually using the sub-principles when adopting new toolsand technologies for large scale software development, seems to bevery limited.Principle 12—Align the organization through simple visual commu-nication: When reducing lead-times in PD by replacing traditionalsequential over-the-wall processes with concurrent developmentpractices, studies on PD reveal that communication becomes oneof the most critical factors in PD (e.g., Clark and Fujimoto, 1991).In particular, communication and coordination of workgroups thatdevelop interdependent pieces of large software system, is cru-cial for a successful outcome of the development effort (Kraut andStreeter, 1995).Overall, many introductions of LPD typically start with visual-ization (planning, action and status boards), and one reason for thismay be the desire of management to strengthen and maintain theircontrol when LPD is deployed (Holmdahl, 2010). Thus, it is a littlesurprising that a majority of the studies do not map to this principle.Five studies on large-scale software development are mapped toPrinciple 12. Two of them report on visualizing the state of the soft-ware project, using boards divided into different areas with the aimto uncover project abnormalities (e.g., time and defects). Middle-ton et al. (S20) focus on continuously monitoring the velocity of theteam, and they retrospectively improve the accuracy of estimatedtime and resources by posting the number of units of work com-pleted over time compared to a target. Sekimura and Maruyama(S28) visualized project management information on an electronicboard as the development was performed at several locations andin parallel. For ensuring that correct information were used, thepersonnel had to follow three rules (1) daily submission of worktime, (2) save information in speciﬁed folders on shared server,and (3) correctly describe information on prescribed worksheets.However, Ippolito and Murman (S11) found that the methods formeasuring and indicating project properties are often deﬁcient. Forexample, their results showed that the end-to-end cycle time is notwell understood by the process leadership leading to difﬁculties inmaking product cost and performance design trades, with respectto total time.Staron et al. (S31) and Peterson and Wohlin (S25) (SPI-LEAM)were the only studies suggesting methods for measuring and pre-senting project metrics. Staron et al. (S31) present a metric thatpredicts the number of defects in large-scale software projectsusing a mix of lean and agile principles that will be open duringa particular week. The metric is based on moving average com-bined with the current level of a defect backlog. For visualizing andcommunicating the forecast of a defect trend to stakeholders, theysimpliﬁed the metric and packeted it as an indicator (an arrow) intoan MS Vista Gadget. In SPI-LEAM, the inventories were measuredas the number of requirements and displayed in cumulative ﬂowdiagrams visualizing undesired behavior of the development (e.g.,bottlenecks). The ﬂexibility of SPI-LEAM allows it to be used fordifferent types of development artifacts that can be selected to ﬁtspeciﬁc organizational needs.As mentioned above, one of the issues found in the case studyconcerned problems in managing speciﬁcations between PD andMan, and in particular, requirements. For improving this, SPI-LEAMmay be used to measure the number of requirements that havebeen transferred from PD to Man, or vice versa, and are waiting tobe understood and handshaked by the counterpart. However, theinventory measurements only indicate the level of requirements,but the produced level of quality of the requirements is not shown.For example, to what extent are the manufacturing requirementsunderstood by design engineers? Therefore, it is also necessary touse methods that aim to ensure that the development processesgenerate the right quality of the requirements. One example isFricker et al. (2010), who report on a method for improving softwarerequirements negotiation.4.6. Validity threatsAn overall challenge in this SMS was to deﬁne the scope, sincethe investigated area is multidisciplinary and spans the ﬁeldsof, for example, SE, systems and manufacturing engineering, andmanagement. Searches across disciplines are difﬁcult, as differ-ent terminology for the same notion is often used and must bedealt with when deﬁning the search criteria (e.g., electronic andembedded systems in systems engineering and software develop-ment in SE). Since LPD has started to be widely adopted in manyindustries developing complex software systems in large organi-zations, and communication and coordination across departmentsis critical for such development (automotive and aerospace), wehave chosen focus on lean principles and practices. Although theinvestigation takes a broad view covering different engineeringdisciplines and industrial sectors developing software, and wasnot restricted to empirical research, this is a limitation of ourresults.One of the major threats to this study is selection bias. As a pro-tection against this threat, we used three main strategies. First, tobalance the comprehensiveness and precision of the search string,we performed several trial searches in the Scopus database, wherewe tested alternative keywords and combinations of them, see Sec-tion 3.2. Furthermore, to capture most of the relevant studies, thepublication year was set to be between 1990 and 2010, since thelean paradigm was ﬁrst introduced by Womack et al. (1990) in 1990.Second, we collected publications from different sources includingthe ACM Digital Library, IEEE Xplore, Inspec, ISI Web of Science,and Scopus. To ensure we located all studies published in 2010,the ﬁnal search was performed in February 2011. Third, to guardagainst built-in bias of the selection based on screening of title,keywords and abstract, the criteria for inclusion and the screeningprocess was elaborated by three researchers. The screening waspiloted twice on randomly selected papers, and the consistency was J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 28212813evaluated by calculating the Fleiss Kappa value (Fleiss, 1971). Theﬁrst pilot involved 100 papers and resulted in a too low inter-rateragreement (0.5). Therefore, the inclusion criteria and the screeningprocess were refactored (e.g., better clariﬁcations of the inclusioncriteria) and a second pilot was performed. The inter-rater agree-ment increased to 0.76, which was deemed acceptable based on therecommendations provided in Landis and Koch (1977).However, basing the inclusion of publications on reading theabstract is a limitation of this study, since the abstract may notreﬂect the content of the paper and relevant papers can have beenmissed. In order to mitigate this threat, the inclusion criteria can betested on a number of papers that are randomly selected for full textreading (e.g., ten percent of the papers). Alternatively, the screeningcould have been performed in parallel by several researchers,enabling triangulation of the results. However, due to the largenumber of publication that were left for the screening (10,230), itwas deemed not feasible to perform any of these alternatives withthe available resources.Data extraction bias is another major threat to this study. Usu-ally, the studies are possible to classify into multiple classes (Glasset al., 2002), which increases the complexity of classifying them,and the difﬁculties of excluding variations owing to random dis-persion of personal judgments. The main strategy for reducing thisthreat was to involve several researchers in the data extraction.To enhance the quality of the data extraction form, it was jointlydeveloped and reﬁned by the three researchers and piloted twiceto assess and augment the consistency of the extracted data asdescribed in Section 3.4. Since many papers lacked sufﬁcient infor-mation for unambiguous classiﬁcation of them, it would have beenpreferable to perform parallel data extraction and cross-checkingof the results between the researchers for all of the 38 papers onwhich data extraction was applied. However, a lack of resourcesmade this impossible. Therefore, the researcher who extracted datafor the remaining papers was to denote a short rationale explainingwhy the paper should be in a certain category. This was then usedwhen the involved researchers debriefed and discussed uncertainclassiﬁcations.The possibility to generalize the ﬁndings in relation to the caseused here are limited as the case study only involves two com-panies in the automotive domain. Using the results of similar casestudies at other automotive companies may result in different ﬁnd-ings, as they most likely face different needs. However, between1999 and 2010, VCC played a leading role in the developmentof software-intensive systems at Ford Motor Company, which isone of the world’s major car manufacturers, and VTC is one ofthe world’s largest producers of heavy vehicles. Furthermore, bothcompanies are organized as matrix organizations and their devel-opment of software-intensive systems is more or less guided by theV-model (ABG, 1997) process that follows the overall vehicle devel-opment system, with its milestones (gates) for decision-making ina vehicle program (see also: Pernstal et al., 2012). This industrialsetting is commonly used among automakers (Broy et al., 2007;Charﬁ and Sellami, 2004). Thus, we believe that our characteri-zation and evaluation of the state of the art in these industrialsettings are relevant for several companies, at least automotivecompanies.The reliability threats are also a major concern in SMSs. Toobtain reliability in this study, three researchers were involvedin the investigation. They continuously documented and updatedthe research procedures in a review protocol (e.g., inclusion orexclusion procedures and piloting) as well as speciﬁcations (e.g.,inclusion or exclusion criteria and data extraction forms) duringthe study. The research methodology is presented and explained inSection 3 and the data extraction form is shown in Appendix B.To summarize, it is possible we may have missed some rele-vant papers since the area of interest is multidisciplinary, wheredifferent terminologies and data sources are used. However, wehave included as many studies as possible, and although we believethat the ﬁndings of this investigation can be slightly differentin similar studies, it is unlikely that the overall ﬁndings will bedifferent.5. ConclusionsThis paper presents an SMS that explores and examines the stateof the art based on lean principles and practices, as used in large-scale development of software-intensive systems. The scope of thisSMS was primarily justiﬁed by an expressed need from two casecompanies to support them in decisions on an SPI project—focusingon the inter-departmental interaction between PD and Man. Inaddition, the case companies, but also in many other companies inwhich software development is becoming an increasingly substan-tial part of PD, are introducing LPD, and they develop their productsin multidisciplinary large-scale settings where communication andcoordination within and across departments is critical. Thus, thefocus of the analysis of the results was on the relationships betweenthe reported state of the art and the broadly well-established leanprinciples inherent to LPD. Each principle was analyzed by usingextracted data from the selected studies and data based on previ-ous observations from the assessment of the case companies. Thiswas a way to gauge the potential value of the results for the casecompanies, but also to identify the gaps in research on applyinglean approaches in large-scale software-intensive systems devel-opment. Furthermore, to provide researchers with an overview ofthe status of the area and any research gaps, the selected studieswere classiﬁed into a number of representative facets (e.g., researchtype and topic in SE) and visually summarized. To assist practi-tioners when seeking to adopt new “best” lean practices, and giveresearchers information about the quality of the studies reported,the degree of relevance and rigor for each study was also assessedand gauged. In total, data were extracted from 38 studies and themajor ﬁndings were:•Only 16 of the 38 studies (42 percent) clearly dealt with large-scale software development (RQ1). 11 out of these 16 studiesreported on lean and 5 on hybrids building on combinations oflean and agile principles. Since it is recommended in researchto combine traditional and agile methods in large-scale soft-ware development, it was unexpected that we could not ﬁndpublications reporting on combinations of lean and plan-drivendevelopment (e.g., waterfall, RUP, and V-model). A majority of allthe studies (24 out of 38) reported on the use of lean in gen-eral terms without specifying the particular practice adopted.Value stream mapping (two studies) and visual management (onestudy) were the only speciﬁc lean practices reported in the studieson large-scale software development.•Classifying the studies into research types (RQ2.1) revealed astrong need for performing more studies on software devel-opment in real industrial cases where data for adopting leanprinciples and practices are systematically collected, analyzed,and evaluated. Most of the studies could be classiﬁed as expe-rience papers (45 percent) and 10 of these studies dealt withlarge-scale software projects. Only 24 percent of all the studiescould be classiﬁed as empirical and among these only four studiesaddressed large-scale development.•The quality assessment of the studies (RQ2.2 and RQ2.3) showedthat it is difﬁcult for practitioners to judge the feasibility of thestate of the art reported, and the possibilities to replicate the stud-ies and assess the validity of their results are limited. A majority(65 percent) of the studies report on work carried out in industriesyielding a relatively high relevance. Of these, 14 studies addressed 2814J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821large-scale software development. However, about 75 percent ofall the studies (28 out of 38) and nine studies on large-scale soft-ware development have relatively low values of rigor becauseof inadequate or missing descriptions of the study design andcontext, and evaluations of the validity.•Classifying the studies into SE topics (RQ2.4) showed that thereis little practical guidance for resolving problems identiﬁed ina speciﬁc KA (e.g., RE, testing, and coding), indicating that thereviewed area of interest is immature. Most of the studies pri-marily provide generic state of the art, since more than half ofthe studies could be classiﬁed into the broad KAs of engineeringmanagement (31 percent) and engineering process (24 percent).An almost identical pattern could also be seen for the studies onlarge scale development and none of these studies is classiﬁedinto the KAs of conﬁguration management, maintenance, design,and quality.•The analysis of the relationships between LPD principles andthe reported state of the art (RQ3) revealed that most of thestudies focused on reducing waste and creating ﬂow in the PDprocess (Principle 3). This was followed by visual management(Principle 12) and deﬁning customer value (Principle 1). Fur-thermore, none of the studies on large-scale development hada strong relationship to the role of product manager (Principle 5),supplier integration (Principle 8), building a culture for continu-ous improvement (Principle 10), or tools for standardization andorganizational learning (Principle 13).•The deeper analysis showed that there is an overall lack ofresearch that investigates the exploitation of LPD principles inthe context of large-scale software development. The main con-tributions of the studies focused on identifying and eliminatingwaste through, for example, uncovering and measuring invento-ries of software development artifacts (e.g., requirements), andVSM. Establishing and maintaining ﬂow in the software devel-opment process was also addressed by some studies, whereincremental and concurrent development was most frequentlysuggested.•When performing literature reviews on research across scien-tiﬁc ﬁelds (here SE, systems and manufacturing engineering, andmanagement), the results indicate that it is difﬁcult to obtaindesired precision while at the same time ensuring the coverage ofthe search. The search in the selected databases resulted in a totalamount of 10,230 papers, which were left for subsequent stepsin the inclusion process. Of these, only 38 papers were selectedfor the subsequent data extraction. The main reasons are thatdifferent terminology is commonly used for the same notion, orterms are too general without the ability to ﬁlter out irrelevantstudies.We conclude that the current state of the art in research, offeringspeciﬁc advice to industry professionals pursuing improvementsin large-scale software development, by applying lean principlesand practices, is scarce. Furthermore, the implication for futureresearch is that there is a strong need for more rigorous stud-ies on the beneﬁts of LPD. This includes a need to explicitly mapwhat must be added to LPD and how the base principles must bechanged and extended in order to support lean-oriented indus-trial sectors where the share of software in the products is rapidlygrowing.Appendix A.List of included studies[S1] A.L. Alwardt, N. Mikeska, R.J. Pandorf, P.R. Tarpley, A lean approach todesigning for software testability. Proceedings of IEEE AUTOTESTCON,pp. 178–183, 2009.[S2] S.W. Ambler, Agile software development at scale, Lecture Notes inComputer Sciencevol. 5082, Springer, 2008, pp. 1–12.[S3] M. Aoyama, Managing the concurrent development of large-scalesoftware systems, International Journal of Technology Management14(1997)
739–765.[S4] R. Beneﬁeld; Agile Deployment: Lean Service Management andDeployment Strategies for the SaaS Enterprise, Proceeding IEEE 42ndHawaii International Conference on System Sciences, HICSS ‘09, pp.1-5,2009.[S5] M. Dall’Agnol, A. Janes, G. Succi, E. Zaninotto, Lean management—Ametaphor for extreme programming?, Lecture Notes in ComputerScience, vol. 2675, Springer, 2003, pp. 26–32.[S6] E. Danovaro, A. Janes, G. Succi, Jidoka in software development,Proceedings of the Conference on Object-Oriented ProgrammingSystems, Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA, pp. 827–830, 2008[S7] V. Gruhn, C. Schäfer, No-frills software engineering for businessinformation systems experienceReport, Proceedings of the eigth conference on New Trends in SoftwareMethodologies, Tools and Techniques, SoMe T 09, pp. 93–105, 2009[S8] J. Heidenberg, I. Porres, Metrics functions for kanban guards,Proceedings 17th IEEE InternationalConference and Workshops on the Engineering of Computer-BasedSystems, ECBS, pp. 306–310, 2010.[S9] M. Ikonen, Leadership in Kanban software development projects: Aquasi-controlled experiment, Lecture Notes in Business InformationProcessing, vol. 65, Springer, 2010, pp.85-98.[S10] M. Ikonen, P. Kettunen, N. Oza, P. Abrahamsson, (2010). Exploringthe sources of waste in Kanban software development projects.Proceedings of the 36th IEEE EUROMICRO Conference on SoftwareEngineering and Advanced Applications, SEAA, pp. 376–381, 2010.[S11] B. Ippolito, E. Murman, Improving the software upgrade valuestream, Proceeding of the 43rd AIAA Aerospace Sciences Meeting andExhibit—Meeting Papers, pp. 4791–4803, 2005.[S12] A. Janes, G. Succi, To pull or not to pull. Proceedings of theConference on Object-OrientedProgramming Systems, Languages, and Applications, OOPSLA, pp.889–894, 2009.[S13] P. Kettunen, (2010), A tentative framework for lean softwareenterprise research and development. Lecture Notes in BusinessInformation Processing, vol. 65, Springer, 2010, pp. 60–71.[S14] F. Kinoshita, Practices of an agile team. Proceedings of the AgileConference 2008, AGILE’08, IEEE, pp. 373–377, 2008.[S15] F.J. Lacoste, Killing the gatekeeper: introducing a continuousintegration system. Proceedings of the Agile Conference 2009, AGILE’09,IEEE, pp. 387–392, 2009.[S16] P. Linecar, D. Preston, Kaizen: a review of Japanese approaches to IT,Proceedings First InternationalConference on Software QualityManagement, pp. 903–909, 1993.[S17] V. Mandic, M. Oivo, P. Rodríguez, P. Kuvaja, H. Kaikkonen, B. Turhan,What is ﬂowing in lean software development?, Lecture Notes inBusiness Information Processing, vol. 65, Springer, 2010, pp. 72–84.[S18] M. Mehta, D. Anderson, D. Raffo, Providing value to customers insoftware development throughlean principles, Software Process Improvement and Practice, 13 (2008)101–109.[S19] P. Middleton, Lean software development: two case studies,Software Quality Journal 9 (2001) 241–252.[S20] P. Middleton, P.S. Taylor, A. Flaxel, A. Cookson, Lean principles andtechniques for improving the quality and productivity of softwaredevelopment projects: A case study, International Journal ofProductivity and Quality Management 2 (2007) 387–403.[S21] R. Morien, Agile management and the Toyota way for softwareproject management, Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE InternationalConference on Industrial Informatics, Perth, Australia, pp. 516–522,2005.[S22] S. Mujtaba, R. Feldt, K. Petersen, Waste and lead time reduction in asoftware product customization process with value stream maps,Proceedings of the Australian Software Engineering Conference, ASWEC,pp. 139–148, 2010.[S23] E. Parnell-Klabo, Introducing lean principles with Agile practices at afortune 500 company, Proceedings of the Agile Conference 2006, IEEE,pp. 232–239, 2006. J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 28212815[S24] G.I.U.S, Perera, M.S.D Fernando, Enhanced agile softwaredevelopment—Hybrid paradigm withLEAN practice, Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference onIndustrial and Information Systems, ICIIS 2007, pp 239–243, 2007.[S25] K. Petersen, C. Wohlin, Software process improvement through theLean Measurement (SPILEAM) method, Journal of Systems and Software83 (2010) 1275–1287.[S26] D. Raffo, D.J. Anderson, R. Harmon, Integrating lean principles withvalue based software engineering, Proceedings of TechnologyManagement for Global Economic Growth 2010, PICMET’10, pp. 1–10,2010.[S27] H. Rudolf, F. Paulisch, (2010). Experience report: Product creationthrough lean approaches, Lecture Notes in Business InformationProcessing, vol. 65, Springer, 2010, pp. 104–110.[S28] T. Sekimura, T. Maruyama, Development of enterprise businessapplication software by introducing Toyota production system, FujitsuScientiﬁc and Technical Journal 42 (2006) 407–413.[S29] C.M. Shinkle, C.M. (2009). Applying the Dreyfus model of skillacquisition to the adoption of kanban systems at Software EngineeringProfessionals (SEP), Proceedings of the Agile Conference 2009, AGILE’09,IEEE, pp. 186–191, 2009.[S30] H. Smits, The impact of scaling on planning activities in an agilesoftware development context,Proceedings of the 40th Annual Hawaii International Conference onSystem Sciences, HICSS 2007, 2007.[S31] M. Staron, W. Meding, B. Söderqvist, A method for forecasting defectbacklog in large streamline software development projects and itsindustrial evaluation, Information and Software Technology 52 (2010)1069–1079.[S32] J.M. Sutton, Lean software for the lean aircraft, Proceedings oftheAIAA/IEEE Digital Avionics Systems, pp. 49–54, 1996.[S33] M. Taipale (2010). Huitale—A story of a Finnish lean startup, LectureNotes in Business Information Processing, vol. 65, Springer, 2010, pp.111–114.[S34] M. Thias, B. Cohen, The power of proximity: how colocated lean-agileteams deliver better project outcomes with fewer resources, Cutter ITJournal, 22 (2009) 37–43.[S35] A.C. Tonini, F.J.B. Laurindo, M.M. De Spinola, An application of sixsigma with lean production practices for identifying common causes ofsoftware process variability, Proceedings of the International Conferenceon Management of Engineering and Technology, IEEE, pp. 2482–2490,2007.[S36] K. Vilkki, K. (2010). When agile is not enough, Lecture Notes inBusiness Information Processing, vol. 65, Springer, 2010, pp 44–47.[S37] B. Vodde, Measuring continuous integration capability, CrossTalk 21(2008) 22–25.[S38] E.R. Willeke, The Inkubook experience: A tale of ﬁve processes,Proceedings of the Agile Conference 2009, AGILE’09, IEEE, pp. 156–161,2009.Appendix B. Data extraction formSection A—General data.ID AttributeA1 TitleA2 Author(s)A3 YearA4 SourceA5 Study purpose/objectivesA6 Domain (e.g., automotive, telecom, Web, etc.)A7 Success/failure?A8 Does the paper repeat a work that has already been reviewedin another paper?A9 Focus on lean or inter-departmental interaction?A10 Focused method/practiceA11 Clearly and explicitly dealing with large scale softwaredevelopment?Section B—Type of research (Wieringa et al., 2006). What typeof research is conducted?ID Type DescriptionB1 ValidationresearchTechniques investigated are novel and have not yetbeen implemented in practice. Techniques used arefor example experiments, i.e., work done in the labTechniques are implemented in practice and anevaluation of the technique is conducted. Thatmeans, it is shown how the technique isimplemented in practice (solutionimplementation) and what are the consequencesof the implementation inB2 Evaluation
researchTerms of beneﬁts and drawbacks (implementationevaluation). This also includes to identify problemsin industryEvaluation is formal i.e., old treatment is comparedto new treatment (e.g., Lean practices). There mustbe some sortCollection of empirical data (e.g., interviews,questionnaires or measurement of dependentvariables) that are compared (e.g., defectsthroughput, leadtime etc.)B3 Solution
proposalA solution for a problem is proposed, the solutioncan be either novel or a signiﬁcant extension of anexisting technique. The potential beneﬁts and theapplicability of the solution is shown by a smallexample or a good line of argumentationB4 Philosophical
papersThese papers sketch a new way of looking atexisting things by structuring the ﬁeld in form of ataxonomy or conceptual frameworkB5 Opinion papers These papers express the personal opinion ofsomebody whether a certain technique is good orbad, or how things should been done. They do notrely on related work and research methodologiesB6 Experience
papersExperience papers explain on what and howsomething has been done in practice. It has to bethe personal experience of the author. Experiencediffers from evaluation as it is no explicitcomparison between the treatments, for example,you implement lean but you really dont no whatthe old process wasSection C—Relevance of state-of-the-art (Ivarsson and Gorschek,2011) What is the relevance of the study?ID Aspect Contribute to relevance (1) Do not contribute torelevance (0)C1 Subject The subjects used in thestudy are representative ofthe intended users of thestate-of-the-artThe subjects used in thestudy are notrepresentative of theintended users of thestate-of-the-art (e.g.,students, researchers orsubjects not mentionedC2 Context The study is performed in asetting that isrepresentative of theintended settingThe study is not performedin a setting that isrepresentative of theintended setting (e.g.,laboratory)C3 Scale The scale of thestate-of-the-art used in thestudy is of realistic scale,i.e., industrial scaleThe scale of thestate-of-the-art used in thestudy is of unrealistic scale(e.g., down-scaledindustrial, toy example)C4 Research
methodThe research method usedis designated forinvestigations of real worldsituation (e.g., actionresearch, case studies,surveys)The research method usedis not designated forinvestigations of real worldsituation (e.g., conceptualanalysis, laboratoryexperiment) 2816J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821Section D—Rigor of state-of-the-art (Ivarsson and Gorschek,2011). What is the rigor of the study?ID Aspect Strong description (1) Medium description (0,5) Weak description (0)D1 Context The context is described to the degreewhere a reader can understand andcompare it to another context Thisinvolves descriptions of context facets andtheir related elements, e.g., product(maturity, size), process (activities,workﬂow), people (roles, competencies)The context in which the study isperformed is brieﬂy described to thedegree to which a reader canunderstand and compare it to anothercontextThere is no description of the contextin which the study was performedD2 Study design The study design is described to the degreeto which a reader can understand thedesign with regard to, for example,treatment, variables, sampling etc.The study is brieﬂy described e.g. weimplemented tool x in department c forn months and then department b etc.There is no description of the studydesignD3 Validity The validity threats are described anddiscussed in detail (e.g., external, internal,construct and construct validity, andreliability) and measures to limit them arepresentedThe validity of the study is mentionedbut not detailedThere is no discussion of the threats tothe study’s validitySection E SWEBOK knowledge areas (KA)(http://www.computer.org/portal/web/swebok/html/ch1). WhatKA(s) can the contributions of the paper explicitly and clearly bemapped to?ID KA DescriptionE1 Requirements The software requirements (KA) is concerned with the elicitation, analysis, speciﬁcation, and validation of softwarerequirementsE2 Design Software design is deﬁned in [IEEE610.12-90] as both “the process of deﬁning the architecture, components,interfaces, and other characteristics of a system or component” and “the result of [that] process“. Viewed as a process,software design is the software engineering life cycle activity in which software requirements are analyzed in order toproduce a description of the software’s internal structure that will serve as the basis for its construction. Moreprecisely, a software design (the result) must describe the software architecture - that is, how software is decomposedand organized into components - and the interfaces between those components. It must also describe the componentsat a level of detail that enable their constructionE3 Construction The term software construction refers to the detailed creation of working, meaningful software through acombination of coding, veriﬁcation, unit testing, integration testing, and debuggingE4 Testing Testing is an activity performed for evaluating product quality, and for improving it, by identifying defects andproblems. Software testing consists of the dynamic veriﬁcationE5 Maintenance Software maintenance is deﬁned as the totality of activities required to provide cost-effective support to software.Activities are performed during the pre-delivery stage, as well as during the post-delivery stage. Pre-delivery activitiesinclude planning for post-delivery operations, for maintainability, and for logistics determination for transitionactivities. Post-delivery activities include software modiﬁcation, training, and operating or interfacing to a help deskE6 Conﬁguration management Conﬁguration management (CM) is the discipline of identifying the conﬁguration of a system, e.g., speciﬁc versions ofhardware, ﬁrmware, or software items combined according to speciﬁc build and at distinct points in time for thepurpose of systematically controlling changes to the conﬁguration, and maintaining the integrity and traceability ofthe conﬁguration throughout the system life cycleE7 Engineering management Software Engineering Management can be deﬁned as the application of management activities – planning,coordinating, measuring, monitoring, controlling, and reporting – to ensure that the development and maintenance ofsoftware is systematic, disciplined, and quantiﬁed (IEEE610.12-90). Examples: organizational policies and standardsprovide the framework in which software engineering is undertaken, and the notion of project management involvingproject integration management, project scope management, project time management, project cost management,project quality management, project human resource management, and projectE8 Engineering process Communications managementThe software engineering process is concerned with the deﬁnition, implementation, assessment, measurement,management, change, and improvement of the software life cycle processes themselves. Measurement should be inKA Engineering management unless it is measurement of the process cause then it goes into KA Engineering ProcessE9 Engineering tools and methods This KA includes speciﬁc methods and tools within any other KA. When the focus is on the tool or method, rather thanon the KA that the tool/method helps in/with, it belongs in this KAE10 Quality Software quality in this KA cover static techniques, those which do not require the execution of the software beingevaluated (e.g., inspection), while dynamic techniques are covered in the Software Testing KA J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 28212817Section F—Principles in lean product development (LPD)(Morgan and Liker, 2006). What relationships are there betweenthe LPD-principle(s) and the contributions of the paper?.Strong relationship (++) Weak relationship (+) No relationship (0)D Principle Description There is a clear andexplicit relationshipbetween thecontributions of thepaper and the principleIt is possible to deduce arelationship between thecontributions of thepaper and the principlebut it is not clear andexplicitThere is no relationshipbetween thecontributions of thepaper and the principleF1 Establish customer-deﬁnedvalue to separate value–added activity fromwaste.To create a lean PD process, it isimportant to establish a customerdeﬁned value as a ﬁrst step. Once thesevalues have been identiﬁed, diffusedand understood throughout the wholePD-organization it is possible eliminatewasteF2 Front-Load the ProductDevelopment Processwhile there is maximumdesign space to explorealternative thoroughly.Front loading the productdevelopment process involves solvingproblems at root cause level in earlyproject phases aiming to eliminate lateengineering changes like “quick ﬁxes”and patches that rarely result inincreased product or processperformance. This is achieved throughconcurrent and multidisciplinaryapproaches such as Set BasedConcurrent Engineering (SBCE)F3 Create a leveled ProductDevelopment Process ﬂowLeveling out the PD ﬂow involveselimination of waste (everything thatdoes not contribute to the value for thecustomer) in the product developmentﬂow. The total PD value stream isexamined aiming to eliminate nonvalue adding activities that occurbetween development steps (e.g.,unnecessary handovers of documentsand reinvention instead ofstandardization of components (“notinvented here”)F4 Utilize rigorousstandardization to reducevariation, and createﬂexibility and predictableoutcomes.Standardization has a large inﬂuenceon PD since it reduces variation whichenables increased ﬂexibility andpredictable outcomes. There are threecategories of standardization: (1)design standardization, (2) processstandardization and (3) engineeringskill-set standardizationF5 Develop a chief engineer(CE) system to integratedevelopment from start toﬁnish.The CE is appointed by the topmanagement immediately after a newprogram has been decided where theCE are considered as the owner of theproduct responsible for the wholedevelopment process from concepts tolaunchF6 Organize to balancefunctional expertise andcross-functional
integration.Creating efﬁcient PD organizations bycombining the beneﬁts of product andfunctional focused structures in amatrix organization allowingsimultaneous attention to functionaland program demands. This matrixstructure contains the program basedorganizations in the lateral directionand the deep specialized functionaldepartments in the verticalF7 Develop towering technicalcompetence in allengineersThe necessity to use a rigorousrecruitment process, mentoring andon-the-job-training (OJT) in astructured way. For example, in orderto have the capability to technicallychallenge PD engineers, therecruitment and training ofmanufacturing engineers should beequally comprehensive 2818J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821Strong relationship (++) Weak relationship (+) No relationship (0)D Principle Description There is a clear andexplicit relationshipbetween thecontributions of thepaper and the principleIt is possible to deduce arelationship between thecontributions of thepaper and the principlebut it is not clear andexplicitThere is no relationshipbetween thecontributions of thepaper and the principleF8 Fully integrate suppliersinto the ProductDevelopment System.Comprises such as a high degree ofsupplier involvement which impliesearly involvement of suppliers in PD,rigorous selection of suppliers and thatsuppliers are committed tocontinuously maintain and developtheir engineering and manufacturingcapabilities to meet the demands ofthe ordering company (e.g., OEM)F9 Build in learning andcontinuous improvement.To achieve continuous improvement(kaizen) of products/processes, it isimportant to recognize and encouragelearning and understanding oftechnologies and processes where bothtacit and explicit knowledge aredeveloped, diffused and maintained inthe organization. For example, acognitive learning approach isemphasized where problems areviewed as opportunities and it isessential to bring the problems to thesurface and solve them as early aspossibleF10 Build a culture to supportexcellence and relentlessimprovement.Culture embraces a fairly stable set oftaken-for-granted assumptions, sharedbeliefs, meanings, and values in anorganization that govern the members’operations and enables theorganization to rely less on formal leancontrol systems. Encouraging amindset among the employees basedon customers come always ﬁrst andthere is always more to learn,understand and improve are examplesof building a lean culture within anorganizationF11 Adapt technology to ﬁtyour people and processes.Tools and technology must becustomized based on organizationalneeds. For example, seamlessintegration of new technologiesfacilitating incorporation with existingsystems/tools and adaptation toestablished processes and not viceversaF12 Align your organizationthrough simple visualcommunication.Deals with the organization’scapability of efﬁciently coordinatingcomplex communication (e.g.,requirements, test results, projectstatus reports manufacturingconstraints etc.) between teams andacross functions in PDF13 Use powerful tools forstandardization andorganizational learning.To build learning organizations, it isnecessary to deploy tools that supportdevelopment, diffusion andpreservation of both explicit and tacitknowledge J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 28212819Appendix C.Relationships between lean principles in LPDS (Morgan andLiker, 2006) and selected studiesTable C1Sub-system Principle Description Strongrelationship*Weak relationshipStudies Freq. Studies Freq.Process 1. Establishcustomer-deﬁned
value to separatevalue-added activityfrom wasteTo create a lean PD process, it is important toestablish a customer deﬁned value as a ﬁrst step.Once these values have been identiﬁed, diffused andunderstood throughout the whole organization, it ispossible eliminate wasteS7, S11, S13,S14, S20, S21,S26, S27, S339(4) S8, S22, S32 3(2)2. Front-load the PDprocess while there ismaximum design spaceto explore alternativethoroughlyInvolves problem-solving at root cause level in earlyproject phases. The aim is to eliminate lateengineering changes like ‘quick ﬁxes’ and patchesthat rarely result in increased product or processperformanceS7, S8, S12, S18,S26, S27, S337(1) S4, S14, S17,S354(0)3. Create a leveled PDprocess ﬂowInvolves eliminating waste (everything that does notcontribute to the value for the customer) andestablishing ﬂow (regular pace) in the PD process.The total PD value stream is examined with the aimto eliminate non-value adding activities that occurbetween development steps such as unnecessaryhandovers of documents and reinvention instead ofstandardization of components. Flow is created byincremental development where work is brokendown into suitable tasksS3, S6, S7, S8,S9, S10, S11,S12, S13, S14,S15, S17, S18,S19, S20, S22,S23, S25, S28,S29, S30, S32,S34, S37, S3825(11) S1, S5, S21, S27,S31, S336(3)4. Utilize rigorousstandardization toreduce variation, andcreate ﬂexibility andpredictable outcomesStandardization has a large inﬂuence on PD since itreduces variation that enables increased ﬂexibilityand predictable outcomes. There are three categoriesof standardization: design standardization, processstandardization, and engineering skill-setstandardizationS32 1(1) S3, S18, S20,S284(3)Skilled People 5. Develop a chiefengineer system tointegrate developmentfrom start to ﬁnishThe top management appoints a chief engineerimmediately after a new program has been decidedupon. The chief engineer is considered to be theowner of the product and is responsible for thewhole development process from concepts to launch.0 S11 1(1)6. Organize to balancefunctional expertiseand cross-functionalintegrationCreating efﬁcient PD organizations by combining thebeneﬁts of product and functional focused structuresin a matrix organization. This allows simultaneousattention to functional and program demandsS36 1(1) S2, S27 2(2)7. Develop toweringtechnical competencein all engineersThe necessity to use a rigorous recruitment process,mentoring and on-the-job-training (OJT) in astructured way. For example, in order to have thecapability to technically challenge design engineers,the recruitment and training of manufacturingengineers should be equally comprehensiveS11, S16, S29,S234(2) S1, S17, S20 3(2)8. Fully integratesuppliers into theproduct developmentsystemComprises a high degree of supplier involvement.This implies early involvement of suppliers in PD, arigorous selection of suppliers, and that suppliers arecommitted to continuously maintain and developtheir engineering and manufacturing capabilities inorder to meet the demands of the ordering company,i.e., original engineering manufacturer (OEM)0 09. Build in learning andcontinuous
improvementTo achieve continuous improvement (Kaizen) ofproducts or processes, it is important to recognizeand encourage learning and understanding oftechnologies and processes where both tacit andexplicit knowledge are developed, diffused andmaintained in the organizationS3, S13, S15,S16, S22, S26,S27, S358(4) S17, S23 S25,S28, S29, S346(3)10. Build a culture tosupport excellence andrelentless
improvementThe culture embraces a fairly stable set ofassumptions that are taken-for-granted, sharedbeliefs, meanings, and values in an organization thatgovern the members’ operations and enables theorganization to rely less on formal lean controlsystemsS16, S19 2(0) S4, S18 3(2) 2820J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 2821Sub-system Principle Description Strongrelationship*Weak relationshipStudies Freq. Studies Freq.Tools & Technology 11. Adapt technologyto ﬁt your people andprocessesTools and technology must be customized based onorganizational needs. This means that theintegration of new technologies facilitatingincorporation with existing systems or tools andadaptation to established processes should beseamless, and not vice versaS31 1(1) S3, S7, S13, S19,S24, S27, S28,S388(4)12. Align yourorganization throughsimple visualcommunicationDeals with the organization’s capability of effectivelycoordinating complex communication such asrequirements, test results, project status reports andmanufacturing constraints between teams andacross functions in the PD processS6, S8,S11, S14,S19, S20, S25,S28, S31, S3810(5) S7, S9, S10, S18,S27, S29, S35,S378(2)13. Use powerful toolsfor standardization andorganizational learningTo build learning organizations, it is necessary todeploy tools that support development, diffusionand preservation of both explicit and tacitknowledge, on which evolving standards are based0 S20, S252(2)
*Frequencies of relationships to studies on large-scale software development are placed in brackets.ReferencesABG, 1997. V-Model: Development Standard for IT-Systems of the Federal Republicof Germany. Lifecycle Process Model.Abrahamsson, P., Warsta, J., Siponen, M.T., Ronkainen, J., 2003. New directions onagile methods: a comparative analysis. In: The 25th International Conference onSoftware Engineering, pp. 244–254.Abran, A., Moore, J.W., et al., 2004. Guide to the software engineering body of knowl-edge (SWEBOK®). In: IEEE Computer Society Guide.Almefelt, L., Berglund, F., Nilsson, P., Malmqvist, J., 2006. Requirement manage-ment in practice: ﬁndings from an empirical study in the automotive industry.Research in Engineering Design 17, 3.Aoyama, M., 1997. Agile software process model. In: The 21st Annual InternationalComputer Software and Applications Conference, COMPSAC ‘97, WashingtonDC.Automotive SIG, 2010. The SPICE User Group, Automotive SPICE Pro-cess Assessment Model v2.5 and Process Reference Model v4.5.http://www.automotivespice.comBasili, V.R., 1985. Quantitative Evaluation of Software Methodology. University ofMaryland, College Park, MD.Beck, K., 2004. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change, 2nd ed. Addison-Wesley, Upper Saddle River, NJ.Bjarnason, E., Wnuk, K., Regnell, B., 2009. Requirements are slipping through thegaps—a case study on causes & effects of communication gaps in large-scale soft-ware development. In: Proc. IEEE 19th International Requirements EngineeringConference, pp. 37–460.Brooks, F.P., 1987. No silver bullet essence and accidents of software engineering.IEEE Computer 20, 10–19.Broy, M., Kruger, I.H., Pretschner, A., Salzmann, C., 2007. Engineering automotivesoftware. Proceedings of the IEEE 95, 2.Boehm, B., 2002. Get ready for agile methods, with care. IEEE Computer 35, 64–69.Carlsson, M., 1991. Aspects of the integration of technical functions for efﬁcientproduct development. R&D Management 21, 55–66.Cawley, O., Wang, X., Richardsson, I., 2010. Lean/agile software developmentmethodologies. Regulated Environments—State of the Art: Lecture Notes in Busi-ness Information Processing, vol. 65. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, pp.31–36.Charﬁ, F., Sellami, F., 2004. Overview on dependable embedded systems in mod-ern automotive. In: Proceedings of the 2004 IEEE International Conference onIndustrial Technology.Clark, K.B., Fujimoto, T., 1991. Product Development Performance: Strategy, Organi-zation and Management in the World Auto Industry. Harvard Business School,Boston, MA.CMMI, 2010. Capability Maturity Model Integration Version 1.3. Techni-cal Report CMU/SEI-2010-TR-033. Software Engineering Institute (SEI).http://www.sei.cmu.edu/cmmi/Conboy, K., 2009. Agility from ﬁrst principles: reconstructing the concept of agility ininformation systems development. Information Systems Research 20, 329–354.Coplien, J., Bjornwig, G., 2010. Lean Architecture for Agile Software Development.John Wiley & Sons Ltd., West Sussex, UK.Curtis, B., Krasner, H., Iscoe, N., 1988. A ﬁeld study of the software design processfor large systems. Communications of the ACM, 31.Dannenberg, J., Kleinhans, C., 2004. The coming age of collaboration in the automo-tive industry. Mercer Management Journal 18, 88–94.de Almeida Biolchini, J.C., Mian, P.G., Natali, A.C.C., Conte, T.U., Travassos, G.H., 2007.Scientiﬁc research ontology to support systematic review in software engineer-ing. Advanced Engineering Informatics 21, 133–151.Dybå, T., Dingsøyr, T., 2008. Empirical studies of agile software development: a sys-tematic review. Journal of Information and Software Technology 50, 833–859.Dybå, T.T., Dingsøyr, T., Hanssen, G.K., 2007. Applying Systematic Reviews to DiverseStudy Types: An Experience Report. In: In: First International Symposium onEmpirical Software Engineering and Measurement (ESEM), pp. 225–234.Dybå, T., Kitchenham, B., Jorgensen, M., 2005. Evidence-based software engineeringfor practitioners. IEEE Software 22, 58–65.Eppinger, S.D., Whitney, D.E., Smith, R.P., Gebala, D.A., 1994. A model-based methodfor organizing tasks in product development. Research in Engineering Design 6,1–13.Fayad, M.E., Laitnen, M., 1997. Process assessment considered wasteful. Communi-cations of the ACM 40, 125–128.Fleiss, J., 1971. Measuring nominal scale agreement among many raters. Psycholog-ical Bulletin 76, 378–382.Fricker, S., Gorschek, T., Byman, C., Schmidle, A., 2010. Handshaking with imple-mentation proposals: negotiating requirements understanding. IEEE Software27, 72–80.Glass, R.L., Vessey, I., Ramesh, V., 2002. Research in software engineering: an analysisof the literature. Information and Software Technology 44, 491–506.Hibbs, C., Jewett, S., Sullivan, M., 2009. The Art of Lean Software Development: APractical and Incremental Approach. O’Reilly Media, Inc.Highsmith, J., 2002. Agile Software Development Ecosystems. Addison-WesleyLongman Publishing Co., Inc, Boston, MA.Hiranabe, K., 2008. Kanban Applied to Software Development: from Agile to Lean.Available from: http://www.infoq.com/articles/hiranabe-lean-agile-kanban(accessed on Jul. 13).Hoffman, D., Weiss, D., 2001. Software Fundamentals: Collected Papers by David L.Parnas. Addison-Wesley, Upper Saddle River, NJ.Holmdahl, L., 2010. Lean Produktutveckling på Svenska. ISBN 978-91-979196-0-9.Göteborg.Ivarsson, M., Gorschek, T., 2009. Technology transfer decision support in require-ments engineering research: a systematic review of REj. RequirementsEngineering Journal 14, 155–175.Ivarsson, M., Gorschek, T., 2011. A method for evaluating rigor and industrial rele-vance of technology evaluations. Empirical Software Engineering 16, 365–395.Kaner, C., 2003. Blog Archive » SWEBOK Problems, Part 2, 2003-06-27, pp. 27http://kaner.com/ (accessed 07.12.2012).Kano, N., 1996. Guide to TQM in Service Industries. Asian Productivity Org.Karlsson, C., Åhlström, P., 1996. Assessing changes towards lean production. Inter-national Journal of Operations & Production Management 16, 24–41.Karlström, D., Runesson, P., 2005. Combining agile methods with stage-gate projectmanagement. IEEE Software 22, 43–49.Kennedy, M.N., Harmon, K., Minnock, E., 2008. Ready, Set, Dominate—ImplementingToyota’s Set Based Learning for Developing Products . . . and Nobody Can Catchyou. Oaklea Press, Richmond, VA.Kitchenham, B., Charters, S., 2007. Guidelines for Performing Systematic LiteratureReviews in Software Engineering. Technical Report EBSE 2007-01. School ofComputer Science and Mathematics, Keele University.Kraut, R., Streeter, L.A., 1995. Coordination in software development. Communica-tions of the ACM 38, 69–81.Kuilboer, J.P., Ashraﬁ, N., 2000. Software process and product improvement: anempirical assessment. Information and Software Technology 42, 27–34.Lakemond, N., Johansson, G., Magnusson, T., Safsten, K., 2007. Interfaces betweentechnology development, product development and production: critical factorsand a conceptual model. International Journal of Technology Intelligence andPlanning 3, 317–330.Landis, J.R., Koch, G.G., 1977. The measurement of observer agreement for categoricaldata. Biometrics 33, 159–174.Layman, L., Williams, L., Cunningham, L., 2004. Exploring extreme programming incontext: an industrial case study. In: Agile Development Conference 2004.Lean Software Development, 2012. IEEE Software 95.Liker, J.K., 2004. The Toyota Way: 14 Management Principles from the World’sGreatest Manufacturer. McGraw-Hill, New York.Mannaro, K., Melis, M., Marchesi, M., 2004. Empirical analysis on the satisfaction of ITemployees comparing XP practices with other software development method-ologies. Extreme Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering, J. Pernstål et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 86 (2013) 2797– 28212821Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3092. Springer Verlag, Berlin, Heidel-berg, pp. 166–174.Miller, E.J., Rice, A.K., 1967. Systems of Organizations. Tavistock, London.Morgan, J.M., Liker, J.K., 2006. The Toyota Product Development System: IntegratingPeople, Process, and Technology. Productivity Press, New York.Murman, E., 2004. Lean aerospace. In: Initiative. Eng Syst Symp. MIT, Cambridge,MA, http://esd.mit.edu/symposium/pdfs/day1-2/murman-slides.pdf, 16 slides.Negroni, D.Y., Trabasso, L.G., 2009. A quality improving method to assist the inte-grated product development process. In: In Proceedings of the 17th InternationalConference on Engineering Design (ICED 09), Palo Alto, CA, pp. 127–136.Nihtilä, J., 1999. R&D—Production integration in the early phases of new productdevelopment projects. Journal of Engineering and Technology Management 16,55–81.Ohno, T., 1988. Toyota Production System. Beyond Large-Scale Production. Produc-tivity Press, Portland.Pernstal, J., Magazinius, A., Gorschek, T., 2012. A Study Investigating Challenges inthe Interface between Product Development and Manufacturing in the Devel-opment of Software Intensive Automotive Systems. International Journal ofSoftware Engineering and Knowledge Engineering 20, 965–1004.Petersen, K., 2010. Is Lean Agile and Agile Lean? A Comparison between Two Soft-ware Development Paradigms. In: Ali Dogru, Veli Bicer (Eds.), Modern SoftwareEngineering Concepts and Practices: Advanced Approaches. IGI Global.Petersen, K., Feldt, R., Mujtaba, S., Mattsson, M., 2008. Systematic Mapping Studiesin Software Engineering. In: 12th International Conference on Evaluation andAssessment in Software Engineering, pp. 71–80.Poppendieck, M., Poppendieck, T., 2003. Lean Software Development: An AgileToolkit. Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA.Reinertsen, D.G., 2009. The Principles of Product Development Flow: Second Gener-ation Lean Product Development. Celeritas Publishing, Redondo Beach, CA.Schwaber, K., Beedle, M., 2001. Agile Software Development with Scrum. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.Sobek, D.K., Ward, A.C., Liker, J.K., 1999. Toyota’s Principles of Set-Based ConcurrentEngineering. Sloan Management Review, 40.Sommerville, I., 2007. Software Engineering, Eighth ed. Addison-Wesley PublishersLtd, Reading. MA.Svensson, H., Höst, M., 2005. Views from an Organization on How Agile DevelopmentAffects its Collaboration with a Software Development Team. Lecture Notes inComputer Science, vol. 3547. Springer Verlag, Berlin, pp. 487–501.Takeuchi, H.I., Nonaka, I., 1986. The new product development game. Harvard Busi-ness Review January–February, 137–146.Vandevelde, A., Van Dierdonk, R., 2003. Managing the design-manufacturinginterface. International Journal of Operations & Production Management 23,1326–1348.Venkatesh Prasad, K., Broy, M., Krueger, I., 2010. Scanning advances in aerospace &automobile software technology. Proceedings of the IEEE 98, 510–514.Wang, X., Conboy, K., Cawley, O., 2012. Leagile’ software development: an expe-rience report analysis of the application of lean approaches in agile softwaredevelopment. Journal of Systems and Software 85, 1287–1299.Ward, A.C., 2007. Lean product and process development. Lean Enterprise Institute,Cambridge, MA, ISBN 978-1-934109-13-7.Weber, M., Weisbrod, J., 2003. Requirements engineering in automotive develop-ment: experiences and challenges. IEEE Software 20, 16–24.Wellington, C.A., Briggs, T., Girard, C.D., 2005. Comparison of student experienceswith plan-driven and agile methodologies. In: In: Proceedings of the 35thASEE/IEEE Frontiers in Education Conference, p. 2005.Wheelwright, S.C., Clark, K.B., 1994. Accelerating the design-build-test cyclefor effective product development. International Marketing Review 11,32–46.Wieringa, R.N.A.M., Maiden, N.A.M., Mead, N.R., Rolland, C., 2006. Requirementsengineering paper classiﬁcation and evaluation criteria: a proposal and a dis-cussion. Requirements Engineering 11, 102–107.Womack, J., Jones, D., 2003. Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth inyour Corporation, Revised and updated edition. Simon & Schuster Ltd, London,UK.Womack, J.P., Jones, D.T., Roos, D., 1990. The Machine that Changed the World.Rawson Associates, New York.Zahran, S., 1998. Software Process Improvement: Practical Guidelines for BusinessSuccess. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.Joakim Pernstål is an industrial Ph.D. at Volvo Cars Corporation and is working withmanufacturing engineering of automotive software. His research project speciﬁ-cally focuses on the interaction between the functions for product developmentand manufacturing in automotive software development. Pernstål received an M.Sc.in electrical and manufacturing engineering from the Institute of Technology inLinköping. Contact him at Volvo Cars Corporation, SE-405 31 Göteborg, Sweden,jpernsta@volvocars.com.Robert Feldt is a Professor of software engineering at the Chalmers Universityof Technology, Sweden and at the Blekinge Institute of Technology, Sweden. Hehas also worked as an IT and Software consultant for more than 18 years. Hisresearch interests include human-centered software engineering, software test-ing and veriﬁcation and validation, automated software engineering, requirementsengineering and user experience. Most of the research is of empirical natureand conducted in close collaboration with industry partners. He received a Ph.D.(Techn. Dr.) in computer engineering from the Chalmers University of Technology in2002.Tony Gorschek is a Professor of software engineering at the Blekinge Institute ofTechnology (BTH) with over 10 years industrial experience. He also manages hisown industry consultancy company, works as CTO, and serves on several boards incompanies developing cutting edge technology and products. His research interestsinclude requirements engineering, technology and product management, processassessment and improvement, quality assurance, and innovation. Gorschek has aPh.D. in software engineering from BTH. He’s a member of the IEEE and the ACM.Contact him at tony.gorschek@bth.se or visit www.gorschek.com.