 The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 1268Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u rn al hom epage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssUnderstanding post-adoptive agile usage: An exploratory cross-case analysisMali Senapathia,,Ananth
 SrinivasanbaSchool of Computing and Mathematical Sciences, AUT University, Auckland, New ZealandbDepartment of Information Systems and Operations Management, The University of Auckland, New Zealanda r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 10 August 2011Received in revised form 4 February 2012Accepted 11 February 2012Available online 20 February 2012Keywords:
Post-adoptive agile usageEffectiveness
Kanban
Scruma b s t r a c tWhile past research has contributed to the understanding of how organizations adopt agile method-ologies (AM), little is known about their post-adoptive usage in organizations. By integrating theoriesfrom systems development methodologies, diffusion of innovations, and agile methodology literature,this paper proposes a new model that identiﬁes a set of critical factors pertinent to post-adoptive usageof agile practices. This model is used to inform analysis of post-adoptive usage of agile practices in twomajor organizations. The results indicate relative advantage, team attitude and technical competence,championing, and top management support (TMS) are the key factors determining the extent to whichagile practices can be assimilated into an organization. Speciﬁcally, both ﬁndings and this model conﬁrmthat the deeper the assimilation of agile practices into the organization, the better understanding of howassimilation leads to speciﬁc improvements in its systems development outcomes.© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionAM reﬂects the values articulated in the agile manifesto(Alliance, 2001) which places emphasis on the ‘people’ factor ratherthan on processes and tools. Working software over comprehensivedocumentation, customer collaboration over contract negotiation,and the embracing of change over following a plan (Cockburn,2002; Highsmith, 2002) are other value factors. Due to a more ﬂex-ible approach toward software development, many organizationshave adopted agile practices. This approach, in turn, has engen-dered substantial related research; mainly studies reporting theadoption, adaptation, and comparison of speciﬁc measures suchas productivity and quality software development between tra-ditional and agile methods (Dyba and Dingsoyr, 2009). However,most studies that report high adoption rates and success of AM donot deﬁne or measure ‘effectiveness’ of usage of agile practices oridentify effective factors. Therefore, there is a lack of clarity on what‘usage’ or ‘effectiveness’ mean in the context of agile development.This has led to gaps in the literature as noted by (Abrahamssonet al., 2009): “studies of issues associated with post-adoption use ofagile methods are much less in number, even though there is increasingneed to have a better understanding of agile methods in use as manyorganizations have completed adoption stage and agile methods startto become well-established processes of these organizations”.Accordingly, the ﬁrst imperative of the current study is to buildand test a model that identiﬁes the factors affecting agile usage.Corresponding author.E-mail address: mali.senapathi@aut.ac.nz (M. Senapathi).The model also proposes agile usage as a mediating factor affect-ing agile effectiveness. A large body of information systems (IS)research is based on well-established theories such as diffusionof innovations and IS implementation research. While such the-ories are suitable for a particular range of adoption scenarios andtechnology types, they cannot be directly applied to complex inno-vations such as AM, because the outcomes of such application aresensitive to the ﬁt between the underlying assumptions, speciﬁcfeatures of the adoption context and the technology in question(Fichman, 1992). Instead, such theories need further evaluation andextension to make them adequate for the study of agile practices(Pikkarainen et al., 2007). Therefore, in this paper, we evaluate theapplication of these theories to the case of AM through the develop-ment of a comprehensive integrated framework for investigatingagile usage and the impact of agile usage on agile effectiveness. Thestudy focuses on how extensively the innovation is used after adop-tion within the organization, rather than its adoption per se. In thecontext of software process innovations, this is generally referredto as the innovation’s degree of assimilation into the organization.According to Kwon and Zmud (1987), diffusion of innovationis a six-staged process comprising initiation, adoption, adaptation,acceptance, routinization, and infusion. While the initial three phases(initiation, adoption, adaptation) relate to ‘adoptive’ behavior of aninnovation, the last three phases (acceptance, routinization, infusion)relate to an innovation’s post-adoptive use. The factors which drivean innovation across the adoptive phases differ from those thataffect the post-adoptive phases (Karahanna, 1999). Prior studies onAM have paid more attention to examining factors that drive orga-nizations to initially adopt AM rather than on those that affect theircontinued usage. Therefore, this study speciﬁcally identiﬁes the0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.jss.2012.02.025 1256M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 1268factors affecting the post-adoption usage of agile practices withinorganizations. The core research question is: what are the criticalfactors that affect the post-adoptive usage and effectiveness of agilepractices in organizations? To answer this question, the paper isorganized into the following sections. First, an a priori model ofAM usage is derived by drawing from established theories such asdiffusion of innovation and the IS implementation literature. Nextis a description and analysis of the empirical ﬁndings that emergedas a result of application of the framework to two organizationsthat relate to their ‘post-adoptive’ implementation and use of agilepractices into their systems development operation for a period ofat least two years.The case study approach is useful because it enables investi-gation of a contemporary phenomenon within its natural settingappropriate for contemporary topics such as post-adoptive usageof agile practices where theory and research are still in their forma-tive stages. The use of multiple case design in building or testing an apriori theoretical model is recognized in the literature (Eisenhardt,1989; Yin, 1994). Therefore, the current study tests the a priorimodel by using the case study approach to inform analysis of post-adoptive usage of agile practices in two large organizations.The paper makes three principal contributions. First, it drawsfrom well-established theories to develop an a priori model forunderstanding post-adoptive agile usage. While such conceptu-alizations have been criticized for denying relevant theoreticalinterpretations from the data (Ahrens and Dent, 1998), Eisenhardt(Eisenhardt, 1989) argues that such a process of deriving a theo-retical model by constant comparison across cases, evidence, andthe literature has the potential to generate less biased theory. Sec-ondly, it identiﬁes a set of critical factors that impact the continuedusage of agile practices and examines the relationship betweenusage and usage effectiveness measures. Thirdly, the application ofthe framework to two real cases enables conceptualization of thecritical factors that affect effective usage of agile practices whichshould contribute to our research knowledge and inform work-ing practice. One of the cases, BBC Worldwide (BBCW) was anextension of a previous independent research study by Middletonand Joyce (2010a,b), and the results and ﬁndings of application ofthe proposed model to this case have been published (Senapathiet al., 2011). This paper extends and revises this earlier study,adding a second case Statistics NZ (Stats NZ) and performs a cross-comparison and analysis of the two case studies.The paper is structured as follows. The ﬁrst section presentsthe a priori model by integrating insights from relevant theoret-ical backgrounds and the literature. The second section describesthe research methodology. The third section presents the researchﬁndings, describing the application of the framework for each orga-nization in turn. Then comes a discussion and analysis sectionwhich is followed by notes on the probable implications for futureresearch and practice.2. Theoretical background and the research modelThe usage of systems development methodologies (SDMs) ingeneral is a versatile concept (Iivari and Huisman, 2007) and,given the lack of strong theoretical and conceptual base in AMresearch, this study draws from the vast base of empirical stud-ies in the diffusion of innovation, IS implementation research, andAM. The diffusion of innovation and IS implementation models havebeen tested and validated extensively in the IS literature (Cooperand Zmud, 1990; Davis et al., 1989; Fichman and Kemerer, 1993;Gallivan, 2001; Iivari, 1996; Kwon and Zmud, 1987; Raghavanand Chand, 1989) to explain the constructs of the adoption andimplementation of new IS innovations (Gallivan, 2001). They werepreviously recognized as useful frameworks for enhancing ourunderstanding of complex technologies (McChesney and Glass,1993; Raghavan and Chand, 1989; Rogers, 2003), and recently havegenerated interest in the agile research community (Pikkarainenet al., 2007).Information system (IS) process innovation is deﬁned as anynew development, implementation, and maintenance of IS in anorganizational context (Swanson, 1994). IS process innovations areexpected to improve the overall quality and productivity of systemsdevelopment (Mustonen-Ollila and Lyytinen, 2003). According tothe IT diffusion framework (Fichman, 1992), which distinguishesboth the locus of adoption (individual vs. organization) and the classof technology (type 1 technology with low knowledge burden andlow user interdependence vs. type 2 technology with high knowl-edge burden and high user interdependence), AM can be classiﬁedas an example of type 2 innovations. Organizational assimilationis described as the degree of implementation within the adoptingunit as a whole (e.g., the department, division, or team) (Gallivan,2001). This study focuses mainly on the post-adoption stage and onthe factors that inﬂuence assimilation in other adopting units suchas teams, projects, and divisions.2.1. Diffusion of InnovationsThough diffusion of innovation (DOI) theory’s relevance to thesoftware engineering process innovations is recognized as enhanc-ing overall understanding of the diffusion process (Raghavan andChand, 1989), it has also been criticized for its inability to explaindiffusion of complex technologies due to its simplistic assumptions(Lyytinen and Damsgaard, 2001). It has been suggested that suchtheories should be suitably adapted for complex process innova-tions (Fichman, 1992) such as AM. While earlier generalizations ofDOI focused on individuals’ adoption of personal-use innovationsthat did not require extensive specialized knowledge prior to adop-tion, some later research focused on extending diffusion theory tocomplex technologies including frameworks for studying organi-zational diffusion (Fichman and Kemerer, 1993; Mangalaraj et al.,2009; Pikkarainen et al., 2007).Rogers’s (2003) organizational DOI is a ﬁve-stage sequentialprocess which is divided into two main phases: initiation (adop-tion) and implementation (post-adoption). DOI theory posits thatan innovation is more likely to be rapidly adopted if it (i) offersspeciﬁc advantages in comparison with its predecessor (relativeadvantage), (ii) is compatible with existing values, practices, etc.(compatibility), (iii) has ease of use (complexity), (iv) can be tri-aled (trialability), and (v) is observable (observability). While theseattributes may inﬂuence an innovation’s rate of adoption, not allcharacteristics necessarily have the same effect on an innovation’spost-adoptive usage. For example, while an innovation’s trialability(i.e., being able to trial an innovation on a speciﬁc project or for aparticular period of time before it is adopted) may have some inﬂu-ence on its rate of adoption, it might not have a similar impact on itscontinued use. In the context of continued usage, attributes such ascomplexity (Iivari, 1996) and observability (Riemenschneider et al.,2002) have not been found to signiﬁcantly impact the acceptance ofsystems development methodologies. Therefore, we propose thatonly relative advantage and compatibility be included as innovationfactors in our model.2.2. Information systems implementation modelThe concept of an innovation’s ‘depth of usage’ was ﬁrst intro-duced by Zmud and colleagues (Cooper and Zmud, 1990; Kwonand Zmud, 1987) who called it ‘infusion’ in their six-stage imple-mentation model. This phase refers to the ‘innovation penetratingdeep into the organization’ (Gallivan, 2001), and ‘. . .the extent towhich an innovation is used completely and effectively (Wynekoop M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 12681257Initiation Adoptio n Adaptation   Acceptance   Routinization  Infusion Fig. 1. IS implementation model.Adapted from Cooper and Zmud (1990) and Kwon and Zmud (1987).and Russo, 1995)’. Their implementation model is well known inthe IS literature as “. . .an example of good deﬁnitions which serveas a model for adequate construct deﬁnition (Prescott and Conger,1995)”, which has been used extensively in studying assimila-tions of a number of complex technologies such as computer aidedsoftware engineering (CASE) tools, distributed database manage-ment systems, object-oriented methodologies, and recently in agileExtreme Programming (XP) (Gallivan, 2001; Green and Hevner,1999; Mangalaraj et al., 2009). It consists of six stages as per Fig. 1:•Initiation: need for change is recognized, a match is identiﬁedbetween an innovation and its application in the organization•Adoption: a decision is made to adopt an innovation•Adaptation: an adaptation to suit the contextual needs•Acceptance: use of the innovation•Routinization: an increase in the extent and intensity of use•Infusion: increased usage in a more comprehensive and inte-grated manner results in increased effectiveness of systemsdevelopment.As the focus of our research is on organizational assimilationof AM, the IS implementation model’s emphasis on organizationaleffort and the signiﬁcance of effective feedback needed to suc-cessfully diffuse an innovation within a user community wereparticularly relevant. The rationale is that knowledge gained byeffective feedback and reﬂective learning is crucial for the suc-cessful assimilation of adaptive innovations such as AM. Learningand reﬂection that occurs in one project or region can inﬂuencefurther assimilation in other projects, regions, etc. (Agarwal et al.,1997; Orlikowski, 1993). For example, a Scrum team that expe-riences some speciﬁc improvements may inﬂuence other teamsto implement Scrum, or a team that has been using Scrum prac-tices for a long period may come up with a set of practices thatbetter reﬂect their contextual needs. Therefore, the underlyingpremise of this study is that the more deeply and widely the agilepractices are assimilated into the organization, the greater the like-lihood of gaining better understanding of the agile practices thatwork within a given context, and whether speciﬁc improvementsin systems development (e.g., quality, productivity) have beenachieved.2.3. AM researchThe theoretical foundation from the agile literature is drawnfrom Williams et al.’s (2004) Extreme programming evaluationframework (XP-EF) which is a framework that can be used to assessthe extent to which an organization has adopted XP practices.The framework is speciﬁc to XP. However, given the lack of suf-ﬁcient theoretical foundations in AM, some of the factors in theXP-EF, which were found applicable to the usage of any generalagile practices were adapted for use in our framework. The origi-nal framework consists of three parts: XP context factors (XP-cf),XP adherence metrics (XP-am), and XP outcome metrics (XP-om).XP context factors record contextual factors which are grouped intosix categories: software classiﬁcation, sociological, project-speciﬁc,ergonomic, technological, and international.Out of these six categories, sociological factors which record thepersonnel characteristics of the project (such as experience level ofteam, attitude), and technological factors (agile practices, tool sup-port) were selected as potential factors affecting continued usage.None of the measures from the adherence metrics were included asthey were speciﬁc to XP. The three metrics (quality, productivity,and customer satisfaction) of XP-om were also included as effec-tiveness measures. However, there are some important differencesbetween XP-om metrics and the measures speciﬁed in this study. InXP-om, productivity is measured using metrics such as lines of codeper month (KLOEC/PM) and user stories per month, and quality ismeasured using metrics such as number of test defects/KLOEC. Inthis study, however, quality refers to outcomes such as improvedquality in defect management, reduction in the number of defects,and improved quality of the delivered product. Similarly produc-tivity refers to outcomes such as lead time, development time, andfaster delivery. This is logical because this research is more inter-ested in studying the depth of usage of agile practices including anycombination of agile practices (XP + Scrum, XP + Kanban, Scrumban,etc.) rather than those that are speciﬁc to a particular AM such as XP(which is the focus of the XP-EF framework). The adapted versionof the framework as applicable to this study is shown in Fig. 2.2.4. Related researchSome recent studies have focused on ‘success’ factors of agilepractices from an adoption perspective. For example, studies con-ducted by Chan and Thong (2009), Chow and Cao (2007) and Misraet al. (2009) identify a set of potential factors that impact per-ceived success or ‘acceptance’ of agile practices where success ismeasured using outcomes such as quality, time, and cost. More-over, the stream of the literature relating to agile adoption is noteasy for busy practitioners to comprehend and apply in practice(Esfahani et al., 2010). From a sociological perspective, Whitworthand Biddle (2007) highlight the signiﬁcance of the ‘people’ factorFig. 2. Agile evaluation framework.Adapted from Williams et al. (2004). 1258M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 1268by investigating the social processes that contribute to the successof AM. More comprehensive frameworks such as the Agile Soft-ware Solution Framework (Qumer and Henderson-Sellers, 2008)focus on introducing agile practices in organizations based on anorganization’s degree of agility. Other studies that have speciﬁcallyfocused on later stages of implementation include studies con-ducted by (Pikkarainen et al., 2007) and (Mangalaraj et al., 2009).While Pikkarainen et al. focus on the assimilation of XP/Scrumpractices using three case studies, Mangalaraj et al. investigate theacceptance of XP practices across different teams within the sameorganization. While these studies have added value to the extantagile literature, they are limited in terms of focusing only on speciﬁctypes of AM such as XP or Scrum. Moreover, the concept of effective-ness as an outcome of increased usage is not covered. In softwaredevelopment, terms such as ‘agile’ or ‘AM commonly refer to one ofthe major agile methods such as XP, feature-driven developmentand Scrum, each of which prescribes a set of core practices, val-ues and principles. However, in practice, most organizations do notstrictly follow or adhere to any one particular agile method, but usea tailored approach by combining a number of agile practices fromdifferent agile methods that reﬂect their contextual requirementsas noted by Patton (Patton, 2009) “. . .if you dumped all these goodpractices out onto a table, you’d have quite a buffet of very good prac-tices with which to tailor your own process. And that’s exactly whatmost organizations do”. Therefore, in this study, agile usage doesnot refer to one particular agile method such as Scrum but ratherto a mature implementation of a set of agile practices. This is anextended version of our previous study on the investigation of thecontinued use of agile practices (Senapathi and Srinivasan, 2011).It aims to add value to the current body of knowledge by investi-gating the assimilation of agile practices at the organizational leveland the impact of such usage on achieving effectiveness measures.3. Research modelThe proposed integrated research model (Fig. 3) is derived fromthe different theoretical backgrounds discussed in the previous sec-tion. The model is proposed as an initial formulation of the keyfactors affecting agile usage and its effectiveness and no claim ismade that the factors identiﬁed here are exhaustive. Further casestudies around agile practices should add to or modify the variousfactors and measures presented here. The model identiﬁes a set ofcritical factors that affect agile usage. Speciﬁcally, it proposes thatnine critical factors (two innovation, three sociological, two techno-logical, and two organizational) inﬂuence the degree of agile usagein organizations. The model also proposes the relationship betweenthe degree of usage and agile usage effectiveness. The agile usagemodel is set out in Fig. 3: (1) Agile innovation factors (relative advan-tage, compatibility) adopted from the innovation diffusion literature(Rogers, 2003), (2) Sociological factors (attitude, experience, techni-cal competence) adopted from XP evaluation framework (Williamset al., 2004), (3) Technological factors (agile practices, tool support)adopted from the XP evaluation framework (Williams et al., 2004),and (4) Organizational factors (TMS, Methodology Champion (MC))adopted from the IS implementation literature (Huisman and Iivari,2002; Iivari, 1996; Roberts and Hughes, 1996).3.1. Innovation factorsRelative advantage is deﬁned as by Rogers (Rogers, 2003) as“. . .the degree to which the innovation is perceived better thanits precursor”. An organization can successfully move to post-adoptive phases only after an innovation consistently offers speciﬁcimprovements in comparison to its predecessor. There is empiricalevidence to suggest that relative advantage is a signiﬁcant factorin predicting the usage of SDMs (Hardgrave et al., 2003; Huismanand Iivari, 2002) as well as evidence at the organizational level(Iivari, 1996). Other studies that have validated the effect of thisattribute on the use of an innovation include software process engi-neering innovations (Fichman and Kemerer, 1993), programminglanguages (Agarwal and Prasad, 2000), and acceptance of AM (Chanand Thong, 2009).“Compatibility refers to the degree to which an innovationis perceived as being consistent with the existing practices, val-ues, [and] past experiences. . .” (Rogers, 2003, p23). In terms ofpost-implementation stages it is described as the ﬁt between aninnovation and a particular context (McChesney and Glass, 1993),which implies that the chosen agile practices must match thecontext in order to be effective and successfully integrated intothe organization. Since the adoption of agile methods representsa major shift in the paradigm of systems development (Rajlich,2006), it entails major alterations to work practices, investmentin tools that support and facilitate rapid iterative development,versioning/conﬁguration management, refactoring and other agiletechniques (Nerur and Mahapatra, 2005). For example, (Mangalarajet al., 2009) found that the use of multiple languages such as C,Innovation
  factor s 1.Relative Advantage2.Compati
 bil ity 
Agile  usa ge a)Horizontal
  Us age 
b)Vertical
  Us age 
Agile  effecti veness  i)Pro
 duct
 ivity 
ii) Quality  iii)Cu
 stome
 r Satisfa
 cti
 on Sociolog
 ical factor
 s 3. Experience4.Attitud
 e 5.Technic
 al Com
 pete
 nce 
a.Business domai
 n b.Technical domain 
Techn olog
 ical factor
 s 8.Agil e Pra cti ces9.Tool Support 
Organizat ion al factors 
10. Top Management Support 
11. Methodology Champion 
Fig. 3. The research model–agile usage model. M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 12681259Java, C++, and Motif, in a large legacy project caused serious chal-lenges to the adoption of XP practices such as code ownership,refactoring, and automated testing. There is sufﬁcient evidence forthe signiﬁcance of compatibility in a number of empirical studieson traditional SDMs (Hardgrave et al., 2003; Huisman and Iivari,2002; Iivari, 1996), and it is also identiﬁed as a signiﬁcant predictorof the acceptance of AMs (Chan and Thong, 2009).3.2. Sociological factorsThe selected sociological factors include attitude – the team’spositive or negative salient beliefs about the consequences of con-tinuing to use an innovation (Karahanna, 1999) and experience –a high level of team experience will contribute to increased pro-ductivity, and technical competence (i.e., domain expertise, a teamwith a high level of expertise may not be subject to the learningcurve associated with an unfamiliar domain, and language exper-tise, a team with high level of expertise may not be subject to thelearning curve associated with learning an unfamiliar program-ming language) (Agarwal and Prasad, 2000; Williams et al., 2004).Past research suggests that high levels of technical knowledgewithin an organizational unit will strongly inﬂuence the effectiveuse of an innovation (Rai and Howard, 1994). Sociological factorshave also been found to affect post-adoptive phases of assimilationrather than earlier stages since they inﬂuence employees’ willing-ness and ability to adapt to changes in newer practices and adoptthe values associated with an innovation. Therefore higher levelsof attributes such as personal innovativeness, personal resilience,and tolerance of ambiguity may facilitate diffusion whereas lowerlevels of these attributes may constrain diffusion (Gallivan, 2001).Throughout the agile literature, technical competency (individualand average team competence) has been repeatedly emphasized asa critical factor to project success (Cockburn and Highsmith, 2001;Highsmith, 2002).3.3. Technological factorsTechnological factors include agile development practices, andtool support (use of Project Management tools such as VersionOne,RallyDev, tools for automated testing). Recording agile practicesmay provide insight into which hybrid practices may lead to moreeffective outcomes (Williams et al., 2004). This outcome is becausethere is often a substantial difference between the ‘vanilla’ textbookversion and the actual “method-in-action” used in practice becausemost prescribed agile practices are tailored to meet the contex-tual needs of software development (Fitzgerald, 1997; Pikkarainenet al., 2007). For example, Pikkarainen et al. (2007) found that dif-ferent XP practices reached different levels of assimilation duringdifferent periods of usage, and practices that addressed speciﬁcneeds of the adopting team reached deeper assimilation levels.While the signiﬁcance of tool support in the adoption of soft-ware process innovations in general has been recognized (Greenand Hevner, 1999), their importance in facilitating acceptance ofagile practices in terms of providing support to speciﬁc XP practiceslike refactoring, continuous integration, and test-driven develop-ment is also documented (Mangalaraj et al., 2009). For example,(Mangalaraj et al., 2009) found that the use of software tools such asIntelliJ and CruiseControl greatly helped in speeding up XP practicessuch as refactoring and test-driven development.3.4. Organizational factorsOrganizational factors include TMS and MC. TMS refers to ongo-ing, continual support and encouragement of the top managementexecutives in the adoption and implementation of innovations(Sultan and Chan, 2000), which has emerged as a key factoraffecting implementation success in IS innovation and the systemsdevelopment methodology literature (Huisman and Iivari, 2002).Active support and direct involvement of top management iscapable of enabling a smoother transition to adaptive practicessuch as agile ones. For example, Roberts et al. (1998) and Robertsand Hughes (1996) found that lack of management support wasone of the biggest obstacles in implementing SDM, while (Iivari,1996) reported signiﬁcant relationships between CASE usage andmanagement support both at the individual and the organizationallevel. In the context of AM (Vijayasarathy and Turk, 2008) foundlack of management support to be one of the biggest obstacles inthe successful implementation of agile methods.MC: Successful adoption of AM implies changes to the orga-nizational culture, form and processes, which require signiﬁcantchanges in the systems development methods, values, and thelearning of new practices. While traditionally MCs are predomi-nantly viewed as playing a critical role in the introduction of newinnovations in organizations (Premkumar and Potter, 1995), theyare also characterized as bearers of persuasive and evaluative infor-mation about an innovation (Beath, 1991). According to Beath, MCsnot only promote the users’ vision of using an innovation, but alsouses a variety of other inﬂuences (social, political, etc.,) to eliminatebarriers to successful diffusion and implementation (Beath, 1991).In the context of AM, MCs play a signiﬁcant role in encouraging andfacilitating the on-going usage of agile practices (Pikkarainen et al.,2007), which include responsibilities such as convincing manage-ment, pushing through implementation hurdles, mentoring, andensuring that agile practices are correctly adhered to by team mem-bers (Pikkarainen et al., 2007).Given the increasingly important role of teams in agile develop-ment, it is proposed that all the factors identiﬁed above be assessedat the team level. This is because members of a team “. . .work ona common set of tasks, inﬂuence each other through interactions, andengage in behaviors acceptable to the group as a whole. . .” (Sarkeret al., 2005), and because they have a deep understanding of theprecise situation, they make the majority of decisions pertain-ing to the use of speciﬁc agile practices, tools, technologies, etc.,(Mustonen-Ollila and Lyytinen, 2003). Moreover, team manage-ment practices that foster ‘facilitate-and-co-ordinate’ rather than‘command-and-control’ style of leadership empowers the team tobe more autonomous and is therefore believed to have a signiﬁcantimpact on the continued usage of agile practices (Mangalaraj et al.,2009).3.5. Agile usageUsage is a key measure of successful implementation of sys-tems development methodologies (Huisman and Iivari, 2002; Iivariand Maansaari, 1998) and has been referred to using differentterminologies such as, acceptance, usage/routinization, infusion(Cooper and Zmud, 1990), and usage, acceptance and incorpora-tion (McChesney and Glass, 1993). The deﬁnition adopted for usagein the present study is similar to that proposed by Zmud and col-leagues (Cooper and Zmud, 1990; Kwon and Zmud, 1987) whereusage is preceded by, and based on the acceptance of the innova-tion. McChesney and Glass specify two measures for post-adoptionusage: (i) horizontal usage; concerned with the use of the innovationacross the organizations such as percentage of projects, number ofteams. It may for example, refer to the spread of the use of Scrumpractices from one team or project to multiple teams/projects, orfrom one region to many regions within an organization. (ii) verticalusage is concerned with maximum intensity of their use i.e., depthof use of speciﬁc agile practices. For example, Scrum is made up ofthree roles (Product Owner, ScrumMaster, Team), four ceremonies(Sprint Planning, Daily Scrum, Sprint Reviews, Sprint retro-spectives), and three artifacts (Product backlog, Sprint backlog, 1260M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 1268Burndown chart), and therefore a team which follows all thesepractices may ideally seem to have achieved maximum Scrumusage. However, Scrum gives a basic set of constraints to drive aprocess improvement (Kniberg and Skarin, 2009), and in reality aScrum team may continue to use some of their predecessor prac-tices such as XP’s pair programming that may have been workingeffectively for their context. Teams gain an understanding of whatagile practice works better for them as they start observing howthings like quality, and productivity change, which may lead to fur-ther adaptations as they start reﬂecting on and drawing conclusionsfrom the results. Though this is an on-going and continual improve-ment process, over a period of time teams gain a better understand-ing of whether a given set of practices works effectively for theircontext. The intensity of the use of these practices is what is referredto as ‘vertical usage’. The important thing is not the agile practicesyou start with, but the set of practices that you end up with, i.e.,the set of agile practices that you derive based on continual learn-ing, improvements, adaptations and change based on a particularcontext.3.6. Agile usage effectivenessAs discussed under related research, some studies have iden-tiﬁed speciﬁc ‘success’ measures relating to adoption of agilemethods such as ‘cost’, ‘quality’, and ‘time’ (Chan and Thong, 2009;Misra et al., 2009). Others have provided some insights on the var-ious factors affecting ‘acceptance’ or ‘use’ without identifying anyspeciﬁc outcome measures. Though it might be impossible to spec-ify with certainty what these outcomes are and to what extent theycan be achieved, this study is more interested in examining if thereare any speciﬁc improvements in the overall systems developmentprocess as a result of continued usage of agile practices as per-ceived by the organization. To that extent, we have found threeeffectiveness measures that have been identiﬁed as the core criteriafor assessing post-implementation effectiveness of systems devel-opment methodologies (McChesney and Glass, 1993): (1) improvedproductivity in the development process, (2) improved quality ofthe development process (Huisman and Iivari, 2002; Iivari, 1996),and (3) customer satisfaction. Customer satisfaction has been rec-ognized as a key measure of agile effectiveness in the agile literaturewhere it is argued that an AM can be considered successful only ifit adds value to the customer and is perceived as satisfactory bythe customer (Cockburn and Highsmith, 2001; Misra et al., 2009).It is believed that in order to know whether there are any improve-ments in systems development, the innovation practices must beused deeply and extensively. This is because the innovation adop-tion theories presume that ‘incorporation’ cannot happen beforethey become a normal part of organizational life. For example, Iivari(1996) examined the impacts of computer aided software engineer-ing (CASE) usage on perceived impacts. He examined how using theCASE tool impacted developer perceptions of quality and produc-tivity based on the rationale that CASE tools cannot be effectiveunless they are continually used. However, agile usage as a factoraffecting agile effectiveness has been omitted from the agile lit-erature. Analyzing the relationship between agile usage and agileeffectiveness, where effectiveness is measured as the impact ofagile usage on systems development outcomes is crucial to under-standing continued usage of agile practices in organizations. Unlessagile practices are used more deeply and widely throughout theorganization, we will not be able to ascertain its impact on sys-tems development activities. This is reﬂected in our frameworkby the bi-directional arrow in Fig. 3 that links agile usage to agileeffectiveness. However, it should be noted that due to the smallamount of research on agile usage, the theorized relationships aretentative.4. Research methodologyThe research followed a case study methodology (Yin, 1994),with the aim of validating the proposed model by informing ananalysis of the inﬂuence of various key factors on the post-adoptionuse of agile practices in two organizations. This approach wasadopted for two main reasons. First, it enables investigation of acontemporary phenomenon within its natural setting (Yin, 1994),and is especially appropriate for newer topic areas such as post-adoptive assimilation of agile practices, where theory and researchare still in their formative stages (Eisenhardt, 1989). Since the mainobjective of this study was to develop a rich, theoretical frameworkfor understanding continued agile usage, an exploratory literalreplication approach which enables predicting similar results (Yin,1994) seemed particularly useful. The following criteria were usedto select the cases:(i)The
 organization had been conducting systems developmentfor a range of different applications using one of the main AM(Scrum, XP) or a combination of practices from different AM(Scrum + XP, Kanban, Kanban +XP, etc.)(ii)The
 organization had been using agile practices for at least 2years(iii)Key
 stakeholders (developers, ScrumMaster, etc.) were avail-able for interviewsSecondly, it facilitated the testing of a well-formulated theoret-ical model, i.e., the a priori agile usage model. Yin (1994) suggeststhat whenever there are two cases, a cross-case analysis of theﬁndings is likely to be more robust that results in conﬁrming, chal-lenging, or extending the theory. One of the cases, BBC Worldwide(BBCW) was an extension to a previously conducted independentresearch study (Middleton and Joyce, 2010a,b), and the ﬁndings ofapplication of the proposed model to this case has been published(Senapathi et al., 2011), and the other case study, Statistics NZ (StatsNZ) was conducted as part of this study.Our primary source of data was semi-structured interviews con-ducted with key stakeholders in both the cases. A total of seventeeninterviews were conducted. An interview protocol was developedto elicit information on the agile practices used in various projects,and to test the factors and measure the outcomes of the usagemodel. Interviewees were selected based on their primary role ina given agile project. The interviewees’ opinions on each of theconstructs were sought to validate the model’s constructs. Theywere also given the opportunity to openly discuss and identify anyother relevant constructs or measures based on both their currentand previous experiences. Different stakeholders such as devel-opers, business analysts, project managers, Scrum masters (SMs),and IT service delivery managers were targeted for the interviewsto capture different perspectives relating to post-adoptive usageof agile practices. Ethical guidelines were followed and informedconsent was obtained by all participants. The duration of the inter-views ranged from 30 to 60 min. All interviews were electronicallyrecorded and transcribed. The interview data was supplementedwith secondary data sources, including publicly available informa-tion such as websites.BBCW is a wholly owned subsidiary of BBC which operates underthe BBC Charter and Agreement, whereas Stats NZ is a governmentorganization and New Zealand’s national statistical ofﬁce whichprovides statistical information needed in a wide range of areas.The two organizations were selected by paying attention to theo-retical relevance which ensures that the substantive area addressedand the continued usage of agile practices was similar (Eisenhardt,1989). Thus, both the organizations chosen for this study had withinthe past few years implemented agile practices in their systemsdevelopment operations. In addition, the organizations were using M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 12681261a different methodology. BBCW used Kanban while Stats NZ usedScrum. Some argue that Scrum and Kanban are signiﬁcantly dif-ferent, and that Kanban offers speciﬁc beneﬁts over Scrum. Forexample, while Scrum uses time-boxed iterations and focuses onwhat work people have completed during retrospectives, Kanbanuses WIP limits and enumerates the actual work done rather thanon people (Middleton and Joyce, 2010b). However, we believe thequestion should not be on which one is better as it depends on thecontextual requirements of an organization. Since both are basedon adaptive principles and are radically different from any of theprevious prescriptive methods of systems development, they cantherefore be categorized under the ‘agile’ group. In fact, such a dif-ference was sought in order to validate the proposed framework indifferent agile contexts. Therefore, the pattern matching data anal-ysis technique which compares an empirical based pattern with thepredicted one, and data involving both within-case and cross-casethematic analysis organized around the theoretical constructs inthe usage model was found to be particularly beneﬁcial (Yin, 1994).These differences allowed useful contrasts to be made during dataanalysis.In the following section we present our analysis of the two casestudies. Each case is structured around a brief description of thecompany and the agile projects studied, followed by a discussionof the factors, usage and effectiveness measures identiﬁed in theagile usage model outlined in Fig. 3.5. BBCWBBCW is the main commercial arm and a wholly owned sub-sidiary of the British Broadcasting Corporation (BBCWorldwide,2010). Its mission is to create, acquire, develop and exploit mediacontent and brands around the world in order to maximize thevalue of the BBC’s assets for the beneﬁt of the UK license payer. Ina separate study, (Middleton and Joyce, 2010b) reported speciﬁcevidence of performance improvements of the Digital Hub (Digi-Hub) development team based on the practical experience gainedbetween April 2008 and October 2009 when the team applied Kan-ban practices. Kanban is a lean approach to software development.It is based on the principles of lean thinking and has been shown tohave the potential to at least double the productivity of both man-ufacturing and service organizations (Middleton and Joyce, 2010a).The core properties of Kanban are: (a) visualize the workﬂow: splitthe work into items and use named columns visually (on a wallfor example) to illustrate where each item is in the workﬂow, (b)limit work in progress (WIP): assign explicit limits to how manyitems may be in progress at each workﬂow state, and (c) measurethe lead time: optimize the process to make lead time as small andpredictable as possible (Kniberg and Skarin, 2009).The Digi-Hub team was made up of nine staff comprising projectmanager, business analyst, software architect, tester, lead devel-oper, three developers and a support developer. It was working ona mix of developing new software and software maintenance. Thetechnology used was C#, .NET, MS SQL Server, and legacy ConnectedService Framework (CSF) code. Data was collected using semi-structured interviews with the team’s key stakeholders, recordingthe precise operation of the lean system, observing daily ‘standup’ meetings, and reviewing statistical analysis of the outputsfrom the system. The study focused mainly only on the softwaredevelopment team as at that time it was not yet an organizationwide implementation. According to (Middleton and Joyce, 2010b),“. . .team had to work within their existing framework to adopt leanpractices where they had discretion in how to manage their own work,and try to inﬂuence other parts of the organization where possible”.The evidence of the effectiveness of the use of lean practices over atwelve month period showed that the lead time to deliver softwareimproved by thirty-seven percent, consistency of delivery roseby forty-seven percent and defects reported by customers fell bytwenty-four percent. Therefore this case with proven evidence ofimprovements in systems development over a period of time wasfound as a suitable candidate to be used as a pilot to test the modelproposed in this study. As part of data collection for this study, fur-ther interviews were conducted with the members of the Digi-Hubin 2010 using the methodology described in the previous section.5.1. Innovation factorsPrior to 2009, BBCW had been using Scrum methodology foralmost two years. The Digi-Hub team was delivering enterprisemessaging systems, which was very complex, poorly designed withvery large and complex legacy code base. It was difﬁcult for theteam to accurately gauge the time required for completing a speciﬁctask. This was because a given piece of work would become biggerand bigger and there was ongoing reprioritization. Therefore, theteam found it difﬁcult to adhere to Scrum’s time-boxed iterations.Moreover, they were not receiving timely feedback from customersand so there were a number of big projects that were not successful.It was about the same time (2009) that Kanban as a lean approach tosoftware development was gaining popularity. Since the team wasalready using Scrum and given Kanban’s ﬂexibility in allowing otherpractices in conjunction with its core properties, provided a perfectcontext for a senior team such as Digi-Hub to implement Kanbanpractices in combination with their existing Scrum practices such asdaily stand up meetings and retrospectives. The speciﬁc advantagesof using Kanban over its precursor Scrum practices were (i) limitingthe work in progress, i.e., stopping context-switching and gettingefﬁciency out of visualizing the process and gaining an understand-ing of the whole process, (ii) reducing batch size, i.e., by reducing thesize of units of work going through the pipeline which resulted inreduction of overheads including changes in requirements and (iii)‘granularity of visualization’; software coach of the team describedthis as “. . .in Scrum you don’t get the granularity of visualization,Kanban is very granular, and what really happens is once you startvisualizing your work, the whole team gets a collective understandingof how they build software”.There were no major issues revealed relating to compatibility.5.2. Sociological factorsThe core part of the team was not only highly experiencedbut also technically competent in software development, and hadpreviously used XP and Scrum practices for at least two years.Though the team was not familiar with the business domain, it wasvery experienced with the technology domain in terms of usingMicrosoft Stack, Web services, user interfaces, etc.The team’s attributes of positive attitude, willingness to change,high motivation, and personal innovativeness appeared to have aninﬂuence on their ability to adapt to changes in agile practices.For example, though Kanban was implemented at a time (2008)when there was limited literature, the team worked together bylearning from each other, which ensured that the strengths andexpertise of different members were reﬂected in the choice of theirtasks and decisions (for example, some members of the team werevery strong on test driven development) and had a common under-standing of what the team thought good practices were. Thoughthe members were not mandated to use Kanban practices, theythemselves became very interested in and motivated by Kanbanand started practicing what they learnt from books, attending Kan-ban meetings, etc. In addition, the high levels of experience of theteam’s project manager and software coaches (who taught techni-cal rather than agile practices) also had an inﬂuence on the fast anddeep assimilation of agile practices. 1262M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 12685.3. Technological factorsThe team was previously a Scrum team which used two-weeklysprint time-boxed iterations, retrospectives, planning meetingsetc., but when it moved to Kanban in 2008 it incorporated Kanbanproperties without making major changes to some of the existingXP/Scrum practices that were already working well such as dailymeetings, refactoring and test-driven developments. Although theteam had a number of engineering practices in place such as testdriven development, automated acceptance testing, source con-trol, bug tracking software, and decoupling, their use improved andconsolidated during the assimilation stages (Middleton and Joyce,2010b). In terms of Kanban practices, the team highlighted the needfor deeply implementing all the core properties along with the sup-port of necessary tools as one developer stated, “. . .we visualized ourworkﬂow, limited WIP, we used models, collected data to manage andmeasure ﬂow, i.e., we had all the ﬁve properties from David Anderson’sbook, and we had some of the emergent properties as well”.A number of technical tools such as Cucumber for automatedtesting, TeamCity for continuous integration were used, and a lotof data collected from the Kanban board in conjunction with otherinternal systems for logging hours etc., were fed into project man-agement practices. The team enjoyed autonomy in their choice oftasks, relevant tools, and making decisions relating to breaking ahigh level problem into smaller modules. Thus, deeper implemen-tation of the core practices with an emphasis on optimizing theexisting practices was found to have an impact on usage effective-ness.5.4. Organizational factorsWhen the team moved to Kanban in 2008 the governance struc-ture was: Business Board (strategy and budget), Project Board(detail and authorize speciﬁc work), Product Owner (reconcile busi-ness and customer wants), Users requesting work (sign off workcompleted), and End users (two–three hundred people). The teamreceived very strong support from the Project Board, the ProductOwner, IT management and knowledgeable colleagues, and bene-ﬁted from hearing world renowned speakers such as Martin Fowler,Craig Larman and David Anderson, who gave talks at BBCW. How-ever, support at the business board level was not as strong dueto a lack of understanding of the changes in methodological andtechnical practices.The MC played a critical role in liaising between the manage-ment and the agile teams. The MC was not only working withthe corporate levels of management to educate them but was alsoinvolved in coaching other teams and providing one-on-one coach-ing. The MC coached the teams in ways that enabled them to ﬁndself-organizing behaviors. The team felt that the MC played a keyrole as a skilled facilitator especially in handling difﬁcult issues, andone that enabled the team to challenge their perceptions of whatthey were really capable of rather than simply answering or solv-ing their issues. One software coach said, “. . .rather than giving theanswer straight away, it’s more allowing them to arrive at the solutionthat should be there”. Everyone in the team felt that the MC was thekey driver who was responsible for creating a community interestin BBCW.5.5. Agile usageHorizontal usage of agile practices at BBCW increased consis-tently after the implementation of Kanban. Before Kanban wasintroduced almost half (ﬁfty percent) of the projects were usingScrum, but when Kanban was implemented usage eventuallyincreased to almost eighty percent. Kanban usage continued tospread widely as other teams (i.e., other than Digi-Hub) also startedimplementing Kanban. Use of Kanban spread into the BBC fromBBCW, the spread being referred to as the ‘Kanban ﬂu’. The num-ber of staff working on Kanban projects also increased steadilyin almost exactly the same proportion as the number of projectsdescribed above.In particular, vertical usage was found to play a signiﬁcant rolein determining the effectiveness of usage which is best reﬂected inwords of a developer on the team; “. . .the depth of adoption mapsto an exponential curve of success – I think if you just do a couple ofpractices you are not going to get much beneﬁt. If you do a lot of themand they are deeply engrained you are likely to be more successful”. Inaddition, the team’s focus on reducing technical debt by allowingtime for making improvements which might not be directly visibleor requested by customers was also found to have an impact onoverall effectiveness and increased future productivity (Middletonand Joyce, 2010b).5.6. Agile usage effectivenessUsage effectiveness was analyzed using three main factors:improved quality of the development process, improved produc-tivity during the development process, and customer satisfaction.Speciﬁc improvements were recorded based on the data collectedbetween October 2008 and October 2009 (for a detailed investiga-tion and speciﬁc discussion of relevant results and ﬁndings refer to(Middleton and Joyce, 2010b)).The quality of the development process improved. This improve-ment was measured by the number of live defects (live defects arethe bugs reported by customers during a week plus the bugs stillopen for investigation). The numbers of live defects reported bycustomers fell by twenty-four percent, i.e., bugs were being ﬁxedmore quickly and the mean numbers of bugs open each week alsodeclined slightly.Three measures were used to gauge improvements in produc-tivity. (i) Lead time: the total elapsed time from when a customerrequests software to when the ﬁnished software is released tothe customer. It tracks how quickly software is delivered to cus-tomers. Lead time to deliver software improved by thirty-sevenpercent, and consistency of delivery rose by forty-seven percent.(ii) Development time: sum of the time estimates of stories ortasks completed. It gives insight into the efﬁciency of development.Development time was recorded in working days. A variation indelivery times reduced by seventy-eight percent from 30.5 to 6.8,and the mean time to develop fewer and smaller software featuresdeclined by seventy-three percent from 9.2 to 2.5 working days. (iii)Release frequency (RF) is deﬁned as the number of items releasedto customers per month. RF increased by a factor of eight from twofrom November 2007 to sixteen in October 2009.It was believed that a lot of the team’s behavior was driven byfocusing on customer needs and satisfaction. One developer stated,“. . .that’s driving a lot of your behavior as well, so, if you are focus-ing on what the customer receives, then a lot of these practices willstart to make more sense – breaking work into smaller units meansmore frequent feedback from customers which is reﬂected back intorequirements of un started work”. By breaking the work into smallerunits, the team was able to get more regular feedback from the cus-tomer. This enabled them to deliver new functionalities faster withmore predictability, which in turn made their customer happier.The team believed ongoing collaboration with the customer had apositive impact on overall customer satisfaction.6. Stats NZStats NZ is a government organization which is New Zealand’snational statistical agency and the major source of ofﬁcial statistics. M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 12681263The programme of ofﬁcial social statistics (POSS) aims to provide acoherent set of ofﬁcial social and population statistics to meet thekey information needs of both the government and the community.The POSS is made up of a suite of social surveys which comprisesa range of statistical data collections such as the ﬁve yearly censusof population and dwellings, household economic survey, and NewZealand health survey. Stats NZ has about one hundred and fortymembers in the IS department who are distributed across threelocations: Christchurch, Wellington and Auckland. Scrum AM wasadopted in a stealth-like manner on one of the projects relatingto General Social Survey (GSS) in Christchurch in 2007. Later it wasintroduced into more low-risk, small to medium size projects in theWellington and Auckland branches. Scrum is an iterative and incre-mental development methodology that emphasizes a set of projectmanagement values and practices with its distinctive emphasison self-organizing teams, daily team measurement, and avoidanceof following predeﬁned steps (Larman, 2009). Some key practicesinclude a daily stand-up meeting, ﬁxed timeboxed iterations, anda demonstration to external stakeholders at the end of each itera-tion. Data was collected using ten semi structured interviews withkey stakeholders of various teams in Wellington and Christchurchwho were involved with at least one project under the POSS.6.1. Innovation factorsPrior to 2007, Stats NZ was using Waterfall methodology whichwas supposedly overlaid on top of Rational Uniﬁed Process (RUP),but in reality they were not actually following RUP and hadan incorrect understanding of the different phases. For example,elaboration was viewed as design, construction as building, andtransition as testing. The teams spent the majority of their timeon the requirement gathering phase and encountered problems inpredicting the time needed for various tasks, which in turn affectedtheir delivery schedules. The morale of the teams was observed tobe very low, as the IT delivery manager (ITDM) described “. . .wedecided to trial it, particularly because of the low morale, low mea-sures of success we were having in delivery, and once we trialed it,the developer’s level of morale just leaped, and that’s what made uscontinue with it. We could see it really changed their work enthusi-asm. These conditions set the stage for Scrum to be introduced asa viable methodology in some low risk, small projects, and basedon the positive feedback from these projects its usage scaled up toother projects over a period of time.Though there were no major compatibility issues in terms ofusing speciﬁc Scrum practices, there were issues in other areas suchas resourcing. For example, there were cross-functional teams, andtherefore trying to manage cross-functional resources for the dura-tion of the project early on was difﬁcult and incompatible with theirexisting resourcing model. From a Waterfall perspective, resourceswould become available in a Waterfall sense, i.e., testers would beavailable in the testing phase, and their resourcing was done at anindividual level rather than at a team level which resulted in someconstraints. There was resistance from business analysts as theystruggled to understand their identity in the agile process or theagile framework. This was because while there was a lot of informa-tion about how developers, testers etc. would sit within the agileframework, there were not many guidelines about product engi-neers or people who liaise between the project stakeholders andthe development team. Business analysts expected recognition fortheir role because the business rules at Stats NZ were detailed andcomplex and had many dependencies between them.6.2. Sociological factorsMost team members were highly experienced (more than tenyears) in a variety of roles such as business analysis, testing anddevelopment but had no speciﬁc experience with Scrum when itwas ﬁrst adopted. Over a period of time, the teams gained experi-ence by learning from each other and applying it on a project byproject basis. Most teams had knowledge of the business domain;almost all members in the IS department were internal employeesand had been working there for at least ﬁve years.In terms of technical expertise, teams included a mix of differ-ent competency levels. One of the project managers said, “. . .whenwe put them together as a Scrum team, there would be a mixtureof these different experience and competency levels, for example,so that we could have a senior person helping a junior”. However,most teams had moderate to high levels of expertise in terms ofprogramming languages, tools and technologies etc. Initially, therewas only one Scrum Master (SM) who looked after all the Scrumteams, but over a period of time more members were given theopportunity to take the SM role on a rotational basis. According tothe MC, this resulted in them gaining a breadth of experience ratherthan the depth required to mentor other SMs; “But over time welearnt that they’ve got a breadth of experience, but not really depth.So I’m ﬁnding it hard at the moment to ﬁnd Scrum Masters thatcan mentor other Scrum Masters. So we’ve got lots of Scrum Mas-ters or lots of people who have had a go at the Scrum master role,but we don’t have anybody who has built up the experience andbuilt up the patterns and that knowledge of what does a particulardynamic in the team look like, and how to put that back on track,or how to encourage that to be able to come back on track”. MostScrum teams perceived themselves as self-organizing, but in realitythey were not autonomous, and were ﬁnding it hard to move awayfrom formalized roles. This was because there were two streamsof management to which the staff members report to, one was theSM of the Scrum team and the other a manager role, for example,a business analyst (BA) who reports to a BA manager, a tester whoreports to a test manager, and so on.6.3. Technological factorsThough the teams were initially required to use all the Scrumpractices ‘out-of-the box’, eventually they adapted the practices tosuit the requirements of individual teams. There were variationsin Scrum practices between the teams. Some experienced teamsused all the practices well, some evolved from the initial stagesand struggled to incorporate some of their own practices, whilefew newer ones still held onto some Waterfall techniques.In terms of tool support, a number of tools/practices such as theRally project management tool, in-house release management sys-tems, defect management tools, and automated testing were used.In particular, Team Foundation Server (TFS) was extensively usedby all the Scrum teams and perceived as highly compatible withtheir existing practices. One BA said, “. . .for example, previously wehad a repository where we had a lot of templates for different doc-umentation, we were still able to use a lot of that – we just had toadapt. So, instead of having software requirements we changed thatdocument to a user story document, and we also created a new doc-ument, called the as-built spec, so instead of worrying about softwarerequirements and continuing to maintain them, we decided that as wewent we create this new document about what we were creating aswe went – that was quite a new thing, and for all these TFS workedalongside agile quite well”.6.4. Organizational factorsTop management support: Although the ﬁrst few Scrum teamshad some support from their immediate managers such as theirproject manager, they were not conﬁdent of gaining support frommanagement until they were able to demonstrate the beneﬁts ofusing agile practices. The MC described this situation: “. . .we had 1264M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 1268to do it by stealth in that sense which led to it being quite a difﬁcultprocess bringing in change, especially when the organization wasn’tsupporting change. But looking back in hindsight, it would have beenalmost a hundred percent, or a ten-fold easier if we had senior executiveteam on board who were quite comfortable with what we were tryingto do, how we were trying to do it and what the return on investmentwas going to be. That would have helped us to smooth down all of thoseissues; isolation, resourcing issues, resistance to change, and wouldhave helped smooth all of that stuff out. And, arguably probably evenprovided a faster transition as well”.The MC who initially started as the only SM at Stats NZ, wasinvolved in a variety of roles such as bringing in the concept of ‘whatis an agile project’, ‘how would it work’, ‘how would it look andfeel?’. Providing one-to-one training, coaching other teams/SMsand enabling them to work independently on their respectiveprojects was necessary. The MC was also instrumental in facilitatingagile use in other branches, for example, one analyst in Wellingtonreported, “. . .though he was based in Christchurch, he was alwaysavailable and willing to come over to Wellington. . . he did not directus in any way, just presenting facts and answer any queries. . .”. Asthe management required evidence of good results before Scrumcould be formally adopted, the MC played a critical role in initiallyencouraging stealth adoption and then using appropriate strategiesfor the diffusion of agile practices in Stats NZ.6.5. Agile usageHorizontal usage of agile practices at Stats NZ increased afterthe implementation of Scrum on a regional basis. Scrum was ﬁrstintroduced in the Christchurch ofﬁce in 2007. As it was very dif-ferent from their previous methodology (waterfall), it was initiallyintroduced in a few low risk, small to medium sized projects, whichallowed the teams to evaluate the process. And based on some goodpositive feedback from the initial projects, Scrum usage scaled upto other projects. The methodology champion stated, “. . .so with allthe positive information that we had compared to previous projectsusing more of a waterfall approach we had some real data there thatwe really were encouraged as a team to take it on and it sort of snow-balled from there”. And after about a year it spread to the other tworegions, i.e., Wellington and Auckland. Overall, the combined hori-zontal usage from all the three regions continued to increase withalmost eighty percent of all small projects and all larger programsof work (those over two years) using Scrum practices quite suc-cessfully, and in the words of a BA “. . .almost every new project thatstarts now uses Scrum”.In terms of vertical usage, all the core properties of Scrum wereimplemented in the initial projects. According to one Business Ana-lyst, “it was better to do by the book. I don’t know whether we did itby the nth degree, at least we followed the process fully, yes, all thepractices, deﬁnitely”. The MC added, “they’ve followed them quite dili-gently and have been doing that for two and half years, so it’d be quitesustainable to do that”. And, over a period of time, many matureteams evolved beyond Scrum to incorporating their own practicesto get the best value of both. So, for STNZ, vertical usage was notjust a set of prescribed Scrum practices ‘by the book’, but a set ofpractices that were derived over a period of time based on continualadaptation and change.6.6. Agile usage effectivenessTwo particular themes were found to relate to quality which arebest reﬂected in the words of the ITDM and SM respectively: (1)improved quality of the delivered product “. . .the reason why weare delivering better quality is simply that the user is more involvedand so they are prioritizing daily at stand-ups, and deﬁnitely everythree weeks at the sprint planning meetings by identifying what ismore important to them and then the end product is that we are deliv-ering better quality than we were before”, and (2) improved quality indefect management, “we are closing the defects a lot quicker than wewere previously which suggest that we are ﬁnding issues early, whichis great. In some instances we are actually ﬁnding more defects whichis a great indicator because it means we are spending time in the rightplaces. And so if our rate of closing those defects is the same as the ratewe’re opening them for a majority of the projects then we know we’vegot the right rhythm; we’re ﬁnding stuff, we’re correcting it and that’sa great quality measure in its own”.Productivity: velocity measured in terms of story points persprint was used to measure improvements in productivity and wasbelieved to provide a basis for improving the accuracy and reliabil-ity of planning projects. One developer stated, there were “. . .someinstances where teams were reaching a fever-pitch in their productiv-ity. And we were getting to a point where we were ﬁnishing projectsearly and it allowed us time to sit back and look at other aspects suchas testing, where we were discovering new areas that we could do tolook at improving the project without being under pressure”.Customer satisfaction: one of the main motivations for adopt-ing agile practices in Stats NZ was to improve their relationshipswith clients. The agile approach to collaborating with the clientthroughout the development process showed speciﬁc improve-ments in quality, regular and faster delivery, and played a criticalrole in improving their customer satisfaction as noted by their ITDM“. . .their engagement has been phenomenal – they’ve really just goton board, and really enjoyed working closely with the teams. They feela lot more, not necessarily in control of the project, but having somereal, direct inﬂuence on the success of the project. They feel they cancontribute with valuable decisions, really understanding what thoseissues are when technical issues pop-up, and being able to talk freelywith the development team. . .the quality of that decision making aswell; seeing that visibility of some of the engineering problems we’vecome up against for example, has really helped them to understandwhat does it mean when we ask for a particular functionality, becausethey’ve seen a lot more of how those decisions can impact the teamdirectly, and how that can have a direct impact on the success of theproject, it’s helped them really understand what software engineeringis all about which is pretty good”.7. DiscussionWhile BBCW and Stats NZ both implemented agile practiceswithin their systems development operations, their experiencesdiffered due to variations in the organizational context, usage, andthe requirements of key players around the adoption and con-tinued use of agile practices. The structure of Stats NZ can becategorized as a matrix, with hierarchical control of agile practicesexercised from the organization’s Christchurch branch, while thedevelopment work was conducted via project teams operating outof the branches in Wellington and Auckland. BBCW, which ownsand administers a number of commercial stations (e.g., BBC WorldNews, BBC Kids) operates in a number of different territories andplatforms, and therefore can be categorized as a divisional formwith divisions/units having signiﬁcant autonomy. Therefore, Scrumwhich prescribes practices such as time-boxed iterations and roleswas found to be a perfect ﬁt for Stats NZ’s role-orientated, for-malized culture. In contrast, for a more autonomous team such asthe BBCW’s Digi-Hub team which was working on a program withmultiples streams where different pieces of work kept coming in,Kanban’s properties of splitting the work into pieces, visualizing theworkﬂow, etc., was found to be more suitable in comparison withScrum’s time-boxed iterations which were restrictive and difﬁcultto adhere to.Table 1 summarizes the ﬁndings of our cross-case analysis ofthese post-adoption usage of agile practices in the two case studies. M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 12681265Table 1Summary of ﬁndings.BBCW Stats NZMethodology Kanban ScrumPredecessorScrumWaterfall/RUP

Innovation factorsRelative advantage Limiting work in progressReducing batch sizeGranularity of visualizationBetter time management in requirementsgathering
Improved delivery schedulesHigher team moraleCompatibility Not mentioned Resistance from business analystsIncompatibility with resourcing modelSociological factorsExperienceHigh
 ModerateAttitude Positive attitude, willingness to learn, andchange, highly motivatedMixed attitudes toward changeTechnical competence Technical – highBusiness domain – moderateTechnical – moderateBusiness domain – highTechnological factorsAgile practices Deeper use of all practices Adaptations of Scrum practicesTool supportCucumber
 for automated testing,TeamCity for continuous integrationRally project management tool, in-houserelease management systems, and VisualStudio Team Foundation ServerOrganizational factorsTop management support and methodology champion Played a critical role in inﬂuencing agile usage Played a critical role in inﬂuencing agile usageAgile usage Signiﬁcant increase in both horizontal (80% ofprojects using Kanban – spread referred to asKanban ﬂu) and vertical usage (all coreproperties of Kanban)Signiﬁcant increase in both horizontal (almostall projects using Scrum) and vertical usage(derived adaptations of Scrum properties)Agile usage effectiveness Speciﬁc improvements recorded in improvedquality and productivityImprovements in both quality and productivityCustomer engagement and satisfaction seen ashaving a direct impact on the success of theprojectIn both cases, relative advantage emerged as a key factor inﬂu-encing agile usage. For example, Stats NZ faced difﬁculties inrequirement prioritization, delays in delivering to the customer,etc., with their previous approach (Waterfall/RUP) and faced seri-ous consequences such as decreased employee morale, deliverydelays that affected their relationship with the customer. Theybelieved that Scrum brought a radical change to Stats NZ. In con-trast, BBCW found Scrum’s time-boxed iterations very difﬁcult toadhere to due to the dynamic growth of their individual pieces ofwork and constant reprioritization by the business. For them, Kan-ban’s properties such as limiting the work in progress, reducingbatch size and granularity of visualization resulted in a reduction ofoverheads including changes in requirements. However, it was sur-prising that no major compatibility issues were reported in eithercase, given the fact that such challenges have been reported in otherrecent studies (Mangalaraj et al., 2009). Though this clearly calls forfurther investigation, the ﬁndings might be interpreted as eitherthat the teams (i) were technically competent enough to adapt tonewer practices (BBCW) or (ii) the more challenging agile prac-tices such as pair programming, test driven development were notbeing used effectively (Stats NZ). However, as previously discussedStats NZ reported incompatibility issues with their resourcing mod-els, resistance from business analysts, and an inability to leverageenough support from the organization, which impacted on the ini-tial diffusion of agile practices.In terms of sociological factors, BBCW displayed higher lev-els of technical competence and positive attitude which could beattributed to the fact that some of the key roles such as lead devel-oper, software coach were hired on a contract basis. It is logicalto expect such high levels of competence and performance frompractitioners who are normally concerned about career mobilityand escalating their marketability in the industry. In contrast, mostIS employees in Stats NZ were internal with very little external hir-ing of experienced IS talent. Some of them been with Stats NZ fortheir entire careers. As a result, most of them had very good knowl-edge of the business domain but lacked the depth of experienceneeded to sustain the use of agile practices. Employees displayedmixed attitudes, where some of them were very passionate aboutagile practices few others were not self-motivated and developedan attitude of “us vs. agilists” This could be partly attributed to thepaternalistic culture at STNZ, where the employees expect the orga-nization to cater to their training and learning needs. Such culturalnorms and mixed attitudes might reduce the likelihood of long-term sustainability of agile practices. It also highlights the fact thatwhile differences in individual attributes such as attitude, personalresilience, etc., might not be evident during the initial stages, theywill become more prominent during the later stages and will havean impact on full organizational assimilation.In both the cases, the management wanted evidence of goodresults before the teams could continue using agile practices andtherefore they had to do a lot of things very cautiously during theinitial stages of agile implementation. Even after that, there was nomajor support from or direct involvement of the top managementdue to a lack of understanding of the changes in technical practices.While it is logical that organizations expect to see speciﬁc beneﬁts,it is important for management to understand that contemporarysoftware engineering process innovations such as agile practicesinvolve continual learning and improvement based on effectivefeedback mechanisms over time and not merely the adoption ofa new AM. As one project manager in STNZ pointed out, “. . .thereis not much support from the top management, they know only thetheory side of it, and it would be good for them to know the practicalside of it, they would get a better understanding of why or why notthings are working? We need ongoing support. . .”. If organizationsare not ﬂexible enough to learn and adapt to the changing needs ofcontemporary practices, it will challenge the teams’ effective use ofagile practices and inhibit further diffusion into the organization.Despite the fact that Stats NZ had substantially progressed inimplementing agile systems development practices, they followedan approach that was well-suited to its formalized culture, and con-tinued to use the training resources and strategies that they werefamiliar with. Some of these were not particularly relevant to the 1266M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 1268speciﬁc needs of the agile teams as one project manager noted;“. . .we do attend specialist training on Business Analyst, Project Man-agement, etc., but we need to have specialist training on Scrum – weare keen to learn”. Stats NZ still overly values the specialist skill andknowledge roles and is ﬁnding it difﬁcult to move away from theold formalized roles. On the other hand, in BBCW the teams enjoyedautonomy in terms of being able to make their own decisions inchoices and adaptation of tools, use of technical and engineeringpractices etc. They also enjoyed the beneﬁts of regularly hear-ing from leading experts and thought leaders on key principles ofKanban implementation which motivated the teams to continuallylearn from their experiences. Both companies believed that the roleof the MC was crucial for the successful diffusion of agile practicesin their organizations. As argued earlier, while the roles that MCsplay at various stages of implementation has been well-recognizedin the IS literature in general, the ﬁndings from this study in par-ticular highlight the various challenges the role undergoes in agilepractice which makes championing crucial to neutralizing the inhi-bitions, fears, resistance necessary for the effective diffusion of agilepractices.Speciﬁc evidence of improvements for all three measures wererecorded in the case of BBCW (Middleton and Joyce, 2010b), andStats NZ believed that there were signiﬁcant improvements in allthree measures (though there was no evidence of any formal mea-surement) and suggested that factors such as increased morale ofteam members had an indirect but signiﬁcant inﬂuence on theirproductivity improvements. As their project manager explained“. . .we are ﬁnding that productivity may be higher because peopleare happier, they have been used for their specialist skills in the rightway, . . .and therefore morale has a big impact on productivity”.Thus, our model, conﬁrms that the deeper the agile practices areassimilated into the organization, the greater will be the likelihoodof gaining a better understanding of whether such assimilationleads to speciﬁc improvements in its systems development out-comes. Findings from the two cases conﬁrm that all factors, i.e.,(1) Agile innovation factors (relative advantage, compatibility) (2)Sociological factors (experience, attitude, technical competence) (3)Technological factors (agile practices, tool support) and (4) Organi-zational factors (TMS, MC) had an inﬂuence on the effective usageof agile practices. Despite some of the challenges involved in dif-fusing agile practices as discussed in this paper, both organizationsappear to have made signiﬁcant improvements in achieving effec-tive outcomes as a result of continued horizontal and vertical usageof agile practices. For example, in terms of vertical usage BBCWimplemented all the core properties of Kanban in combination withtheir predecessor Scrum and XP practices such as daily stand-upmeetings, test-driven development, and pair programming with-out making any major changes to their existing workﬂow, jobtitles, roles and responsibilities. As one team (Digi-Hub) beganexperiencing positive outcomes of using Kanban, its use spread toother teams, divisions, etc., to the business divisions and eventu-ally throughout BBC. In the highly data and business-rule orientedenvironment of Stats NZ where people were very attached to theirroles, recognizing the signiﬁcance of key roles such as businessanalysts and making people in these roles feel they ‘belonged to’the agile framework was critical. Scrum was ﬁrst introduced in theChristchurch ofﬁce, where all the practices were adopted ‘by thebook’. As the ITDM explained “. . .we were determined at the verystart that we should do scrum out of the box, because we knew thatwe needed to understand how it works ﬁrst – we said people hadto stick with it for at least 6 months. . .before adapting it. and laterthey adapted things to something that is more beneﬁcial for them”.The complete adoption of all Scrum practices enabled the teams toderive effective adaptations of Scrum practices which in turn hadan impact on speciﬁc improvements such as faster delivery and cus-tomer satisfaction. The use of Scrum eventually spread to all teams,and in the words of the ITDM “. . .we started out with a handful ofprojects, and now almost every IT project is done using agile”.When participants were asked to comment on any other factors(other than those proposed in the model) that might potentiallyimpact agile usage, the common factor that emerged from both theorganizations was budgetary constraint. One of the lead developersat BBCW said, “you need to have enough budget to take on technicaldebt or practices to change the system, for example, we spent quite alot of money on automating deployment”. The MC at STNZ reported,“yes, if we are quite constrained then we cannot afford additional orspecialized resourcing and that can have a negative effect”, and addedtime as another factor, “in a government funding environment suchas ours time constraints are very important. But not in a negativeway, it can be actually quite liberating in terms of making consciousdecisions. . . because we are looking to manage the project by scope.So, as we get closer to that time constraint we can start making moredetailed decisions about what should or should not be in the productat that particular time. So, in the beginning we are quite ambiguous inour decision making in terms of scope. . .. but by the end we are makingalmost binary decisions on the scope; what is in and what is out of theproject”. So time was perceived to have a positive inﬂuence on agileeffectiveness as it allowed improvements in the quality of decisionmaking. However, the impact of budget and time factors on agileusage needs to be further validated before it can be incorporated into our proposed model.In summary, we have seen how two different sets of agile prac-tices each based on a core underlying methodology (Scrum andKanban) experienced improvements in their systems developmentoperations based on continued and deepened usage of agile prac-tices. The ﬁndings highlight the signiﬁcance of context, and the factthat the question is not which is better; Scrum or Kanban, but ratheron ﬁnding the set of practices that works for a particular organiza-tion and using it deeply and extensively until speciﬁc evidence ofimprovements are evident. Then ‘reﬂect, learn and change’ can bebased on consistent and continual feedback mechanisms, whichneeds to be an on-going process.8. ConclusionThis article has presented an exploratory empirical study intounderstanding the factors that facilitate effective usage of agilepractices in organizations. The evidence from these two casestudies suggests that the usage framework presented impacts onresearch in this area. However, though the ﬁndings from this studyconﬁrm that the various factors identiﬁed in the framework play asigniﬁcant role in affecting the post-adoptive usage of agile prac-tices, it should be noted that these factors represent general factorsconducive to agile usage. Given that the primary objective of ourresearch is to articulate the a priori research model, we havefocused our efforts toward this purpose. Usage effectiveness orsuccess in certain organizations may, however, be inﬂuenced byspeciﬁc factors or measures not identiﬁed in the model. Therefore,further research would reﬁne or expand the model in several ways.A large scale survey could be used to statistically conﬁrm and val-idate the usage framework’s propositions at a more general level.Studies in different organizational settings and for different typesof agile practices would potentially increase the applicability of thisframework.From a research perspective, the study draws upon relatedstreams of literature to synthesize the various factors that relateto the effectiveness of agile usage. It focused on identifying factorsthat may explain post-adoptive behavior of agile usage. The empha-sis was on how extensively and deeply the innovation is used afteradoption, rather than its adoption per se. In the context of softwareprocess innovations, this is generally to as the innovation’s degree M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 12681267of assimilation into the organization (Fichman and Kemerer, 1997;Gallivan, 2001).While some recent research (Mangalaraj et al., 2009;Pikkarainen et al., 2007) provides some insights into the post-adoption use of speciﬁc agile methods/practices such as XP orScrum, there is very limited empirical research studying the actualuse of agile practices using appropriate theoretical concepts orframeworks (Pikkarainen et al., 2007). Moreover, the relationshipbetween agile usage and agile effectiveness i.e., usage as a factoraffecting effectiveness, has been omitted from this importantstream of research. Our research can be seen as a ﬁrst step inaddressing this gap in the extant agile literature which has devel-oped a theoretical framework by identifying a set of factors thatmight affect post-adoptive agile usage where ‘usage’ refers to thecontinued use of agile practices ranging from the use of speciﬁcmethods/practices such as XP or Scrum to the use of combinationof properties/practices from different methods such as XP, Scrumand Waterfall.For the practitioner community, the study has identiﬁedimportant factors that might play a signiﬁcant role in affectingeffectiveness of agile usage in organizations. Since higher levelsof technical knowledge and expertise are key factors that affectthe effective use of agile practices, managers can cultivate suchexpertise among their staff through effective coaching, training,and support programs. Adequate support from management is nec-essary to overcome resistance, compatibility issues and to impartnecessary skills to members of the development team. While MCsplay a critical role in overcoming the implementation hurdles andfacilitating the propagation of agile practices, top management sup-port will be crucial to sustain the efforts of such initiatives in orderfor the whole organization to evolve into an agile one.ReferencesAbrahamsson, P., Conboy, K., Wang, X., 2009. ‘Lots done, more to do’: the currentstate of agile systems development research. European Journal of InformationSystems, 18.Agarwal, R., Prasad, J., 2000. A ﬁeld study of the adoption of software process inno-vations by information systems professionals. IEEE Transactions on EngineeringManagement 47, 295–308.Agarwal, R., Tanniru, Wilemon, D., 1997. Assimilating information technology inno-vations: strategies and moderating inﬂuences. IEEE Transactions on EngineeringManagement 44, 347–358.Ahrens, T., Dent, J., 1998. Accounting and organizations: realizing the richness ofﬁeld research. Journal of Management Accounting Research 10, 1–39.Alliance, A., 2001. Agile Alliance, Agile Manifesto.BBCWorldwide, 2010. http://www.bbcworldwide.com/about-us.aspx.Beath, C.M., 1991. Supporting the information technology champion. MIS Quarterly10, 355–371.Chan, F.K.Y., Thong, J.Y.L., 2009. Acceptance of agile methodologies: a critical reviewand conceptual framework. Decision Support Systems 46, 803–814.Chow, T., Cao, D.-B., 2007. A survey study of critical success factors in agile softwareprojects. The Journal of Systems and Software 81, 961–971.Cockburn, A., 2002. Agile Software Development. Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA.Cockburn, A., Highsmith, J., 2001. Agile software development: the people factor.Software Management.Cooper, R.B., Zmud, R.W., 1990. Information technology implementation research:a technology diffusion approach. Management Science 36, 123–139.Davis, F.D., Bagozzi, R.P., Warshaw, P.R., 1989. User acceptance of computer technol-ogy: comparison of two theoretcial models. Management Science 35, 982–1003.Dyba, T., Dingsoyr, T., 2009. What do we know about agile software development?IEEE Software (September/October), 6–8.Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989. Building theories from case study research. The Academy ofManagement Review 14, 532–550.Esfahani, H.C., Yu, E., Annosi, M.C., 2010. Capitalizing on empirical evidence duringagile adoption. In: AGILE Conference, 2010, pp. 21–24.Fichman, R.G., 1992. Information technology diffusion: a review of empiricalresearch. In: DeGross, J.I., Becker, J.D., Elam, J.J. (Eds.), Thirteenth InternationalConference on Information Systems. Dallas, TX, pp. 195–206.Fichman, R.G., Kemerer, C.F., 1993. Adoption of software engineering processinnovations: the case of object orientation. Sloan Management Review 34,7–22.Fichman, R.G., Kemerer, C.F., 1997. The assimilation of software process inno-vations: an organizational learning perspective. Management Science 43,1345–1363.Fitzgerald, B., 1997. The use of systems development methodolgies in practice: aﬁeld study. Information Systems Journal 7, 201–212.Gallivan, M.J., 2001. Organizational adoption and assimilation of Comlex technologi-cal innovations: development of a new framework. The DATABASE for Advancesin Information Systems 32, 51–80.Green, G.C., Hevner, A.R., 1999. Perceived Control of Software Developers and itsImpact on the Successful Diffusion of Information Technology, CMU/SEI-98-SR-013. Carnegie Mellon. Software Engineering Institute, Pittsburg, PA.Hardgrave, B.C., Davis, F.D., Riemenschneider, C.K., 2003. Investigating determinantsof software developers’ intentions to follow methodologies. Journal of Manage-ment Information Systems 20, 123–151.Highsmith, J., 2002. Agile software development ecosystems. In: Cockburn, A., High-smith, J. (Eds.), The Agile Software Development Series. Addison-Wesley, Boston.Huisman, M., Iivari, J., 2002. The individual deployment of systems developmentmethodologies. In: Pidduck, A.B. (Ed.), CAISE 2002, LNCS 2348. Springer-Verlag,Berlin, pp. 134–150.Iivari, J., 1996. Why are CASE tools not used. Communications of the ACM 39,94–103.Iivari, J., Huisman, M., 2007. The relationship between organizational culture andthe deployment of systems development methodologies. MIS Quarterly 31,35–58.Iivari, J., Maansaari, J., 1998. The usage of systems development methods:are we stuck to old practices? Information and Software Technology 40,501–508.Karahanna, E., 1999. Symbolic adoption of information technology. In: Proceedingsof Decision Sciences International Conference, Athens, Greece.Kniberg, H., Skarin, M., 2009. Kanban and Scrum Making the Most of Both,http://www.infoq.com/minibooks/kanban-scrum-minibook.Kwon, T.H., Zmud, R.W., 1987. Unifying the fragmented models of information sys-tems implementation. In: Critical Issues in Information Systems Research. JohnWiley & Sons, Inc, 227–251.Larman, C., 2009. Agile and Iterative Development: A Manager’s Guide. PearsonEducation.Lyytinen, K.J., Damsgaard, J., 2001. What’s wrong with the diffusion of innovationtheory? The case of complex and networked technology. In: M.A.A.a.B.L.M.E.(Ed.), Diffusing Software Products Process Innovations. Kluwer Academic Pub-lishers, Norwell MA.Mangalaraj, G., Mahapatra, R., Nerur, S., 2009. Acceptance of software process inno-vations – the case of extreme programming. Empirical Software Engineering 18,344–354.McChesney, I.R., Glass, D., 1993. Post-implementation management of CASEmethodology. European Journal of Information Systems 2, 201–209.Middleton, P., Joyce, D., 2010a. Lean software development: BBC Worldwide casestudy. In: Lean Software and Systems Conference, Atlanta, pp. 24–44.Middleton, P., Joyce, D., 2010b. Lean software management: BBC Worldwide casestudy. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management.Misra, S.C., Kumar, V., Kumar, U., 2009. Identifying some important success factorsin adopting agile software development practices. The Journal of Systems andSoftware 82, 1869–1890.Mustonen-Ollila, E., Lyytinen, K., 2003. Why organizations adopt information systemprocess innovations: a longitudinal study using diffusion of innovation theory.Information Systems Journal.Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R., 2005. Challenges of migrating to agile methodologies. Com-munications of the ACM 48, 73–78.Orlikowski, W., 1993. CASE tools are organizational change: investigating incremen-tal and radical changes in systems development. MIS Quarterly 17, 309–340.Patton, J., 2009. Kanband Development Oversimpliﬁed,http://www.agileproductdesign.com/blog/2009/kanban over simpliﬁed.html.Pikkarainen, M., Wang, X., Conboy, K., 2007. Agile practices in use from an innovationassimilation perspective: a multiple case study. In: Twenty-Eighth InternationalConference on Information Systems, Montreal.Premkumar, G., Potter, M., 1995. Adoption of computer aided software engineeringtechnology: an innovation adoption perspective. In: DATA BASE Advances 26.Prescott, M., Conger, S., 1995. Information technology innovations: a classiﬁcationby it locus of impact and research approach. In: The DATABASE for Advances inInformation Systems 32.Qumer, A., Henderson-Sellers, B., 2008. A framework to support the evaluation,adoption and improvement of agile methods in practice. Journal of Systems andSoftware 81, 1899–1919.Raghavan, S.A., Chand, D.R., 1989. Diffusing software-engineering methods. IEEESoftware 6, 81–90.Rai, A., Howard, G.S., 1994. Propagating CASE usage for software development: anempirical investigation of key organizational correlates. International Journal ofManagement Science 22, 133–147.Rajlich, V., 2006. Changing the paradigm of software engineering. Communicationsof the ACM 49, 67–70.Riemenschneider, C.K., Hardgrave, B.C., Davis, F.D., 2002. Explaining software devel-oper acceptance of methodologies: a comparison of ﬁve theoretical models. IEEETransactions on Software Engineering 28, 1135–1145.Roberts, T.L., Gibson, M.L., Fields, K.T., Rainer, R.K., 1998. Factors that impact imple-menting a SDM. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 24, 640–649.Roberts, T.L., Hughes, C.T., 1996. Obstacles to implementing a system developmentmethodology. Journal of Systems Management 47, 36–40.Rogers, E.M., 2003. Diffusion of Innovations, Fifth ed. Free Press., New York.Sarker, S., Valacich, J., Sarker, S., 2005. Technology adoption by groups: a valenceperpective. Journal of the Association of Information Systems 6, 37–68. 1268M. Senapathi, A. Srinivasan / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1255– 1268Senapathi, M., Middleton, P., Evans, G., 2011. Factors affecting effectiveness of agileusage – insights from the BBCWorldwide case study. In: Sillitti, A., et al. (Eds.),XP2011 L, 1 Ed. Springer-Verlag, Berlin/Madrid, Spain, pp. 132–145.Senapathi, M., Srinivasan, A., 2011. Understanding post-adoptive agile usage –an exploratory cross-case analysis. In: AGILE Conference (AGILE), 2011, pp.117–126.Sultan, F., Chan, L., 2000. The adoption of new technology: the case of object-orientedcomputing in software companies. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Manage-ment 47, 106–206.Swanson, E.B., 1994. Information systems innovation among organizations. Man-agement Science 40.Vijayasarathy, L.R., Turk, D., 2008. Agile software development: a survey of earlyadopters. Journal of Information Technology Management, 19.Whitworth, E., Biddle, R., 2007. The social nature of agile teams. AGILE 2007, 26–36.Williams, L., Layman, L., Krebs, W., 2004. Extreme Programming Evaluation Frame-work for Object-Oriented Languages Version 1.4, NCSU Technical Report.Wynekoop, J.L., Russo, N.L., 1995. Systems development methodologies: unan-swered questions. Journal of Information Technology 10, 65–73.Yin, R.K., 1994. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. Sage Publications, CA.Ananth Srinivasan is a Professor of Information Systems and Digital Commerceat the University of Auckland Business School. He is a Co-Director of the Centreof Digital Enterprise which is engaged in research about the deployment of digitaltechnologies in organizations and society. He serves on the editorial boards of majorinternational journals in the area of information systems.Mali Senapathi is a Senior lecturer in the School of Computing and MathematicalSciences at AUT University, Auckland, New Zealand. Her special focus is in the areasof systems development methodologies, in particular agile methodologies. She hasstrong interests on how these emerging methodologies differ from traditional oneswith an emphasis on both technical and social aspects of systems development inthe context of these new methodologies.