 The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u r n al homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssSoftware product line scoping and requirements engineeringin a small and medium-sized enterprise: An industrial case studyIvonei Freitas da Silvaa,c,e,, Paulo Anselmo da Mota Silveira Netoc, Pádraig O’Learyd,Eduardo Santana de Almeidab,c,f, Silvio Romero de Lemos Meiraa,caFederal University of Pernambuco (UFPE) – Recife, Pernambuco, BrazilbFederal University of Bahia (UFBA) – Salvador, Bahia, BrazilcReuse in Software Engineering (RiSE), BrazildLero – The Irish Software Engineering Research Centre, IrelandeState University of Western Paraná, BrazilfFraunhofer Project Center for Software and Systems Engineering, Brazila r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 11 July 2012Received in revised form 9 October 2013Accepted 18 October 2013Available online 5 November 2013Keywords:
Requirements engineeringAgile methodsSoftware product line scopinga b s t r a c tSoftware product line (SPL) engineering has been applied in several domains, especially in large-scalesoftware development. Given the beneﬁts experienced and reported, SPL engineering has increasinglygarnered interest from small to medium-sized companies. It is possible to ﬁnd a wide range of studiesreporting on the challenges of running a SPL project in large companies. However, very little reports existthat consider the situation for small to medium-sized enterprises and these studies try develop universaltruths for SPL without lessons learned from empirical evidence need to be contextualized. This studyis a step towards bridging this gap in contextual evidence by characterizing the weaknesses discoveredin the scoping (SC) and requirements (RE) disciplines of SPL. Moreover, in this study we conducted acase study in a small to medium sized enterprises (SMEs) to justify the use of agile methods whenintroducing the SPL SC and RE disciplines through the characterization of their bottlenecks. The resultsof the characterization indicated that ineffective communication and collaboration, long iteration cycles,and the absence of adaptability and ﬂexibility can increase the effort and reduce motivation during projectdevelopment. These issues can be mitigated by agile methods.© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionSoftware product line (SPL) has been applied in a wide varietyof domains, such as driver ﬁrmware (Iwasaki et al., 2010), securityinspection (Li, 2010), enterprise resource planning (Hamza et al.,2010), and operational research (Demir et al., 2010), as a meansto achieve quality improvements, and reductions in time to mar-ket (Pohl et al., 2005; Clements and McGregor, 2012). Despite theaforementioned beneﬁts, during SPL adoption several issues mustbe overcome by the company such as the required up-front invest-ment to achieve an operational SPL, challenging adoption barriers,and the lack of guiding empirical studies in the ﬁeld (Bastos et al.,2011).Corresponding author at: State University of Western Paraná, Paraná, Brazil.Tel.: +55 4599017037.E-mail addresses: ivonei.silva@unioeste.br (I.F. da Silva),pauloadmsn@gmail.com (P.A. da Mota Silveira Neto), padraigoleary@gmail.com(P. O’Leary), esa@dcc.ufba.br (E.S. de Almeida), srlm@cin.ufpe.br (S.R.d.L. Meira).The scoping (SC) and requirements (RE) disciplines areextremely important to a SPL, as they deﬁne the initial activitiesand steps of the SPL life-cycle. For this study, we consider SC as aplanning activity that deﬁnes the boundaries of the SPL by decid-ing which features are “in” (economically relevant to be included asSPL core assets) and “out” (not economically relevant). We considerRE as the statements that describe the features such as the behav-ior descriptions, properties, qualities, and the constraints that thefeature should satisfy. To specify these statements, we used textualspeciﬁcations for features, requirements, and use cases. Thus, a fea-ture can represent a requirement, a selection amongst optional oralternative requirements, nonfunctional requirements, and imple-mentation characteristics. A set of features describes a domain.There are few industrial studies in the literature that character-ize the SPL SC and RE disciplines. Moreover, studies that justify theuse of agile methods to improve the SPL SC and RE disciplines arescarcer. All these studies try develop universal truths for SPL but thelessons learned from empirical evidence need to be contextualized(Dyba, 2013).The goal of this study is to justify the use of agile methods whenintroducing the SPL SC and RE disciplines in a SME through the0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2013.10.040 190I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206characterization of their bottlenecks with contextualized empiri-cal evidence (Dyba, 2013). We grouped characterized bottlenecksand identiﬁed the weaknesses in a number of aspects that theliterature mentions as success factors for agile software develop-ment (Silva et al., 2011). The success factors are: the effort (Dybå,2000; Hazzan and Hadar, 2008; John and Eisenbarth, 2009), com-munication and collaboration (Dybå, 2000; Hazzan and Hadar, 2008;Pettersson et al., 2008; Stelzer and Mellis, 1999; Niazi et al., 2005),iteration and adaptation (Hazzan and Hadar, 2008; Pettersson et al.,2008), motivation (John and Eisenbarth, 2009), and requirementsand technology volatility.These factors were chosen, mainly, because of a systematic map-ping study into SPL and agile methods (Silva et al., 2011). In thismapping study, the primary studies partially addressed each oneof these factors.As these factors can have different meanings, for this study wedeﬁned them as:•Effort factor. The time spent by one participant on developmenttasks such as specify features and validate requirements.•Communication and collaboration factor. The interactionsamong the team members and how these interactions contributeto the development of the tasks.•Motivation factor. The participant’s feelings regarding the tasksassociated with a discipline before, during, and after performingthem.•Iterativeness factor. The potential of the disciplines to fosterthe building scope and requirements artifacts through severaliterations in sequence. In that each iteration is a self-containedmini-scoping or mini-requirements discipline composed of taskssuch as identify features, specify requirements, and inspect use cases.•Adaptability factor. The potential of the disciplines to fosteradjustments in the artifacts, team, technology, and process tobecome more effective.•Volatility factor. The changes from the customer needs, tech-nology, and domain, which must be considered in the adoptedprocess.This paper discusses the challenges that emerged from theweaknesses and the lessons learned. The challenges are discussedfrom the point of view of mitigation strategies and the use of agileapproaches to overcome identiﬁed bottlenecks.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2describes related work. Section 3 describes the context in whichwe performed the case study. Section 4 discusses the study design,by stating the research questions, and the data collection, analy-sis and validity procedures. The results are presented in Section 5.Section 6 presents the threats to validity. Section 7 describes themain ﬁndings, the lessons learned, and identiﬁed challenges, andﬁnally, Section 8 describes the conclusions, implications, and futurework.2. Related workSome studies have provided data about effort, use of communi-cation, iterativeness, adaptation, motivation, or volatility regardingSPL SC or RE. The following studies are brieﬂy described, since theyprovide empirical data regarding SPL SC or RE.In the study by Knauber et al. (2000), the authors describeinitial results and lessons the application of the PuLSE approach(Bayer et al., 1999) in six SMEs. Despite the limited resources inthe companies, the scoping discipline contributed to the creationof a business vision and the identiﬁcation of new business oppor-tunities. However, the study provided few details regarding theeffort, communication and collaboration, iterativeness, adaptability,motivation, and volatility.In Gacek et al. (2001) and Verlage and Kiesgen (2005), theauthors describe lessons learnt and drawbacks regarding the intro-duction of a SPL (using the PuLSE approach (Bayer et al., 1999)) inthe company Software AG. The company transitioned from legacysystems to save development effort and get started on a sta-ble platform of domain functionalities. The scoping team (fromdevelopment, management, sales, and marketing units) was nota permanent team and the meetings occurred only when majorscoping activities were required. Communication was consideredeffective and fast. The initial ﬁndings of these two studies also con-tributed to increase the body of evidence in the SPL area. However,they did not address weaknesses in iterativeness and motivation.Complementing the discussion in Bayer et al. (1999), the work ofSchmid (Schmid, 2002) presents a well-documented approach forSC and its extensive validation in Software AG and Bosch companies.The approach describes the product line, its domains and featuresand performs an assessment of the reuse beneﬁts and risks, whileidentifying assets for the product line. The extensive validation wasaccomplished in the case studies. The results have contributed toSPL scoping. However, the study focused only on the effort factor.Herrmann and Liebehenschel discuss their experiences in astudy (Herrmann and Liebehenschel, 2011) focusing on effort, com-munication, feedback, adaptability, and volatility when performingrequirements engineering for SPL. The study applied SPL RE in sev-eral automotive systems. Although they present various aspects ofSPL RE that helped them to generate the SPL requirements docu-ments, detailed information about what they consider scoping aswell as information on weaknesses in effort, communication, iter-ativeness, adaptability, motivation, and volatility are missing. Yu,Geng, and Wu discuss a case study (Yu et al., 2012) that evalu-ated an approach to provide traceability between requirements andfeatures for individual applications within same domain. After theapproach deﬁnes a feature tree and establishes traceability withrequirements for each application, the approach then merges allthe models to form a domain feature tree model as well as trace-ability between the domain features and requirements. Althoughthe study has relevant aspects, such as the traceability betweenfeatures and requirements, the paper does not describe the factorsaddressed in our work.Noor describes two studies (Noor et al., 2006, 2008), where thecollaboration factor is alleviated through the collaboration engi-neering technique. This improves communication and collaborationbetween SPL stakeholders during the SPL SC. The authors orga-nized the approach in three different layers: (i) process layer,which deﬁnes the objectives, tasks and participants of the process,(ii) pattern layer, where the process is modeled using patternsfrom collaboration engineering, and (iii) thinKLets layer, wherethe tasks are decomposed to allow their execution using thinKLets.The approach facilitates stakeholder involvement and theresults are based on an industrial context with the reengineeringof legacy systems into a SPL. However, results about the effort,motivation, and volatility variables were not reported in the stud-ies. The aforementioned studies partially address our objective. Asstated previously in this section, the studies focused on one disci-pline, for example scoping, or on a few variables, for example, effortand collaboration. They did not aim to investigate, qualitatively,the weaknesses of several variables for scoping and requirementsdisciplines as well as their effects on each other. This paper inves-tigates the effort, communication and collaboration, iterativeness,adaptability, and volatility during the SPL SC and RE disciplinesthrough a qualitative study. As a result, this study aims to jus-tify the use of agile methods when introducing the SPL SC and REdisciplines. Additional information about these studies and othersthat addressed SPL SC or RE, although with limited data about our I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206191Fig. 1. Company feature model.studied aspects, can be found in John and Eisenbarth (2009), wherethe authors conducted a survey on approaches for the scoping dis-cipline, and in Alves et al. (2010), which reports a systematic reviewon the requirements discipline in SPL.3. Case study contextConsidering that the context can cause misinterpretations onwhat SMEs are, and make more difﬁcult to generalize the answers,challenges, and lessons learned of the study, we show real infor-mation about the company and context in the following section.3.1. The companyWe carried out the case study within a Brazilian softwaredevelopment company which develops systems in the domain ofinformation systems for medical management, since the year 1994.It was created offering strategic and operational integrated solu-tions for hospitals, clinics, labs, and private ofﬁces. The companycurrently has more than ﬁfty clients across many states in Brazil.The company has about ﬁfty employees (about six developers,an architect, and requirement analysts) and maintains four prod-ucts presented in decreasing order according to their sizes. ProductA has features which belong to thirty-ﬁve sub-domains and man-ages all sections of a hospital, from ﬁnancial to patient aspects.Product B has features which address twenty-eight sub-domains,including clinical management supporting activities related tomedical exams, diagnostics, and other related tasks. Product C hasfeatures which belong to twenty-eight sub-domains to manage labsof clinical pathology. Finally, Product D is a web product whichaddresses eleven sub-domains to manage the tasks and routinesof a private ofﬁce.Fig. 1 shows a partial feature diagram for the products. The com-plete domain has about six million lines of source code distributedacross 373 ﬁles, and the company is operating in this domain forﬁfteen years.A previous investigation identiﬁed that the company develop-ment and maintenance teams are conceptually divided along withtwo solutions, the desktop product and web-based units (Bastos,2011). Even with such a division, it is common to exchange activi-ties among employees, and furthermore, some of them hold morethan one role in the same project.The staff presented deﬁciencies in the application of impor-tant software engineering practices such as requirements analysisand design, conﬁguration management, and testing. Additionally,the company does not meet the goals for the process areas inCMMi (CMMI, 2010), for this reason it is not possible to associatethe company to any maturity level. The existing documentationis composed of a wiki system with a description of the domains,training manuals, and single-system screen images.Within this context and through partnership with RiSE Labs,1the company decided to introduce SC and RE. During their execu-tion, experts in the domain, business, and legacy products (fromcompany) validated the artifacts produced by a SPL team. In total, astaff with twelve members (from company and RiSE) was involvedin the SPL project.3.2. Object of studyThe SC and RE disciplines are the object of study in this paper.They are components of the SPL approach named RiPLE (RiSEProduct Line Engineering Process). The approach also includes thedesign (Filho et al., 2009), test (Machado et al., 2011), evolution(Oliveira, 2009), and risk management (Lobato et al., 2012b) disci-plines. If we compare the SEI framework (Northrop et al., 2007) withRiPLE, the former is more comprehensive as it addresses organiza-tional and technical management beyond the common softwareengineering activities. However, the RiPLE is a process with workproduct, roles, and tasks to be followed by the practitioners. TheSC discipline consists of four main phases (Balbino et al., 2011):Pre-Scoping, Domain Scoping, Product Scoping, and Assets Scoping.Pre-scoping aims to identify relevant characteristics that will inﬂu-ence the next stages of the scoping process, such as business goals,team proﬁle, operational and organizational contexts, and mar-ket aspects. Moreover, this phase aims to promote initial contactbetween the project team and customers. Domain scoping has theobjective to systematically analyze and discuss the domains amongthe project members. Product scoping aims to identify the particularproducts that will be developed and the features that they shouldprovide. Assets scoping aims to identify the assets which should bedeveloped in a reusable way. In this phase, the scope is alignedwith the business goal previously determined by the stakeholdersduring the pre-scoping phase.The RE activities are responsible for reﬁning the scope. Thescope deﬁnition is a pre-requisite to starting the process whichhas the product map artifact as a mandatory input. The RE encom-passes three main steps (Neiva et al., 2010): model scope, deﬁnerequirements, and deﬁne use cases. The objective of the model scopestep is to specify and describe features, which composes the coreasset platform. The deﬁne requirements step aims to specify anddescribe the requirements associated with the features previouslydescribed in the functional view. The objective of the deﬁne usecases step is to specify and describe the use cases associated with1labs.rise.com.br. 192I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206the requirements previously described in the process view. Theseare the steps required to perform a speciﬁc operation.The RiSE Labs developed and we adopted a tool (Cavalcanti et al.,2011) to support the features, requirements, and use case speciﬁ-cation. In addition, we applied the inspection activity to verify andvalidate the artifacts generated in both disciplines (Souza et al.,2013).4. Case study designThe research method applied in this study was an embedded,ﬂexible, exploratory, and single case study (Runeson and Höst,2009; Yin, 2003). Embedded because the case study encompassedtwo analysis units (the scoping and requirements disciplines). Flex-ible as new information during data collection can be importantor critical for the study, and this way, the study design can beupdated based on this feedback. Exploratory since we are interestedin understanding the SC and RE disciplines to explore the nature andweaknesses associated with them within a certain context (Patton,2001) (a software industry). Finally, it is single-case study sincethe company develops several products with similarities betweenthem in the same domain.This case study is based on the general process (see Fig. 2)deﬁned in Runeson and Höst (2009). The ﬁrst step is the case studydesign that deﬁnes the goals and the planning of the study. The sec-ond step, preparation for data collection, deﬁnes the procedures andprotocol of the study. The third step, collecting evidence, is the exe-cution of the data collection procedure. The fourth step, analysis ofcollected data, is the analysis procedure of the data, describing theconclusions. Finally, the ﬁfth step, reporting, packages the study tobe reported.4.1. Research questionsAs previously mentioned, the main objective of this study is tojustify the use of agile methods in the SPL SC and RE by characteriz-ing them in terms of possible weaknesses. In order to address thisobjective, the effort, communication and collaboration among thestakeholders, iterativeness and adaptability of the process, motiva-tion, and requirements and technology volatility were the variablesobserved. Thus, in order to characterize these issues we deﬁned thefollowing research questions:•How do the stakeholders characterize the effort to performSPL SC and RE? Rationale: This question aims to identify the mainbottlenecks regarding effort in terms of man-hours when per-forming the scoping and requirements disciplines. Besides theeffort distribution amongst the disciplines, the tasks are charac-terized as well. As a result, the answer for this question can serveas input to the deﬁnition and establishment of agile practices toovercome this issue.•How do the stakeholders characterize communication andcollaboration in SPL SC and RE? Rationale: Characterizing howcommunication and the collaboration are performed by thestakeholders can aid in understanding the inception of the scop-ing and requirements issues, and to identify opportunities toapply agile practices that overcome these issues.•How do the stakeholders characterize the SPL SC and RE pro-cess iterativeness and adaptability? Rationale: Interactivity andFig. 2. Case study general process.adaptability are important aspects for improvement, feedback,and reﬂection of the process. Both SPL and agile processes mustbe adjustable to the company context. A process that is notadjustable can be frustrating and demotivating for the stakehol-ders. Thus, it is important to identify where, when, and how wecan make the process more adequate to the company and theirdevelopers.•How do the stakeholders characterize the motivation with SPLSC and RE? Rationale: Different factors may contribute to themotivation. In this study, we would like to understand whetherdifferent variables, such as communication, organization, docu-mentation, effort, or iteration might impact on the motivationwithin the project environment.•How do the stakeholders characterize SPL SC and RE to dealwith volatile requirements and technology? Rationale: SPLworks well with stable domains. However, frequent changes indomain, requirements, or technology encourage the applicationof agile approaches. Considering the company context, Section 3,it has migrated its systems slowly from desktop to web platform.Functionalities have been discarded according to domain analystsfrom the company. We would like to develop an understandingof what occurs in terms of volatility that could impact negativelyin both SC and RE disciplines.4.2. Case and participants selectionThe basic conditions to address our problem, goal, and researchquestions are: any SME that has a legacy single-system portfolioin a speciﬁc domain; their products share commonalities; and thecompany is involved with the study.After an initial search in the Brazilian company catalog and con-tacts, the RiSE Labs (henceforth named as SPL team) established acollaborative project with a company (henceforth named as thecompany) that works in the domain of information systems formedical management.Twelve participants were selected based on the conveniencesampling method (Wohlin et al., 2000). This selection considereddifferent roles and proﬁles involved in SC and RE disciplines per-formed within the company. For the scoping discipline, we selecteda domain expert (from the company), a scoping expert (from the SPLteam), a domain analyst (company), an architect (company), deve-lopers (SPL team), a risk manager (SPL team), and a product linemanager (SPL team). For the requirements engineering discipline,we selected two requirements analysts (SPL team), a risk manager(SPL team), and a requirements inspector (SPL team).As our case is a SME, we assumed that a role could be playedby more than one engineer, i.e., the domain expert and architectroles could be performed by the same participant. In such cases, thecommunication and collaboration variable could not be captured.4.3. Data collection proceduresThis study adopted four data collection methods, namely docu-mentation analysis, observation, focus group, and interviews.4.3.1. Documentation analysisThe analysis of the documents is a technique which focuseson the documentation generated by software engineers (Seamanet al., 2007). All documents related to SPL SC and RE disciplineswere analyzed including the reports from the project managementactivity, as well as the features, requirements, and use cases spec-iﬁcations. We analyzed other informal documentation artifacts: awiki system, product screenshots, and messages (by e-mail) fromstakeholders.In this method, the effort, communication and collaboration, iter-ativeness, adaptability, and volatility variables could be captured. I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206193Effort data was recorded in the project management documents.The activities, dates, time, and involved roles are the most commontypes of recorded data.Communication variables could be found, e.g., in the messagesexchanged between the stakeholders, and meeting proceedings.Sent messages and the response time for them are examples ofrelevant data that characterize this variable.The records of the adopted version control system, exchangedmessages between the stakeholders, and meeting proceedings haveevidence about the iterativeness and adaptability variables. Datasuch as the number of changes, iterations between disciplines, andadjusts in the team or process, aided to characterize these variables.4.3.2. ObservationThis method followed the advices from Seaman et al. (2007), inspeciﬁc, the use of the following methods: think aloud and directobservations, ﬁeld notes with place, time, participants, tone and moodof the interactions, and observer’s comments.The observed roles were: scoping experts, developers, SPL man-agement, architects, domain analyst, and requirements analystsand inspector. Both disciplines were observed over 120 h. This wasbroken down into 40 h in scoping and 80 h in requirements engi-neering.We captured the effort by observing the time required to accom-plish the task by one person, the communication and collaboration byobserving the interactions between stakeholders when exchangingmessages either by email or chat, and in face-to-face interactionsduring meetings. We also captured requirements volatility wheninteracting with the domain expert and domain analyst.As SC and RE disciplines do not have iterations between thedisciplines, we could not characterize such a variable.We observed the adaptability when inspecting some artifacts(mainly features and requirements). In this case, after the inspec-tion (Souza et al., 2013), the suggested changes were incorporatedinto the templates to specify features, requirements, and use cases.4.3.3. Focus groupWe performed focus group meeting, as advocated in Kontioet al. (2007). These meetings took 34 min in which time we dis-cussed the improvements to the SPL SC and RE disciplines interms of challenges and lessons learned, and their relationship withagile software development. We selected the main developers (SC),requirements analysts and inspectors (RE), and risk manager (SCand RE) to participate in the focus group, since they actively inter-acted across both disciplines.We characterized all the variables by analyzing the answersto the open questions from participants. Although the motivationvariable could be captured in variables, some additional reasonsthat could affect this variable were identiﬁed.4.3.4. InterviewsFace-to-face interviews were conducted after ﬁnishing the SCand RE disciplines. We identiﬁed most weaknesses in the SC andRE disciplines with this method. The participants were free totalk about the process deﬁciencies, difﬁculties and beneﬁts of theproject. Similarly to the focus group method, all the variables couldbe captured during the interview, although at this point we onlyanalyzed the answers for the open-ended questions.4.4. Analysis procedureBased on Miles and Huberman (1994), this study analyzed thecollected data qualitatively. Fig. 3 shows the overall analysis pro-cedure.After data collection, we reduced the body of data to a com-prehensible format by coding based on the study goals. A codeFig. 3. Approach for data collection and analysis.list2(see Section 5; Table 2) was categorized considering the inter-est of the research questions. We identiﬁed some codes in thedocumentation, the observation notes, and the excerpts from theinterviews and focus group audio. Each code represents events,variables, states, and so on that addresses directly or indirectly theresearch variables. For each code, we attached a memo3with someproprieties or descriptions.All of these codes described incidents, categories, and eventsoccurring during the SPL SC and RE disciplines. After identifyingthem, we clustered and coded them in patterns to identify insightsregarding the interactions in both disciplines.We built the memos and drafted a causal loop diagramto facilitate the visualization of the code interconnections andcausal–effect relationships.The causal loop diagram (Sterman, 2000) or diagram of effect(Weinberg, 1992) focuses on the relationships and impacts thata speciﬁc code (variable) has on another code. A causal loop dia-gram can be used to explore which variables impact on others, i.e.,what would be the effect on a variable or the project when codeproperties change (see Section 5; Fig. 5).These relationships can be a causal link (arrows), where an ele-ment can have an effect on another. The “O” symbol on the arrowmeans that an element has an opposite effect. For example, if anelement increases, the other element decreases to a certain extent.The symbol “C” means a constraint on one element on another one.For example, “cash supply” element restricts the element “numberof developers”.Thus, whether the arrow has a direction from one variable (ele-ment) to another one, this means that the former variable has animpact on the latter. The opposite effect indicates that a formervariable is impacted inversely. When the symbol “O” is not present,the effect is not inverted. The constraint symbol “C” represents theformer variable constrains, e.g., resources on the latter one.2A list of phenomenons of interest to the researcher, which abstracts an event,object, action, or interaction that has a meaning for the researcher (Glaser andStrauss, 1967).3A memo can be a sentence, a paragraph or a few pages for example. Memosare used to write-up ideas about codes and their relationships. It is a theorized ideaabout codes (Strauss and Corbin, 1990). 194I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206Table 1Analyzed SPL project disciplines.Period SPL discipline DataJanuary–May Scoping 740 h 58 min 840 identiﬁedfeaturesJune–December Requirements
engineering478 h 92 speciﬁed features 144requirements 327 use casesWe wrote-up memos while we collected, coded, drafted thedata, or drew the causal loop diagram. When drawing the causalloop diagram, we revised the memos to comply with the diagramand vice-versa. The memos in Section 5 and Table 4 are related tothe causal links showing the main causal–effect relations observedin the scoping and requirements disciplines.The conclusion task in Fig. 3 is responsible for deciding thedata meaning through the patterns, explanations, causal ﬂows andpropositions visualized in the causal loop diagram. The patterns orthemes, contrasts, comparisons, clustering, and counting are per-formed on the causal loop diagram and the memos attached to themap are used to draw the conclusions.Finally, discussion with participants of the project were per-formed in order to test, verify, and validate the conclusions. For eachdata collection instrument, these steps were considered in orderto make draft characterizations on our insights, and suggestionsregarding each research question. Next, the conclusions gatheredfrom all data collection instruments are used to answer the researchquestions.5. ResultsIn this section, the ﬁndings of the case study are presenteddescribing the SPL SC and RE disciplines performed within thecompany, through the answers of the aforementioned researchquestions. Some general data from the case study are depicted inTable 1.5.1. Case study historicThe SPL SC discipline started in January, with the pre-scopingphase, followed by domain scoping, product scoping, and assetsscoping.During the pre-scoping, some meetings were scheduled withdifferent project stakeholders to evaluate the SPL availability, bene-ﬁts, drawbacks, and the domain in which it would be implemented.Next, the domain scoping was held aiming to identify thedomains and sub-domains with more potential to compose theproducts of the product line. The product scoping was performed toidentify and review features, identify products, and construct andvalidate the product map. Finally, asset scoping created metrics,applied them, and prioritized the features on the product map. Thetimeline for each discipline is shown in Fig. 4.The SPL SC discipline was performed by nine people from the SPLteam and three software engineers from the company, composedof one scoping expert, one product line manager, seven develo-pers, one architect, one project manager, one market analyst, andone business analyst. One employee fulﬁlled the roles of projectmanager, domain expert, and architect. During the execution, weidentiﬁed 3644 features. However, as the granularity was too ﬁne-grained, the project members decided to adequate the featuresgranularity according to Kang et al. (1990), contributing to increasethe time spent during the feature identiﬁcation. At the end, a poolof 840 features, four products, and 102 sub-domains were consoli-dated and validated during meetings with the SPL team members.The wiki system and the products from the company were usedto collect data about the products, domains, and features. All ofthem were consolidated in a SPL vision document and stored ina repository. The SPL RE discipline started with the model scope,followed by deﬁne requirements, and deﬁne use cases steps.This case study focused on two iterations in the RE discipline.The ﬁrst iteration was conducted by the requirements analysts andinspected by a different team. Each phase (model scope, deﬁnerequirements, and deﬁne use cases) in the requirements engineer-ing discipline resulted in the artifacts – features, requirements, anduse cases.After the requirements analysts performed all the phases, theinspection process was started to ensure the quality of the artifacts.The second iteration in SPL RE was performed with differences. Forexample, the inspection was carried out after each phase, that is,after the features were deﬁned by the model scope step, the inspec-tors conducted meetings to inspect the speciﬁed features beforestarting the next step (deﬁne requirements). The timeline for eachstep and the inspection process are shown in Fig. 4.We collected data from the wiki system documentation,produced scoping artifacts, domain experts, and the legacyproducts.Fig. 4. Scoping and requirements discipline timelines. I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206195Table 2First generated code list with some comments.Code name DescriptionEffort Stakeholders took 20 min to describe a use case, thus, many features implied in a big effort. Is the scalability impaired?Poor documentationPoor legacy documentation before starting the SPL project. The wiki system was the only legacy documentationdescribing the legacy products. SPL team did not pay attention to the wiki system because the products were the mainway to capture and specify features, requirements, and use cases. New scenarios had no documentation.Incorrect description offeaturesThe inexperience of the SPL team with the domain contributed to misunderstanding between feature andrequirements.Absence of the domainexpertDomain experts were too busy with other company activities to remain onsite.Simulate operation systemIn order to identify features and use cases, the scoping expert simulated some scenarios in the legacy systems. Thisaction identiﬁed many obsolete features. It was the main way to capture features, requirements, and use cases.Incorrect granularity The simulation of scenarios in the legacy systems to identify features generated many detailed features.Prioritize features,requirements, and usecasesThe prioritization of sub-domains was demotivating because there were much features, requirements, and use casesfor each sub-domain, thus the iterations ended up being large.Poor communication The company members had little commitment with the SPL project. The work was not integrated between thecompany team and SPL team, interaction face-to-face with the domain expert was not effective.Poor collaboration Company team did not write features, requirements, or use cases together with the SPL team.Meetings The validations of the artifacts were performed during the meetings.Validation The SPL and company teams validated the domain, features, requirements, and use cases.Email and chat Whenever the domain experts were not present in the meetings, they sent their validation by email.Face-to-face Some questions were solved face-to-face, but the domain expert was too busy.Motivation Building the core assets incrementally, training in the products, and tools to manage features, requirements, and usecases motivated the SPL team. However, the participants stated as having little motivation due to the lack ofinteraction with other disciplines. The building of a SPL incrementally, including other disciplines, could increase themotivation in the SC and RE disciplines.Iterativeness Iteration time box was too long.Adaptability No activity was estimated. There was no adaptability activities. In the requirements discipline, some adaptationsemerged because of the inspection activity.Reﬂection ad hoc The reﬂection on the process was documented as lessons learned.Other disciplinesThe participants encouraged the interaction with other disciplines such as design, testing, and implementation.Time box The iteration time box took months. The participants considered it as ‘too long’. It should take few weeks.Inspection The inspection provided a rigor to specify the artifacts through the inspection patterns. Inspection built a templateproviding improvements in the speciﬁcation.Volatile requirements andtechnologyThe SPL team did not contact customers (hospitals, clinics, labs, doctor ofﬁce). However, the SPL team noticed changesin the requirements during the validation meetings with the domain experts.System expert SPL team suggested a new role for the project, named of legacy system expert.Return value The SPL team thought that the value of the artifacts is small to the company.Scoping The participants applied a formalized process for scoping deﬁned in a master dissertation.Decisions about features,requirements, and usecasesSeveral decisions were taken by email or chat, regarding the absence or presence of features, requirements, or usecases in the legacy products.Requirements Requirements discipline took 2 iterations. There were ambiguous between features and requirements. The companydid not validate the requirements artifacts.Besides the inspection process, risk management activities werecarried out to capture the challenges and risks emerged during theproject (Lobato et al., 2012a,c).Organizing its legacy products as a SPL and identifying whichsub-domains should be developed as reusable assets were the mainresults for the company.5.2. Codes, clusters, and memos of the evidenceThe code list, clusters, and memos aided understanding of howeach research variable (effort, communication and collaboration, iter-ativeness, adaptability, motivation, and volatility) impacted on theothers.We consolidated the ﬁrst code list in Table 2. There are sev-eral codes that are not deﬁned as research variables for this study,however they still impacted on these. Moreover, all the codes werepresent in the captured evidence from the observations, inter-views, and documents. Many of these codes were suppressed whenthe causal loop diagram (Fig. 5) was drawn, in order to make thediagram more concise. The column Description explains or comple-ments the meaning for each code.As an example for code clusters, we grouped the codes face-to-face and absence of the domain expert into the group communication,since both address aspects about the communication between thecompany and the SPL team. Thus, communication becomes thecode drawn in the causal loop diagram.From the codes we derived twelve variables of the causalloop diagram: effort, communication and collaboration, iteration andadaptation, motivation, requirements and technologies volatility, newrole – product expert, and inspect meetings variables. For example,it is intuitive to derive inspect meetings from the code inspection.However, we derived company team availability from the codesabsence of the domain expert, face-to-face, and simulate operationsystem.The mapping among the codes and variables is organized inTable 3. Although there are many other possibilities for the rela-tionships among the code list and causal loop diagram variables,this mapping reﬂects the main insights from the participants whenperforming the SPL project.The codes scoping and requirements were not mapped in thecausal loop diagram because they represent all the variables.With the code list and clustering performed (causal loop dia-gram), we built the memos. In Table 4, we show the memosregarding the impacts of a code on another one. The columnDescription explains events that justify that impact (causal-effectrelationship).The following sections answer the case study research ques-tions. 196I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206Fig. 5. Causal loop diagram.5.2.1. How do the stakeholders characterize the effort to performSPL SC and RE disciplines?The stakeholders characterized the SPL SC effort as extensive.This is evident from the amount of documentation generatedregarding features, requirements, and use cases (lines one, two andthree, Table 6), divergences on the feature granularity that resultedin a multitude of features (lines four and ﬁve, Table 6), and theabsence of domain and business experts while legacy documenta-tion was incomplete and inconsistent (line six, Table 6). Moreover,in Table 4, memos relating to effort were observed. Fig. 5, shows thecause for the mentioned effort.The number of features and the absence of domain and businessexperts were impacted on the effort. To specify features with theappropriate granularity without expertise in the SPL SC disciplineand with little knowledge of the domain under investigation wasan important factor that impacted on the effort as well. The effort forthe SPL SC discipline can be seen in terms of time for each activity aswell. The overall SPL SC discipline took 740 h and 58 min (see Table 5for more details). The hourly effort is the total for project partici-pants. It is distributed irregularly as in some cases one participantaccomplished the task alone.In the SPL SC effort distribution (see Table 5), the most costlyphase was the product scoping. This took 565 h and 37 min whichis 76.33 of the overall discipline execution time. This activity wasresponsible for the identiﬁcation, speciﬁcation, inspection, andvalidation of the features.The stakeholders characterized the SPL RE effort as extensive aswell. We deduced this characterization from the high number offeatures, requirements, and use cases (line ﬁve, Table 6), incom-plete and inconsistent documentation from the company (line six,Table 6), and few collaboration between the SPL team and companymembers (line six, Table 6). Moreover, lines seven, eight, and nine(Table 6) reveal that the effort was impacted by the inappropriateprioritization of requirements, features, and/or use cases; and thedescription of use cases through the operation in the systems.As in SPL SC discipline, the number of features and absense ofthe domain and business experts were factors that the stakeholdersshould handle during the project. However, to specify step-by-step the use cases (simulation of functionalities, variation points,variants, etc in the systems), incomplete documentation (domainanalysts dependency), and prioritization by sub-domain (many fea-tures for each iteration) also impacted on the effort.The requirements analysts carried out the two iterations in 501 hand 37 min (with 144 requirements and 327 use cases speciﬁedand inspected). As in scoping, this effort is the total hours for allstakeholders involved in the RE discipline. Tables 7 and 8 showTable 3Mapping between code list and causal loop diagram variables.Code list Causal loop diagram variableseffort; prioritize features, requirements, and use cases; simulate operation system effortvolatile requirements and technology requirements and technology volatilityiterative; adaptability; time box; reﬂection ad-hoc iteration and adaptationsystem expert; motivation (single-system training) new role-product expertmotivation feature, requirements, use cases speciﬁcation toolmotivation single-system trainingmotivation; return value; other disciplines motivationcommunication; collaboration; email and chat; decisions about features, requirements, and use cases communication and collaborationincorrect description of features; incorrect granularit; validation standardizing artifactsmeetings; inspection inspection meetingspoor documentation company documentationabsence of the domain expert; face-to-face; simulate operation system company team availability I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206197Table 4Reviewed memos.Memo nameDescription
Iteration and adaptation toeffortThere is evidence that the iterativeness and adaptability between the requirements discipline and inspection activitydecreased the effort. The evidence is based on the fact that the requirements analysts directed the standardization offeatures, requirements, and use cases artifacts. In addition to decreasing their redundancy and inconsistency throughinspection meetings.Communication andCollaboration to EffortThere as a lack of time between the company and the SPL team. Much rework could be avoid if the stakeholders weretogether more frequency.Requirements andtechnologies volatility toEffortRework was necessary to deal with changes in the features, requirements, and use cases during the project.Effort to Motivation Motivation was an issue for the SPL team because of the effort required to build artifacts for scoping and requirements.Communication andCollaboration toMotivationThe team reported that poor communication and collaboration negatively impacted the SPL effort because the SPL teamhad little feedback at times from the company.Iteration and adaptation toMotivationDuring focus group, the scoping and requirements team commented about the lack of interaction with otherdisciplines. They also commented that the long time box of the disciplines (scoping and requirements) reduced theirmotivation.Iteration and adaptation toStandardizing artifactsWhen iterations and adaptations were planned, the standardizing speciﬁcation/documentation for features,requirements, and use cases could be anticipated for the ﬁrst iterations. For example, an adaptation occurredencompassed some pieces of the textual descriptions inside only one artifact. The decision that originated thisadaptation occurred after the ﬁrst iteration and was adopted in the second one.Training to Motivation The training in the single-systems provided the SPL team with maturity in the use of the features/process. The SPLteam suggested that a new role, the product expert, should be created for the scoping and requirements disciplines.Company team availabilityto Communication andcollaborationCommunication and collaboration rely on the availability and commitment of the company domain experts. Lack ofcommitment to the SPL project could cause the project could fail.Company documentation toCommunication andCollaborationReading and mining single-systems documentation were performed in an ad-hoc fashion. The disciplines did notanticipate activities for the analysis of existent documentation. A systematic and efﬁcient process to read and mineexisting documentation could reduce the dependency on communication and collaboration with the company team.Inspection meetings toStandardizing artifactsInspection meetings detected problems in the artifacts and provided new templates to improve the speciﬁcation tasks.Feature, requirements, usecases speciﬁcation tool toMotivationThe requirements analysts used a tool to specify features, requirements, and use cases (including their variabilitiesand traceabilities). The stakeholders demonstrated motivation for use of the tool.Standardizing artifacts toCommunication andcollaborationWhen the inspection built templates for the stakeholders, the communication through those artifacts improved.Iteration and adaptation toCommunication andcollaborationFace-to-face communication was more effective for the milestones (presentation of the project results). With moremilestones (systematized by iterations with shorter time boxes), increased the collaboration among the stakeholderswas identiﬁed.Company documentation toCommunication andcollaborationThe company documentation (that was incomplete and inconsistent) aided very little when the SPL team collaboratedwith company team by documents. Many features were identiﬁed wrong.New role – product expert toEffortInteraction with the product expert for single-systems improved understanding of the products by providinginformation about the systems ﬂow of execution and their features. This streamlined use of the systems, andimproved domain knowledge. This fact became more important as the systems was the main information source forfeatures, requirements, and use cases for the SPL team. Effort could be decreased if there was more training.Requirements andtechnology volatility toIteration and adaptationCommunication andcollaborationWhen some change took place, the team required short iterations to feedback the adaptations.that the use case description is the most costly task, which in bothiterations represented 41.5 of the time.The inspection process during the RE discipline was anothereffort observed in the study. The inspection is responsible for theassessment of features, requirements and use cases artifacts fortheir relationship, their description and their adequacy. This taskspent 143 h and 32 min in the ﬁrst iteration and 139 h and 23 minin the second one.Table 5Effort distribution for scoping discipline.Activities Time Total Effort %Pre-scoping 24 h 55 min740 h58 min3.36%Domain scoping75
 h 41 min 10.21%Product scoping 565 h 37 min 76.33%Assets scoping 74 h 45 min 10.09%5.2.2. How do the stakeholders characterize communication andcollaboration in the SPL SC and RE?The stakeholders characterized the communication and part-nership between the SPL (SC and RE) team and the companystakeholders as ineffective (see line six, Table 6). This ineffectivecollaboration stemmed from the observations (in ﬁeld and inter-views) summarized in Table 9 regarding the lack of face-to-facecommunication during the feature speciﬁcations. For example, thecompany used to validate the artifacts by e-mail (lines seven andeight), since the company employees were busy with other activ-ities (line nine). Moreover, the lack of integration (lines two, four,ﬁve, six, eight) was highlighted by the stakeholders. Moreover, inTable 4, memos about communication and collaboration, and Fig. 5,show the cause for the mentioned communication and collaboration.When we look at Table 9, the inception of this characterizationis in the line nine, “. . .SPL team worked on the SPL platform, thecompany team worked on the WEB . . .”. This issue was a factor thatthe SPL team had to handle during the project. It is evident that thecollaboration would be negatively impacted because of this factor. 198I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206Table 6Effort insights.How the stakeholders characterize the effort to perform SPL SC and RE?Discipline Data Collection instrumentSC “. . .identifying and documenting the features took the major effort . . .” Interview (developer)SC “. . .to describe the features was an exhaustive task and took much time to perform . . .” Interview (developer)SC “. . .much documentation effort for a small return (value) . . .” Interview (developer)SC Discordance between the stakeholders about feature granularityDocumentation
 (SVN)SC Many features were identiﬁed in product scoping (840). The SPL members think that featureswere described at a low granularity. The product training offered by the company improvedunderstanding about the features.Observation (in ﬁeld)SC The absence of a domain expert during product scoping, ineffective communication andcollaboration with company domain experts, incorrect granularity of several features, andincomplete and inconsistent documentation.Observation (in ﬁeld)RE “. . .should prioritize by requirements, features, and/or use cases to optimize the process instead ofperforming a prioritization by sub-domains . . .”Interview (requirements analyst)RE “. . .to describe use cases took more time because we had to simulate the operation of the systemand describe that observation . . .”Interview (requirements analyst)RE The requirements analyst needs to navigate the system observing the steps to perform thatfunctionality. When the navigation does not work, the requirements analyst needs assistance fromcompany members. This task took a long time (20 minutes).Observation (in ﬁeld)Table 7Fist iteration.Elicit Specify InspectFeature 4 h 45 min 15 h 12 min 67 h 07 minRequirements 22 h 37 min 27 h 06 min 49 h 27 minUse cases 15 h 22 min 64 h 29 min 26 h 57 minTable 8Second iteration.Elicit Specify InspectFeature 0 h 21 min 2 h 34 min 46 h 17 minRequirements 2 h 23 min 16 h 00 min 42 h 34 minUse cases 13 h 31 min 34 h 23 min 50 h 32 min5.2.3. How do the stakeholders characterize the SPL SC and REprocess iterativeness and adaptability?The SPL SC and RE disciplines were characterized as a waterfallprocess, due to the very long time boxes (lines three, six, and eight,Table 10). In average, each iteration was two months long (lineseven, Table 10).A group of features for a sub-domain (prioritized by the com-pany domain expert) was used for an iteration. The prioritizationresulted in the choice of sub-domains with the most features mak-ing the iteration extensive.The process adaptability was characterized as unplanned. Theadaptability emerged only with the developers feelings (in anad-hoc way), because there was no planning to address it (linesone, two, three, four, and ﬁve, Table 10).In Table 4 and Fig. 5, memos show the cause for iterativenessand adaptability.5.2.4. How do the stakeholders characterize the motivation withSPL SC and RE?The analyzed documentation shows that the stakeholders (com-pany team) characterized the SPL SC motivation as “satisﬁed”.However, the SPL team characterized the SPL SC discipline as “littlemotivation”.In the lines one and two of Table 11, the company team showmotivation with the project expressed with the terms “faith” and“satisﬁed”. On the orther hand, the SPL team reveals little moti-vation (line three) because of other variables (effort, iterativeness,communication, and adaptability).Characterization of the SPL RE is confused. Some events causesatisfaction with the discipline (lines ﬁve and eight, Table 11) andother ones reduce motivation (lines six, seven, and nine, Table 11).Moreover, in Table 4, memos about motivation, and Fig. 5, showthe cause for the mentioned motivation.In general, as an important motivating factor, the SPL team men-tioned that trainings on the products, which provided a deeperunderstanding of the features, increased SPL team motivation (linefour, Table 11).As a demotivating factor, the SPL team reported that the effort toidentify the features, their documentation and granularity (whichTable 9Communication and collaboration insights.How the stakeholders characterize the communication/collaboration to perform SPL SC and RE?Discipline Data collection instrumentSC “. . .we faced difﬁculties scheduling meetings with company team . . .” InterviewSC “. . .SPL team was not working together in the same room as the company team. This impactednegatively on communication . . .”InterviewSC “. . .failure to transfer scoping activities to company members . . .” Interview (developer)SC “. . .absence of the scoping expert in the process . . .” Interview (developer)RE “. . .there is no integration between SPL and company members . . .” Interview (requirements analyst)RE “. . .should have someone from the company working together with SPL team . . .” Interview (requirements analyst)RE “. . .during the speciﬁcation, communication was performed per chat . . .” Interview (requirements analyst)RE “. . .moderate involvement, only when we called them to aid us. Sometimes they aided throughchat. They did not write features, requirements, or use cases. They participated in someworkshops . . .“Interview (requirements analyst)RE lack of interaction and absence of the customer (company team) in the product scoping phase isthe major problem. The SPL team did not integrate well with company members. While the SPLteam worked on the SPL platform, the company team worked on maintenance of products and onthe web technology and featuresObservation (in ﬁeld) I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206199Table 10Iterativeness and adaptability insights.How the stakeholders characterize the SPL SC and RE process iterativeness and adaptability?Discipline Data Collection instrumentSC “. . .there is no activity for reﬂections about the process adaptability . . .” Interview (developer)SC “. . .the adaptations occurred only in the end of the process . . .” Interview (developer)SC Process is named as iterative, but the time box is very long (months), mainly in product scopingphase – the process did not have milestones to reﬂect about self-adaptationsObservations and document analysisRE ”. . .the process does not contain an activity for adaptation . . .” Interview (requirements)RE ”. . .occurred adaptations (process, format) stemming from the inspection meeting . . .” Interview (inspector)RE ”. . .there was iteration but the time box is very long . . .” Interview (inspector)RE Two iterations: First iteration from June to October (about ﬁve months long). Second iterationfrom October to December (about three months long).Document analysis (dotProject)RE very long iterations and absence of the customer (company members) are the main challengesObservation
Table 11Motivation insights.How the stakeholders characterize the motivation with SPL SC and RE?Discipline Data Collection instrumentSC “. . .we are motivated with the project so far and we have faith that it will be performed well . . .” Interview (company domain expert)SC 100% of the developers were satisﬁed using the scoping process. This data was captured in thereport of another researcherDocumentation analyzedSC “. . .little motivation due to repetitive work and we could not visualize the return. Littleiterativeness in the process in relation to SPL design and implementation process . . .”Interview (SPL team)SC “. . .the training in the system was productive. Several new features were mapped when thetraining was held. If we did not have the training, many features would not be mapped . . .”Interview (developer)RE ”. . .I was motivated with feature speciﬁcation because I used the feature list from the scopingprocess . . .”Interview (requirements analyst)RE ”. . .I was not motivated with requirements speciﬁcation because of misunderstandings betweenfeatures and requirements . . .”Interview (requirements analyst)RE “. . .First iteration was less motivating than the second one, because in the second iteration, wehad a pattern to specify features, requirements, and use cases . . .”Interview (requirements analyst)RE ”. . .we believe in the project, in the activities performed . . .that the project will be well ﬁnished. . .”Interview (company domain expert)RE “lack of iterations with others processes (such as design) and unavailability of the customer(company members) in the process caused demotivation “Observationwas solved considering the feature concepts in Griss (2000)),no interaction with other disciplines (design, implementation, ortesting), ineffective communication and the lack of collaborationcontributed to demotivation. As the participation of the companyteam occurred only in validation meeting.5.2.5. How do the stakeholders characterize SPL SC and RE to dealwith volatile requirements and technology?The SPL stakeholders did not mention in the interviews or focusgroup that there was a high volatility in the domain, requirements,and technology. However, we noticed volatility in the documen-tation (bug tracking system) and ﬁeld observations events forchanges such as adoption of a new technology (Web) for devel-opment, and adaptive and corrective maintenance in the legacysystems (lines two and three, Table 12).The SPL stakeholders did not say anything about these eventswhich caused severe changes to the SC and RE disciplines butonly reported which features and requirements speciﬁcations wereupdated in the validation and feedback meetings (lines one, three,and four, Table 12).When the requirements analysts were browsing the systemto describe features, requirements, or use cases, doubts emergethat were mitigated with the support of the domain expert. Afterthese events, during the feature, requirements, and use case artifactinspections, the SPL RE steps and artifacts were reviewed in orderto make them more effective.6. Threats to validityWe considered four criteria for validity, which follows a speciﬁcclassiﬁcation scheme (Yin, 2003; Wohlin et al., 2000).Table 12Requirements and technology volatility insights.How the stakeholders characterize SPL SC and RE to deal with volatile requirements and technology?Discipline Data Collection instrumentSC “. . .during the workshops (meetings with the stakeholders) the suggestions (requirementschanges) of the company members were updated . . .”Interview (developer)SC and RE Many trouble tickets (for adaptive and corrective maintenances) were opened during SPL SC andRE disciplines.Documentation analyzedSC We noticed that feedback meetings or workshops were used to communicate and update changesin the requirements.ObservationRE The company is concerned with innovations, mainly technologic, however, the SPL was not thetarget of these concerns. According to company’s domain analyst, system functionalities that arenot working fostered the changes or updates in the requirements. It was noticed that feedbackmeetings or workshops were used to communicate and update changes in the requirements.Observation 200I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 2066.1. Construct validityWe identiﬁed some threats to construct validity and the strate-gies to mitigated them:•Prolonged involvement: As the SPL project was a new experi-ence for the participants and researchers in real scenario, manyevents, objects, and their relationships could not be identiﬁedand analyzed. To mitigate this threat, we adopted the pro-longed involvement strategy. The researchers had a close andlong involvement with the object of study, which allowed theacquisition of tacit knowledge, enabling avoidance of misunder-standings and misinterpretations (Karlström and Runeson, 2006)on the large amount of information;•Data source triangulation: Although there was much captureddata on the project, some data source could provide incompleteor inconsistent information. In order to mitigate this threat, wetook into account multiple sources, which enhanced the rigor ofthe research (Yin, 2003) and enabled us to perform a triangulationof data to achieve a greater coverage of research topics (Runesonand Höst, 2009). In this study different sources of evidence wereused: interviews, focus group, project documentation, artifacts,and observations to avoid the effects of one interpretation of asingle data source; and•Peer debrieﬁng: The main researchers of this study could inﬂuencethe conclusions because his belief, for example. Thus, we decidedto analyze the results in a shared way, where two researchersevaluated the results and another seven participants reviewedthem (Karlström and Runeson, 2006).6.2. Internal validityIn our case study, we identiﬁed different threats, as follows:•Research questions: The research questions deﬁned in this studymay not focus on the most important aspects regarding agilemethods in the context of SPL. We mitigated this risk throughdiscussions with SPL experts, reviewing important papers in thetopic, and the mapping study (Silva et al., 2011).•Interview questions: The proposed set of interview questions maynot have properly covered the Agile SPL area, implying that onecannot ﬁnd answers to those questions. Maybe, we did not selectthe optimum set of questions, however we attempted to addressthe most frequently asked ones and those questions that we con-sidered open issues in the ﬁeld. We also considered the mappingstudy (Silva et al., 2011) results regarding agile software productlines to elaborate the questions.•Observations: The observation was performed by looking at keyemployees, documentation, and artifacts. However, the mostimportant people and documentation might have not been cho-sen. To mitigate this threat, the observation was conducted bytwo researchers.•Participants selection: As the selection was based on conveniencesampling, the most appropriate set of participants may not havebeen selected. In this study, the SPL team was selected fromdifferent areas with similar background in SPL. The companyparticipants were selected because of their domain expertise.•Participants background: The different participant backgroundsmay have biased the results because of previous knowledge inSPL. This threat was handled through the selection of a SPL teamwith little experience in SPL. Two SPL team members had noknowledge in SPL when the project started. The other mem-bers only knew SPL concepts through one single academic SPLproject. None of the SPL team members had previously appliedthe adopted processes. When replicating this study, it would benecessary to provide training in SPL for the company team inorder to provide a level of experience similar to the our SPL team.•Company selection: The selected company may not be the mostappropriate, mainly because the company team was not verycommitted to the SPL project. However, the company had allnecessary characteristics to perform a SPL. Its sponsors wereinterested in reengineering their legacy products into a SPL. Eventhough the commitment, managerial and technology transferstrategies had impacted on our variables, we understand that thiscontext is very common in industrial scenarios, and therefore,remains interesting to investigate them.•External consultants and Hawthorne effect: Employees often havea problem with external knowledge and consultants that knowbetter. As a result, employees may block this new innovation.Thus, that is a threat that might have biased this study. However,during the case study, there were two ongoing projects beingexecuted in the company. The ﬁrst was responsible for buildingthe SPL based on the company legacy systems and the other wasresponsible for legacy system maintenance. The SPL team wasonly involved in SPL activities and intermittently the domain andbusiness experts interacted with SPL team. Although it is difﬁcultto avoid the Hawthorne effect, the main researcher of the casestudy and the SPL team was interacting with the company teambefore this case study began. This strategy meant a more familiarcontext among the participants was created. Most ﬁeld obser-vations were performed on the SPL team activities. The adopteddata and methodological triangulation could mitigate this threatas well.6.3. External validityAs the case study was executed in only one company, it isdifﬁcult to make generalizations (Patton, 2001). The ﬁndings anddiscussions in this study are delimited for the SME. Thus, althoughthe ﬁndings and discussions could be generalized for large compa-nies, we should not, because the challenges and problems could bedifferent. For example, it is common in small teams for one mem-ber to perform more than one role. In our case study, one memberhad the role of developer, architect, domain expert, and businessanalyst. However, in large companies, this scenario may not be socommon.Despite the limitations, researchers can extend the study byreplicating it in different companies following the context andthe design of this study. It enables an analytical generalization,where the results are extended to other cases, which have com-mon characteristics and hence for which the ﬁndings are relevant,i.e. deﬁning a theory.6.4. ReliabilityIt is concerned with to what extent the data and the analysisare dependent on speciﬁc researchers. Hypothetically, if anotherresearcher later on conducted the same study, the result should bethe same (Runeson and Höst, 2009). The use of a guideline (Runesonand Höst, 2009) for both design and report the case study, as wellas, the deﬁnition of a case study protocol (Brereton et al., 2008)and a structured case study database with all the relevant data canmitigate this threat. In our study, the case study protocol, inter-view protocol, excerpts of the focus group meeting, and some notesabout the ﬁeld observations were deﬁned and they are available in apublic web site.4The database with all relevant data is not availablepublicly because of company conﬁdentiality rules.4http://riselabs.dcc.ufba.br/ivonei/case study/. I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 2062017. DiscussionThis section discusses the identiﬁed weaknesses when char-acterizing the SPL SC and RE disciplines. To better organize andfacilitate the understanding of this section, we grouped the weak-nesses regarding to the following items: (i) inadequate technologytransfer strategy, (ii) lack of company commitment with the SPLproject, and (iii) inappropriate managerial strategy factors. Theseare detailed in ﬁve subsections (c.f. Section 5.2). In addition, thissection presents the identiﬁed challenges and future directions whenperforming the SPL SC and RE disciplines, the lessons learned, andthe main ﬁnding of the project.Before we delve into the upcoming subsections, it is importantto mention that we did not state any expectations in terms of effort,communication and collaboration, iteration, adaptation, motivation,and volatility prior to this study. This case study is the ﬁrst industrialexperience for the SPL team, thus our intention is to characterizethe SPL SC and RE disciplines while understanding their weaknessesto justify the use of agile methods with SPL SC and RE.7.1. Effort weaknessesThe technology transfer strategy, company commitment, and man-agerial factors impacted on the effort. Several weaknesses wereidentiﬁed and we grouped them according to these factors.7.1.1. Technology transfer strategyThe technology transfer strategy was a factor that fostered theothers to a certain extent. In the adopted strategy, there was littleintegration between the SPL and company teams, because the SPLteam performed the SPL development, while the company teamonly validated its artifacts. Company team was focussed on otherproject that was already in progress.7.1.2. Company commitmentLow integration between SPL and company teams fostered aweak commitment to the SPL project.The lack of company commitment to the SPL project resulted inthe absence of domain and product experts during the SPL SC and REdisciplines, which could impact on the features, requirements, anduse case speciﬁcations.To mitigate the absence of domain and product experts, theSPL team elicited and inspected the features, requirements, anduse cases through legacy systems. However, an important problemwith the legacy systems during the elicitation was the dependenceon the participant understanding and abstracting the product func-tionalities. The validation meetings identiﬁed understanding andabstraction mistakes in the features, requirements, and use casesartifacts. The ﬁne granularity issue mentioned in Section 5.2 is aresult of these mistakes. It may have contributed to the high num-ber of features.We believe that better interaction between the companydomain and product experts and the SPL team could improve theuse case speciﬁcation resulting in reduced effort. This is reinforcedby the opposite effect that communication and collaboration hadon the effort in the causal loop diagram, Fig. 5. In addition to thememo Company team availability to Communication and Collabora-tion (Table 4) which addresses the company commitment with theSPL project.It is also possible that the immaturity of the company team inthe software engineering practice areas (Jones and Northrop, 2010)affected the company commitment factor. This may be due to the SPLSC and RE disciplines requiring the use of the formal software engi-neering practices such as requirements elicitation, documentation,and inspection which were not desired by the company team.7.1.3. ManagerialThe managerial factor of the adopted approach was not appro-priate. There was little feedback, mostly received by email and witha long time box between validations.The managerial factor also fostered the effort weaknesses for theprioritization rule used in the iterations that did not work properly.The prioritization rule consisted of prioritizing the sub-domainsto be ﬁrst used in the SPL SC and RE disciplines. As each sub-domainwas composed of many features with its associated requirementsand use cases speciﬁcations, each iteration had many artifactsthat had to be built, making the effort to perform any iterationexhaustive. In addition, as the iterations were adjusted to meet thesub-domains, the time boxes became very long. The sub-domaingrouping and prioritization caused exhaustible iterations for theSPL team. With the grouping and prioritization by features, require-ments, or uses cases with shorter time boxes, it could increase theiterativeness and foster process adaptability earlier. Thus, the effortwould be decreased for each iteration.In the causal loop diagram, Fig. 5, it is possible to see that theiteration and adaptation variable has an impact on the effort. Thus,the time box reduction would address the SPL team point of view.This would be in accordance to the memo Iteration and adaptationto Motivation (see Table 4) and the eighth insight in Table 6.7.1.4. Technology transfer, commitment, and managerialWe observed that features granularity and difﬁculty in differen-tiating features and requirements are associated with each other.These aspects impacted on the effort as well.As can be seen in the memo New role – product expert to Effort, inTable 4, and in the causal loop diagram, Fig. 5, we can decrease theeffort in SPL SC and RE, if we had performed the training in the legacyproducts. Training could improve understanding of the features andrequirements.This training provided a deep understanding regarding the com-pany domain. As the product expert (employee who had strongexperience in training users and customers in the products) showedpractice situations performed by users and customers to face dailyactivities. The training clariﬁed several questions for the SPL teamrelated to the product operation and domain deﬁnitions. As a result,the number of features was reduced from 3644 to 840 features.7.2. Communication and collaboration weaknessesThe weaknesses in terms of lack of inadequate technologytransfer strategy, company commitment with the SPL project, andinappropriate managerial strategy for the project also contributedto ineffective communication and collaboration between companyand SPL teams.7.2.1. Technology transfer strategyTo mitigate the weaknesses on communication and collabora-tion, an extractive model (Krueger, 2002) with with an incrementalor pilot technology transfer strategy, which reuses one or moreexisting software products for the product line could be moreappropriated to foster interest from the company.It can be seen from Fig. 1, that in the company product portfoliothere is a product that encompasses the other products. Thus, thismodel seems to be more appropriate for our context and the ideaof an incremental strategy could work well.This model as an incremental or pilot strategy could contributeto some actions. For example, both teams could focus on the samefeatures, technologies, and disciplines, especially, if the resultswere executable artifacts (code of functionalities, visual proto-types) scheduled within the SPL project iterations. Thus, the SPL 202I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206team could be closer to customers and increase the face-to-faceinteraction with the company domain experts.7.2.2. Company commitmentWe could observe the negative impact of the company com-mitment on the communication and collaboration in the followingevidence: (i) in Table 9, the memo Company team availability toCommunication and collaboration in Table 4, and the causal loop dia-gram, Fig. 5, where the company team availability has constraintson the communication and collaboration; (ii) in Table 9 the companyfocused on maintenance and migration of single-systems/Web,paying little attention to the transition to SPL; (iii) in Table 9 the par-ticipant of the case study declared the lack of integration betweenthe SPL and company teams.7.2.3. ManagerialThe weaknesses regarding the company commitment and man-agerial factors resulted in two main weaknesses for communicationand collaboration. First, the size of the iteration time box was long,thus there was a reduced number of communication and collabora-tion events during the SPL SC and RE disciplines. Second, as therewas few interactions among the participants, the feedbacks basicallyoccurred during the validation meeting, when the iteration had beencompleted.During an iteration, when some questions emerged, the com-munication and collaboration among the stakeholders were seldomperformed face-to-face to solve the issue.7.3. Iterativeness and adaptability weaknessesThe inadequate technology transfer, lack of company commitmentwith the SPL project, and inappropriate managerial aspects of theproject factors identiﬁed weaknesses in the SPL SC and RE disci-plines in terms of iterativeness and adaptability (see Table 10).7.3.1. Technology transfer strategyThe inadequate technology transfer strategy (proactive and top-down with poor integration between the teams) impacted on theproject two fold. Firstly, on the company commitment which wasa pre-requisite for adaptability and iterativeness. Secondly, inade-quate management as in long time boxes and poor self-reﬂectionsregarding activities, roles, and artifacts.As a suggestion, to mitigate these issues in the project, an extrac-tive technology transfer strategy is more appropriate with agileapproaches that can improve the adaptability and iterativenessin the processes, strong developer commitment and appropriatemanagement to enable the adaptations and iterations.7.3.2. Company commitment and managerialIn the scoping discipline, the main identiﬁed weakness was thatonly one iteration occurred and no other discipline was performed. Inrequirements engineering, two iterations occurred, however, manyfeatures, requirements, and use cases speciﬁcations were performedper iteration. During the focus groups with the SPL team, they sug-gested weekly iterations with different disciplines, such as designand implementation.The SC and RE disciplines did not provide any suggestions foradjusting or improvement of the processes (see Table 10). This isthe main weakness in any approach. It cannot adapt itself to thecompany context, team, and unpredictable changes, in order tobecome more effective. In other words, the team had to cope withother weaknesses without changing them.Both iterativeness and adaptability have direct impact on effort,motivation, and communication and collaboration variables in thecausal loop diagram (see Fig. 5). Thus, the teams should addressfeedback about iteration and adaptation in the next steps of theSPL project (Tables 4 and 10).7.4. Motivation weaknessesAll the weaknesses previously mentioned impacted on the moti-vation during process execution. In this section, the most importantweaknesses (in terms of the previous variables, effort, commu-nication and collaboration, and iterativeness and adaptability) arereported.•In both SPL SC and RE disciplines there was a large effort to per-form some tasks. We noticed excessive descriptions on somefeatures, for example, descriptions very similar for the glos-sary, features, requirements, and use cases speciﬁcations. Duringthe SPL SC and RE inspection activity, the inspector describedsome problems with non-conformities such as incompletenessand ambiguity on the features, requirements, and use cases. Thesuperﬁcial understanding of the domain and legacy systems, lackof a speciﬁc template, and misconceptions regarding the speciﬁ-cation task were the root cause for the non-conformities. Maybe,glossary, features, and requirements descriptions could be justone artifact. This would greatly reduce the effort in the SPL REdiscipline.•Even though the company was located close to the team, itsemployees were busy with the single-systems evolution (legacysystem) and paid little attention to the SPL project impacting onthe communication and collaboration.•The long iterations (see Table 4) prevented the stakeholders visu-alizing the artifacts achievements in future activities such asdesign, implementation, and tests. We inferred that the partic-ipants of this study believed that short iterations could provideinsights and improvements for SPL engineering knowledge.•Fourth, there was no adaptability in the disciplines. Even thoughthe domain is relatively stable, it is necessary that the disciplinescan be adjustable.•A positive impact on motivation was generated by the use ofthe SPL tool (Cavalcanti et al., 2011), which helped the stakehol-ders during features, requirements, and use cases elicitation andalso to maintain the traceability among these artifacts. However,the tool still requires improvements to be as effective as a CASEtool that integrates features modeling to architecture and testingactivities.By observing the ﬁeld, we noticed an alignment between thecompany activities, such as source code evolution, and activities forthe SPL such as executable prototypes, including the possibility ofreuse of source code. These could positively impact on motivation.7.5. Volatile requirements and technology weaknessesThe company has been developing products in the informationsystems for medical management domain for more than 15 years.Thus, their products had maturity regarding implemented func-tionalities. However, as any domain, volatility can be present forfeatures or technology.As the SPL team did not have contact with the company cus-tomers, any major volatility in customer features could have beenhidden from the SPL team. However, investigating the bug trackingsystem, there were many change requests for adaptations and cor-rections. These requests are indicatives of some kind of volatility.An additional set of studies have been undertaken towards under-standing how these legacy systems evolve, and how the volatilitymight impact the SPL project. I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 2062037.6. Challenges and future directionsThrough analysis, we identiﬁed the main challenges regardingthe weaknesses mentioned. These challenges suggest new direc-tions for dealing with SPL SC and RE disciplines. We verify if theprocess effort, communication and collaboration improvements, pro-cess adaptability, company commitment, managerial, SPL scalability,and technology transfer strategy challenges can be addressed by thenew approaches for dealing with SC, RE, and other disciplines. Ourcomments are as following:•Process effort: The effort for requirements engineering could bereduced by the use of agile practices such as test-driven develop-ment (TDD) (Williams et al., 2003). Using TDD, the acceptance andunit tests, and user stories (Beck, 1999), could replace or supportthe activities which involve features, requirements and use caseelicitation, speciﬁcation, and validation (Ghanam and Maurer,2008, 2009, 2010a,b; Ghanam et al., 2010). As the aforementionedpractices are agile, the process could be iterative and incremen-tal and, for example, the SPL architecture could emerge from thetests. Refactoring and incremental design could also suitable inthis context.•Communication and Collaboration improvements: The use of thesingle-system documentation could have compensated for thelack of communication and collaboration among the stakeholders(John, 2010). The existing documentation should be mined inorder to answer the simple questions about the legacy systems.As a result, work load of the domain experts could be reduced aswell.The use of collaboration engineering patterns (Briggs andGrünbacher, 2002; Briggs et al., 2003) in the SPL context can bean opportunity for the stakeholder collaboration process becausethey can support the stakeholders involvement during the scop-ing discipline.Basically, the use of those patterns would address signiﬁcantagile principles for the scoping and requirements disciplines suchas (i) “Business people and developers must work together dailythroughout the project” and (iii) “At regular intervals, the teamreﬂects on how to become more effective, then tunes and adjustsits behavior accordingly” (Noor et al., 2008, 2006).Another opportunity to deal with this challenge is the agilepractice also applied in studies with SPL, planning game (Carbonet al., 2006, 2008). It addresses tasks prioritization in agile soft-ware development. In the SPL project, it can be used to prioritizefeatures, requirements, or use cases and support the interactionbetween core assets and application developers, as the practiceencourages communication and collaboration among the stakehol-ders.•Process adaptability: In the case study context, the SPL team iden-tiﬁed two aspects to be adjusted, the iteration time box and therelationship of the SC and RE with other disciplines. To performthese two adaptations some aspects should be considered such asorganizational culture and technology. In addition, other aspectscould be identiﬁed, what lead us to question how we could setadaptability on the RE and SC disciplines.The SPL and company teams should embrace the project mis-sion. The approaches should be ﬂexible enough to adapt todifferent contexts and projects characteristics. An importantaction, that provides information regarding process adaptability,would be the feedback through reﬂections on the process, fastand continuous meetings with retrospective thoughts on the iter-ation, and improvements the stakeholders learned incorporatedinto the process.Some practices applied in Feng (2008) could also be replicatedin other projects with requirements elicitation such as on-siteinteractive sessions from the extreme programming (XP) methodand white boards from the LEAN method.Methods such as dynamic systems development method(DSDM) (Stapleton, 2003) and feature driven development (FDD)(Palmer and Felsing, 2001) which embrace adaptability in a nat-ural way could be used Tourret (2006), Paige et al. (2006). TheDSDM deﬁnes the business study such as where the scoping andthe high level reference architecture could be implemented. TheFDD deﬁnes an activity to build an overall model for a speciﬁcdomain, where the scoping, requirements and reference archi-tecture could be addressed.SCRUM could be also be useful for assisting the adaptabil-ity issues. The daily meeting and sprint retrospective couldbe applied to improve learning and discipline adaptation(Raatikainen et al., 2008).•Company commitment, managerial, and technology transfer strat-egy: The adopted technology transfer strategy was completelyagainst the values, principles, or practices widespread in agile orlean approaches. For example, all the Lean principles such as GoSee, Help partners be lean, and Pull (Larman and Vodde, 2008) andagile principles such as Customer Collaboration and Business peo-ple and developers must work together daily throughout the projectshould be tried until the teams identify the best way to build theSPL project.The agile or lean principles also impact the company commit-ment and managerial factors. The principle Go See – weekly, forinstance – could require greater company commitment to theSPL project. Regarding management, the SPL team could changethe iteration prioritization rule e.g. by features. The managementcould try an iteration pilot with a small time box, less require-ments and use cases, and involvement with other disciplines suchas architecture, implementation, and testing. The feeling that theSPL project brings value to the company business could increase.•SPL scalability: Due to number of features (840) and the fact thatrequirements plus use cases were speciﬁed based on the previousset of features, we had a high number of requirements plus usecases as well as many interactions with the domain analysts toelicit and validate these artifacts.To minimize this problem, the SPL team performed some prior-itizations considering the sub-domains. The SPL team also used atool (Cavalcanti et al., 2011) to manage all the artifacts, the vari-ability, and the traceability among them. However, prioritizationson features and a comprehensive tool could foster the scalabilityin a more appropriate way.7.7. Lessons learnedBy conducting the case study and analyzing the results, we iden-tiﬁed some lessons learnt. They are described next.The inspection activity evaluated the quality of the artifacts built.It also aided in mitigation of problems that emerged during thetasks. The activity occurred in two iterations. The ﬁrst iteration hada huge impact in the second one, as the lessons learnt from the ﬁrstwere considered during the speciﬁcation of the new artifacts. Thus,future iterations will be performed with more quality and less effortaccording to the memo Iteration and adaptation to Effort recordedin Table 4.Besides the previously described activities, an important taskwas the use case speciﬁcation with variability. As advocated byGomaa (2005), the SPL team adopted the same use case elements todescribe the scenarios and variabilities, such as alternative ﬂow andextended use case. The only difference is the use of tags to identifywhere in the ﬂow (main or alternative) a variation point can occurand a tag for the element that enables traceability with require-ments artifacts. There are different practices to describe use cases 204I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206in SPL contexts (Eriksson et al., 2005; Moon et al., 2005). However,further research is required to decide which ones are more efﬁcient.Other lessons learnt are the need for a system expert role to sup-port the SPL team in the understanding of products functionalities;the training intertwined with the iterations; the use of guidelines tospecify features, requirements, and use cases suggested by inspec-tion; and the support tool to manage the assets such as features,requirements, and use cases.In addition, we understand that the limited availability ofdomain experts in general is inevitable and it is intensiﬁed in SMEcontext, where the domain experts can assume different roles. Thisunavailability fosters an important question to be explored fur-ther “How can a SPL project decrease the dependency on domainexperts?” This question can guide us to conduct scoping andrequirements in legacy systems using different sources, such asdocumentation and code.Finally, requirement and use case artifacts could be replaced byothers from agile methods. Stories and backlog items could replacerequirements as they can describe the requirements and the vari-abilities. In the same way, the acceptance test might replace the usecase, as it can describe scenarios for requirements.7.8. Main ﬁndingIn this case study we highlight some general ﬁndings.First, although the company is considered small, it had commu-nication problems among stakeholders. These problems and thosementioned about iterativeness, adaptability and volatility negativelyimpacted on effort and motivation.Second, the adopted scenario and the identiﬁed weaknessescan support the integration of agile methods into SPL SC and REdisciplines, as the agile practices and principles address thosebottlenecks and there is evidence to support combining bothapproaches (Silva et al., 2011; Diaz et al., 2011).Third, the motivation can be improved through the mitigationof the variables effort, communication and collaboration, iterative-ness, and adaptability with an extractive, incremental, and pilotstrategies.Fourth, the extractive model with a strategy for SPL incremen-tal or pilot could be more appropriated to foster interest from thecompany.8. Conclusions and future workSPL engineering provides a systematic way to reuse commonartifacts to meet customer needs, by developing different prod-ucts. SPL Scoping and Requirements Engineering are importantdisciplines, which capture the business essence and domains ofthe company. During these two disciplines, several bottlenecksemerged in the project.We grouped them according to three weaknesses factors:inadequate transfer strategy, lack of company commitment, andinappropriate managerial strategy.The case study discussed these weakness factors under ﬁve dif-ferent variables: (i) effort in applying SPL disciplines, (ii) projectcommunication and collaboration, (iii) iterativeness and adaptability,(iv) motivation, and (v) requirements and technology volatility.The identiﬁed bottlenecks that impacted on effort are: theabsence of domain and product experts causing large dependence onparticipant understanding and abstraction on product functionalities;the prioritization rule used in iteration prioritizing in the sub-domains;the difﬁculty in differentiating features and requirements; and featuregranularity. Besides, communication and collaboration, iterativenessand adaptability variables also affected the effort.In terms of communication and collaboration, the bottlenecks are:the size of the iteration time box was long; there were few interactionsamong the participants, thus the feedbacks mostly occurred during thevalidation meeting; and the lack of face-to-face communication andcollaboration among the stakeholders.In terms of iterativeness and adaptability, the bottlenecks are onlyone iteration occurred and no other discipline was performed; manyfeatures, requirements, and use cases speciﬁcations per iteration wereperformed; the disciplines did not provided any aspect for adjusting orimprovement of the processes; and the poor self-reﬂections regardingto activities, roles, and artifacts.All the previous bottlenecks impacted on motivation. The bot-tlenecks on the volatility variable are the same as observed in theiterativeness and adaptability variables. In this case, whether there isno iterativeness and adaptability, it is difﬁcult to deal with changesbecause those provide milestones for adjustments and identiﬁca-tion of problems with the process, for instance.These bottlenecks were not handled by the SPL SC and RE disci-plines. This fosters challenges for future work.The study results discussed some emerged challenges. Chal-lenges that may be overcome with some changes such as moreparticipation of the domain experts, shorter iterations in the SCand RE disciplines, and iterations with other disciplines. However,the improvements can be better carried out with approaches thathave presented successful cases in this direction such as the AgileSPL approaches.The use of agile approaches in the SPL context has demonstratedimportant academic and industrial results in the area (Silva et al.,2011), even though focusing on working code, and reducing up-front design and the process overhead of traditional approaches(Cockburn, 2001).In future work, we intend to conduct other case studies to collectfurther empirical evidence and apply agile practices and principlesinto the SPL framework.AcknowledgementsThis work was partially supported by the National Institute ofScience and Technology for Software Engineering (INES1), fundedby CNPq and FACEPE, grants 573964/2008-4 and APQ-1037-1.03/08and CNPq grants 305968/2010-6, 559997/2010-8, 474766/2010-1,and FAPESB.ReferencesAlves, V., Niu, N., Alves, C., Valena, G., 2010. Requirements engineering for soft-ware product lines: a systematic literature review. Information and SoftwareTechnology 52 (8), 806–820.Balbino, M., Almeida, E.S., Meira, S.R.L., 2011. A scoping process for software prod-uct lines. In: In 23rd International Conference on Software Engineering andKnowledge Engineering (SEKE), Miami, USA.Bastos, J., 2011. A multi-method research approach to understand the adoption ofsoftware product lines in small and medium-sized enterprises. Federal Univer-sity of Pernambuco, Brazil (master’s thesis).Bastos, J.F., Neto, P.A.M.S., Almeida, E.S., Meira, S.R.L., 2011. Adopting softwareproduct lines: a systematic mapping study. In: Evaluation and Assessment inSoftware Engineering – EASE, Durham, UK, pp. 717–722.Bayer, J., Flege, O., Knauber, P., Laqua, R., Muthig, D., Schmid, K., Widen, T.,DeBaud, J.-M., 1999. Pulse: a methodology to develop software product lines.In: Proceedings of the 1999 Symposium on Software Reusability, SSR ’99, NewYork, NY, USA, ACM, pp. 122–131.Beck, K., 1999. Embracing change with extreme programming. IEEE Computer 32,70–77.Brereton, P., Kitchenham, B., Budgen, D., 2008. Using a protocol template for casestudy planning. In: Proceedings of EASE 2008, BCS-eWiC.Briggs, R., Grünbacher, P., 2002. Easywinwin: Managing complexity in requirementsnegotiation with gss. In: Proceedings of the 35th Annual Hawaii International1http://www.ines.org.br. I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206205Conference on System Sciences (HICSS’02)-Volume 1, HICSS ’02, IEEE ComputerSociety, Washington, DC, USA, p. 21b.Briggs, R.O., De Vreede, G.-J., Nunamaker Jr., J.F., 2003. Collaboration engineeringwith thinklets to pursue sustained success with group support systems. JournalManagement Information System 19, 31–64.Carbon, R., Lindvall, M., Muthig, D., Costa, P., 2006. Integrating product line engi-neering and agile methods Flexible design up-front vs. incremental design. In:Proceedings of the 1st International Workshop on Agile Product Line Engineer-ing (APLE’06), Baltimore, MD.Carbon, R., Knodel, J., Muthig, D., Meier, G., 2008. Providing feedback from applica-tion to family engineering – the product line planning game at the Testo AG. In:Software Product Line Conference, International, pp. 180–189.Cavalcanti, Y.C., Machado, I.C., Neto, P.A.M.S., Lobato, L.L., Almeida, E.S., Meira, S.R.L.,2011. Towards metamodel support for variability and traceability in softwareproduct lines. In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Workshop on VariabilityModelling of Software-intensive Systems, VAMOS 2011, Namur, Belgium, pp.49–57.Clements, P., McGregor, J., 2012. Better, faster, cheaper: Pick any three. BusinessHorizons 55 (2), 201–208.CMMI (2010). Capability maturity model integration (CMMI) homepage.http://www.sei.cmu.edu/cmmi/ (last accessed in October 2011).Cockburn, A., 2001. Agile Software Development. Addison-Wesley Longman Pub-lishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, USA.Demir, M., Bener, A., Kurt, T., Anarim, E., 2010. Application of software product lineprinciples to multi-sector software development. In: Proceedings of the 14thInternational Software Product Line Conference (SPLC 2010), Jeju Island, SouthKorea, pp. 267–268.Diaz, J., Perez, J., Alarcon, P.P., Garbajosa, J., 2011. Agile product line engineering asystematic literature review. Software: Practice and Experience 41 (8), 921–941.Dybå, T., 2000. An instrument for measuring the key factors of success in softwareprocess improvement. Empirical Software Engineering 5, 357–390.Dyba, T., 2013. Contextualizing empirical evidence. IEEE Software 30 (1), 81–83.Eriksson, M., Brstler, J., Borg, K., 2005. The PLUSS approach domain modeling withfeatures use cases and use case realizations. In: Obbink, H., Pohl, K. (Eds.), Soft-ware Product Lines, volume 3714 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. SpringerBerlin, Heidelberg, pp. 33–44.Feng, K., 2008. Towards a Knowledge Based Agile Product Line Requirements Engi-neering Framework: Collection of Expertise and its Application to RUP BasedProcess Templates. University of Texas, Dallas, USA, Ph.D. Thesis.Filho, E.D.S., Almeida, E.S., Meira, S.R.L., 2009. Experimenting a process to designproduct line architectures. In: Proceedings of the EASA’09 – 2nd Workshop onEmpirical Assessment in Software Architecture, Cambridge, UK.Gacek, C., Knauber, P., Schmid, K., Clements, P., 2001. Successful software productline development in a small organization. In: Software Product Lines: Practicesand Patterns, Chapter 11, Addison Wesley Longman.Ghanam, Y., Maurer, F., 2008. An iterative model for agile product line engineering.In: 12th International Software Product Lines Conference, Limerick, Ireland, pp.377–384.Ghanam, Y., Maurer, F., 2009. Extreme product line engineering: Managing vari-ability and traceability via executable speciﬁcations. In: Dubinsky, Y., Dybå, T.,Adolph, S., Sidky, A.S. (Eds.), AGILE. IEEE Computer Society, pp. 41–48.Ghanam, Y., Maurer, F.,2010a. Linking feature models to code artifacts using exe-cutable acceptance tests. In: Proceedings of the 14th international conferenceon Software product lines: going beyond, SPLC’10. Springer-Verlage, Berlin, Hei-delberg, pp. 211–225.Ghanam, Y., Maurer, F.,2010b. Linking feature models to code artifacts using exe-cutable acceptance tests. In: Proceedings of the 14th international conferenceon Software product lines: going beyond. Springer-Verlage, Berlin, Heidelberg,pp. 211–225.Ghanam, Y., Andreychuk, D., Maurer, F., 2010. Reactive variability managementusing agile software development. In: In Agile ’10: Proceedings of the inter-national conference on Agile methods in software development, Orlando, USA,pp. 27–34.Glaser, B.G., Strauss, A.L., 1967. The Discovery of Grounded Theory: Strategies forQualitative Research. Aldine Publishing Company, Somerset, NJ, USA.Gomaa, H., 2005. Designing Software Product Lines with UML – From Use Casesto Pattern-Based Software Architectures. Addison-Wesley Longman PublishingCo., Inc., Boston, MA, USA.Griss, M.L., 2000. Implementing product-line features by composing aspects. In:Proceedings of the ﬁrst conference on Software Product Lines: Experienceand Research directions, Norwell, MA, USA. Kluwer Academic Publishers, pp.271–288.Hamza, H.S., Martinez, J., Alonso, C., 2010. Introducing product line architectures inthe erp industry: Challenges and lessons learned. In: Proceedings of the 14thInternational Software Product Line Conference (SPLC 2010), Jeju Island, SouthKorea, pp. 263–266.Hazzan, O., Hadar, I., 2008. Why and how can human-related measures supportsoftware development processes? Journal of Systems and Software 81 (7),1248–1252.Herrmann, D., Liebehenschel, J., 2011. An approach for requirements engineering forsoftware library-components and patterns to be reused in and across productlines. Softwaretechnik-Trends 31 (3).Iwasaki, T., Uchiba, M., Ohtsuka, J., Hachiya, K., Nakanishi, T., Hisazumi, K., Fukuda,A., 2010. An experience report of introducing product line engineering acrossthe board. In: Proceedings of the 14th International Software Product Line Con-ference (SPLC 2010), Jeju Island, South Korea, pp. 255–258.John, I., 2010. Using documentation for product line scoping. IEEE Software 27,42–47.John, I., Eisenbarth, M., 2009. A decade of scoping: a survey. In: In Proceedings of the13th International Software Product Line Conference, SPLC ’09, Pittsburgh, PA,USA. Carnegie Mellon University, pp. 31–40.Jones, L.G., Northrop, L.M., 2010. Clearing the way for software product line success.IEEE Software 27, 22–28.Kang, K., Cohen, S., Hess, J., Nowak, W., Peterson, S., 1990. Feature-Oriented DomainAnalysis (FODA) Feasibility Study. Technical Report CMU/SEI-90-TR-21.Karlström, D., Runeson, P., 2006. Integrating agile software development intostage-gate managed product development. Empirical Software Engineering 11,203–225.Knauber, P., Muthig, D., Schmid, K., Widen, T., 2000. Applying product line conceptsin small and medium-sized companies. IEEE Software 17, 88–95.Kontio, J., Bragge, J., Lehtola, L., Shull, F., Singer, J., Sjøberg, D.I., 2007. The Focus GroupMethod as an Empirical Tool in Software Engineering in Guide to AdvancedEmpirical Software Engineering. Springer-Verlage New York, Inc., Secaucus, NJ,USA.Krueger, C., 2002. Eliminating the adoption barrier. IEEE Software 19 (4), 29–31.Larman, C., Vodde, B., 2008. Scaling Lean and Agile Development. Thinking andOrganizational Tools for Large-Scale Scrum. Addison Wesley, Westford, Mas-sachusetts, USA.Li, D., 2010. A robust-reference-architecture-centric approach for high availabilitysple in security inspection domain. In: In Proceedings of the 14th InternationalSoftware Product Line Conference (SPLC 2010), Jeju Island, South Korea, pp.259–262.Lobato, L.L., do Carmo Machado, I., da Mota Silveira Neto, P.A., de Almeida, E.S., deLemos Meira, S.R., 2012a. Risk management in software engineering: a scopingstudy. In: EASE, pp. 243–252.Lobato, L.L., Neto, P.A.M.S., Machado, I.C., Almeida, E.S., Meira, S.R.L., 2012b. Riskmanagement in software product lines: an industrial case study. In: Interna-tional Conference on Software and System Process (ICSSP), pp. 180–189.Lobato, L.L., da Mota Silveira Neto, P.A., do Carmo Machado, I., 2012c. A study on riskmanagement for software engineering. In: EASE, pp. 47–51.Machado, I.C., Neto, P.A.M.S., Almeida, E.S., Meira, S.R.L., 2011. Riple-te: a process fortesting software product lines. In: The Twenty-Third International Conferenceon Software Engineering and Knowledge Engineering (SEKE), pp. 711–716.Miles, M.B., Huberman, M., 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Source-book, 2nd ed. Sage Publications, Inc.Moon, M., Yeom, K., Chae, H.S., 2005. An approach to developing domain require-ments as a core asset based on commonality and variability analysis in a productline. IEEE Transactions on Software Engineering 31 (7), 551–569.Neiva, D.F.S., Almeida, F.C., Almeida, E.S., Meira, S.R.L., 2010. A requirementsengineering process for software product lines. In: 11th IEEE International Con-ference on Information Reuse and Integration (IRI), Las Vegas, USA, pp. 266–269.Niazi, M., Wilson, D., Zowghi, D., 2005. A maturity model for the implementationof software process improvement: an empirical study. Journal of Systems andSoftware 74, 155–172.Noor, M.A., Rabiser, R., Grünbacher, P., 2006. A collaborative approach forreengineering-based product line scoping. In: APLE – 1st International Work-shop on Agile Product Line Engineering, Baltimore, DC, USA.Noor, M.A., Rabiser, R., Grünbacher, P., 2008. Agile product line planning: a col-laborative approach and a case study. Journal of Systems and Software 81 (6),868–882.Northrop, L.M., et al., 2007. A Framework for Software Product Line Practice,Version 5.0, http://www.sei.cmu.edu/productlines/frame report/index.htmlhttp://www.sei.cmu.edu/productlines/frame report/index.html (lastaccessed November 2012).Oliveira, T.H.B., 2009. RiPLE-EM: a process to manage evolution in software productlines. CIn – Informatics Center, UFPE – Federal University of Pernambuco, Recife-PE, Brazil, M.Sc. Dissertation.Paige, R., Wang, X., Stephenson, Z., Brooke, P., 2006. Towards an agile process forbuilding software product lines. In: Abrahamsson, P., Marchesi, M., Succi, G.(Eds.), Extreme Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineering, vol.4044 of Lecture Notes in Computer Science. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, pp.198–199.Palmer, S.R., Felsing, M., 2001. A Practical Guide to Feature-Driven Development, 1sted. Pearson Education.Patton, M.Q., 2001. Qualitative Evaluation and Research Methods, Vol. 3rd. SagePublications.Pettersson, F., Ivarsson, M., Gorschek, T., Öhman, P., 2008. A practitioner’s guide tolight weight software process assessment and improvement planning. Journalof Systems and Software 81 (6), 972–995, Agile Product Line Engineering.Pohl, K., Böckle, G., Linden, F.J.V.D., 2005. Software Product Line Engineering: Foun-dations, Principles and Techniques. Springer-Verlage, Secaucus, NJ, USA.Raatikainen, M., Myllärniemi, V., Mannistö, T., 2008. Towards managing develop-ment by analyzing integration of backlog and feature model. In: In NordicWorkshop on Model Driven Engineering (NW-MoDE 08), Reykjavik.Runeson, P., Höst, M., 2009. Guidelines for conducting and reporting case studyresearch in software engineering. Empirical Software Engineering 14, 131–164.Schmid, K., 2002. Planning Software Reuse – A Disciplined Scoping Approach forSoftware Product Lines. University of Kaiserslautern, Kaiserllautern, Germany,Ph.D. Thesis.Seaman, C., Shull, F., Singer, J., Sjøberg, D.I., 2007. Qualitative Methods in Guideto Advanced Empirical Software Engineering. Springer-Verlage New York, Inc.,Secaucus, NJ, USA. 206I.F. da Silva et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 88 (2014) 189– 206Silva, I.F., Mota Silveira Neto, P.A., O’Leary, P., Almeida, E.S., Lemos Meira, S.R., 2011.Agile software product lines: a systematic mapping study. Software, Practiceand Experience 41 (8), 899–920.Souza, I.S., da Silva Gomes, G.S., da Mota Silveira Neto, P.A., do Carmo Machado, I.,de Almeida, E.S., de Lemos Meira, S.R., 2013. Evidence of software inspection onfeature speciﬁcation for software product lines. Journal of Systems and Software86 (5), 1172–1190.Stapleton, J., 2003. DSDM: Business Focused Development. Addison-Wesley Pub Co.Stelzer, D., Mellis, W., 1999. Success factors of organizational change in softwareprocess improvement. In: Software Process Improvement and Practice, pp.227–250.Sterman, J., 2000. Business Dynamics. Irwin/McGraw-Hill.Strauss, A.L., Corbin, J.M., 1990. Basics of Qualitative Research: Grounded TheoryProcedures and Techniques. Sage Publications, Newbury Park, CA.Tourret, R., 2006. Using Agile Methods to Develop Software Product Lines. Universityof York, Department of Computer Science, Master’s thesis.Verlage, M., Kiesgen, T., 2005. Five years of product line engineering in a smallcompany. In: Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on SoftwareEngineering, ICSE ’05, New York, NY, USA, ACM, pp. 534–543.Weinberg, G.M., 1992. Quality Software Management: Systems Thinking. Incorpo-rated. Dorset House Publishing Company.Williams, L., Maximilien, E., Vouk, M., 2003. Test-driven development as a defect-reduction practice. In: 14th International Symposium on Software ReliabilityEngineering, ISSRE 2003, pp. 34–45.Wohlin, C., Runeson, P., Höst, M., Ohlsson, M.C., Regnell, B., Wesslén, A., 2000.Experimentation in Software Engineering: An Introduction. Kluwer AcademicPublishers, Norwell, MA, USA.Yin, R.K., 2003. Case Study Research: Design and Methods, vol. 5. Sage Publications.Yu, D., Geng, P., Wu, W., 2012. Constructing traceability between features andrequirements for software product line engineering. In: Software EngineeringConference (APSEC), 19th Asia-Paciﬁc, vol. 2, pp. 27–34.Ivonei Freitas da Silva is an assistant professor of software engineering at StateUniversity of Western Paraná, Brazil. Dr. Silva received a PhD in computer sciencefrom Federal University of Pernambuco, Brazil. His research interests include agilemethods and software product line.Paulo Anselmo da M. Silveira Neto has a Bachelor of Computer Science degreefrom Catholic University of Pernambuco (UNICAP), Specialist in Software Engi-neering from University of Pernambuco (UPE) and a Master of Science degree inComputer Science (Software Engineering) from Federal University of Pernambuco(UFPE). Nowadays, he is PhD student from UFPE and member of the Reuse in Soft-ware Engineering (RiSE) Group, working with Software Product Lines (SPL) Testing,SPL Architecture Evaluation and Test Techniques.Dr. Pádraig O’Leary is a Research Fellow with the Irish Software EngineeringResearch Centre and ARCH – the centre for Applied Research in Connected Health.Previously, he was a post-doctorate researcher in Federal University of Bahia, Brazil.He did his PhD in the University of Limerick, Ireland where he also graduatedwith a BSc (ﬁrst class honours) in software systems. He has a graduate diplomain New Business Development and has been involved in various commercialisationprojects.Eduardo Santana de Almeida is an assistant professor of software engineer-ing at Federal University of Bahia, Brazil, where he leads the Reuse in SoftwareEngineering (RiSE) Labs. He is also the Head of Engineering and Developmentat Fraunhofer Project Center (FPC) in Salvador, Brazil. Dr. Almeida received aPhD in computer science from Federal University of Pernambuco, Brazil. Hisresearch interests include methods, processes, metrics, and tools to develop reusablesoftware.Silvio Romero de Lemos Meira is the chief scientist of Recife Center for AdvancedStudies and Systems (C.E.S.A.R.). He is also a full professor of software engineeringin the Informatics Center at the Federal University of Pernambuco. Born in city ofTaperoá, state of Paraíba, Brazil. He holds a bachelor’s degree in Electronic Engineer-ing from the Aeronautical Institute of Technology (1977), a MSc and PhD degrees incomputer science, respectively from the Federal University of Pernambuco (1981)and the University of Kent at Canterbury (1985). He is a software evangelist and hasauthored hundreds of scientiﬁc papers in the main journals and conferences in thesoftware area, as well as presented a hundred of lectures around the world. He hasalso supervised a number of MSc and PhD students. His research interests involve adozen of aspects on software engineering and correlated areas.