 The Journal of Systems and Software 87 (2014) 48– 59Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
j our na l ho me p age: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssModeling continuous integration practice differences in industrysoftware developmentDaniel Ståhla,, Jan BoschbaEricsson AB, Datalinjen 3, 581 12 Linköping, SwedenbChalmers Institute of Technology, Göteborg, Swedena r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 1 February 2013Received in revised form 23 August 2013Accepted 29 August 2013Available online 8 September 2013Keywords:
Continuous integrationAgile software developmenta b s t r a c tContinuous integration is a software practice where developers integrate frequently, at least daily. Whilethis is an ostensibly simple concept, it does leave ample room for interpretation: what is it the developersintegrate with, what happens when they do, and what happens before they do? These are all openquestions with regards to the details of how one implements the practice of continuous integration,and it is conceivable that not all such implementations in the industry are alike. In this paper we showthrough a literature review that there are differences in how the practice of continuous integrationis interpreted and implemented from case to case. Based on these ﬁndings we propose a descriptivemodel for documenting and thereby better understanding implementations of the continuous integrationpractice and their differences. The application of the model to an industry software development projectis then described in an illustrative case study.© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionContinuous integration has, not least as one of the extremeprogramming practices (Beck, 1999), become popular in softwaredevelopment. It is reported to improve release frequency andpredictability (Goodman and Elbaz, 2008), increase developer pro-ductivity (Miller, 2008) and improve communication (Downs et al.,2010), among other beneﬁts. In previous work we found that theproposed beneﬁts of continuous integration are disparate not onlyin literature: there are also great differences in the extent to whichpractitioners in industry software development projects have expe-rienced those beneﬁts (Ståhl and Bosch, 2013). Consequently, weasked ourselves whether this disparity might be because of dif-ferences in the way the continuous integration practice itself hadbeen implemented in different projects, be it because the concepthad been interpreted differently or because the project contextrestricted the freedom of that implementation. Indeed, among thefour projects included in the study there were indications that thismay be the case, but as that study was not intended for this newresearch question it did not contain sufﬁcient data to satisfactorilyanswer whether such differences manifest in software develop-ment at large.Consequently, we decided to establish whether there are alsodifferences in continuous integration descriptions found in theCorresponding author. Tel.: +46 10 711 5573.E-mail addresses: daniel.stahl@ericsson.com, daniel.b.stahl@gmail.com(D. Ståhl), jan.bosch@chalmers.se (J. Bosch).literature, and if so, in which regards the described implementa-tions differ. In this paper we show the results of the systematicreview conducted in order to answer this question, along witha proposed descriptive model for continuous integration practicevariants based on its ﬁndings.In this work we have focused on process related differences,rather than differences in tooling. While we recognize that toolingmay improve or otherwise affect a continuous integration imple-mentation, the practice of continuous integration itself requires noparticular tools at all (Fowler, 2013). Consequently we regard toolsto be of secondary importance, but not of primary interest. Fur-thermore, we have not included contextual factors such as the sizeand longevity of the projects, the business environment or similarparameters. While they may conceivably correlate with variationsin continuous integration practice – indeed, we consider the inves-tigation of such correlations an important ﬁeld of study in itself –they are not themselves aspects of continuous integration.The contribution of this paper is twofold. First, it shows thatthere is not one homogeneous practice of continuous integration.Rather there are variation points – those evident in literature arepresented and discussed individually in this article – with the termcontinuous integration acting as an umbrella for a number of vari-ants. This is important, because when consequences of continuousintegration are reported and discussed, it must be understood thatsuch consequences potentially may not apply to the practice of con-tinuous integration as a whole, but rather be related to a particularvariant of it. Therefore, the second contribution of this article is thata descriptive model that addresses all the variation points uncov-ered in the study is proposed. Such a model enables better study0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2013.08.032 D. Ståhl, J. Bosch / The Journal of Systems and Software 87 (2014) 48– 5949and evaluation of continuous integration and can thereby bring aﬁner granularity to our understanding of the practice.The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. In thenext section the research method is described. Then the aspects ofcontinuous integration described in literature, and the statementspertaining to those aspects, are presented and analyzed in Section3. In Section 4 the proposed model is described, and then appliedto a software development project in an illustrative case study inSection 5. The paper is then concluded in Section 6.2. Research methodThe research was conducted by ﬁrst reviewing existing arti-cles on continuous integration to ﬁnd differing descriptions of thepractice, with the purpose of identifying aspects where there iscontention in published literature. In other words, we searchedfor aspects (represented by clusters of statements, see Section 2.2)where different attributes or characteristics of the practice are evi-dent, as such areas can then be considered to constitute potentialvariation points. To exemplify, some sources describe how checksand barriers are implemented to prevent non-correctional changesto be integrated on top of a broken build, whereas others relatehow anyone is able to contribute anything at any time (see Section3.2.8). As these are clearly differing views, this area is considered avariation point in the practice of continuous integration.In contrast, aspects where differing views are either not evident(see e.g. Section 3.1.4) or only addressed by a single source (see e.g.Section 3.1.5) are not regarded as potential variation points, thereasoning being that there appears to be consensus in the indus-try or that there is insufﬁcient source material to reliably assessthem.Based on this literature review a model for the description anddocumentation of continuous integration implementations wasthen constructed, intended as a guide to help ensure that the vari-ation points discovered in the literature review are covered.2.1. Systematic reviewAs a result of observations of dramatically different experiencesof continuous integration beneﬁts (Ståhl and Bosch, 2013), andour assumption that this may be caused by differences betweenindustry software development projects in how the concept of con-tinuous integration is interpreted and implemented, we wanted toﬁnd an answer to the question of “Is there disparity or contentionevident in the descriptions of various aspects of the softwaredevelopment practice of continuous integration found in litera-ture?”. To answer this question we conducted a systematic review(Kitchenham, 2004), where a review protocol was created andinformally reviewed by colleagues. The protocol described theresearch question above, the sources to be searched (the IEEEXplore and Inspec databases), the exclusion and inclusion criteriaof the review (see Table 1) and the method of extracting and clus-tering descriptive statements found in the publications (see Section2.2). Following this the sources were searched (October 2012), withACM subsequently being added for completeness, for publicationsrelating to the software practice of continuous integration.The search terms yielded 64, 79 and 45 results in IEEE, Inspecand ACM respectively. Combined, these result sets contained 112unique items. Exclusion criteria EC1, EC2 and EC3 (see Table 1) wereapplied to this set, and the abstracts of the remainder were stud-ied to determine whether they dealt with the software practiceof continuous integration, or pertained to other ﬁelds of research(exclusion criterion EC4). This left a set of 76 publications.Finally, these 76 publications were reviewed in full in searchof descriptions of continuous integration practices (exclusionTable 1Inclusion and exclusion criteria of the literature review.Inclusion criteriaIC1 Papers, technical reports, theses, industry white papersand presentations with the terms “continuousintegration” and “software” in their titles or abstractsExclusion criteriaEC1 Where studies were published multiple times (e.g. ﬁrstas a conference paper and then as a journal article)only the most recent publication was includedEC2 Material not available to us in English or SwedishEC3 Posters for industry talks lacking content beyondabstract and/or referencesEC4 Material that does not address the software practice ofcontinuous integration, or only mentions it in passingEC5 Material that does not describe one or more aspects ofhow continuous integration practices are, can orshould be implementedcriterion EC5). Such descriptions were found in 46 of the reviewedarticles.2.2. Analysis of literatureStatements as to the nature of continuous integration found inthe 46 publications of the literature review were extracted andclustered in groups addressing similar aspects, where one state-ment may be included in more than one cluster. This yielded 180discrete, descriptive statements pertaining to one or more aspectof continuous integration and 22 clusters (see Table 2). Followingthis, any group not containing any disparity in their statementswere culled. In other words, only groups of statements describingaspects of continuous integration where contention was evidentwere preserved. This could either manifest as multiple statementsin disagreement, or as statements themselves identifying disparity.Additionally, clusters containing statements from only one uniquesource were culled.It shall be noted that determining what in this context consti-tutes an aspect of continuous integration practice – and therebya cluster – is ultimately a call of judgment. Particularly, automa-tion is not included, even though it is frequently brought up bypapers discussing continuous integration, e.g. stating that “testcases [...] will be folded into the automated regression test suite”(Sturdevant, 2007), that “an automated integration server not onlymakes integration easy, it also guarantees that an integration buildwill happen” (Rogers, 2004), “the build process has to be fully auto-mated” (Dösinger et al., 2012) or that “the build process is initiatedautomatically” (Pesola et al., 2011) to mention a few. For the pur-poses of this study, we have taken the position that the practiceof continuous integration is by deﬁnition automated, as describedmy Martin Fowler: “Each integration is veriﬁed by an automatedbuild” (Fowler, 2013). Indeed, from the literature included in thisstudy, we have not found reason to reconsider this position. Onesource goes so far as to consider it a criterion for success that “all[continuous integration] steps pass without error or human inter-vention” (Rasmusson, 2004), and so questions of e.g. whether testcases are included in automated test suites rather becomes a mat-ter of the scope of continuous integration, which is covered by itsown statement cluster (see Section 3.2.13).2.3. Proposing a modelBased on the analysis of the literature review, a model for doc-umenting continuous integration was created. The purpose of thismodel was to cover all the statement clusters displaying contentionor disparity, thereby answering all the relevant questions that mayset one particular instance of continuous integration apart fromanother, yet at the same time being practical to use. 50D. Ståhl, J. Bosch / The Journal of Systems and Software 87 (2014) 48– 59Table 2Clusters of descriptive statements extracted from literature, shown alongside the number of constituent statements, the number of unique sources from which those state-ments were extracted, whether there exists contention between the sources and whether there are within the cluster single sources claiming disparity of implementations,respectively.Cluster Statements Unique sources Contention Claimed disparityC1 Build duration 10 9 Yes YesC2 Build frequency 10 8 Yes NoC3 Build triggering 32 29 Yes YesC4 Build version selection 2 2 No NoC5 Component dependency versioning 6 3 No NoC6 Deﬁnition of failure and success8
 6 Yes NoC7 Fault duration 5 5 Yes YesC8 Fault frequency 1 1 No YesC9 Fault handling 9 9 Yes NoC10 Fault responsibility 6 5 No NoC11 Integration frequency 7 7 No YesC12 Integration on broken builds6
 6 Yes NoC13 Integration serialization and batching 6 6 Yes YesC14 Integration target 8 6 Yes YesC15 Lifecycle phasing 1 1 No YesC16 Modularization 17 11 Yes YesC17 Pre-integration procedure 16 12 Yes YesC18 Process management 1 1 No NoC19 Scope 50 40 Yes NoC20 Status communication 19 16 Yes YesC21 Test separation 11 9 Yes YesC22 Testing of new functionality 10 9 Yes YesThe beneﬁt to researchers from using such a model is that itmay help focus attention on the aspects of continuous integrationthat act as differentiators, and it provides a method for managingthe multitude of continuous integration variants in existence. Thebeneﬁt to software development professionals – to practitioners ofcontinuous integration – is that it lists choices that they can make– and possibly have already made, consciously or unconsciously –with regards to implementing continuous integration. Such infor-mation can be an important factor in successfully improving one’sdevelopment process.3. Statement clustersThis section describes each of the clusters of statements foundin the literature (see Section 2). In Section 3.1, those clusters thatwere culled from the set are presented. Then, in Section 3.2, thepreserved clusters are discussed.3.1. Culled clustersClusters either not containing more than one unique source, ornot found to display disparity or contention were culled from theset. These are described and discussed below.3.1.1. Build version selectionIt is pointed out in van der Storm (2008) that “the continuousintegration system should always attempt to build the latest ver-sion of the software”, while (van der Storm, 2007) states that “ifthe latest build of a component has failed [...] an earlier success-ful build is used instead”. While these perspectives seem to differ,it shall be understood that they deal with different contexts: onediscusses source code revision, while the other concerns itself withhandling component failures in a modularized environment. There-fore there is no contention between them – indeed, they are entirelycompatible with each other – and this cluster was therefore culled.3.1.2. Component dependency versioningOne topic found in several of the papers is that of modularizationof the product, and whether to rebuild the entire product upon inte-gration of new changes, or only those components affected by thechange (see Section 3.2.11). In the latter case, some articles discussversion handling of such components. It is stated that each compo-nent shall be built individually, with new versions made availablefor every such build (Roberts, 2004). It is also said that componentdependencies shall be on the latest available version and that onlyone version of any one component may occur in a system conﬁg-uration (van der Storm, 2008). Furthermore, if a component buildfails, then the latest working version shall be used for dependenciesin its stead (van der Storm, 2007).There is only a small number of articles addressing this aspect– which is not altogether surprising, as it is only relevant in acomponent oriented continuous integration setup – and no directcontention between them.3.1.3. Fault frequencyThe issue of fault frequency in continuous integration is dis-cussed by Brooks (2008), where two development teams have beencompared. Among other ﬁndings, it is pointed out that one teamsuffered much more frequent build failures than the other. It isreadily conceivable that, while being a complex factor dependenton multiple parameters, the frequency of errors in continuous inte-gration can have an impact on the development effort. Lackingadditional sources, however, this cluster was culled from the set.3.1.4. Fault responsibilityMultiple sources describe how developers causing faults in con-tinuous integration are also responsible for correcting those faults(Miller, 2008; Yuksel et al., 2009), e.g. stating that it is “the respon-sibility of [the last person who checked in code] to ensure that areported bug is resolved immediately” (Ablett et al., 2007). Addi-tionally, the practice of developers not leaving work until theirchanges have been successfully veriﬁed is mentioned (Miller, 2008;Rogers, 2004). No statements contradicting these stated practiceswere found in the study, with the exception of (Janus et al., 2012),describing how a “Quality Manager” interprets the produced codeanalysis metrics. This, however, is only for non-critical violations ofcoding standards, and so we ﬁnd that this cluster does not displayany contention or disparity.3.1.5. Lifecycle phasingIt is stated in Holck and Jørgensen (2007) that continuous inte-gration may be performed “during a phase of integration and tests; D. Ståhl, J. Bosch / The Journal of Systems and Software 87 (2014) 48– 5951or it may be part of iterative methods”. While other sources in thestudy do not explicitly discuss this – causing this cluster to be culled– it shall be noted that, in our understanding, it is implicit in manyof the studied publications that continuous integration takes placeduring, if not necessarily limited to, development.3.1.6. Process managementIn Holck and Jørgensen (2007) it is noted that the degree of con-trol over continuous integration processes differs, giving examplesof projects using “less structured processes” as opposed to “centralmanagement of the build process”. This aspect was, however, nothighlighted by other sources in study.3.2. Preserved clustersStatement clusters containing more than one unique sourceand either displaying contention between sources, or containingsources themselves acknowledging diversity in implementationswere preserved. These clusters are presented and discussed below.3.2.1. Build durationSome publications in the study give more or less exact ﬁg-ures for the duration of “builds” (where the scope of what a buildentails varies, see Section 3.2.13); time from check-in to notiﬁca-tion of verdict can be “several minutes” (Downs et al., 2010) or “afew minutes” (Woskowski, 2012), or the time required to compileand run tests can be over an hour (Yuksel et al., 2009). Some arti-cles highlight that build duration does vary from project to project(Brooks, 2008) and that this can be of some importance, as a too longduration means that “continuous integration starts to break down”(Rogers, 2004) and the build time must be quick enough to “allowthe CI server to keep up with the changes and return feedback tothe software engineers while their memory of the changes is stillfresh” (Dösinger et al., 2012). Others discuss separating quick testsuites from slower ones to provide incremental feedback (Roberts,2004), removing slow tests altogether from the regular continuousintegration builds and instead running them on a separate schedule(Holmes and Kellogg, 2006), or how parallelism caused by modu-larization can affect build durations (van der Storm, 2008), as it isremarked that “the primary factor inﬂuencing the build time is theincreasing number of tests” (Rogers, 2004).From this it is clear that not only is build duration a varia-tion point for continuous integration and considered to be of greatimportance; it is also not an independent variable. Instead, it ishighly dependent on what is included in the build. This would posea problem if one were to attempt classiﬁcation and comparison ofcontinuous integration implementations, as any measurement ofbuild duration would also have to take into account what is actuallyachieved in that duration. The abstract concept as such, representedby this statement cluster, however, is preserved for the purposesof this study.3.2.2. Build frequencyIt shall be noted that for the purposes of this study, we make adistinction between build frequency and integration frequency (seeSection 3.2.7). By the former we mean the frequency at which con-tinuous integration “builds” (regardless of the scope of those builds)are performed, while the integration frequency refers to how oftenchanges are brought into the product development mainline (typ-ically in the form of source code changes). We consider these to betwo crucially different activities which may or may not be synchro-nized.The build frequencies described in literature vary. Some men-tion “multiple builds per day” (Stolberg, 2009) or “every few hours”(Rogers, 2003), in contrast to the daily builds practiced by others(Holck and Jørgensen, 2007). Yet the frequency does not just varybetween projects, it may also vary within the same project. Sep-aration of slow activities into more infrequent cycles is described(Holmes and Kellogg, 2006; Downs et al., 2010; Woskowski, 2012;Long, 2008) as well as performing “weekly integration” builds whilemodules are tested in isolation “several times a day” (Tingling andAkbar, 2007).3.2.3. Build triggeringThe vast majority of statements on how continuous integrationbuilds are triggered describe how source code changes cause a buildto start (Liu et al., 2009; Bowyer and Hughes, 2006; Holmes andKellogg, 2006; Ablett et al., 2007; Rogers, 2003, 2004; Sturdevant,2007; Stolberg, 2009; Kim et al., 2009, 2009; Pesola et al., 2011;Cohan, 2008; Janus et al., 2012; van der Storm, 2007; Woskowski,2012; Dösinger et al., 2012; van der Storm, 2005; Matsumoto et al.,2012; Gatrell et al., 2009; Gestwicki, 2012). This is not alwaysthe case, however: builds can be executed at a certain time eachday (Holck and Jørgensen, 2007), or a mixed approach wheresome activities run on a ﬁxed schedule while others are triggeredby source code changes can be used (Tingling and Akbar, 2007;Hoffman et al., 2009; Downs et al., 2010; Woskowski, 2012).Another setup is where multiple activities are chained togetherin a sequence. A source code change triggers the ﬁrst activity(Yuksel et al., 2009), while subsequent activities are triggered by“successful execution and evaluation of prior events” (Hill et al.,2008). There is reason to believe that this may be more commonthan the number of explicit statements suggests, as it is some-times hinted at or implied, e.g. stating that when “a step in theprocess fails, further process steps are skipped” (Dösinger et al.,2012). Though such a statement is not unambiguous enough to becounted to the statement cluster total, it does imply that there areprocess steps which are triggered by the success of upstream steps.In a modularized scenario, where each component has its owncontinuous integration, a build can also be triggered by a new ver-sion of a component dependency being made available (Roberts,2004; van der Storm, 2007).3.2.4. Deﬁnition of failure and successWhat is considered a failure in a continuous integration build istouched upon by several sources. Commonly, if any test fails dur-ing the build, then the build as a whole is failed (Ablett et al., 2007;Rasmusson, 2004), with some sources explicitly mentioning thatcompilation must also succeed (Downs et al., 2010; Janus et al.,2012; Yuksel et al., 2009) (although it may be argued that compila-tion errors are implicitly not allowed, even where the source doesnot explicitly state it).This zero tolerance toward test failures is not ubiquitous, how-ever: it is put forward that for most teams “it is ﬁne to permitacceptance tests to break over the course of the iteration as longas the team ensures that the tests are all passing prior to the end ofthe iteration” (Rogers, 2004). Yet others impose additional require-ments before they will consider a build to be successful, such as acertain level of test coverage (Yuksel et al., 2009) or the absence ofsevere static code analysis warnings (Janus et al., 2012).3.2.5. Fault durationFault duration – that is, how long a detected fault persists beforeit is successfully addressed – is not extensively discussed in thestudied sources, but there are statements indicating differences.One example is a comparatively strict approach where “if any com-pilation errors or any test failure occurs, the relevant developershould solve the problem in less than 30 min or revert the check-in”(Yuksel et al., 2009), whereas another notes that “the great majorityof build breaks were ﬁxed within an hour” (Miller, 2008), with-out explicitly stating any similarly precise rules. Much longer faultdurations are also described: “there were several occasions when 52D. Ståhl, J. Bosch / The Journal of Systems and Software 87 (2014) 48– 59[...] the code was broken for up to two weeks” (Tingling and Akbar,2007). Indeed, Brooks (2008) recognizes that build failure lengthdiffers: while some would be “stuck for hours because of a brokenbuild”, others have “very few of these problems”.Yet the question of fault duration is dependent on that of thedeﬁnition of failure and success, as demonstrated by one sourceclaiming that typically not all types of test failures need to be ﬁxedimmediately, but can be left until “the end of the iteration” (Rogers,2004). Consequently, the question of fault duration only reallybecomes meaningful in a context where “fault” is well deﬁned.That being said, there are clear differences in fault duration as it isdescribed by the sources in our study, and consequently the clusteris preserved.3.2.6. Fault handlingHow faults, once detected, are handled (e.g. given what priorityby whom) is touched upon by a number of sources. Several describea policy of fault ﬁxing being given top priority, either as the personalresponsibility of the developer committing the fault (Yuksel et al.,2009) (a policy which would arguably presume that the offendingcommit can always be identiﬁed), as the responsibility of the deve-lopers “that have committed Source Code since the last successfulintegration” (Janus et al., 2012), or as the responsibility of the lastdeveloper to check in code, who is then responsible “to ensure that[the fault] is resolved immediately, for example by reverting to anolder version or by ﬁxing the problem in another way” (Ablett et al.,2007). Another source describes how “after an initial investigation,one developer would ﬁx the build while the rest of the team con-tinued with their work” (Miller, 2008), hinting at a more ﬂexibledelegation of work.Some sources display a slightly more relaxed attitude withregards to faults, however. It is stated that there’s a differencebetween types of tests, some of which may not be a priority toﬁx (Rogers, 2004). One source describes a development team dis-playing a certain extent of ambivalence: while ﬁxing faults is nota top priority, broken builds cause a number of problems unlessﬁxed quickly – e.g. promoting a “laissez-faire attitude” and hidingother problems – and it is suggested that perhaps “a team policycould be instituted to make the broken build the highest priority,ahead of any other work items” (Downs et al., 2010). In a multi-stepintegration setup it is furthermore stated that if one step fails, then“further steps are skipped” (Dösinger et al., 2012).In other words, while sources take a similar position on the ques-tion of responsibility per se (see Section 3.1.4), there are differentviews on the methods used and priority given to addressing thesefaults.As something of a special case in this context, if one uses amodularized continuous integration implementation with separatebuilds per component, it is mentioned that if a component buildfails, then the latest successful build of that component is used bydownstream dependencies (van der Storm, 2007).In conclusion, there are clear differences in how one reactsto and handles a continuous integration fault once it has beendetected, even though this, as is indeed the case with other aspects,is not an independent variable. As the deﬁnition of a fault (seeSection 3.2.4) or whether one uses modularized continuous inte-gration (see Section 3.2.11) varies, so the very meaning of faulthandling is not constant.3.2.7. Integration frequencyIntegration frequency, as opposed to build frequency (seeSection 3.2.2), is described by a number of sources. It is claimedthat “on average developers check in once a day” (Miller, 2008),and that while the integration frequency “will vary from projectto project, from developer to developer, and from modiﬁcation tomodiﬁcation [...] a good rule of thumb [is that] developers shouldintegrate their changes once every few hours and at least once perday” (Rogers, 2004). Other sources conclude that this implies thatthere will be multiple integrations per day (Watanabe et al., 2012),relating how “on average, a version was submitted to the sourcecontrol system every hour over the period studied” (Gatrell et al.,2009), although presumably this would depend on the number ofdevelopers co-existing in the same source context.While not mentioning any ﬁgures, other source simply claimthat integration should be “frequent and timely” (Baumeisterand Reutelshoefer, 2011) or “[performed] regularly and early”(Dösinger et al., 2012). Meanwhile, van der Storm (2008) statesthat even though current usage of the term continuous integra-tion often does not consider the frequency at which check-ins aremade, “continuous integration proper [...] includes the continuouschecking in of changes, however small they may be”.To conclude, we do not consider contention to be evident in thiscluster – not least because several of the sources are very vague –but it still fulﬁlls the preservation criteria, as disparity is claimed.3.2.8. Integration on broken buildsThere are different approaches as to whether commits on top ofrevisions that failed in continuous integration are acceptable or not.Several sources describe how commits are not allowed unless thelatest continuous integration build was successful (van der Storm,2008), saying that “once the build is broken other developers can-not check in their work” (Miller, 2008), that “all merge requests[are refused] unless they contain a special tag [identifying them asﬁxes]” (Lacoste, 2009) and that “developers not working directlyon ﬁxing the problem are not permitted to commit their changes[because] it could greatly complicate the problems for the peopleengaged in ﬁxing the build” (Rogers, 2004).Others are less concerned. In “decentralized” continuous inte-gration, developers are allowed to “add contributions to thedevelopment version at any time” (Holck and Jørgensen, 2007).In another case, check-ins on broken builds were not prevented,even though it was suggested that this sometimes caused problems,since “new code could conceivably be problematic too, but the con-founding factors would make it difﬁcult to determine exactly wherethe problem was” (Downs et al., 2010).To summarize, the consensus appears to be that code commitson broken builds can be problematic, but whether enough so toactively try to prevent it (by process or by automated blocking ofunwanted check-ins) is contended.3.2.9. Integration serialization and batchingWhile it is common to let committed changes trigger new builds(see Section 3.2.3), it’s an open question how one handles a situ-ation where multiple changes are made during the timespan of asingle build. This can be particularly relevant in a context of slowbuild times and high integration frequency. This is discussed byRasmusson (2004), pointing out that there are different approachesto serialization and batching: the check-in process can be serial-ized in order to minimize failures and “avoiding all integrationconﬂicts”, as opposed to “the more normal free ﬂowing practicewhereby any developer can optimistically check-in as soon as theyhave run the build locally and all tests pass”. One source states thatpolling for changes implies “batching the revisions to be tested”(Lacoste, 2009), while another claims that “every commit shouldbuild the mainline on an integration machine” (Stolberg, 2009),with references to tooling used for achieving this.It shall also be noted that in a situation where activities (particu-larly tests, see Section 3.2.15) are separated into stages it is possiblethat those stages are not executed at the same frequency (Tinglingand Akbar, 2007; Hoffman et al., 2009; Downs et al., 2010), in effectbatching changes in between different integration activities. D. Ståhl, J. Bosch / The Journal of Systems and Software 87 (2014) 48– 59533.2.10. Integration targetThe integration target aspect concerns where developers checkin their changes. Most of the publications in the study do not explic-itly deal with this, but rather state that, for example, a change insource code repository triggers a build (see Section 3.2.3) withoutspecifying where in the repository those changes are made. Thereare, however, some that go into details.One method is that of every commit resulting in a new buildon the product “mainline” (Stolberg, 2009) and letting develo-pers check in to the development version at any time (Holck andJørgensen, 2007). It is described how “all the development teams[were moved] into one common code branch – no private branches”and “each code check-in is now immediately integrated” (Goodmanand Elbaz, 2008).Multiple branches are also used, however. One variant is the pat-tern of a single development branch into which new changes aremerged, and a “stable” branch into which “all the revisions vettedby [the continuous integration] are pushed”, the latest version ofwhich is used for deployment (Lacoste, 2009). Another variant isto let each team in a multi-team project integrate internally, usingtheir own integration server, before integrating with the project atlarge (as a response to problems encountered when attempting toscale continuous integration) (Rogers, 2004). However, the samesource continues, this “creates the problem of cross-team integra-tion” where “teams are potentially building up an integration debt”.Indeed, another source relates how, when implementing continu-ous integration, the initial decision was made “that each individualScrum team should have a dedicated and private server”, but “asintegration issues were being discovered very late” they put “allteams onto a single server environment again” (Sutherland andFrohman, 2011).3.2.11. ModularizationWhile there are sources making explicit statements that theircontinuous integration is not modularized (Rasmusson, 2004), e.g.claiming that “the entire software is built [and] tested” uponchanges (Ablett et al., 2007) or that “testing in the CI process focusesonly on ‘local’ projects” (Dösinger et al., 2012), it is our understand-ing that sources where this topic is not discussed generally presumea non-modularized approach. For the most part, the sources that dodeal with modularization are positive examples, in that they eitherexplain how continuous integration can be modularized or describeexamples of such modularization.In such sources, it is related how products can be composed of“hundreds of components with complicated dependency relation-ship[s]” and “the source code of each [component] is controlledindependently” (Kim et al., 2008). Expanding on this concept,another source describes how components rely on pre-built arti-facts of their dependencies, and “integrating the whole applicationthen means building the topmost component in the dependencyhierarchy” (van der Storm, 2008). Furthermore it is stated that eachcomponent has its own continuous integration cycle, followingwhich it is published to be tested in combination with other com-ponents (Roberts, 2004), that “continuous integration can be seenas a [directed acyclic graph], where nodes correspond to packagebuilds and edges correspond to dependencies among packages”(Beaumont et al., 2012) and that components are rebuilt if theythemselves are changed, or one of their dependencies change (vander Storm, 2007). Similar concepts are also discussed by Rogers(2004).Additionally, a modularized approach to continuous integrationis claimed to impact feedback times. It is described how “moduleswere tested in isolation and embedded into the program” (Tinglingand Akbar, 2007) and that such a practice enables faster feedback,because “instead of building the complete system on every change”,only the components that have affecting changes are rebuilt (vander Storm, 2008). In a similar vein, it is claimed that while a sin-gle source repository is often assumed in continuous integration,this in fact scales poorly, thus motivating a modularized approach(Roberts, 2004). To facilitate testing of components in such an envi-ronment, “surrogates” can be used “to simulate the behaviors ofunavailable components” (Liu et al., 2009), and it is described howtests can be executed in several steps: ﬁrst by component, then forthe system at large (Kim et al., 2008).It is noteworthy how, unlike most continuous integrationaspects in this study, statements pertaining to modularization aremostly found in sources explicitly focused on that very problem. Incontrast, few other sources mention it at all. This leads us to theconclusion that in many cases, non-modularized continuous inte-gration is the default alternative, possibly even adopted withoutbeing consciously chosen.3.2.12. Pre-integration procedureThe pre-integration procedure of continuous integration refersto which actions are prescribed prior to performing an integration,e.g. by checking in source code. In some cases, these procedures canbe practically non-existent, with one source arguing that the ben-eﬁt of continuous integration can be measured as the time savedby developers not compiling and testing before checking in Miller(2008). Others offer the option without prescribing any mandatoryprocess, with developers running small subsets of tests rather thanwaiting for the centrally executed test suite (Holmes and Kellogg,2006). It is also related how developers “typically [...] run testsbefore checking in changes” (Brooks, 2008) and that “developerscould ensure their check-in [...] both by manually compiling thecode [...] and by executing the set of unit tests, [but] few did so”(Downs et al., 2010). These examples appear to share the senti-ment that “fundamentally, it needs to be acceptable to break thebuild” (Rogers, 2004).Other sources provide examples or mandatory pre-integrationprocedures, where developers are obliged “to integrate their owncontributions properly” (Holck and Jørgensen, 2007). This can takevarious forms, such as reviews before checking in Downs et al.(2010), Janus et al. (2012), running light-weight “developer builds”(Rasmusson, 2004), performing “a pre-check [...] before commit-ting” (Woskowski, 2012) or “[ensuring that] all corresponding unittests are successful” (Alyahya et al., 2012). One source stresses theimportance of testing before integration, fearing that the alterna-tive “would be a nightmare” (Lacoste, 2009), while (Yuksel et al.,2009) describes a checklist of mandatory activities, where beforecommitting any code, the developers must compile the whole sys-tem, design and code the needed unit and integration tests, andﬁnally execute the entire unit and integration test suites.Clearly, there are stark contrasts in what procedures arerequired before integrating. One source remarks on this, statingthat it is “a common approach [to] institute a strict and thor-ough precommit procedure that will make it as hard as possiblefor developers to break the build”, but that such procedures alsohave negative side effects (Rogers, 2004). The automation of pre-integration procedures is also discussed, since the developers “mayforget [or] may not follow the practices” (Alyahya et al., 2012).3.2.13. ScopeBy scoping of continuous integration we refer to the amountand type of activities included in the practice, either as part of asingle “build”, or separated into several stages (see Section 3.2.15).Typically the compilation (where applicable) of source code fol-lowed by testing is included (Alyahya et al., 2012; Miller, 2008; Liuet al., 2009; Bowyer and Hughes, 2006; Kim et al., 2008; Holmes andKellogg, 2006; van der Storm, 2008; Ablett et al., 2007; Hill et al.,2008; Holck and Jørgensen, 2007; Rogers, 2003, 2004; Sturdevant,2007; Stolberg, 2009; Roberts, 2004; Tingling and Akbar, 2007; 54D. Ståhl, J. Bosch / The Journal of Systems and Software 87 (2014) 48– 59Sunindyo et al., 2010; Kim et al., 2009, 2009; Pesola et al., 2011;Goodman and Elbaz, 2008; Rasmusson, 2004; Beaumont et al.,2012; Cannizzo et al., 2008; Hoffman et al., 2009; Moreira et al.,2010; Downs et al., 2010; Cohan, 2008; Huang et al., 2008; Brooks,2008; Janus et al., 2012; van der Storm, 2007; Yuksel et al., 2009;Matsumoto et al., 2012; Lier et al., 2012) – even in sources thatdo not explicitly state this, it is to our understanding often implic-itly the case. The tests are frequently combined with static and/ordynamic code analysis (Miller, 2008; Holmes and Kellogg, 2006;Hill et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2009; Cannizzo et al., 2008; Moreiraet al., 2010; Woskowski, 2012), even though this can be consid-ered to be “Continuous Measurement” and therefore not part ofthe scope of continuous integration itself (Janus et al., 2012).The types of tests executed varies: some only run automatedunit test suites (Miller, 2008; Bowyer and Hughes, 2006; Hillet al., 2008; Moreira et al., 2010), others also run integrationtests (Alyahya et al., 2012; Liu et al., 2009; Holmes and Kellogg,2006; Downs et al., 2010; Huang et al., 2008; Woskowski, 2012;Baumeister and Reutelshoefer, 2011; Watanabe et al., 2012), func-tional and/or non-functional system tests (Holmes and Kellogg,2006; Sturdevant, 2007; Cannizzo et al., 2008; Baumeister andReutelshoefer, 2011) and/or acceptance tests (Holmes and Kellogg,2006; Stolberg, 2009; Roberts, 2004; Cannizzo et al., 2008;Watanabe et al., 2012). Continuous integration can also involve cre-ating installation packages (Miller, 2008; Pesola et al., 2011; Cohan,2008; Gestwicki, 2012), so that a release “boils down to select-ing the desired build” (van der Storm, 2007), and deploying theproject (Ablett et al., 2007; Rogers, 2003; Stolberg, 2009; Sunindyoet al., 2010; Pesola et al., 2011; Goodman and Elbaz, 2008; Moreiraet al., 2010; Cohan, 2008; Dösinger et al., 2012; Lier et al., 2012;Gestwicki, 2012). It shall be noted, however, that the term “deploy-ment” in this context is loosely deﬁned and may refer to differentactivities.In conclusion, we consider merely compiling and unit testing tobe the basic continuous integration “build” activities. Then, otheractivities can be added on top of this, including but not limited tovarious types of more advanced testing, code analysis, packagingand deployment. Indeed, it’s essentially possible “to chuck every-thing into [the build], including the kitchen sink” (Rogers, 2004).3.2.14. Status communicationThere are various approaches to communicating the continu-ous integration status, e.g. sending notiﬁcations of build failures(Dösinger et al., 2012; Matsumoto et al., 2012), in develop-ment projects. Dispatching e-mails is common (Sturdevant, 2007;Stolberg, 2009; Kim et al., 2009, 2009; Hoffman et al., 2009; Downset al., 2010; Gestwicki, 2012), either notifying the last person tocheck in Ablett et al. (2007), “relevant developers” (Yuksel et al.,2009) or “the whole development [project]” (Lacoste, 2009). Othercommunication methods can be used, such as RSS (Stolberg, 2009),web pages (van der Storm, 2005) or dashboards (Baumeister andReutelshoefer, 2011). This may then be displayed on “informationradiators” (Ablett et al., 2007; Goodman and Elbaz, 2008; Hoffmanet al., 2009; Downs et al., 2010), making the current status visibleto all in the vicinity. Other methods include differently colored lavalamps and robotic dogs walking up to the responsible developers,“[displaying] to the team that it is not happy with that developer,in a friendly, funny and playful way” (Ablett et al., 2007).One source extensively discusses and evaluates differences innotiﬁcation methods, and concludes that a combination of multiplecommunication channels can have a great impact on awareness ofand responsiveness to broken builds (Downs et al., 2012).3.2.15. Test separationTest separation refers to the practice of segmenting test suitesinto multiple parallel or sequential activities. Similar to the case ofmodularization (see Section 3.2.11), sources that touch upon thisissue tend to be positive examples, and it is difﬁcult to ﬁnd explicitstatements to the effect that testing is not separated, although toour understanding this is the case in a number of the articles inthe study. That being said, one source argues that even though it’scommon to have “a single integration process that compiles thecode, runs the unit tests and the acceptance tests, builds deploy-ment packages for QA and the customer, validates code coverageand checks coding standards amongst other things” (Rogers, 2004),this is not necessarily a good thing, as they increase the build dura-tion (see Section 3.2.1) and thereby delay feedback. Consequently,tests are sometimes separated into multiple activities.One separation approach is to “segment tests by functional areaand to only run those tests thought to be affected by the codechange” (Brooks, 2008) or to split test suites by components (Kimet al., 2008). Commonly tests are separated into sequential stagesbased on the time it takes to execute them and the context in whichthey run (Sturdevant, 2007; Sunindyo et al., 2010; Brooks, 2008;Yuksel et al., 2009), e.g. “one an ‘express build’ that just runs unittests to give a basic idea of the success of an integration; anothera longer ‘full’ build that actually runs database processes, accep-tance tests, deployments, etc.” (Roberts, 2004), or slower tests areperformed on a different schedule altogether (Tingling and Akbar,2007; Woskowski, 2012). Another source states in passing thatcontinuous integration “is the automation of sequential build pro-cess steps” (Dösinger et al., 2012), which could be interpreted asimplying that automated steps are linked together in a chain ofsequential stages, but is ultimately too ambiguous to be includedin the statement cluster.3.2.16. Testing of new functionalitySome sources in the study describe testing in continuous inte-gration as primarily safe-guarding legacy functionality (Downset al., 2010) by “[testing] against a suite of automated regressiontests” (Ablett et al., 2007). Continuous integration can, however,be used for validating new functionality as well, by creating theautomated test cases before the production code is implemented(Liu et al., 2009; Holmes and Kellogg, 2006; Yuksel et al., 2009), orin parallel with the implementation (Sturdevant, 2007; Stolberg,2009; Tingling and Akbar, 2007; Goodman and Elbaz, 2008).Some sources discuss the use of test-driven development, e.g.stating that “writing failing unit tests prior to writing any produc-tion code, then writing only enough production code to make thetest pass” is required practice (Gestwicki, 2012), yet do not explic-itly describe the practice in relation to continuous integration andcould therefore not be included in the statement cluster.4. A descriptive modelIt is apparent that continuous integration implementations varyin a multitude of ways. Consequently, we conclude that to derivemore value from studies and discussions on continuous integrationand its effects, more comprehensive information about the actualparticular implementation or implementations at hand is required.In this section we propose a model, or guide, for how to betterdocument the practice, that is designed to address every one of thevariation points discovered in the systematic review (see Section3.2). The model consists of two parts: the Integration Flow Anatomy– depicting activity and input nodes and their relationships (seeSection 4.1) — and the node attributes applying to those nodes (seeSection 4.2). Both of these parts, together forming the completedescriptive model, are detailed in turn below, as well as how theywere designed and which variation points they cover. Followingthis there is a discussion on how to use a sub-set of the attributesand possible constraints (see Section 4.3). D. Ståhl, J. Bosch / The Journal of Systems and Software 87 (2014) 48– 5955As an alternative to deﬁning a new model, existing waysof representing variability were also considered, with particularattention paid to the COVAMOF framework (Sinnema et al., 2004).We consider the problem of representing activities, their scope,relationships and characteristics in a software integration process,however, to be a much simpler one than that of modeling e.g. vari-ability, dependencies and interactions of software components. Inaddition, not all concepts (e.g. dependencies and realizations) nec-essarily translate well across the problem domains. Consequently,we have opted for the model described in this section.4.1. Integration Flow AnatomyA number of statements found in the systematic review touchupon how a “build” may consist of large numbers of interconnectedsteps, performing various tasks, which conditionally trigger eachother. These steps may be executed in parallel or in sequence, or runon different schedules altogether. They may concern themselveswith the entire product, or with separate components. As one of thearticles in the study explains, this can be thought of as a directedacyclic graph (DAG) (Beaumont et al., 2012).We ﬁnd that by using such a DAG to depict the steps, or activities,of an integration process, several questions can be answered. There-fore, a meta-model was constructed with the aim of being able toaccurately reﬂect all the variants possible from the variation pointsdiscovered in the systematic review. This meta-model is shown inFig. 1. It consists of two types of nodes: Input (e.g. source code) andActivity (e.g. execution of test cases). Activities may be triggeredby either input or activity nodes, with the conditions under whichthe trigger is activated (e.g. the source activity succeeded or failed)documented. Furthermore, both activity and input nodes contain aset of attributes describing their scope and characteristics.The nodes themselves and their triggering relationships canbe used to answer questions pertaining to the variation points ofmodularization and build triggering (see Sections 3.2.11 and 3.2.3respectively). Section 4.2 describes how the remainder of the vari-ation points are covered by adding attributes to the nodes.4.2. Node attributesThis section presents a set of attributes, grouped into themes,for the activity and input nodes of the Integration Flow Anatomy(see Section 4.1). These attributes are derived from the variationpoints uncovered in the literature review (see Section 3.2). As eachgroup of attributes is presented below the reasoning behind it andthe variation points addressed by each attribute is explained.Fig. 1. The meta-model of the descriptive model. Note that the attribute set of eithernode type is ﬂexible: the depicted model contains all attributes required to addressthe uncovered variation points (see Section 4.2), but both sub-sets and super-setsare conceivable.It shall be noted that, when applying the model, the actualattribute set used may vary – with the information conveyed by thedescriptive model varying accordingly – depending on the scopeand purpose of the application of the model. A study focusing, forexample, solely on the communication aspects of a particular inte-gration ﬂow may choose to exclude attributes deemed irrelevantto that purpose. This is further discussed in Section 4.3.4.2.1. Scope attributesThe scope theme of attributes applies to the activity nodesand addresses the scope (see Section 3.2.13), test separation (seeSection 3.2.15) and testing of new functionality (see Section 3.2.16).The following attributes are designed to fully cover these variationpoints:•legacy-testing: a list of testing activities applied to legacy code.Different nomenclature is used by different sources – testingactivities mentioned by articles in the study include e.g. unit,acceptance, system, integration, performance and function tests.•new-functionality-testing: a list of testing activities applied tofunctionality that is not yet fully implemented or consideredlegacy. Deﬁnitions of what constitutes legacy may vary.•analysis: a list of analysis activities carried out, e.g. static codeanalysis or test coverage measurements.•packaging: a boolean signifying whether the product is packagedand made ready for deployment.•deployment: a list of environments (e.g. a lab environment orlive customer systems) to which the product is deployed as partof this activity.The legacy-testing and new-functionality-testing attributes arederived from both the test separation and testing of new functional-ity variation points. Since test activities may be split across multipledifferent steps, it’s important to document in the DAG which nodescontain which types of testing. Also, since it’s evident that projectstreat testing of new functionality differently, the test activities needto be documented in two separate attributes for legacy and newfunctionality respectively.The analysis, packaging and deployment attributes all addressthe scope variation point. Apart from testing, these are the threeareas where the systematic review shows that the scope differs,and so these attributes are included in order to clearly show which,if any, of the tasks of analysis, packaging and deployment are per-formed in any given activity node.4.2.2. Build characteristics attributesThe build characteristics theme contains questions pertainingto build duration (see Section 3.2.1), build frequency (see Section3.2.2), integration frequency (see Section 3.2.7), integration on bro-ken builds (see Section 3.2.8) and integration serialization andbatching (see Section 3.2.9). To answer these questions, we pro-pose that the following attributes shall be applied to the activitynodes:•duration: the average duration of the activity.•execution-frequency: the execution frequency of the activity.•trigger-frequency: the triggering frequency of the activity.•batching-allowed: a boolean signifying whether integrations maybe batched into single builds.•trigger-modiﬁers: a list of descriptions of possible modiﬁers tothe activity’s triggering behavior.The duration attribute reﬂects the time required to execute anactivity and addresses the build duration variation point. Similarlyto the scope of the entire continuous integration being equal to the 56D. Ståhl, J. Bosch / The Journal of Systems and Software 87 (2014) 48– 59union of its constituent parts, its duration is then equal to the totalduration of the activity nodes on its critical path.Furthermore, though seemingly similar, execution-frequencyand trigger-frequency are treated as separate attributes, corre-sponding to the separate variation points of build frequency andintegration frequency. The former documents how often an activityis executed, whereas the latter how often it is triggered. Dependingon the type of trigger this metric obviously has different meanings:in a situation where the trigger is a source code change it shows thefrequency at which new content is integrated, whereas if it’s a newversion of a component being published it shows the frequency atwhich that component is being made available for integration withthe larger system. Regardless it’s informative – in particular, it’srelevant to the batching-allowed attribute (corresponding to thevariation point of integration serialization and batching): wherethe integrations frequency is higher than the build frequency, doesone batch those integrations into a single build or not?Finally, the trigger-modiﬁers attribute is derived from the vari-ation point of integration on broken builds. Here any impact ofthe activity’s state or context on the trigger, e.g. failures blockingnew incoming changes unless they are ﬂagged as ﬁxes, should bedocumented.4.2.3. Result handling attributesLike the build characteristics theme of attributes (see Section4.2.2), result handling attributes apply to each individual activitynode (see Section 4.1). This theme covers the deﬁnition of failureand success (see Section 3.2.4), fault handling (see Section 3.2.6),fault duration (see Section 3.2.5) and status communication (seeSection 3.2.14). In order to address these variation points, we pro-pose the following attributes:•result-deﬁnition: a list of possible results and their deﬁnitions.•status-communication: a description of when, how and to whomthe activity’s status is communicated.•fault-handling: a description of how discovered faults areaddressed: by whom, and given what priority.•fault-duration: the average duration of unbroken faulty status ofthe activity.The result-deﬁnition attribute describes what is considered e.g.a faulty or successful execution of the activity. As possible outcomesmay vary, a description shall be given per outcome. Status-communication, fault-handling and fault-duration all address theircorresponding variation points.4.2.4. Input node attributesThis section describes the proposed attributes that apply to theinput nodes of the model. The relevant variation points in thiscontext are pre-integration procedure (see Section 3.2.12) and inte-gration target (see Section 3.2.10). From these the following twoattributes are derived:•pre-integration-procedure: a description of the procedurerequired before integrating changes.•integration-target: a description of where the integration takesplace (e.g. which branch and the rules governing it).The pre-integration-procedure attribute describes what, if any-thing, the developer must do in order to integrate, and therebycreate the change-set that serves as input to the activities of theintegration ﬂow. The integration-target attribute, on the otherhand, describes whether the context of that integration is e.g. ateam branch or a “mainline” branch.Fig. 2. A descriptive model, containing all proposed scope and build characteristicsattributes, of a hypothetical simple integration ﬂow.4.3. Attribute selection and constraintsWe recognize that it is not always desirable, practical or evenpossible to assemble all the data required by the full list of attributesproposed above. This is the reason why the meta-model does notprescribe any mandatory attributes. Obviously, the more completethe model, the more information and potential value it brings, butnone of the proposed attributes explicitly requires any of the otherin order to be valid or meaningful. A hypothetical descriptive modelcontaining only a sub-set of attributes is shown in Fig. 2 to serve asa simple illustrative example.On a further note, we have not identiﬁed any deﬁnite constraintsin the sense of invalid or impossible attribute combinations creat-ing invalid areas in the attribute space. However, this does not ruleout that such areas, or areas that in practice are unpopulated, exist.In future work, we intend to investigate this further by means ofgathering empirical data through multiple-case studies (see Section6.4.3).5. Illustrative case studyThis section describes how the model proposed in Section 4was applied to a development project, in this article referred toas Project A, within Ericsson AB. The assembled model and its datais not presented in its entirety in this article – instead, the pur-pose is to illustrate the steps involved in assembling the model andto present an example of how those steps may play out and theinsights such an exercise may provide.It shall be understood that the descriptive model (see Section4) is not based on this case study, but on a systematic review (seeSection 2.1). Neither is it intended as a complete validation of themodel, beyond demonstrating that it can be applied with positiveresults. Furthermore, conducting the case study did not give causefor revising the model.5.1. Project AIn Project A, multiple development teams are responsible fordeveloping one of the components of a network node, with non-trivial integration dependencies to the other components of thenode. The project was chosen as a case study candidate when oneof the authors was invited to assist in improving its continuousintegration implementation. In that situation, the model was usedin order to establish the baseline implementation, and as a basisfor identifying and planning improvement activities. Based on themultiple continuous integration case studies conducted in previ-ous work (Ståhl and Bosch, 2013) and our experience of industrysoftware development, we deemed the project representative ofindustry practice and therefore suitable to serve as an illustrativeexample of application of the model. D. Ståhl, J. Bosch / The Journal of Systems and Software 87 (2014) 48– 5957Fig. 3. The Integration Flow Anatomy of Project A. Activity D1 was followed by amanual delivery to another part of the organization, which was outside the scopeof the case study. The ﬁgure only shows the anatomy itself, with all node attributesdeliberately left out.5.2. Sketching the integration ﬂow anatomyThe ﬁrst step of building the model was to sketch the IntegrationFlow Anatomy. This was done in front of a whiteboard, in collabora-tion with engineers working in the project, by analyzing the actualactivities conﬁgured in Jenkins (2013), their continuous integrationtool. By studying how the Jenkins activities, or Projects, related toeach other and their contents we were quickly able to create a graphof the component’s entire ﬂow (see Fig. 3), including its internaldelivery to another part of the organization, and also determinethe scope attributes of the activity nodes. During this work it soonbecame evident that the emerging anatomy had not been entirelyclear to the project members themselves beforehand, which showsthat this in itself can be a rewarding exercise from an educationalpoint of view. It was also discovered that the delivery from D1 (seeFig. 3) to the receiving organization was done manually and that notmuch data on this was available. Consequently this was identiﬁedby the engineers as a prioritized area of the project’s integration toimprove.5.3. Determining the input node attributesFollowing the Integration Flow Anatomy, the attributes of theinput node was discussed. This took the form of an unstructuredinterview between the authors and the project’s engineers, withthe authors asking for descriptions of the current pre-integration-procedure and integration-target (see Section 4.2.4) in Project A.With regards to the integration-target attribute, it was suggested bythe engineers themselves that the current implementation, where a“develop” branch was used both as the integration branch for all thedevelopers and as the release branch from which deliveries werepicked, might prove to be unsuitable in the future. It was agreed,however, that in the project’s current early stage of developmentthis solution was adequate, but that it may have to be revised inthe future.5.4. Determining the activity node attributesAll the build characteristics attributes (see Section 4.2.2) for theactivity nodes could be gathered by the authors themselves by ana-lyzing the conﬁguration of the project’s continuous integration tool,Jenkins. One insight gained while collecting the trigger-modiﬁersinformation was that the ﬁrst activity, A1, was in Jenkins conﬁguredas being part of the same “Project” (the entity used to conﬁgure anactivity in Jenkins) as D1, meaning that A1 would not be ready tostart work on new changes until all other activities had ﬁnished.The consequence of this was that the entire ﬂow became serial, inthe sense that it was unable to work on more than a single change-set at any given time. It was concluded that this was a problem thatshould be addressed, not least because it caused under-utilizationof available hardware.Furthermore, this example illustrates how activities in the Inte-gration Flow Anatomy may not necessarily map directly to e.g.Jenkins Projects – rather, the activities in the model should corre-spond to how the project members themselves would conceptuallydescribe their integration ﬂow. It may be argued, then, that if thatdescription does not easily translate into how the activity entities ofone’s continuous integration tool are conﬁgured, then this shouldbe seen as an indication that there may be a problem with saidconﬁguration, as indeed turned out to be the case in the studiedproject.Finally, in a second session, the result handling attributes (seeSection 4.2.3) of each activity in the integration ﬂow was discussedwith the project’s engineers. In this project, the Result Handling ofall the activities in the ﬂow were similar – for instance, the sta-tus of all activities considered relevant were visualized in real timeusing a special information radiator functionality in the continuousintegration tool, thereby made available to all stakeholders. Also,while failure in any activity would cause mails to be sent out toall developers and project support staff, it was a dedicated team’sresponsibility to act on those failures, and then escalate to deve-lopers if deemed necessary. Though it was said that this may notbe the best solution, and that it would be better if the developersthemselves had the mindset to take that responsibility directly, theresult handling in the project was considered satisfactory and nourgent improvement needs were identiﬁed.6. ConclusionThis section presents the conclusions of the conducted litera-ture review, the model proposal, the illustrative case study andremaining questions left unanswered.6.1. Disagreements in related workIt is clear from the conducted literature review that thereis currently no consensus on continuous integration as a single,homogeneous practice. Out of the 22 statement clusters syn-thesized from statements extracted from the included articles,differences and/or disagreements were evident in all but six (seeSection 3). Not only does this mean that, in order to make a mean-ingful comparison of software development projects, simply statingthat they use continuous integration is insufﬁcient information aswe instead need to ask ourselves what kind of continuous inte-gration is used. It also means that, taking into account the dramaticdifferences in experienced continuous integration effects (Ståhl andBosch, 2013), we need to ask which aspects or variants of continu-ous integration any proposed beneﬁt (or disadvantage) is an effectof. For this purpose, based on the ﬁndings in our study, we have pro-posed a descriptive model for better documentation of continuousintegration variants.6.2. Model proposalIn this paper we have proposed a descriptive model of continu-ous integration implementations, based on variation points evidentin literature. We believe that using this model will enable us tobetter understand implementations of continuous integration andhow they compare to each other. This in turn is a prerequisitefor studying correlations between differences in those implemen-tations and differences in their experienced effects. If we are toreach a level understanding where a development project is ableto pro-actively and conﬁdently design its continuous integrationaccording to the beneﬁts it wishes to maximize, then this is animportant step on that path. That being said, it is also clear that 58D. Ståhl, J. Bosch / The Journal of Systems and Software 87 (2014) 48– 59applying the model to one’s own integration ﬂow, with or withoutcomparing it to others, can be a valuable and educational expe-rience, as it may provide insights into one’s own developmentprocess.6.3. Model validationWe have demonstrated through an illustrative case study theapplicability of the model proposed in this article to an industrydevelopment project, and that tangible beneﬁts can be derivedfrom it. Not only did the model bring to light the actual anatomyand characteristics of the integration ﬂow in the project – some-thing that had thitherto been an opaque part of the environmentfor a number of the project members – but it was also able to indi-cate areas where opportunities for improvement could be foundand served as a basis for the planning of activities to pursue thoseimprovements.That being said, however, while the research presented in thisarticle demonstrates that disparity in multiple areas exists, thesample size is insufﬁcient to fully understand their distributionand consequently the actual space of variations. Also, we do notassume that we have identiﬁed every possible variation point inthis research. There may still be important differentiators not yetincluded in the model, particularly as continuous integration asexercised by practitioners may well evolve in the future. There-fore, additional data provided by further case studies would help inimproving our understanding of not only the value ranges and sta-tistical distribution of the model’s attributes, but could also uncoverattributes that are as of yet missing. Based on the case studiesconducted in previous work (Ståhl and Bosch, 2013) and our profes-sional experience we expect such case studies to allow reﬁnementof the proposed model, but not lead to major disruption.In conclusion, we would consider future case studies applyingthe model to a larger number of industry software developmentprojects to be an important contribution, both in that they wouldserve to further validate and reﬁne the model and at the same timeprovide additional data points in the study of continuous integra-tion itself – in particular, we ﬁnd that comparative case studies ofmultiple implementations are lacking in contemporary literature.6.4. Open questions for further researchA number of questions still remain unanswered in the ﬁeld ofcontinuous integration.6.4.1. Correlations between differences in practice and differencesin experienceIn previous work (Ståhl and Bosch, 2013) we have identiﬁed dis-agreement among software development professionals as to thebeneﬁts of continuous integration experienced in their projects.In the research presented in this article we have further demon-strated that continuous integration implementations themselvesmay differ. Consequently, what we ask ourselves is whether thereis a correlation between these differences in experience on the onehand, and differences in implementation on the other. Would itbe possible to improve our understanding in such a way that wecannot only present a model for describing variants of the practice,but also demonstrate that these variants allow for different effects?If so, could that be used to allow industry professionals to decidewhich ﬂavor of continuous integration they should strive for, basedon the beneﬁts they prioritize?We are still far from such an understanding of the practice.In order to get there we need a sufﬁcient body of data detailingboth experienced effects and the variation points of continu-ous integration in a number of projects utilizing continuousintegration. We therefore propose that case studies be performedin this area.6.4.2. Contextual differencesSoftware development projects obviously differ in more waysthan in how they have chosen or been able to implement contin-uous integration. They may be of varying size, longevity, budget,organizational structure, competence setup, geographic distribu-tion etc. While the number of such conceivable variation pointsmay be nearly inﬁnite, it is nevertheless possible that some of theminteract with the variation points of continuous integration. It maybe that certain contextual factors enable or are enabled by partic-ular variants of continuous integration, or that they inﬂuence thevery interpretation of the continuous integration concept.We believe that case studies investigating such relationships inthe industry would be a valuable contribution in this area.6.4.3. Internal constraints and correlations of the modelWe have proposed a model containing a number of attributes,grouped into themes, covering the variation points where we haveshown that continuous integration implementations can and dodiffer. What is not understood is how, if at all, these variation pointscorrelate. It is conceivable that some variants enable or disable eachother, or certain variants tend to manifest together, allowing us tocluster them an identify “typical species” of continuous integration.Conversely, it is possible that constraints exist such that certainareas of the combinatorial space created by these attributes areinvalid, or unpopulated in practice.It could also be that some of the variation points identiﬁed in thisresearch are so tightly coupled that they can be better understoodas different manifestation of the same underlying practice, therebyallowing variation points to be merged and the model simpliﬁed.Our understanding of these questions would be furthered byaccess to larger sets of empirical data. To this end, we proposemultiple-case studies to be conducted, where the proposed modelis applied and any constraints and correlations are searched for.AcknowledgementsWe would like to thank Ericsson AB for allowing us to study oneof their software development projects and publishing our ﬁndings.We also want to thank our colleagues for all their feedback and thepatience they have demonstrated during our research.ReferencesFowler, M., 2013. Continuous Integration. http://martinfowler.com/articles/continuousIntegration.html (accessed 30.01.13).Jenkins, 2013. http://jenkins-ci.org (accessed 30.01.13).Ablett, R., Sharlin, E., Maurer, F., Denzinger, J., Schock, C., 2007. BuildBot: roboticmonitoring of agile software development teams. In: 16th IEEE InternationalSymposium on Robot and Human interactive Communication, pp. 931–936.Alyahya, S., Ivins, W., Gray, W.A., 2012. A holistic approach to developing a progresstracking system for distributed agile teams. In: 2012 IEEE/ACIS 11th Interna-tional Conference on Computer and Information Science, pp. 503–512.Baumeister, J., Reutelshoefer, J., 2011. Developing knowledge systems with contin-uous integration. In: 11th International Conference on Knowledge Managementand Knowledge Technologies, Article No. 33.Beaumont, O., Bonichon, N., Courtè, L., Hanin, X., Dolstra, E., 2012. Mixed data-parallel scheduling for distributed continuous integration. In: 2012 IEEE 26thInternational Parallel and Distributed Processing Symposium Workshops & PhDForum, pp. 91–98.Beck, K., 1999. Embracing change with extreme programming. IEEE Computer 32(10), 70–77.Bowyer, J., Hughes, J., 2006. Assessing undergraduate experience of continuous inte-gration and test-driven development. In: Proceedings of the 28th InternationalConference on Software Engineering, pp. 691–694.Brooks, G., 2008. Team pace – keeping build times down. In: Agile 2008 Conference,pp. 294–297.Cannizzo, F., Clutton, R., Ramesh, R., 2008. Pushing the boundaries of testing andcontinuous integration. In: Agile 2008 Conference, pp. 501–505. D. Ståhl, J. Bosch / The Journal of Systems and Software 87 (2014) 48– 5959Cohan, S., 2008. Successful customer collaboration resulting in the right product forthe end user. In: Agile 2008 Conference, pp. 284–288.Downs, J., Hosking, J., Plimmer, B., 2010. Status communication in agile softwareteams: a case study. In: Fifth International Conference on Software EngineeringAdvances, pp. 82–87.Downs, J., Plimmer, B., Hosking, J., 2012. Ambient Awareness of Build Status inCollocated Software Teams. 2012 34th International Conference on SoftwareEngineering (ICSE) , pp. 507–517.Dösinger, S., Mordinyi, R., Bifﬂ, S., 2012. Communicating continuous integrationservers for increasing effectiveness of automated testing. In: 27th IEEE/ACMInternational Conference on Automated Software Engineering, pp. 374–377.Gatrell, M., Counsell, S., Hall, T., 2009. Empirical support for two refactoring studiesusing commercial C# software. In: 13th International Conference on Evaluation& Assessment in Software Engineering, pp. 1–10.Gestwicki, P., 2012. The entity system architecture and its application in anundergraduate game development studio. In: International Conference on theFoundations of Digital Games, pp. 73–80.Goodman, D., Elbaz, M., 2008. “It’s not the pants, it’s the people in the pants” –learnings from the gap agile transformation. In: Agile 2008 Conference, pp.112–115.Hill, J., Schmidt, D., Porter, A., Slaby, J., 2008. CiCUTS: combining system executionmodeling tools with continuous integration environments. In: 15th Annual IEEEInternational Conference and Workshop on the Engineering of Computer BasedSystems, pp. 66–75.Holck, J., Jørgensen, N., 2007. Continuous integration and quality assurance: a casestudy of two open source projects. Australasian Journal of Information Systems11 (1), 40–53.Hoffman, B., Cole, D., Vines, J., 2009. Software process for rapid development of HPCsoftware using CMake. In: 2009 DoD High Performance Computing Moderniza-tion Program Users Group Conference, pp. 378–382.Holmes, A., Kellogg, M., 2006. Automating functional tests using selenium. In: Agile2006 Conference, pp. 270–275.Huang, H., Liu, H., Li, Z., Zhu, J., 2008. Surrogate: a simulation apparatus forcontinuous integration testing in service oriented architecture. In: 2008 IEEEInternational Conference on Services Computing, pp. 223–230.Janus, A., Schmietendorf, A., Dumke, R., Jäger, J., 2012. The 3C Approach for AgileQuality Assurance. 3rd International Workshop on Emerging Trends in SoftwareMetrics (WETSoM) , pp. 9–13.Kim, E.H., Na, J.C., Ryoo, S.M., 2009. Implementing an effective test automationframework. In: 33rd Annual IEEE International Computer Software and Appli-cations Conference, pp. 534–538.Kim, E.H., Na, J.C., Ryoo, S.M., 2009. Test automation framework for implemen-ting continuous integration. In: Sixth International Conference on InformationTechnology: New Generations, pp. 784–789.Kim, S., Park, S., Yun, J., Lee, Y., 2008. Automated continuous integration ofcomponent-based software: an industrial experience. In: Proceedings of the2008 23rd IEEE/ACM International Conference on Automated Software Engi-neering, pp. 423–426.Kitchenham, B., 2004. Procedures for Performing Systematic Reviews. Joint Techni-cal Report, Computer Science Department. Keele University (TR/SE-0401) andNational ICT Australia Ltd (0400011T.1).Lacoste, F., 2009. Killing the gatekeeper: introducing a continuous integration sys-tem. In: Agile 2009 Conference, pp. 387–392.Lier, F., Wrede, S., Siepmann, F., Lütkebohle, I., Paul-Stueve, T., Wachsmuth, S., 2012.Facilitating research cooperation through linking and sharing of heterogenousresearch artefacts: cross platform linking of semantically enriched research arte-facts. In: 8th International Conference on Semantic Systems, pp. 157–164.Liu, H., Li, Z., Zhu, J., Tan, H., Huang, H., 2009. A uniﬁed test framework for continuousintegration testing of SOA solutions. In: 2009 International Conference on WebServices, pp. 880–887.Long, B., 2008. Managing module dependencies to facilitate continuous testing.Information Processing Letters 108 (3), 127–131.Matsumoto, K., Kibe, S., Uehara, M., Mori, H., 2012. Design of development as a servicein the cloud. In: 2012 International Conference on Network-Based InformationSystems, pp. 815–819.Miller, A., 2008. A hundred days of continuous integration. In: Agile 2008 Conference,pp. 289–293.Moreira, G., Mellado, R., Montini, D., Dias, L., da Cunha, A., 2010. Softwareproduct measurement and analysis in a continuous integration environ-ment. In: 2010 Seventh International Conference on Information Technology,pp. 1177–1182.Pesola, J., Tanner, H., Eskeli, J., Päivi, P., Bendas, D., 2011. Integrating early V&V sup-port to a GSE tool integration platform. In: Sixth IEEE International Conferenceon Global Software Engineering Workshops, pp. 95–101.Rasmusson, J., 2004. Long build trouble shooting guide. Extreme programming andagile methods – XP/Agile Universe 2004. LNCS 3134, 557–574.Roberts, M., 2004. Enterprise continuous integration using binary dependencies.Extreme programming and agile processes in software engineering. LNCS 3092,194–201.Rogers, R.O., 2003. CruiseControl.NET: Continuous Integration for. NET. Extremeprogramming and agile processes in software engineering. LNCS 2675, 114–122.Rogers, R.O., 2004. Scaling continuous integration. Extreme programming and agileprocesses in software engineering. LNCS 3092, 68–76.Sinnema, M., Deelstra, S., Nijhuis, J., Bosch, J., 2004. Covamof: a framework formodeling variability in software product families. Software Product Lines,197–213.Ståhl, D., Bosch, J., 2013. Experienced beneﬁts of continuous integration in industrysoftware product development: a case study. In: The 2013 IASTED InternationalConference on Software Engineering, pp. 736–743.Stolberg, S., 2009. Enabling agile testing through continuous integration. In: Agile2009 Conference, pp. 369–374.van der Storm, T., 2005. Continuous release and upgrade of component-based soft-ware. In: 12th international workshop on Software conﬁguration management,pp. 43–57.van der Storm, T., 2007. The Sisyphus continuous integration system. In: 11th Euro-pean Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering, pp. 335–336.van der Storm, T., 2008. Backtracking incremental continuous integration. In:12th European Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering, pp.233–242.Sturdevant, K., 2007. Cruisin’ and Chillin’: testing the java-based distributed grounddata system “Chill” with CruiseControl. In: Aerospace Conference, pp. 1–8.Sunindyo, W., Moser, T., Winkler, D., Bifﬂ, S., 2010. Foundations for event-basedprocess analysis in heterogeneous software engineering environments. In: 201036th EUROMICRO Conference on Software Engineering and Advanced Applica-tions, pp. 313–322.Sutherland, J., Frohman, R., 2011. Hitting the wall: what to do when high performingscrum teams overwhelm operations and infrastructure. In: Proceedings of the44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, pp. 1–6.Tingling, P., Akbar, S., 2007. Extreme programming in action: a longitudinal casestudy. Human-computer interaction. interaction design and usability. LNCS4550, 242–251.Watanabe, W.M., Fortes, R.P., Dias, A.L., 2012. Using acceptance tests to validateaccessibility requirements in RIA. In: International Cross-Disciplinary Confer-ence on Web Accessibility, Article No. 15.Woskowski, C., 2012. Applying industrial-strength testing techniques to critical caremedical equipment. Computer Safety, Reliability, and Security, 62–73.Yuksel, H.M., Tuzun, E., Gelirli, E., Biyikli, E., Baykal, B., 2009. Using continuousintegration and automated test techniques for a robust C4ISR system. In: 24thInternational Symposium on Computer and Information Sciences, pp. 734–748.Daniel Ståhl is a software developer and continuous integration architect at EricssonAB in Linköping, Sweden. He has a background of six years as a software developer inthe telecom industry, and his work primarily revolves around the application of agilepractices in general, and continuous integration in particular, to large scale softwaredevelopment. He received a MSc degree from Linköping University, Sweden, in 2007.Jan Bosch is professor of software engineering and director of the software researchcenter at Chalmers University Technology in Gothenburg, Sweden. Earlier, he hasworked as Vice President Engineering Process at Intuit Inc and as head of the Soft-ware and Application Technologies Laboratory at Nokia Research Center, Finland.Before joining Nokia, he headed the software engineering research group at theUniversity of Groningen, The Netherlands, where he holds a professorship in soft-ware engineering. He received a MSc degree from the University of Twente, TheNetherlands, and a PhD degree from Lund University, Sweden.