 The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 1238Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
j ourna l ho me page: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssCoordination in co-located agile software development projectsDiane E. Strode,Sid
 L. Huff,Beverley
 Hope,Sebastian
 LinkSchool of Information Management, Victoria University of Wellington, PO Box 600, Wellington 6140, New Zealanda r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 4 August 2011Received in revised form 27 January 2012Accepted 7 February 2012Available online 15 February 2012Keywords:
Agile methodsAgile software development projectCoordination effectivenessCoordination strategyCoordination TheoryExtreme ProgrammingScruma b s t r a c tAgile software development provides a way to organise the complex task of multi-participant soft-ware development while accommodating constant project change. Agile software development is wellaccepted in the practitioner community but there is little understanding of how such projects achieveeffective coordination, which is known to be critical in successful software projects. A theoretical modelof coordination in the agile software development context is presented based on empirical data fromthree cases of co-located agile software development. Many practices in these projects act as coordina-tion mechanisms, which together form a coordination strategy. Coordination strategy in this context hasthree components: synchronisation, structure, and boundary spanning. Coordination effectiveness hastwo components: implicit and explicit. The theoretical model of coordination in agile software devel-opment projects proposes that an agile coordination strategy increases coordination effectiveness. Thismodel has application for practitioners who want to select appropriate practices from agile methods toensure they achieve coordination coverage in their project. For the ﬁeld of information systems develop-ment, this theory contributes to knowledge of coordination and coordination effectiveness in the contextof agile software development.© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionAgile software development is a new paradigm in informationsystems development that provides a way to organise complexmulti-participant software development while accommodatingconstant project change. Although this class of system develop-ment methodology is accepted practice amongst the practitionercommunity and has been adopted and adapted in a multitudeof different project contexts (Ambler, 2009; Dyba and Dingsoyr,2008), it is still of intense practical and theoretical interest due toits wide-ranging effects. Adoption of the agile approach impactsorganisation structure, culture, and roles, contract negotiation,human resourcing, the way customers are involved in projects, theway system quality is negotiated, and the way that software isdelivered. Agile software development also changes many facetsof software project practice, both technical practices and teamsocial interaction. This means that existing theories about soft-ware development organisations, project management, and systemdevelopment may need to be re-evaluated to accommodate thisnew paradigm (Dingsoyr et al., 2010).Long before the advent of agile software development, effec-tive coordination was acknowledged as a critical element inCorresponding author. Tel.: +64 4 472 1000; fax: +64 4 499 4601.E-mail addresses: diane.strode@vuw.ac.nz (D.E. Strode), sid.huff@vuw.ac.nz(S.L. Huff), beverley.hope@vuw.ac.nz (B. Hope), sebastian.link@vuw.ac.nz (S. Link).organisations generally, and in software development in partic-ular (Curtis et al., 1988; Kraut and Streeter, 1995; Van de Venet al., 1976). Nidumolu (1995) articulated the problem clearly whenhe asked, “How can software development projects be coordinatedmore effectively in the presence of uncertainty?” (p. 213). Agile soft-ware development methods were particularly designed to dealwith change and uncertainty, yet they de-emphasise traditionalcoordination mechanisms such as forward planning, extensivedocumentation, speciﬁc coordination roles, contracts, and strictadherence to a pre-speciﬁed process. Instead, they favour intensiveface-to-face communication and other apparently simple practices.Yet, agile software development has contributed to the success ofmany software projects, so arguably effective coordination, of sometype, is taking place within the agile approach. However, the formand nature of this coordination is not well understood.It is timely to reinvestigate the important concept of coordi-nation in the light of this new paradigm in information systemsdevelopment (Agerfalk et al., 2009; Cao and Ramesh, 2007;Dingsoyr et al., 2008; Kautz et al., 2007). A large and diverse bodyof coordination research exists in contexts relevant to softwaredevelopment practice, but agile software development came intocommon use subsequent to much of that research. Therefore apply-ing a coordination lens to agile software development may uncoverfacets of coordination or software development not previouslyidentiﬁed.In any study of coordination, there are two important consid-erations. The ﬁrst is to ﬁnd out what activities and artefacts in a0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.jss.2012.02.017 D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 12381223situation support coordinated action, and the second is to identifythe characteristics of a highly coordinated state – i.e. what sucha state “looks like.” Once these two aspects of coordination areclariﬁed, it becomes possible to investigate which activities andartefacts are more, or less, effective at bringing about a highly coor-dinated state. The purpose of this article is to identify agile practicesthat have a coordinative function and how they ﬁt together to forma coordination strategy. In addition, how this coordination strat-egy contributes to effective coordination is explored. Two relatedresearch questions guide the study:1.How
 is coordination achieved when using an agile developmentapproach?2. What is the relationship between coordination strategy andproject coordination effectiveness in the context of agile soft-ware development?This article follows the guidelines of Eisenhardt and Graebner(2007) for theory building from positivist multi-case study researchwhere the aim is to deﬁne concepts and elaborate their relation-ships in a form that makes them suitable for testing in future work.The ﬁndings come from three cases, each one an independent soft-ware project using an agile software development method.The article is organised as follows. First, a brief review of thecurrent state of research on agile software development providesa background to the study. There follows a discussion of coordina-tion in the literature of organisation studies, information systemsproject studies, and teamwork, highlighting the lack of a clearframework in that literature for exploring agile software develop-ment. Then the small body of research linking coordination withagile software development is discussed. Following this is a discus-sion of how the concepts of coordination strategy and coordinationeffectiveness ﬁt within a general framework of project success. Adescription of the case study research method used in the studyis next, followed by the ﬁndings, which include a description ofeach project including its development methodology and coordi-nation problems. Then a theoretical model of coordination in agilesoftware development projects, with supporting evidence from thecases is presented. Propositions linking the coordination strategyand coordination effectiveness concepts of the model are presentedfollowed by a discussion section where the research questions areaddressed along with implications of the theory for IS practitioners.The strengths and limitations of the research are examined and thearticle concludes by considering the ways in which further researchin this area can make use of this theory of coordination in an agilesoftware development context.2. Agile software developmentFor forty years system development methodologies have beendesigned for different types of organisation, different types of prob-lem, and different technologies (Avison and Fitzgerald, 2006; Olleet al., 1983). In the 1990s, the approach to system developmentcalled agile software development ﬁrst appeared (Iivari et al., 2004).This approach is designed to support ﬂexible, rapid, and effectivedevelopment under conditions of change, uncertainty, and timepressure (Dyba and Dingsoyr, 2008). These conditions are commonin the current fast-paced business environment (Madsen, 2007)where agile software development has proven efﬁcacy (Baskervilleet al., 2007). Amongst practitioners the popularity of this approachhas grown rapidly since it was ﬁrst introduced (Ambler, 2009; Westand Grant, 2010) and some researchers argue that agile softwaredevelopment has fundamentally changed the practice of softwaredevelopment (Abrahamsson et al., 2009; Agerfalk et al., 2009;Baskerville et al., 2007; Rajlich, 2006).‘Agile software development’ is a catch-all term which includesa variety of agile methods. All agile methods are founded on adistinct philosophy and a set of practices for conducting infor-mation systems development (Abrahamsson et al., 2003; Hilkkaet al., 2005). There are at least 13 different agile methods, the mostpopular are Extreme Programming (XP) and Scrum. Others includeDynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM), Crystal methods,Adaptive System Development, Lean Software Development, Fea-ture Driven Development, and Evo (Dyba and Dingsoyr, 2008). Theunifying philosophy of agile methods derives from the ‘agile mani-festo’ developed by a number of system development experts whohad designed different methodologies based on similar ideals (Becket al., 2001). This philosophy emphasises the importance of individ-uals and their interactions, teamwork, production of early workingsoftware, collaboration with customers, and responding effectivelyto change. This is in preference to the traditional focus on process,tools, documentation, contract negotiation, and following plans.Each agile method loosely conforms to this philosophy (Conboyet al., 2005), yet each agile method has a distinct focus (e.g. Scrumfor project management, XP for rapidly producing quality software)and an integrated set of work practices and iterative micro-phases.Before 2005, few rigorous studies of agile software developmenthad been conducted. More recently, prompted in part by a reviewof research on this topic by Dyba and Dingsoyr (2008), rigorousresearch methods have been used to explore how agile softwaredevelopment is used. Detailed ethnographic studies have shed lighton how practitioners perform agile development (MacKenzie andMonk, 2004; Sharp and Robinson, 2004) and carefully conductedcase studies have provided insights into agile development in spe-ciﬁc contexts such as health care systems (Fruhling and de Vreede,2006), software product families (Fitzgerald et al., 2006), and dis-tributed system development (Sarker and Sarker, 2009).There is a large body of existing theory in organisation stud-ies, management science, and information systems that could beapplied to the agile approach to better understand, explain, andpredict its effects and efﬁcacy. Cao and Ramesh (2007), Nerur andBalijepally (2007) and Dingsoyr et al. (2008) have called for this typeof work. Examples of research of this sort include a study by Conboy(2009), who deﬁned a theory of agility in the context of systemsdevelopment by linking agile software development to agility inother ﬁelds. In addition, empirically supported studies linking dis-tributed agile software development and project success conceptshave recently appeared (Sarker et al., 2009). Maruping et al. (2009)used control theory to explain the impact of agile software devel-opment on software project quality; Harris et al. (2009) extendedcontrol theory to explain the effectiveness of ﬂexible managementpractices.Research into the agile approach to software development hasmatured in the past ﬁve years. Nevertheless, a number of openquestions remain, and the relevance and implications of certainfundamental organisational concepts are still not fully understoodin this context (Abrahamsson et al., 2009; Agerfalk et al., 2009).One such concept is coordination. In the next section, we brieﬂyreview previous research on coordination, which is scattered acrossa number of different domains.3. Previous research on coordinationNo single widely accepted deﬁnition of coordination exists.When Malone (1988) ﬁrst proposed a theory of coordination, hedeﬁned it in this way: “when multiple actors pursue goals together,they have to do things to organise themselves that a single actorpursuing the same goals would not have to do. We call these extraorganising activities coordination” (Malone, 1988, p. 5). Later thisdeﬁnition was reﬁned by Malone and Crowston (1994) when they 1224D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 1238developed their interdisciplinary theory of coordination. Their the-ory is based on the tenet that “coordination is the managing ofdependencies” (Malone and Crowston, 1994, p. 90). In contrast,knowledge management researchers deﬁne coordination as a wayto manage “problems of sharing, integrating, creating, transforming,and transferring knowledge” (Kotlarsky et al., 2008, p. 96). Whilethere is no consensus on a deﬁnition of coordination evident in theliterature, there does exist a broad-based theory of coordination(Malone and Crowston, 1994).3.1. Malone and Crowston’s Coordination TheoryMalone and Crowston (1994) developed an interdisciplinarytheory of coordination (which we will refer to hereafter as ‘Coordi-nation Theory’). Their Coordination Theory is based on ideas fromorganisation theory, economics, management, and computer sci-ence. The key idea in Coordination Theory is that coordination isneeded to address dependencies, which are the constraints on actionin a situation. Coordination is made up of one or more coordina-tion mechanisms; each one addresses one or more dependenciesin a situation. While Coordination Theory is very useful for identify-ing dependencies, categorising those dependencies, and identifyingthe coordination mechanisms in a situation, it is a ‘theory foranalysis’ (Gregor, 2006, p. 623) and is not intended to be usedfor prediction. In particular, Coordination Theory encompassesno stated propositions or hypothesised relationships. In their 10-year retrospective of Coordination Theory research, Crowston et al.(2006) acknowledged these limitations and stated, “challenges forfuture research include developing testable hypotheses (e.g. about thegenerality of coordination mechanisms)” (p. 135). While Coordina-tion Theory in its present form may not be suitable for predictingparticular outcomes such as coordination effectiveness or projectsuccess, nevertheless it is a valuable tool for better understandingthe ways in which particular activities or artefacts support coordi-nation in organisational settings. In this study, Coordination Theoryis used to analyse the dependencies and associated coordinationmechanisms in agile software development projects. From thatanalysis a generic coordination strategy concept relevant to agilesoftware development projects is developed.Other coordination research relevant to software developmentprojects appears in one of three contexts: organisation studies, ISprojects, and teamwork. In the following sections, research in eachcontext is presented in turn.3.2. Coordination in organisation studiesCoordination is considered a key determinant of organisa-tion structure in classic organisational theory research, andvarious organisation-level coordination modes have been iden-tiﬁed (Galbraith, 1977; Malone, 1987; March and Simon, 1958;Mintzberg, 1980; Thompson, 1967; Van de Ven et al., 1976).Impersonal coordination is based upon “a codiﬁed blueprint ofaction[which] is impersonally speciﬁed” (Van de Ven et al., 1976,p. 323) and is achieved with the use of “pre-established plans,schedules, forecasts, formalized rules, policies and procedures, andstandardized information and communication systems” (Van de Venet al., 1976, p. 323). Minimal verbal communication is a character-istic of this mode. Coordination by mutual adjustment (Thompson,1967) occurs at the level of either a group or an individual (Vande Ven et al., 1976). Scheduled or unscheduled meetings achievegroup coordination. Personal coordination can be either vertical orhorizontal. Vertical personal coordination involves communicationvia supervisors and line managers whereas horizontal coordina-tion occurs via one-to-one communication between individuals ina non-hierarchical relationship.In addition to deﬁning various coordination modes, Van de Venet al. (1976) identiﬁed task uncertainty, task interdependence, andsize of the work unit as fundamental determinants of coordina-tion mode. They deﬁned four workﬂow categories: independent,sequential, reciprocal, and team. Each category evidences a differ-ent level of interdependence and an associated coordination mode.In particular, team mode is shown to have the highest level of work-ﬂow interdependence, and coordination takes place in group modeusing scheduled and unscheduled meetings.Considering agile methods and the agile manifesto (Beck et al.,2001) in the light of coordination theory from organisation stud-ies, agile approaches are seen to achieve coordination by mutualadjustment at the group level (formal and informal meetings), andby personal horizontal coordination (Van de Ven et al., 1976) atthe individual level. For example, in the Scrum method (Schwaberand Beedle, 2002), group mode coordination is achieved with sprintplanning meetings, daily scrum meetings, and sprint review meet-ings. In Extreme Programming (Beck, 2000), personal horizontalcoordination is achieved using pair programming and co-location.In addition, Van de Ven et al.’s (1976) team workﬂow concept,despite having been proposed long before agile methods were ﬁrstused, has similarities with the self-organising team approach rec-ommended in the agile manifesto (Beck et al., 2001), inasmuch asteam workﬂow involves a group working concurrently to diagnose,collaborate, and problem-solve to process the work. Organisationstudies also suggest that an agile approach may engender high coor-dination cost due to its reliance on mutual adjustment and groupmechanisms (Van de Ven et al., 1976).Two issues arise when applying organisation theory to agilesoftware development or any other type of IS project. First,organisation-level coordination research is based on theoreticaland empirical work carried out in the pre-1990 era and the IS organ-isational environment of 2011 may not be comparable. Second,using organisation theories to explain and predict agile approachesassumes an agile development project is a form of time-boundedorganisation. While some researchers have made this assumption –for example, Barki et al. (2001), Nidumolu (1995), and Xia and Lee(2005) – such an assumption is questionable. Organisation leveltheories may not hold at the project level due to the effect of timeconstraints that may not be present in permanent organisations(Barki et al., 2001).3.3. Coordination in information systems projectsA number of researchers have studied the role of coordina-tion at the level of the information systems (IS) project. Nidumolu(1995) investigated the impact of project uncertainty and verticaland horizontal coordination mechanisms on project performancein 64 IT projects, and found that horizontal coordination had apositive effect on project performance. Andres and Zmud (2001)studied the impact of task interdependence, coordination strat-egy, and goal conﬂict on software development success using anexperimental approach, and found that ‘organic’ coordination wasgenerally superior in supporting success under conditions of highinterdependence between organisational subunits.McChesney and Gallagher (2004) conducted an interpretiveinterview-based study of coordination practices in software engi-neering projects. They found that in order to explain all of thecoordination mechanisms in the two projects they studied, theyneeded to use Coordination Theory (Malone and Crowston, 1994)alongside collective mind theory (Weick and Roberts, 1993). Theydetermined that coordination has both explicit as well as implicitcomponents, and proposed that both types are necessary for aproject to be successful.Research into the impact of coordination on project successwithin IS development is diverse. A variety of contexts have D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 12381225been studied (e.g. IT projects, software projects, student projects,software teams) and a variety of ‘success’ constructs have beenused (e.g. project satisfaction, productivity, process success, teameffectiveness) (Aladwani, 2002; Andres and Zmud, 2001; Chenet al., 2009; Kraut and Streeter, 1995; MacCormack et al., 2001;Nidumolu, 1995; Nidumolu and Subramani, 2004). Overall, thisbody of research has shown that effective coordination is necessary,but not sufﬁcient, for the success of software projects (Curtis et al.,1988; Espinosa et al., 2004; Kraut and Streeter, 1995; Nidumolu,1995).3.4. Coordination in teamwork studiesTeamwork is the third context in which coordination is a focus.Teamwork research has identiﬁed an implicit form of coordinationthat goes by many different names. ‘Shared cognition’ is implicitcoordination that occurs within work groups without explicitspeech or message passing (Rico et al., 2008). Implicit coordina-tion can occur via shared mental models (Kang et al., 2006; Yuanet al., 2007), collective mind (Weick and Roberts, 1993), exper-tise coordination (Faraj and Sproull, 2000), or team mental models(Mohammed et al., 2010). Furthermore, research has linked teamcognition directly with team coordination (Fiore and Salas, 2004).Although these concepts are all slightly different, taken togetherthey suggest that there is more to coordination than the explicitforms referred to in Coordination Theory (Malone and Crowston,1994) and in organisation theory more generally.3.5. Coordination in agile software developmentCoordination is recognised as an important aspect of agilesoftware development in a small number of theoretical and empir-ical studies. Classic organisation theory was used by Cao andRamesh (2007) to examine whether the coordination mechanismssuggested by agile methods (e.g. co-located customers, short itera-tions) are consistent with the coordination mechanisms proposedby Van de Ven et al. (1976) (i.e. coordination by impersonal, per-sonal, and group modes). They proposed consistencies between theclassic coordination modes and agile practices in small projectsbut inconsistencies when using these methods in large projects.Thompson’s (1967) ideas on interdependencies and coordination(i.e. coordination by standardisation, planning, and mutual adjust-ment) were used by Barlow et al. (2011) to justify a theory-basedmethodology selection framework to guide large organisations inselecting between pure agile, pure plan-driven (Boehm and Turner,2004) or hybrid methodologies.Empirical research into coordination in agile software projectshas identiﬁed individual practices that contribute to coordina-tion. Pikkarainen et al. (2008) used Coordination Theory (Maloneand Crowston, 1994) to study two small co-located agile projectsand found sprint planning meetings, open ofﬁce space, and dailymeetings provide efﬁcient communication. Used together, thesepractices were found to promote informal communication and sub-stituted for documentation as a communication mechanism. Moeet al. (2010) studied a single co-located Scrum project where coor-dination suffered due to misapplication of Scrum practices partiallycaused by an existing organisational structure that promoted spe-cialisation of skills within individuals. This ultimately resulted inteam members “not knowing what the others were doing” (Moeet al., 2010, p. 488).Product backlog, sprint backlog, scrum board, and daily meet-ings were practices identiﬁed for achieving coordination in aglobally distributed Scrum project involving teams in India andDenmark. In this study, Pries-Heje and Pries-Heje (2011) identi-ﬁed coordination as one of four critical elements that explain whyScrum ‘works’ as a project management approach.Ethnographic studies of co-located XP teams by Sharp andRobinson (2004), and MacKenzie and Monk (2004) also drew atten-tion to speciﬁc coordination practices and artefacts. These studiesidentiﬁed story cards used for recording requirements, wallboardsdisplaying story cards and their progress to completion, unit tests,card games, and code repositories as practices for achieving coor-dination. Hoda et al. (2010) identiﬁed a ‘coordinator role’ in theirgrounded theory study and found people taking that role act asconduits for the transfer of information between the agile projectteam and the customer group.In summary, the various approaches for studying coordinationin the extant literature all evidence shortcomings in explaining orpredicting the effectiveness of agile software development. Coor-dination Theory is not suitable for prediction, although it is usefulfor identifying dependencies and coordination mechanisms. Fur-thermore, the three coordination research domains relevant to thestudy of agile software development –organisational,
 IS project,and teamwork –provide
 many coordination concepts that couldbe applied to the context of agile software development, and somestudies have made this link. However, those studies tend to describewhich practices act to achieve coordination, but do not attempt todevelop theory using coordination as a central lens.4. An initial conceptual frameworkThe general coordination framework shown in Fig. 1 is usefulfor positioning the present research. This framework is an exten-sion and simpliﬁcation of one previously proposed by Espinosaet al. (2004). Those authors melded previous coordination research,including items mentioned in the preceding literature review, intoa single framework. Their framework links dependencies, implicitand explicit coordination mechanisms, and a coordination out-come concept, with team performance in an input–process–outputmodel of coordination. Their framework has two focal coordinationconcepts: “coordinating” and “state of coordination.” Coordinatingis the managing of dependencies; it is the combination of differentcoordination mechanisms used within a project to achieve coordi-nation. In contrast, the state of coordination is the extent to whichthat coordination is effective. To clarify the distinction between thetwo concepts they are hereafter referred to as coordination strat-egy, which consists of coordination mechanisms occurring in agilesoftware development projects, and coordination effectiveness.Complexity and uncertainty were incorporated into the con-ceptual framework because these concepts are associated withcoordination in the organisation theory literature (Van de Ven et al.,1976), in the IS project literature (Barki et al., 1993; Xia and Lee,2005), and in the general project literature (Strauss, 1988).Coordina StrategyProject
SuccessCoor
 dinaon
 nessProjectComplexi
 tyand
Unce rtain
 tyOther
Antecedents
Coo rdinaon
 in agile
 e
 dev elopme
 nt project
 sFig. 1. Initial conceptual framework.Source: Adapted from Espinosa et al. (2004). 1226D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 1238Table 1Organisation, project, and data collection summary.CasesLand Storm SilverOrganisation type Government Commercial service provider Commercial software development ﬁrmOrganisation size 2000 in NZ 200 in Australasia, Asia and Europe 20 in NZProject purpose To improve the organisationsinteractions with the publicTo migrate a critical legacy system to a moderntechnology platformTo provide a new reporting system for anexternal clientContractual basis In-house development Independent contractors working on the clientsiteDevelopment for external clientDevelopment methodology Scrum Scrum and XP ScrumTeam size 6 10 5Interviews 2 5 4Roles of interviewees1
 Project manager1 Software developer1 Project manager2 Software developers1 Tester1 Domain expert1 Development manager1 Scrum coach2 DevelopersAs depicted in Fig. 1, coordination strategy, which is com-prised of a combination of coordination mechanisms in a situation,determines coordination effectiveness. Coordination effectivenessis represented as an antecedent to project success, but coordina-tion effectiveness is only one of a number of factors contributingto project success, as the literature review showed. A project maybe well coordinated yet be unsuccessful for reasons unrelated tocoordination, such as misinterpretation of requirements, or bud-getary and resource constraints. Therefore, to maintain a focus oncoordination, project success, and other antecedents are not con-sidered further in this study. Finally, complexity and uncertaintyare hypothesised to inﬂuence the project, but the exact nature ofthat relationship is unclear.This coordination framework, while general, provides a use-ful starting point for the present research. Data gathered from aﬁeld study (discussed below) will be analysed in order to developa more speciﬁc model of coordination which pertains directly toagile software projects.5. Research methodA positivist multi-case study research approach was selectedto explore the concepts of coordination strategy and coordina-tion effectiveness based on empirical data from ongoing softwaredevelopment projects. This approach is a well-accepted way toinvestigate phenomena in natural information system develop-ment contexts where events cannot be controlled and where it isimportant to capture the detail in a situation (Darke et al., 1998;Eisenhardt, 1989; Pare, 2004; Yin, 2003). Furthermore, this methodis suitable for building theory, which was the principal objective ofthe research (Eisenhardt and Graebner, 2007). To ensure acceptedstandards for validity and reliability, the study followed guide-lines developed by Dube and Pare (2003) for carrying out rigorousexploratory positivist case study research in the ﬁeld of informationsystems.5.1. Case selection strategyThe unit of analysis – the individual case – was a softwaredevelopment project with co-located participants. Case selectionfollowed a replication logic strategy, a tactic recommended in casestudy design (Eisenhardt, 1989; Miles and Huberman, 1994; Yin,2003) which involves selecting cases that are similar and thereforelikely to provide similar results (are literal replications) or selectingcases that are dissimilar and therefore likely to provide contrastingresults for predictable reasons (are theoretical replications).The study consisted of three literal replications. Each project wasa ‘typical’ case selected because it was expected to show normalor average characteristics (Pare, 2004). Case sites used the com-mon agile method Scrum, or Scrum with some additional practicesfrom Extreme Programming, with a team size between 2 and 10.Ten is the maximum team size recommended for effective use ofthese methods (Beck, 2000; Schwaber and Beedle, 2002). To distin-guish this research from that addressing distributed agile softwareprojects, all projects were required to have co-located teams. Vari-ability across the cases was maximised by selecting ‘polar types’ asrecommended by Eisenhardt and Graebner (2007) to provide bet-ter concept deﬁnition by accounting for a variety of contexts andfactors in the emergent theoretical concepts. To ensure variability,projects were selected from different types of organisation usingdifferent types of development contracts. Key details concerningthe three projects are provided in Table 1.Certain practical considerations also inﬂuenced case selection.Wellington, the capital city of New Zealand (NZ) was the location forall selected projects. Wellington is a centre for software develop-ment because government departments and company head ofﬁcesare located there. Selected projects had to be at least one-half com-pleted or completed within one month prior to the interviews.Consequently, all of the projects studied were well underway andparticipants were responding to current events. The software underdevelopment had to be at least moderately complex, and be of atleast moderate importance to the client or host organisation. A keyinformant was consulted and asked for their assessment of projectuncertainty and complexity while the project was being consideredfor selection.Cases were located through a not-for-proﬁt group, the AgileProfessionals Network (APN1), and from the researchers’ extensiveprofessional network. The aim of APN is to inform practitioners andtheir organisations about the agile approach by hosting monthlyseminars on agile adoption in organisations. Contacts within APNand speakers at seminars were approached and asked to suggestpotential projects for the study. A meeting was held with a keyorganisational contact to determine whether their project met theselection criteria. Not all people approached agreed to participate,and initial contacts were discontinued if their project did not meetthe selection criteria. Three projects were eventually selected andcode-named, Land, Storm, and Silver.5.2. Data collectionThe primary data collection method was semi-structuredinterviews of project team members. An interview scheduleappropriate for collecting data on coordination in software1APN: http://www.agileprofessionals.net/. D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 12381227development projects was developed based on suggestions byCrowston (1991) for identifying coordination mechanisms anddependencies, McChesney and Gallagher (2004) for softwareproject proﬁles, and Spradley (1979) for interviewing in naturalsituations. Spradley, for instance, suggests avoiding ‘why’ ques-tions to ensure that participants give a full and open range ofresponses. Therefore questions related to coordination and depen-dencies were not asked directly in the form of ‘why’ questions, e.g.“Why do you have a wallboard to show tasks?”, but more indirectlyas ‘how’ questions such as “how do you know what task to performwhen the current task is complete?”In each project, the ﬁrst interview was conducted with onesenior team member who could provide details on the project, itspurpose, background, history, and issues. This person was often aproject manager, but not in all cases, as not all teams included a for-mal project manager role. Following this interview, and dependingon team size, up to four other project team members includingdevelopers, analysts, domain experts, and testers, were inter-viewed for 1 to 1½ hours. As well as interview transcripts, sourcedata included ﬁeld notes taken during observations made whilevisiting work sites and attending meetings, project documents,photographs taken at the work sites, and questionnaire data. Ques-tionnaires were used in particular to gather data on the organisationand project details and the agile method practices used on theproject. The questionnaire items were adapted from items devel-oped for this purpose by Strode (2005).Interviews of project team members focused on three topics:speciﬁc questions about the participants’ background, open-endedquestions about the participants’ daily work practices, and eachinterview concluded with three speciﬁc questions designed to elicitperceptions of project coordination effectiveness:1. What makes this project well-coordinated?2. What interferes with coordination on this project?3. In your opinion, based on all of the software developmentprojects you have worked on, what is a well-coordinatedproject?5.3. Data analysisThe ﬁrst step in data analysis was to prepare a full descriptionof each case using a common framework. This description includeddetails of the organisation, the project, the technologies, the team,the development method, and any coordination problems in theproject that emerged during the interviews. The description wassent to one project participant for veriﬁcation, and any factualerrors found in the description were then corrected.Within-cases analysis was the second step in data analysis. Foreach case, this involved transcribing all interviews using a com-mon template and setting up a database of data obtained fromother sources. Transcript data was entered into the qualitativedata analysis tool NVivoTMfor ease of qualitative coding. A gen-eral inductive coding approach was followed (Miles and Huberman,1994; Thomas, 2006) beginning with starter codes based on con-cepts in the initial conceptual model (i.e. coordination strategy –formed from a variety of coordination mechanisms, and projectcomplexity and uncertainty). The aim of this analysis was to iden-tify dependencies and their associated coordination mechanismsbecause a coordination mechanism is only legitimate if it addressesa dependency (Malone and Crowston, 1994). Heuristics provided byCrowston and Osborn (2003) for analysing dependencies and coor-dination mechanisms in a situation were followed. Their procedureis as follows:Dependency-focused analysis. Identify dependencies, and thensearch for coordination mechanisms. In other words, look fordependencies and then ask which activities manage those depen-dencies. Failure to ﬁnd such activities might suggest potentiallyproblematic unmanaged dependencies.Activity-focused analysis. Identify coordination mechanisms, andthen search for dependencies. In other words, identify activities inthe process that appear to be coordination activities, and then askwhat dependencies those activities manage. This approach asksdirectly whether all observed coordination activities are necessary(Crowston and Osborn, 2003, p. 352).Each case was analysed using both dependency-focused andactivity-focused analysis. The unit of data was a sentence orshort paragraph, depending on the amount of conversational textrequired to convey the participants’ meaning.Codes identiﬁed in the ﬁrst case were used as starter codes forthe second case, and codes from the second case acted as startercodes for the third case. In addition, new codes were added as theyemerged from each case during the dependency and coordinationmechanism analysis. By way of illustration, Table 2 lists a numberof the coordination mechanism codes identiﬁed in one case, projectStorm. For descriptions of the agile practices used in the projects inthis study, many of which were identiﬁed as coordination mecha-nisms, see Strode (2005) or Williams (2010).In Table 2, Column A shows individual coordination mechanismsﬁrst identiﬁed in the case, while Columns B and C show higher-levelcategories formed after identifying similarities in the coordinationmechanisms in Column A. These higher-level categories formedthe basis of a coordination strategy for the project. Information tosupport the coordination strategy concept was also drawn fromthe project coordination issues found in the case, and any unman-aged dependencies identiﬁed. Further, evidence of the inﬂuence ofproject complexity, and project uncertainty on coordination strat-egy was noted, along with any other antecedents inﬂuencing thecoordination strategy. Outcomes of the coordination strategy werealso identiﬁed to assist in forming the coordination effectivenessconcept.Table 2A sample of codes from case Storm.AB CCoordination mechanism code Coordination mechanismcategoryFrequency ofoccurrenceDomain specialist on teamSynchronisationactivitiesProjectBreakdown session IterationAssignment of task to self IterationDaily stand-up DailyCross-team talk Ad hocContinuous build Ad hocProduct backlogSynchronisationartefactsNot applicable(n/a)Wallboard n/aUser story n/aDone list n/aWorking softwaren/a
Project wiki n/aWorkshop to generate backlogBoundary spanningactivityProjectSoftware demo to user IterationDedicated time forconsultationDailyFormal meetingAd
 hocInformal negotiation Ad hocList of user acceptance tests Boundary spanningartefactAd hocSingle priority team Availability n/aTeam member co-locationProximityn/a
Redundant skill Substitutability n/aTesterCoordinator
 role n/aProject manager n/a 1228D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 1238Cross-case analysis, the third step in data analysis, involvedblending the individual project coordination strategies to forma single generic coordination strategy concept. In a separatecross-case analysis, the coordination effectiveness concept wasdeveloped based on responses to the three speciﬁc questions oncoordination effectiveness presented above.6. Case descriptionsThis section describes each of the three projects including theircoordination problems, and development methodology.6.1. LandProject Land took place in a Government department. Thisproject was highly important to the organisation and its purposewas to improve the organisation’s interaction with the public byproviding a better level of service on the public web site. Thisinvolved redeveloping the site using current technologies. Anotheraim of the project was to streamline internal processing of requestsfor service from the public. The IT section had experienced a lackof success with recent projects, so when this project began theproject manager convinced management to trial the Scrum method.This person was self-taught in Scrum, whereas the single devel-oper on the project had worked in a Scrum project previously inanother company. None of the other team members had experi-ence with agile development. The end-users of the software werelocated throughout New Zealand and had little direct inﬂuence onthe project. The project had a strict time limit because the singledeveloper was leaving on a speciﬁc date, and his expertise was notavailable elsewhere in the organisation, therefore it was imperativethat the project be completed before he left.Coordination problems in Land were related to the lack of con-sistent availability and proximity of all team members. The keydeveloper was not working full-time, and the other team mem-bers were not devoted full-time to the project. Although the projectteam consisted of six people, three of them were domain and tech-nical experts whose role was to elaborate the system requirements.These people formed a management sub-team that was not co-located with the development sub-team. This caused time delaysin clarifying requirements, and the project manager had to makeadditional efforts to achieve coordination with the managementsub-team. The project manager explained:“. . .Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday was building [the software].Thursday morning was a get together [. . .]. Now it wasn’t sup-posed to be ‘show and tell’ of what we had done so far, becausewe were supposed to be communicating with them daily, butunfortunately some of the business people were involved in[another project] that was [due] to be delivered to the exec-utive leadership team. So poor Brian was all day in meetingsand so trying to get hold of him sometimes was a little bit dif-ﬁcult. So, we found that the Thursday morning became a catchup to see where we were all at, formally as a group, as opposedto me talking to each person individually, which I did a lot ofas well. So Thursday morning became a bit of a ‘show and tell’,decide what user stories were going to be in the next iteration,size those, and then do the design work for it.” [Land, Projectmanager]The project manager explained the impact this had on her work:“I was just forever either picking up the phone, or if it wasgoing to be a longer conversation, that needed to show themsomething, I would wander upstairs, or them if they weren’taround so at least the question had been posed to them, andthey would get back to me and we would get together. But itwould have been so much nicer if they had been [co-located]actually.” [Project manager, Land]The underlying cause for this coordination problem was the way theorganisation was structured. A matrix organisation structure meantthe management sub-team members were not assigned exclusivelyto a single project.Land followed a Scrum process that began with an iterationzero for planning, and then maintained a strict weekly sprintwith particular activities scheduled on certain days of the weekorganised to accommodate the lack of availability and proximityof all team members. Each sprint included one main meeting toreport progress and carry out requirements deﬁnition. Whole-teammeetings outside of these scheduled meetings were uncommon.Ad hoc meetings normally involved the project manager havingdiscussions with individual team members. A shared documentmanagement system gave all team members access to project doc-uments. Two main project documents were used: one showedproject progress in the form of user stories and their completionstatus, and the other was a requirements and design speciﬁcationdocument. A wallboard to display user stories and project progresswas not used in this project.6.2. StormProject Storm took place in a quasi-public sector organisation(an SOE2). This organisation provided critical infrastructure to theNew Zealand economy and worked closely with international agen-cies. The project involved the migration of a complex and key legacysystem, which underpinned the activities of the whole organisa-tion, to a new technology platform. When the project began, it wascontracted to a project manager who selected a team of 10 con-tractors to develop the new system. Team members were selectedbecause they possessed strong technical ability, had good commu-nication skills, and were adept at working in a team. The teammembers all worked full-time on site in a single large room. Theend-users of the software were highly skilled engineers located inthe same building, in a separate room. The engineers were freelyavailable for consultation on requirements during most workinghours. However, they worked shift work, so it was not alwayspossible to consult with a particular individual. This coordinationproblem was handled by forming a special group, as the testerexplained:“Well because they are on crazy shifts you know they run 24-7 at [the organisation], so they are on really wild shifts. We’vemanaged to grab a team of four who are what we call our betatesters so generally there will be one of those persons on everyday that we can always have an ear with.” [Tester, Storm]Coordination problems in Storm occurred when interacting withthe wider organisation, other organisations, and the engineers. Theproject manager and the tester who took coordination roles withinthe project team primarily handled these problems. The tester wasa person highly skilled at communicating both within the teamand with external parties. Coordinating with other business unitsand understanding their needs was achieved by drafting a perma-nent employee of the host organisation into the team to provideadditional technical domain knowledge. This person had workedfor the organisation for many years, and provided an important2State-Owned-Enterprises: “SOEs are businesses (typically companies) listed inthe First Schedule to the State-Owned Enterprises Act 1986. SOEs operate as com-mercial businesses but are owned by the State. They have boards of directors,appointed by shareholding Ministers to take full responsibility for running thebusiness”. Sourced from The Treasury, New Zealand Government. 13 April 2011.http://www.treasury.govt.nz/glossary/soe. D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 12381229bridge from the project to other business units within the hostorganisation because he knew who to go to within the organisationfor information and assistance. Occasionally, hold-ups occurred atrandom when there was critical work occurring in the engineersgroup and that work always took priority over consultation withthe development team.Storm followed a ﬂexible Scrum process. An iteration zero wasused to set up the project and write an initial set of user stories. Thiswas followed by two-week iterations, but as the project progressed,that was adjusted to a one-week timeframe. The project managerexplained:“So we started with very very structured two week iterations.What we found was when we then took all of the stories fromthe backlogs that we were working on for two weeks worth ofwork and tried to do task breakdown on them, we ended up withtoo much time to do a task breakdown for that much work. Ifyou can imagine nine developers, you can get through a lot. Sothat would become hours and hours to get through that taskbreakdown and it was a pain, so we actually shifted to a bit ofan informal one-week process. One week iteration, so we tendto take the next stories from the backlog and break them intotasks on a one week rotation.” [Project manager, Storm]Otherwise, project Storm used the typical Scrum practices of post-ing user stories and tasks on a wallboard, having daily stand-upmeetings, adjusting the wallboard tasks at these stand-ups, andhaving regular sessions for prioritising and sizing user stories andperforming task breakdown (breaking user stories into individualtasks). Sub-teams were assigned to various sub-projects, and theyhad separate meetings to discuss issues and develop new storiesand tasks as and when necessary. Whole-team meetings held atthe start of the project, during each iteration, and daily were inter-spersed with ad hoc meetings between team members, and alsobetween team members and the engineers. The tester describedthese ad hoc sessions thusly:“So there might be a couple of chit chat sessions where theywhiteboard some data models up, and things, and then they’llgo off and do it. Then, at the end of that they’ll probably grab afew people and say, “look, I’ll show you what I’ve done and themethod’s here to call this”, and everyone’s like “great great nowI know how to do it”.” [Tester, Storm]6.3. SilverProject Silver took place in a small, privately owned softwaredevelopment company specialising in software products for Gov-ernment and quasi-government agencies. The client in projectSilver was a not-for-proﬁt organisation providing services to theHealth sector. The new software was to replace an outdated andinadequate records management system. The ﬁve developers wereall new to agile methods when the project began, and a consultantScrum coach was employed to assist them for most of the project.Coordination problems in Silver were primarily due to a seri-ous issue with inadequate responsiveness from the client andthe team’s inability to consult freely with the end-users. Theclient organisation used management representatives to provide allrequirements, but these people were not end-users of the existingsystem. The client did not allow the development team to interactdirectly with the end-user group for budgetary reasons, which cre-ated a major blockage in the progress of development. End-userscould not collaborate on requirements details, the client organisa-tion was tardy when installing a test version of the new system, andfeedback in the form of acceptance testing was slow and inconsis-tent. Each participant noted this problem with the client and itsimpact on the project. Here are two perspectives on the problem:“We deﬁnitely had co-ordination problems between us and theend user. I get the impression a lot of that was political withinthe [client] organisation themselves and I, my personal opinionis that was detrimental to the project it really was. The bits thatworked, worked well, but yeah, there was this big bottleneck.”[Silver, Senior Developer]“Ok, ‘what do you want to have in this dropdown of educationalinstitutions?’ We had sent data in an Excel spreadsheet to [theclient] a week ago, ‘Can you please take out those that are notused’. I had, in my calendar, every two days, follow up Neil [theclient], follow up with Neil, have you had a chance to have a lookat this yet, have you had a chance to look at this yet, have youfound out yet, and there would be notes, nag Neil, nag Neil, nagNeil.” [Silver, Development Manager]This problem with the client blocked progress at times and madethe team change the way they dealt with tasks:“. . .we had one of the columns [on the wall board], we had– apart from ‘in progress’ and ‘test complete’ – was a columncalled ‘blocked’. And if you found yourself blocked you put [thetask sticky-note] up there, it may be you were waiting for a ques-tion from the [client] you know, we’ve asked the question weare waiting for an answer, we can’t do any more on that untilwe get the answer to work out what we are going to do.” [Silver,Senior Developer]Occasionally, this situation meant the project team dropped incom-plete stories from the sprint:“we have sometimes, once or twice, taken stories out of thesprint because we couldn’t get the information. And sometimesit was relatively high. . .priority stories that we could not imple-ment in a subsequent Sprint, because we did not have enoughinformation because they did not come back to us.” [ScrumCoach, Silver]Silver followed a Scrum process with some standard XP prac-tices. The project had an initial iteration for planning, generating‘epics’ (high-level requirements that can be broken down into userstories), deciding on the development environment, and spiking(coding a problem to see if it is achievable). Iterations were twoweeks in length throughout the project duration. The iterationsinvolved a sprint planning meeting, a retrospective at the end ofthe sprint, and a product demonstration to the client. The softwarewas released at the end of each sprint to a test environment at theclient site. Daily stand-ups were used, along with numerous ad hocmeetings. The developers were all seated in the same room and eas-ily visible to one another; as well, they could easily view the walldisplaying user stories, tasks, the done list and burn down chart.The team communicated directly with one another on problems,for example when asked how they solved problems one partici-pant said, “Shout. Just verbal. If it was something that was of a morepersistent nature we’d circulate an email”. [Silver, Senior Developer]In developing the theoretical model presented in the nextsection we draw on these variations in methodology use, thecoordination issues encountered, and a detailed analysis of thecoordination mechanisms identiﬁed in each of the three projects.7. A theoretical model of coordination in co-located agilesoftware development projectsA theoretical model of coordination in co-located agile softwaredevelopment projects was developed by combining evidence fromeach of the three cases, as described in the data analysis section. Thissection presents the resultant theory in three parts: coordinationstrategy, coordination effectiveness, and propositions deﬁning therelationship between them. The theory is depicted in Fig. 2. 1230D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 1238Fig. 2. A theory of coordination in agile software development projects.7.1. The coordination strategy conceptWe deﬁne a coordination strategy as a group of coordinationmechanisms that manage dependencies in a situation. These mech-anisms form a strategy because they are selected consciously byproject stakeholders, rather than occurring by chance. In analysis,an activity or artefact was categorised as a coordination mechanismonly when it was associated with one or more distinct dependen-cies (this article does not discuss dependencies any further for spacereasons). Development of a coordination strategy concept involvedﬁrst identifying the individual coordination strategy of each caseand then amalgamating all strategies to form a generic coordinationstrategy concept. The resultant concept has three distinct compo-nents: synchronisation, structure, and boundary spanning. Table 3provides deﬁnitions and illustrative evidence from the case data foreach of these concepts and their component parts.7.1.1. SynchronisationSynchronisation was achieved with synchronisation activitiesand synchronisation artefacts produced and used during thoseactivities.Synchronisation activities are activities that bring all of theproject team members together at the same time and place for somepre-arranged purpose. These activities occur at different frequen-cies: once per project, once per iteration, daily, and ad hoc (i.e. asand when necessary). Activities at each of the frequencies are nowconsidered in turn.Project synchronisation activities occur once during the project.All projects used an initial iteration zero for discussing techni-cal decisions, developing an initial high-level project scope in theform of epics (high-level stories), and deﬁning initial require-ments by writing user stories. This is often referred to as ‘sprintzero’ on Scrum projects because little production development D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 12381231Table 3Deﬁnitions of coordination strategy components.Component Deﬁnition EvidenceSynchronisationSynchronisationactivityActivities performed by all team members simultaneouslythat promote a common understanding of the task,process, and or expertise of other team members“I think the weekly meetings. We had a weekly kind ofcatch up where everybody attended and I think that wasreally important to just make sure everyone was on thesame page and no one was drifting too much.” [Land,Software Developer]SynchronisationartefactAn artefact generated during synchronisation activities.The nature of the artefact may be visible to the whole teamat a glance or largely invisible but available. An artefact canbe physical or virtual, temporary or permanent[Storm – photograph of wallboard]StructureProximityThis
 is the physical closeness of individual team members.Adjacent desks provide the highest level of proximity“We deﬁnitely had a daily team meeting on the IT side of it.The business members were not necessarily alwaysinvolved in that, which is again largely around the lack ofco-location. . .”. [Land Project Manager]Availability Team members are continually present and able torespond to requests for assistance or information“But you know the developers are right there and we justturn around and involve one of them in the discussions.”[Storm, Tester]Substitutability Team members are able to perform the work of another tomaintain time schedules“. . . in the beginning, [Steve], who did not know C#, I had aconversation with him, about how he did not feelcomfortable. So, I told him, ‘I . . . didn’t care, I was happy totake him on. . .and, if you can’t do it by yourself, getsomeone to help you, pair, get someone to explain it toyou. I don’t care. We are not going to have specialist areaswere one person can only do a certain type of code’. Andthat went for coding, testing, and making user stories.”[Scrum Coach, Silver]“So a Developer, if he wants his story to be done, . . . if theysee a couple of test tasks hanging on there for a goodcouple of days, they may just say “Sam, do you want me todo these, you look pretty busy there”, and they’ll go off anddo them.” [Storm, Tester]BoundaryspanningBoundary spanningactivityActivities (team or individual) performed to elicitassistance or information from some unit or organisationexternal to the project“. . .the main people we annoy with that are the operationsgroup, are the infrastructure. The people who look afterthe servers; and we suddenly go “oh by the way in twoweeks we want to release this new thing to you” and theygo “well I’m not sure I can be ready in two weeks” and yougo [rolls his eyes].” [Storm, Project Manager]Boundary spanningartefactAn artefact produced to enable coordination beyond theteam and project boundaries. The nature of the artefactmay be visible to the whole team at a glance or largelyinvisible but available. An artefact can be physical orvirtual, temporary or permanent“. . .so when a [end user] does come down me it’s like “Iwas trying out this screen Sam and it doesn’t seem towork” [Storm, Tester]The artefact in this quote is the working software acting asa coordination mechanism between the end user and thetesterCoordinator role A role taken by a project team member speciﬁcally tosupport interaction with people who are not part of theproject team but who provide resources or information tothe project“They [the engineers] always pop down and talk to me ifthey are experiencing anything, an issue, and I generallyend up being a bit of an entry point for them into the restof the team because I guess I talk to them a lot more than,you know, everyone else does. I arrange meetings.” [Tester,Storm]occurs during this iteration. Project synchronisation activitiesalso occurred during the project, for instance, in Storm, aftera number of sprints were complete, a domain specialist fromanother business unit was drafted into the team to provideeasy access to in-depth knowledge about the legacy system. Thisperson was located in the project room with the team, andwas continuously available for consultation by everyone on theteam.Iteration synchronisation activities occur once per iteration. Aniteration (also called a ‘time box’ or ‘sprint’), is a length of time usu-ally consisting of a number of whole days. Land used a one-weekiteration, Storm and Silver used a two-week iteration. Within eachiteration, and on all projects, a regular sequence of activities wasperformed. For example, in Silver, a sprint planning session washeld at the start of each iteration. This involved the whole teamselecting user stories from the prioritised backlog, writing manualacceptance tests for each story (each developer wrote the test forone story), decomposing stories into tasks, and ﬁnally placing thestories and tasks onto the project wallboard. Silver held a ‘retro-spective’ at the end of the iteration when the whole team met todiscuss improvement to practices, and new practices to introduceinto the iteration: 1232D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 1238“. . .we are very few people so [the retrospective] is a conversa-tion, which is – what did we like, how did we perform? We setout to do velocity 45 we achieved 40. How do we feel about it?What was the reason? Is that good, is that bad? And what did welike about the last Sprint? What did we hate, did we try any ofthose things that we were giving two weeks and how did theygo, do we want to keep them, do we want to abolish them?”[Scrum Coach, Silver]Another example of an iteration synchronisation activity involvedpreparing for the product demonstration and the subsequentrelease of software to the client site. In Silver, this involved ﬁrstselecting a demonstrator from the team using “a process of draw-ing straws to nominate who is going to demonstrate to the business”[Developer, Silver]. The demonstrator’s job included preparing ascript for the demonstration, “a process that we could follow so thatwhoever was doing the demo could do it in a fairly coherent fashion.”[Developer, Silver]. This sharing of responsibility for the demon-strations extended the demonstrators knowledge of the code basebecause they had to come to understand story code written byother developers in the team by consulting with them directly. Testdata was prepared for the demonstration and regression testingensured the demonstration would run smoothly and the softwarewould be suitable for release immediately following the demon-stration. Sometimes the demonstrator would ﬁnd bugs that had tobe ﬁxed quickly before the demonstration. The whole team wouldthen become involved to resolve these bugs, which could arise fromany stories worked on in the iteration:“We also had the last half day, panic. Because once we startedscripting the demo, it was not just testing on a user story level,but all those user stories interacting with each other, so we usu-ally found some stuff that needed ﬁxing. And sometimes we tookout user stories, because we thought they were completed, butwe found a bug, so we removed them from the demo.” [ScrumCoach, Silver]Daily synchronisation activities occurred in all projects. This con-sisted of a brief whole-team meeting at the start of the day wheneach team member stated their current situation and any issuesor problems impeding their progress. In Land, these meetings tookplace very informally between the project manager and the sin-gle developer who had adjacent desks. In Storm and Silver, withlarger teams, a ‘stand-up’ meeting was held in front of the wall-board located on one of the walls in the room. The position of taskson the wallboard were adjusted at these meetings to reﬂect theircurrent progress to completion (see photograph in Table 3).At 9:25 am, there was a stand-up meeting attended by all 10project members. This was held in front of the wallboard, whichtook up most of one wall in the room where everyone worked.Each team member in turn described yesterday’s progress, andany issues he or she currently faced. This meeting ﬁnished at9:35 am. [Field notes, Storm]Ad hoc synchronisation activities occur as and when needed. InStorm, ad hoc sessions involving all of the team or sub-groups ofthe team were common. The people would sit together at a deskprovided in a corner of their ofﬁce to discuss and clarify theirissues or problems. In Storm and Silver, ad hoc synchronisationwas also achieved using continuous builds with automated testingwhich informed the whole team of the status of the software underdevelopment. Silver, the project with difﬁculties in getting timelyfeedback from their customer representatives, used a product back-log maintenance session when, at random intervals, usually abouttwice per sprint, the whole team would sit and discuss stories andsize them. The purpose was to maintain the backlog so that it heldenough stories to cover one to one-and-a-half sprints. Land, withtheir team distributed around a building, reported no ad hoc syn-chronisation activities involving all of the team. This project reliedsolely on a weekly meeting and a project manager contacting teammembers individually during the week about any issues affectingprogress such as decisions on requirements.Synchronisation artefacts are things produced during synchroni-sation activities that contain information used by all team membersin accomplishing their work. These artefacts included working soft-ware, product backlog, epics, stories, tasks, the wallboard, Donelists, burn-down charts, project information repositories such aswikis or the RallyTMapplication,3and shared document systems.In Land, there was no wallboard, stories were developed andstored in a shared document, and a continuously evolving designspeciﬁcation document was the primary source of project designinformation. The single developer on the project described this doc-ument as the “one source of truth” [Developer, Land] in the project.7.1.2. StructureThe second component of coordination strategy is termed“structure.” We use structure in its common sense as the arrange-ment of, and relations between, the parts of something complex.Three categories of coordination mechanism were deemed to havestructural qualities: proximity, availability, and substitutability.Close proximity of the whole team is a feature of agile softwaredevelopment methods. All project team members should be locatedin the same open-plan room without divisions between desks topromote an easy ﬂow of communication (Beck, 2000; Schwaberand Beedle, 2002). This was achieved in Storm and Silver who hadspecial project rooms set aside for their use. In Land, close prox-imity was not achieved and was detrimental to coordination in theproject, as discussed in the case description.Availability is another feature of agile development becauseteam members work full-time on a single project. Availability wasachieved readily in Storm and Silver because project team membersworked full-time on the project and were all in the room togetherfor most of the day. In Land, lack of availability caused coordinationproblems. Individuals were not readily available for consultationbecause they were not devoted to a single project and the developerwas not at work one day each week. Their mechanism for copingwith this situation was to have an inﬂexible sequence of activitieswithin each iteration to ensure people set aside time to participatein joint activities, for example:“The reason for the one week iteration is our developer waspart time working only four days a week so what we decidedwe would do was we would keep the ﬁfth day for testing sothe rest of us would test what he had built. [This also meant]we would do our iteration planning on the Thursday for thefollowing week, while he was still here.” [Land, Project Manager]Substitutability is when team members have the expertise and skillsto perform the tasks of another to maintain the project sched-ule. Substitutability was achieved with a coordination mechanismnamed ‘redundant skill’, which improved coordination by reducingworkﬂow bottlenecks. In Storm, redundant skills were apparentbecause the project manager selected the 10 contractors on theproject team speciﬁcally for their similar skills. In Land, roles werenot substitutable, although some crossover occurred by chancebecause the project manager had database skills, and the developerhad web design skills. In Silver, the Scrum Coach made a specialeffort to encourage skill sharing by supporting helping behaviours(Table 3 provides a relevant quote).3A software product for supporting the Scrum methodology. D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 12381233In Storm, skill redundancy, or substitutability, improved work-ﬂow. For example, when a developer saw a test task was blockingthe progress of the story he was working on, he could choose tocomplete the test himself, rather than wait for the tester to do thetest task (Table 3 provides a relevant quote).7.1.3. Boundary spanningBoundary spanning is the third component of coordinationstrategy that emerged from the case analyses. Boundary spanningoccurs when someone within the project must interact with otherorganisations, or other business units, outside of the project toachieve project goals. There are three aspects to boundary span-ning: boundary spanning activities, the production of boundaryspanning artefacts, and coordinator roles. Boundary spanning isincluded in the model because the timeliness of responses by exter-nal parties to project needs has an impact on project progress. Incontrast to the synchronisation and structure components of coor-dination, these activities are normally not team-wide, nor are theyperformed in subgroups. Individuals on the team performed themwhen the project needed information, support, or resources fromother organisational units or external organisations.Boundary spanning activity is well recognised in studies oforganisations and projects. It occurs when different organisations,or groups within organisations, separated by location, hierarchy,or function, interact to share expertise (Levina and Vaast, 2005).In the projects, boundary spanning activities occurred at three fre-quencies, per project, per iteration, and ad hoc. The frequency ofboundary spanning activities was inﬂuenced by the way the cus-tomer, or their representatives, was situated relative to the projectteam. In Land, customer proxies were part of the team and con-sequently they participated in all of the synchronisation activitiesand production of synchronisation artefacts. This meant bound-ary spanning in Land was minimal involving occasional contactbetween the developer and the IT support group. In Storm, cus-tomer proxies were not part of the team and interactions with thisgroup, the engineers, involved numerous and continuous bound-ary spanning activities. At project frequency, examples include aninitial workshop to prioritise stories, and selection of four engi-neers to act as beta testers. These engineers became preferredpeople for team members to contact for requirements clariﬁca-tion and user acceptance testing feedback. Boundary spanning alsooccurred with the whole engineering group per iteration whenthe team gave software demonstrations to the engineers. Iter-ation frequency boundary spanning activities included sessionswith the whole team and individual engineers for story creationand prioritisation. Ad hoc meetings between members of thedevelopment team and the engineers were frequent and includedformal and informal meetings, and unscheduled breakdownsessions.Another boundary spanning activity in Storm was to send aselected project team member out for extended periods to workwith another business unit to learn about the requirements ortechnical aspects of another system that would later be integratedwith the new system. Silver achieved boundary spanning with theircustomer proxies by adhering to a strict per iteration schedule toensure they had regular contact and feedback from their customer.Ad hoc boundary spanning activity was severely limited due to theproblems with customer availability.Boundary spanning artefacts are physical things produced to sup-port boundary-spanning activities and enable coordination beyondthe team and project boundaries. For example, Land producedproject management plans for their project management ofﬁce, andRequest for Change forms for the IT support unit when additionalservers were required. In Storm, a single document was sent to theengineers to guide their User Acceptance Testing:“I send them out a kind of . . . worksheet of things [a list of tests]that I would like to see them looking at, although I try not to tellthem what to do, otherwise they are going to do exactly what Iwould have done.” [Tester, Storm]In Silver, the Scrum coach produced a project plan for the manage-ment of the organisation to provide them with feedback on projectprogress.Coordinator role was another coordination mechanism toaccomplish boundary spanning. In Land and Storm, the projectmanager acted as a coordinator between the organisation manage-ment and the project team by providing reports to managementon progress, and by gathering information need by the team fromother organisations and business units. In Storm, the tester actedas a coordinator between the engineers and the project team, heexplained his role this way: “and I generally end being a bit of anentry point for them [the engineers] into the rest of the team becauseI guess I talk to them a lot more than, you know, everyone else does. Iarrange meetings.” [Tester, Storm].7.2. The coordination effectiveness concept“Coordination effectiveness” is the dependent variable in themodel depicted in Fig. 2. A particular coordination strategy resultsin a certain level of coordination effectiveness. Coordination effec-tiveness is deﬁned as the state of coordination achieved in a projectgiven the execution of a particular coordination strategy; in otherwords, it is the outcome of that coordination strategy. In relatedwork, Strode et al. (2011) describes the development of this con-cept and provides evidence from the same three cases presented inthis article, along with one other case of non-agile software devel-opment. Their concept of coordination effectiveness is summarisedbrieﬂy here.Coordination effectiveness has an implicit and an explicit com-ponent. The explicit component encompasses the objects (personsor artefacts) involved in a project. Borrowing from CoordinationTheory (Malone and Crowston, 1994) and Crowston’s (2003) tax-onomy of generic dependencies and coordination mechanisms, aproject is coordinated effectively when a required object is in thecorrect place, at the correct time and in a state of readiness for usefrom the perspective of each individual involved in the project.In contrast to explicit coordination, which emphasises physi-cal objects, implicit coordination is concerned with coordinationthat occurs within work groups without explicit speech or messagepassing, as discussed in the teamwork literature on coordination.Implicit coordination encompasses ﬁve components: ‘Know why’,‘Know what is going on and when’, ‘Know what to do and when’, ‘Knowwho is doing what’, and ‘Know who knows what’.‘Know why’ encompasses each individual working on the projectunderstanding the overall project goal and understanding how atask contributes to that overall goal. ‘Know what is going on andwhen’ is concerned with each individual working on the projecthaving an overall idea about the project status, that is, tasks thatare currently underway and tasks that need to be performed in thefuture. ‘Know what to do and when’ is concerned with each indi-vidual working on the project knowing what task they should beworking on and when they should be working on that task relativeto all of the other tasks that must be completed. ‘Know who is doingwhat’ concerns each individual on the project knowing what tasksothers are currently working on. Finally, ‘Know who knows what’addresses expertise location. This component is supported by evi-dence from research conducted by Faraj and Sproull (2000) intoexpertise coordination in software development projects.A deﬁnition of coordination effectiveness is as follows:“Coordination effectiveness is a state of coordinationwherein the entire agile software development team has a 1234D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 1238CoE
 ec
 nessImpli citKnowwhy
(shared
goal)Knowwhat
 isgoingon
and
 when
Know
what to doand
 when
Know
 whois doing
what
Know who
kno wswhat
Explicit
Right
plac
 eRight
 thing
Right e
Fig. 3. Components of coordination effectiveness from Strode et al. (2011).comprehensive understanding of the project goal, the projectpriorities, what is going on and when, what they as individualsneed to do and when, who is doing what, and how eachindividuals work ﬁts in with other team members work. Inaddition, every object (thing or resource) needed to meet aproject goal is in the correct place or location at the correcttime and in a state of readiness for use from the perspective ofeach individual involved in the project.” (Strode et al., 2011,p. 10)Fig. 3 illustrates the conceptualisation of coordination effective-ness.7.3. Propositions linking the coordination conceptsThe coordination strategy–coordination effectiveness modelshown in Fig. 2 was derived through a qualitative analysis of casestudy data. We propose this model not as a ﬁnished product, but asa starting point for understanding the key constructs and relation-ships comprising coordination in agile development projects. Toelaborate the proposed model, we provide a rationale for each linkin the form of tentative propositions. Each proposition is illustratedin Fig. 2, and discussed below.The primary relationship proposed in this theory is that thecoordination strategy employed in an agile software project leads tocoordination effectiveness. However, the coordination strategy dif-fers depending on how the customer is associated with the project.When the customer, or their representative, is part of the teamthen a project coordination strategy that includes synchronisationand structural coordination mechanisms, will lead to high levels ofcoordination effectiveness. Synchronisation activities must occur ateach frequency – project, iteration, daily, and ad hoc. Synchronisa-tion artefacts must be produced at each frequency and the nature ofthe artefact must be visible to the whole team at a glance or largelyinvisible but available (e.g. available in RallyTM). An artefact can bephysical or virtual, temporary or permanent. Structural coordina-tion mechanisms, that is, proximity, availability, and substitutabil-ity must all be at high levels. When the customer is part of the team,this attenuates coordination mechanisms for boundary spanning.These mechanisms are still necessary for interactions with externalparties, for example requesting a server from the IT section, but thisform of coordination is needed relatively infrequently.However, when the customer, or their representative, is not partof the team then the project coordination strategy becomes morecomplex. In this situation, the coordination strategy includes thecoordination mechanisms of synchronisation and structure alongwith multiple coordination mechanisms for boundary spanning.Boundary spanning then includes boundary-spanning activitiesat each of the frequencies –project,
 iteration, and ad hoc, andthe production of boundary spanning artefacts at each of thesefrequencies. In addition, it may become necessary for one or moreproject team members to take a coordinator role. When the cus-tomer is external to the team, boundary-spanning coordinationmechanisms increase in frequency because they are the means bywhich a continuous supply of information is fed into the project.This information comes from customers, and is necessary for build-ing the product backlog and for providing requirements and featuredetails. Information may also come via informal (ad hoc) feed-back from the customer on the quality of working software, ormore formally as the result of user acceptance testing. This leads toProposition 1, which has two parts:Proposition 1a. A coordination strategy that includes synchro-nisation and structure coordination mechanisms improves projectcoordination effectiveness when the customer is included in the projectteam. Synchronisation activities and associated artefacts are requiredat all frequencies –project,
 iteration, daily, and ad hoc.Proposition 1b. A coordination strategy that includes synchroni-sation, structure, and boundary spanning coordination mechanismsimproves project coordination effectiveness when the customer is anexternal party to the project. Synchronisation activities and associ-ated artefacts are required at all frequencies – project, iteration, daily,and ad hoc. Boundary spanning activities and associated artefacts arerequired at all frequencies – project, iteration, and ad hoc.Proposition 1 treats coordination effectiveness as a unitary con-cept and makes no distinction between the effect of coordinationstrategy on the implicit and explicit components of coordinationeffectiveness. Many coordination mechanisms contribute to bothimplicit and explicit coordination. However, some coordinationmechanisms tend to promote implicit coordination whereas otherspromote explicit coordination. The following propositions reﬂectthis tendency. Note that in the following discussion the com-ponents of implicit coordination, as deﬁned in the coordinationeffectiveness section, are italicised.Synchronisation activities and their associated artefactsincrease implicit coordination. For example, the whole team is ableto ﬁnd out what is going on and when, and knows what to do andwhen by participating in epic creation during iteration zero, and bylooking at the current state of the wallboard displaying currentlyopen stories and the completion status of tasks. The team is ableto know who is doing what by viewing the avatar attached to atask, by ‘asking the room’ [Silver, Developer], or by attending andparticipating in the daily stand-up meeting. Therefore:Proposition 2. Synchronisation activities at all frequencies – project,iteration, daily, and ad hoc, along with their associated synchronisationartefacts, increase implicit coordination effectiveness.When project team members are in close proximity, especiallywhen they are in the same room with adjacent desks, they becomemore aware of the work of other team members by observing andover-hearing their activities. They may also become familiar withhow their own task ﬁts with others’ tasks; in other words, theyknow why they are performing their task. In addition, they learnwhat is going on and when, they come to know who is doing what,and they become aware of who knows what.When a project team member is consistently and freelyavailable, other team members can readily consult that personwhenever they need to and at short notice. Availability thereforeraises project team members’ awareness about who knows what inthe project.When project team members can perform each other’s tasksbecause they have overlapping skill sets this is substitutability. Sub-stitutability raises awareness about who knows what because toperform the work of another, you come to understand what theyknow and do not know. Therefore: D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 12381235Proposition 3. Structural coordination mechanisms i.e. close prox-imity, high availability, and high substitutability, increase implicitcoordination effectiveness.The purpose of boundary spanning is to acquire resources for theproject. Resources may be physical (e.g. servers) or informational(information about requirements or the technical domain). Activ-ities such as meetings with vendors and customers, artefacts suchas ofﬁcial requests, and someone on the project team taking a coor-dinator role all contribute to boundary spanning and ensuring thatrequired resources, the right things, are in the right place, at the righttime, so that project progress is not hindered in any way. Therefore:Proposition 4. High levels of boundary spanning coordinationmechanisms, i.e. boundary spanning activities at all frequencies –project, iteration, and ad hoc, their associated boundary spanningartefacts, and a coordinator role, increases explicit coordination effec-tiveness.Project complexity can be handled by increasing the frequencyof iterations. Project Storm used this tactic to cope better withunmanageably complex story-breakdown sessions. Shorter itera-tions mean fewer open stories and therefore fewer tasks to addressin the sprint. This focused the team on a smaller subset of over-all requirements and reduced the complexity of the overall task bylimiting the number of factors to consider at one time. Therefore:Proposition 5. Under conditions of high project complexity, increas-ing the frequency of iteration and ad hoc synchronisation activitieswill maintain coordination effectiveness. The production of relatedsynchronisation artefacts must be adjusted accordingly.Project uncertainty primarily takes the form of uncertainty inrequirements, but can also include such things as uncertainty abouttools, techniques, infrastructure, and other factors. Silver had highproject uncertainty caused by their customer who could not pro-vide requirements details or feedback on the quality of workingsoftware in a timely manner. To cope with this the team used atactic of putting blocked stories and their tasks on hold, openingadditional stories during a sprint to ensure some stories were com-pleted by the end of the sprint, and story switching (de-prioritisingblocked stories and opening lower priority stories). Therefore:Proposition 6. Under conditions of high project uncertainty,to maintain synchronisation activity frequency and production ofassociated artefacts, changing the priority of stories will maintain coor-dination effectiveness.Organisations may choose any number of ways to organise theirproject work. Some organisations choose a mono-project struc-ture whereby each project has a project team who are devotedfull-time to a single project. In others, a matrix or multi-projectstructure means project team members work simultaneously onmultiple projects, or work on a project while also performing oper-ational duties. Land, as explained in the case description, used amatrix organisation structure, and this had an impact on both teammember proximity and availability. Therefore:Proposition 7. A mono-project organisation structure enables closeproximity relative to multi- or matrix structures.Proposition 8. A mono-project organisation structure improvesavailability relative to multi- or matrix style structures.In the situation where the source of requirements (that is, the cus-tomer or end-user) is isolated from the team rather than co-locatedand part of the team, increased uncertainty has a slightly differentaffect to that described in Proposition 6. When uncertainty is highand the customer is not readily available, it is possible to maintaincoordination effectiveness by increasing boundary spanning coor-dination mechanisms. In Storm, this involved setting up beta testersto become a primary source of requirements details, and then ini-tiating additional ad hoc meetings with them when necessary. Inaddition, the tester on the team took on a coordinator role betweenthe engineers and the project development team. Therefore:Proposition 9. Under conditions of high project uncertainty, whenthe customer is not part of the team, increased boundary spanningcoordination mechanisms will maintain coordination effectiveness.The production of related boundary spanning artefacts must beadjusted accordingly.8. DiscussionThis study addressed two research questions. The ﬁrst askedhow coordination is achieved when using an agile developmentapproach. This study has shown that an agile software projectcoordination strategy is achieved through three distinct cate-gories of coordination mechanism – synchronisation, structure, andboundary spanning – that together enhance implicit and explicitcoordination effectiveness.Synchronisation is achieved with a variety of synchronisationactivities involving the whole team and by producing artefactsduring these activities that were used later as coordination mech-anisms as the project progresses (e.g. stories, tasks, test suites, andworking software). These activities occur at different frequenciesover the project lifecycle including one-off activities that occurredonce per project (e.g. iteration zero workshops with the customerto scope the project), activities that occur at each iteration (e.g.planning game and retrospective), activities that occur daily (e.g.daily stand up meeting), and ad hoc activities (e.g. cross-teamtalk, unscheduled story breakdown sessions). Structural coordina-tion mechanisms formed three categories: proximity, availability,and substitutability of project team members. Boundary spanningis achieved with activities and artefacts but does not involve thewhole team, but rather individuals interacting with external partiesto ensure a ﬂow of requirements and resources needed to maintainproject progress. Coordinator roles may also be necessary whenstakeholder groups are large and complex and particularly whenthe customer is external to the team and cannot work with along-side them on a daily basis.The second research question asked about the relationshipbetween the coordination strategy in these projects and projectcoordination effectiveness. The theoretical model proposes thatthere is a relationship between an agile coordination strategy andproject coordination effectiveness. Acting together, synchronisa-tion, structure, and boundary spanning components affect explicitand implicit coordination. For example, when the project teammeets to demonstrate the working software (a synchronisationartefact) to the client (a synchronisation activity) this involves acurrent functioning version of the software (the right thing is in theright place, at the right time). As another example, when the projectteam has a daily stand up meeting (synchronisation activity), andthis leads to each team member being better informed about whois performing what task on the project on that day, this contributesto the implicit component of coordination effectiveness (i.e. knowwhat is going on and when).Aspects of this theoretical model may have some relevance innon-agile and more traditional software projects. However, in tra-ditional projects certain coordination mechanisms appearing inthe theoretical model would be absent. These include iterationand daily synchronisation activities and many of their associatedartefacts (wallboards, tasks), and a high level of substitutabil-ity. Substitutability is unlikely in traditional projects because rolespecialisation is considered a more effective strategy. Further,although close proximity and high availability may occur in non-agile projects they are not generally implemented as a speciﬁc 1236D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 1238strategy to improve coordination. Boundary spanning activities andartefacts certainly occur in non-agile projects; however, they wouldnot occur at the same frequency, because iteration is not generallyused in such projects.This study has limitations. The qualitative data were drawn fromonly three cases and a relatively small number of participants,therefore the empirical grounding of the coordination model is lim-ited and the ﬁndings necessarily tentative. The ﬁndings, and themodel of coordination effectiveness are based upon the responsesof co-located teams; the validity of these ﬁndings in the case of dis-tributed teams has not been established. Another limitation is thatall of the projects used Scrum and XP practices. Since many otheragile methods exist, the theory derived from the case data may haveless relevance for practitioners using other agile methods.The theoretical model has limitations because interactioneffects between synchronisation, structure, and boundary spanningcoordination mechanisms are not considered. We have made theassumption that all of these forms of coordination are needed inan effective strategy, however some may be more important thanothers. Further, other coordination mechanisms may exist that wehave not considered due to our small number of cases. For example,the effect of team duration and individual expertise on coordinationwas not identiﬁed in our study but may be involved in coordination.Further research may warrant their inclusion in the model.8.1. Practical implicationsAlthough each agile method was originally conceived as acoherent set of practices, practitioners commonly select individualpractices from a method rather than implementing the full method(Conboy and Fitzgerald, 2007). It is also common to ﬁnd practi-tioners combining practices from two or more methods (Fitzgeraldet al., 2006). As a practical matter, when practitioners select prac-tices, either from a single agile method or from multiple agilemethods, they can use the model presented here as an aid in iden-tifying which agile practices to choose to achieve coordinationcoverage. The model suggests that practices should be selectedthat provide synchronisation at all of the frequencies in the model:project, iteration, daily, and ad hoc. Artefacts can be produced atall these frequencies and contribute to coordination. In addition,practitioners should consider whether their organisational struc-ture will ensure that proximity and availability are achievable forall team members. Substitutability should be encouraged ratherthan discouraged. Furthermore, boundary spanning is an issue notaddressed adequately in agile methods. XP provides no guidanceon this issue, although in Scrum, the person who takes the role ofScrum Master acts to solve problems hindering project progress,which could include boundary spanning activities. From a coordi-nation perspective, this role is important for handling interactionsand negotiating effective support from external parties, while free-ing other project team members to focus on internal project issues.Another ﬁnding with implications for practice is that iterationlength provides a way to manage an effective level of coordination.That is, under conditions of complexity, reducing iteration lengthincreases the frequency of synchronisation activities but maintainseffective coordination. It is less clear from this study how projectscan effectively manage requirements uncertainty when externalparties (customers or end-users) are unwilling or unable to workclosely with the team. This problem may be mitigated to someextent by maintaining formal contact with these parties at leastonce per iteration.Distributed software development is common in some partsof the world and efforts to use agile software development inthis context are not as simple as in the co-located situation. Thismodel provides a starting point for understanding coordination inco-located projects, and could be extended to the case of globallydistributed software development.Operationalisation of the coordination effectiveness constructwould provide a valuable measure of coordination effectiveness inagile (and possibly other) projects. Such a measure could be usedto assess coordination effectiveness at various time points duringa project, providing a proﬁle of project coordination, and an earlywarning signal when coordination problems begin to occur. Thiswould help organisations understand how their projects are per-forming with respect to coordination over the project lifecycle. Itcould also assist organisations to identify and address their coordi-nation problems in a timely fashion, and improve the likelihood ofsuccessful agile project completion.9. ConclusionInformation systems development has suffered from a dearthof research exploring and explaining agile software development,in particular the role of coordination in agile projects. In thisarticle, we bring these two streams of research together to con-tribute to an understanding of how such projects are organised toachieve effective coordination. In addition, coordination theory hasbeen extended to provide evidence for the relationship betweencoordination strategy, what you ‘do’ to achieve coordination, andcoordination effectiveness, your ‘state of coordination’.For practitioners undertaking or adapting their agile approach,this theoretical model provides guidance in a number of areas.When choosing agile practices, many practitioners lack guidance onhow different practices ought to work together to achieve an effec-tive coordination strategy. The theory proposed here suggests thatconsideration should be given to adopting synchronisation activi-ties, including practices at project, iteration, daily, frequencies andincorporating ad hoc activities as well. In addition, the organisationstructure in which the agile project occurs should be a considera-tion because it is an important enabler of effective coordinationby supporting staff availability and proximity. Role generalisation(what we have named substitutability) also enhances coordinationin agile projects, and consideration of coordination in boundaryspanning is also needed, because although boundary spanning maybe partially external to a project, it also has an inﬂuence on howeffectively a project is coordinated.Future work is needed to conﬁrm the efﬁcacy of this theoret-ical model using additional empirical tests. In particular, futureresearch should aim to verify our conceptualisation of coordinationstrategy (i.e. certain agile practices acting as coordination mech-anisms) and its effect on coordination effectiveness. The theorymight also be used to compare coordination between softwareprojects, and between different types of software projects, forexample agile and non-agile projects, distributed and co-locatedprojects, and between different system development methodolo-gies.This research provides a preliminary overall model depictinghow the fundamental concept of coordination is achieved in agilesoftware development projects. Agile practices and organisationlevel activities and artefacts that support coordination can now beinvestigated in light of the model, and coordination theorists maychoose to use this theoretical model to gain interesting new insightsinto coordination in other contexts.AcknowledgementsWe wish to acknowledge the assistance of the contributingorganisations and especially the individual participants. These peo-ple gave freely of their time to share their project experiences,and we are grateful for that. We also acknowledge the assistance D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 12381237of the Wellington Agile Professionals Network in locating suitableprojects.ReferencesAbrahamsson, P., Conboy, K., Wang, X., 2009. ‘Lots done, more to do’: the currentstate of agile systems development research. European Journal of InformationSystems 18, 281–284.Abrahamsson, P., Warsta, J., Siponen, M.K., Ronkainen, J., 2003. New directions onagile methods: a comparative analysis. In: Proceedings of the 25th InternationalConference on Software Engineering, ICSE’03, IEEE Computer Society, Washing-ton, DC, USA, pp. 244–254.Agerfalk, P.J., Fitzgerald, B., Slaughter, S.A., 2009. Flexible and distributed informa-tion systems development: state of the art and research challenges. InformationSystems Research 20, 317–328.Aladwani, A., 2002. An integrated performance model of information systemsprojects. Journal of Management Information Systems 19, 185–210.Ambler, S.W., 2009. Agile Adoption Rate Survey Results: February 2008.Andres, H.P., Zmud, R.W., 2001. A contingency approach to software project coordi-nation. Journal of Management Information Systems 18, 41–70.Avison, D., Fitzgerald, G., 2006. Information Systems Development: Methodologies,Techniques and Tools, 4th ed. McGraw-Hill, London.Barki, H., Rivard, S., Talbot, J., 1993. Toward an assessment of software developmentrisk. Journal of Management Information Systems 10, 203–225.Barki, H., Rivard, S., Talbot, J., 2001. An integrative contingency model of soft-ware project risk management. Journal of Management Information Systems17, 37–69.Barlow, J., Giboney, J., Keith, M., Wilson, D., Schuetzler, R., 2011. Overview andguidance on agile development in large organizations. Communications of theAssociation for Information Systems 29, 25–44.Baskerville, R., Pries-Heje, J., Ramesh, B., 2007. The enduring contradictions of newsoftware development approaches: a response to ‘persistent problems and prac-tices in ISD’. Information Systems Journal 17, 241–245.Beck, K., 2000. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change. Addison-Wesley,Boston.Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A., Cunningham, W., Fowler,M., Grenning, J., Highsmith, J., Hunt, A., Jeffries, R., Kern, J., Marick, B.,Martin, R.C., Mellor, S., Schwaber, K., Sutherland, J., Thomas, D., 2001. Man-ifesto for agile software development. Retrieved 26 January 2012 fromhttp://www.agilemanifesto.org.Boehm, B., Turner, R., 2004. Balancing Agility and Discipline. Addison-Wesley,Boston.Cao, L., Ramesh, B., 2007. Agile software development: ad hoc practices or soundprinciples? IT Professional, 41–47.Chen, H.-G., Jiang, J.J., Klein, G., Chen, J.V., 2009. Reducing software requirementperception gaps through coordination mechanisms. The Journal of Systems andSoftware 82, 650–655.Conboy, K., 2009. Agility from ﬁrst principles: reconstructing the concept of agility ininformation systems development. Information Systems Research 20, 329–354.Conboy, K., Fitzgerald, B., 2007. The views of experts on the current state of agilemethod tailoring. In: McMaster, T., Wastell, D., Ferneley, E., DeGross, J. (Eds.),IFIP International Federation for Information Processing. Springer, Boston, pp.217–234.Conboy, K., Fitzgerald, B., Golden, W., 2005. Agility in information systems develop-ment: a three-tiered framework. In: Baskerville, R., Mathiassen, L., Pries-Heje,J., DeGross, J. (Eds.), Business Agility and Information Technology Diffusion:IFIP TC8 WG 8.6 International Working Conference, May 8–11, 2005, Atlanta,Georgia, U.S.A. Springer, New York, pp. 36–49.Crowston, K., 1991. Towards a Coordination Cookbook: Recipes for Multi-agentAction. Alfred P. Sloan School of Management, Massachusetts Institute of Tech-nology, 352 pp.Crowston, K., 2003. A taxonomy of organizational dependencies and coordinationmechanisms. In: Malone, T.W., Crowston, K., Herman, G.A. (Eds.), OrganizingBusiness Knowledge: The MIT Process Handbook. The MIT Press, Cambridge,MA, pp. 86–108.Crowston, K., Osborn, C.S., 2003. A coordination theory approach to process descrip-tion and redesign. In: Malone, T.W., Crowston, K., Herman, G.A. (Eds.), OrganizingBusiness Knowledge: The MIT Process Handbook. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA,pp. 335–370.Crowston, K., Rubleske, J., Howison, J., 2006. Coordination theory: a ten-year ret-rospective. In: Zhang, P., Galletta, D. (Eds.), Human–Computer Interaction andManagement Information Systems: Foundations. M.E. Sharpe, Armonk, NewYork, pp. 120–138.Curtis, B., Krasner, H., Iscoe, N., 1988. A ﬁeld study of the software design processfor large systems. Communications of the ACM 31, 1268–1287.Darke, P., Shanks, G., Broadbent, M., 1998. Successfully completing case studyresearch: combining rigour, relevance and pragmatism. Information SystemsJournal 8, 273–289.Dingsoyr, T., Dyba, T., Abrahamsson, P., 2008. A preliminary roadmap for empiri-cal research on agile software development. In: Proceedings of the Agile 2008Conference, pp. 83–94.Dingsoyr, T., Dyba, T., Moe, N.B., 2010. Agile Software Development: CurrentResearch and Future Directions. Springer-Verlag, Heidelberg.Dube, L., Pare, G., 2003. Rigor in information systems positivist case research: currentpractice, trends, and recommendations. MIS Quarterly 27, 597–635.Dyba, T., Dingsoyr, T., 2008. Empirical studies of agile software development: asystematic review. Information and Software Technology 50, 833–859.Eisenhardt, K.M., 1989. Building theories from case study research. The Academy ofManagement Review 14, 532–550.Eisenhardt, K.M., Graebner, M.E., 2007. Theory building from cases: opportunitiesand challenges. Academy of Management Journal 50, 25–32.Espinosa, A.J., Lerch, F.J., Kraut, R.E., 2004. Explicit versus implicit coordinationmechanisms and task dependencies: one size does not ﬁt all. In: Salas, E.,Fiore, S.M. (Eds.), Team Cognition: Understanding the Factors that Drive Pro-cess and Performance. American Psychological Association, Washington, DC,pp. 107–129.Faraj, S., Sproull, L., 2000. Coordinating expertise in software development teams.Management Science 46, 1554–1568.Fiore, S.M., Salas, E., 2004. Why we need team cognition. In: Salas, E., Fiore, S.M.(Eds.), Team Cognition. American Psychological Association, Washington, DC,pp. 235–248.Fitzgerald, B., Hartnett, G., Conboy, K., 2006. Customising agile methods to soft-ware practices at Intel Shannon. European Journal of Information Systems 15,200–213.Fruhling, A., de Vreede, G.-J., 2006. Field experiences with eXtreme programming:developing an emergency response system. Journal of Management InformationSystems 22, 39–68.Galbraith, J.R., 1977. Organization Design. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.Gregor, S., 2006. The nature of theory in information systems. MIS Quarterly 30,611–642.Harris, M., Collins, R.W., Hevner, A.R., 2009. Control of ﬂexible software developmentunder uncertainty. Information Systems Research 20, 400–419.Hilkka, M.-R., Tuure, T., Matti, R., 2005. Is extreme programming just old wine innew bottles: a comparison of two cases. Journal of Database Management 16,41–61.Hoda, R., Noble, J., Marshall, S., 2010. Organizing self-organizing teams. In: Proceed-ings of the IEEE/ACM International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE2010), Cape Town, South Africa, May 2–9, 2010.Iivari, J., Hirschheim, R., Klein, H.K., 2004. Towards a distinct body of knowledge forInformation Systems experts: coding ISD process knowledge in two IS journals.Information Systems Journal 14, 313–342.Kang, H.-R., Yang, H.-D., Rowley, C., 2006. Factors in team effectiveness: cognitiveand demographic similarities of software development team members. HumanRelations 59, 1681–1710.Kautz, K., Madsen, S., Norbjerg, J., 2007. Persistent problems and practices in infor-mation systems development. Information Systems Journal 17, 217–239.Kotlarsky, J., van Fenema, P.C., Willcocks, L.P., 2008. Developing a knowledge-basedperspective on coordination: the case of global software projects. Informationand Management 45, 96–108.Kraut, R.E., Streeter, L.A., 1995. Coordination in software development. Communi-cations of the ACM 38, 69–81.Levina, N., Vaast, E., 2005. The emergence of boundary spanning competence inpractice: implications for implementation and use of information systems. MISQuarterly 29, 335–363.MacCormack, A., Verganti, R., Iansiti, M., 2001. Developing products on “InternetTime”: the anatomy of a ﬂexible development process. Management Science47, 133–150.MacKenzie, A., Monk, S., 2004. From cards to code: how extreme programming re-embodies programming as collective practice. Computer Supported CooperativeWork 13, 91–117.Madsen, S., 2007. Conceptualising the causes and consequences of uncertaintyin IS development organisations and projects. In: Osterle, H., Schelp, J., Win-ter, R. (Eds.), 15th European Conference on Information Systems. St. Gallen,Switzerland, pp. 855–864.Malone, T.W., 1987. Modeling coordination in organizations and markets. Manage-ment Science 33, 1317–1332.Malone, T.W., 1988. What is Coordination Theory? Alfred P. Sloan School of Man-agement, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.Malone, T.W., Crowston, K., 1994. The interdisciplinary study of coordination. ACMComputing Surveys 26, 87–119.March, J.G., Simon, H.A., 1958. Organization. Wiley, New York.Maruping, L.M., Venkatesh, V., Agarwal, R., 2009. A control theory perspective onagile methodology use and changing user requirements. Information SystemsResearch 20, 277–399.McChesney, I.R., Gallagher, S., 2004. Communication and coordination practicesin software engineering projects. Information and Software Technology 46,473–489.Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M., 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis, 2nd ed. SAGE Publica-tions Inc., Thousand Oaks.Mintzberg, H., 1980. Structure in 5’s: a synthesis of the research on organizationdesign. Management Science 26, 322–341.Moe, N., Dingsoyr, T., Dyba, T., 2010. A teamwork model for understanding an agileteam: a case study of a Scrum project. Information and Software Technology 52,480–491.Mohammed, S., Ferzandi, L., Hamilton, K., 2010. Metaphor no more: a 15-year reviewof the team mental model construct. Journal of Management 36, 876–910.Nerur, S., Balijepally, V., 2007. Theoretical reﬂections on agile development method-ologies. Communications of the ACM 50, 79–83.Nidumolu, S., 1995. The effect of coordination and uncertainty on software projectperformance: residual performance risk as an intervening variable. InformationSystems Research 6, 191–219. 1238D.E. Strode et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1222– 1238Nidumolu, S.R., Subramani, M., 2004. The matrix of control: combining process andstructure approaches to managing software development. Journal of Manage-ment Information Systems 20, 159–196.Olle, T.W., Sol, H.C., Tully, C.,1983. Information systems design methodologies: afeature analysis. In: Proceedings of the IFIP WB 8.1 Working Conference onFeature Analysis of Information Systems Design Methodologies. North-Holland,Amsterdam.Pare, G., 2004. Investigating information systems with positivist case study research.Communications of the Association for Information Systems 13, 233–264.Pikkarainen, M., Haikara, J., Salo, O., Abrahamsson, P., Still, J., 2008. The impact ofagile practices on communication in software development. Journal of EmpiricalSoftware Engineering 13, 303–337.Pries-Heje, L., Pries-Heje, J., 2011. Why Scrum works. In: Agile Conference 2011, IEEEComputer Society.Rajlich, V., 2006. Changing the paradigm of software engineering. Communicationsof the ACM 49, 67–70.Rico, R., Sanchez-Manzanares, M., Gil, F., Gibson, C., 2008. Team implicit coordinationprocesses: a team knowledge-based approach. Academy of Management Review33, 163–184.Sarker, S., Munson, C.L., Sarker, S., Chakraborty, S., 2009. Assessing the relative con-tribution of the facets of agility to distributed systems development success: ananalytic hierarchy process approach. European Journal of Information Systems18, 285–299.Sarker, S., Sarker, S., 2009. Exploring agility in distributed information systems devel-opment teams: an interpretive study in and offshoring context. InformationSystems Research 20, 440–461.Schwaber, K., Beedle, M., 2002. Agile Software Development With Scrum. PrenticeHall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.Sharp, H., Robinson, H., 2004. An ethnographic study of XP practice. Empirical Soft-ware Engineering 9, 353–375.Spradley, J.P., 1979. The Ethnographic Interview. Holt, Rinehart and Winston, NewYork.Strauss, A., 1988. The articulation of project work: an organization process. TheSociological Quarterly 29, 163–178.Strode, D.E., 2005. The Agile Methods: An Analytical Comparison of Five AgileMethods and an Investigation of Their Target Environment. Department of Infor-mation Systems, Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand, Retrieved26 January 2012 from http://hdl.handle.net/10179/515.Strode, D.E., Hope, B., Huff, S.L., Link, S., 2011. Coordination effectiveness in an agilesoftware development context. In: Paciﬁc Asia Conference on Information Sys-tems, PACIS 2011, Brisbane, Australia.Thomas, D.R., 2006. A general inductive approach for analyzing qualitative evalua-tion data. American Journal of Evaluation 27, 237–246.Thompson, J.D., 1967. Organization in Action. McGraw-Hill, Chicago.Van de Ven, A.H., Delbecq, A.L., Koenig, R., 1976. Determinants of coordination modeswithin organizations. American Sociological Review 41, 322–338.Weick, K.E., Roberts, K.H., 1993. Collective mind in organizations: heedful interre-lating on ﬂight decks. Administrative Science Quarterly 38, 357–381.West, D., Grant, T., 2010. Agile Development: Mainstream Adoption has ChangedAgility. Forrester Research Inc, pp. 1–20.Williams, L., 2010. Agile software development methodologies and practices.In: Zelkowitz, M.V. (Ed.), Advances in Computers. Elsevier, Amsterdam,pp. 1–44.Xia, W., Lee, G., 2005. Complexity of information systems development projects:conceptualization and measurement development. Journal of ManagementInformation Systems 22, 45–83.Yin, R.K., 2003. Case Study Research, 3rd ed. Sage Publications, Thousand Oaks.Yuan, M., Vogel, D., Zhang, X., Chen, Z., Chu, X., 2007. Antecedents of coordinationeffectiveness of software developer dyads from interacting teams: an empiricalinvestigation. In: 11th Paciﬁc-Asia Conference on Information Systems.Diane E. Strode is a PhD candidate in Information Systems and Contract Lecturer atVictoria University of Wellington, School of Information Management, New Zealand.Currently she investigates agile software development from a coordination perspec-tive with the aim of building theory in this complex area. Her research interestsinclude system and software development methodology and factors inﬂuencingsoftware project success. She has extensive teaching experience in the Polytech-nic and University sectors covering analysis and design, software development, andproject management. She also has software development experience in an interna-tional company. She has a MInfSc (Information Systems) from Massey University,New Zealand.Sid L. Huff is Professor of Information Systems at Victoria University of Welling-ton, New Zealand. His teaching and research address IS strategy, IT governanceand IS management. His work has appeared in numerous academic and practi-tioner journals, including MIS Quarterly, Information Systems Research, Journal ofMIS, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, and Communications of the ACM. Hismost recent book is Managing IT Professionals in the Internet Age, co-authoredwith Dr. Pak Yoong. He currently serves as Senior Editor for Information SystemsManagement Journal and for Journal of Information Technology, and as Associate Edi-tor for MIS Quarterly. He has also written over 60 teaching cases for educationaluse. He received his PhD in Information Systems from the M.I.T. Sloan School ofManagement.Beverley Hope is employed in the School of Information Management at VictoriaUniversity of Wellington teaching in areas that focus on management of InformationSystems. She also serves on the School’s research degrees committee. Her researchinterests include service quality in online environments, knowledge management,and information systems education. She has acted as editor or reviewer for manyjournals and conferences, and held responsibility as Conference Chair and ProgramDirector for regional and international conferences. Beverley holds a PhD in Com-munication and Information Science from the University of Hawaii and an MBA fromthe University of Kansas.Sebastian Link received a PhD in Information Systems from Massey University (NewZealand) in 2005. Currently, he is an associate professor at the School of Informa-tion Management, the Victoria University of Wellington (New Zealand). His researchinterests include conceptual modeling, data management, e-commerce and soft-ware veriﬁcation. Sebastian has published more than 75 research papers, and servedas a reviewer for numerous conferences and journals. He is a member of the editorialboard of the journal Information Systems.