 The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–66Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
j our na l ho me page: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssIntegrating usability work into a large inter-organisational agiledevelopment project: Tactics developed by usability designersAdeola Yetunde Wale-KoladeDepartment of Information Systems, University of Agder, Gimlemoen 25, 4630 Kristiansand S, Norwaya r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 20 December 2013Received in revised form23 September 2014Accepted 15 October 2014Available online 25 October 2014Keywords:
Usability
Agile software developmentTacticsa b s t r a c tIn this paper we examine the integration of usability activities into a large inter-organisational agiledevelopment project. Inter-organisational agile projects possess unique attributes. They involve multiplestakeholders from different organisational contexts and are thus characterised by competing priorities.Team members also lack a mutual awareness of what constitutes work. These issues make the collabora-tion between project teams challenging. Meanwhile collaboration between usability designers and agileproject teams is an integral part of the integration of usability activities into agile development projects.We carried out an interpretive case study on a large inter-organisational agile development project toexamine how usability designers and agile project teams collaborate in this project type. Results showedintegration goals were achieved through ﬁve tactics deployed by the usability designers. These tacticswere negotiating inclusion; upward inﬂuencing, placating expert users, establishing credibility and dif-fusing designs. The implications of these ﬁndings are summarised in the form of three propositions thatpertain to how usability designer–agile project team collaborations might be organised in agile develop-ment projects. Further, the role of the usability designer in ensuring the integration of usability activitiesis also emphasised.© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. Introduction“We did all kinds of things, we did everything that worked, if beingoverly friendly with developers got us where we wanted then wedid that. We also hung up, plastered the wall with sketches, thatworked– we did everything that worked”. (Head usability designer,Beta)This article presents a case study on how usability activitieswere integrated into a large inter-organisational agile developmentproject. Our empirical analysis highlights ﬁve tactics, deployed bythe usability designers, which were useful in facilitating this inte-gration.Usability, deﬁned as “the effectiveness, efﬁciency and satisfac-tion with which speciﬁed users achieve speciﬁc goals in particularenvironments” (ISO, 2006) is a software quality attribute known forits beneﬁts. It leads to improved user productivity, reduced train-ing and documentation (Juristo et al., 2007). It is also critical foruser system acceptance (Ferré et al., 2001). Although few woulddisprove the importance of including usability activities into theTel.: +47 38142305.E-mail address: adeola.y.wale-kolade@uia.nosoftware development process, actually doing so has proven dif-ﬁcult in practice (Abrahão et al., 2010). This is especially true ofprojects in which agile methods are used, since these methods nei-ther give consideration to software usability nor the activities orcompetencies needed to ensure usability (Jokela and Abrahamsson,2004; Blomkvist, 2005). These issues have led to an increased focuson how usability activities might be integrated into agile develop-ment methods, more so as there has been a widespread adoptionof these methods in the software industry (Hussain et al., 2009).Within these integration discussions, the general view is thatit is the responsibility of the usability designer to ensure the inte-gration of usability activities; hence their involvement is critical tothe ensuring of usability (Lievesley and Yee, 2006; Ambler, 2008).In relation to this it is important that they are able to collabo-rate with their agile partners and that project conditions encouragethese collaborations (Brown et al., 2012; Raison and Schmidt, 2013).However the establishing of these collaborations in agile settingsis not without its challenges (Ferreira et al., 2010). For instance,challenges have been noted upon the introduction of the usabilitydesigner role into agile project teams previously not accustomedto this role (Lee et al., 2011).In this paper, we examine how usability activities wereintegrated into a large inter-organisational agile developmentproject where the Scrum of Scrums model was applied.http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2014.10.0360164-1212/© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. A.Y. Wale-Kolade / The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–66 55Inter-organisational projects are known for their complexity(Paasivaara and Lassenius, 2003). Competing priorities are aninevitable part of these projects as participating organisations oftenhave divergent goals and agendas (Barton, 2009). Further, as projectteam members are drawn from different organisations, there is anabsence of the long standing professional and social relationshipsthat provide a context and history within which problems andmisunderstandings can be resolved (Herbsleb, 2007). The diver-sity in the organisational backgrounds of project team membersalso means that these team members do not have a shared workculture which leads to a lack of awareness on how they mightcoordinate their work (Paasivaara and Lassenius, 2003; Herbsleb,2007). Here work culture describes the collectively constructedrealities about work procedures and norms that a group of indi-viduals have produced in the course of their shared interactionsand which have become institutionalised among these individuals(Vaughan, 1998). The Scrum of Scrums model as used in theseprojects addresses these conﬂicts by prescribing a technique forscaling Scrum practices, thus enabling inter-team coordination andconsensus (Sutherland et al., 2007).The effectiveness of the Scrum of Scrums model in resolving thecollaboration conﬂicts associated with inter-organisational agileprojects has been well documented in the literature (Sutherlandet al., 2007; Vallon et al., 2013). In this paper we broaden this dis-cussion by examining what happens when usability activities areintroduced into these projects and how the conﬂicts that emergeas a consequence of this inclusion are resolved. Speciﬁcally, weexamine how usability designers and agile project teams are able tocollaborate in inter-organisational agile projects, such that usabil-ity integration goals are achieved. Our examination of this mattermay be seen as a response to calls (Kollmann et al., 2009) for morestudies examining the integration of usability work in a variety ofproject contexts. Thus we ask,“How are usability activities integrated into large inter-organisational agile development projects?”The rest of this paper is organised as follows. In Section 2,we begin with an overview of related research on the integrationof usability activities and agile methods, with a particular focuson studies that have examined the collaboration between usabil-ity designers and agile project teams. An overview of the Scrummethod is also included in this section. Section 3 is a description ofour research approach. Section 4 presents our results where wehighlight the tactics employed by the usability designers whichfacilitated the integration of usability activities in the project. Sec-tion 5 is the discussion where we elaborate more on our ﬁndingsand their implications. Section 6 concludes the study and directionsfor further research are discussed.2. Related researchThis section begins with a summary of current research on theintegration of usability activities into agile software development.We then provide an overview on the use of Scrum in large agileprojects.2.1. Integration of usability activities into agile softwaredevelopmentVolatile business environments have resulted in an increasedpreference for agile software development methods, since thesemethods mitigate risks by delivering working software on time andwithin budget (Conboy, 2009; Misra et al., 2009). There are clearlybeneﬁts associated with these methods; but software usability isnot one of these (Jokela and Abrahamsson, 2004). Agile methodsprescribe an evolutionary approach to requirements deﬁnition alsoknown as Just-In-Time requirements analysis (Adikari et al., 2009)which contradicts the detailed approach to design that is charac-teristic of usability activities such as user research (Meingast et al.,2013). Additionally they lack the user perspective as they placemore emphasis on the customer role (Jokela and Abrahamsson,2004). The integration of usability activities into the agile softwaredevelopment process has been highlighted as a means throughwhich these tensions might be resolved. This integration is arguedto be possible since both agile methods and usability activities focuson delivering value, are iterative in nature and engage in continuoustesting (Chamberlain et al., 2006; Hussain et al., 2009).Usability designers play a critical part in this process. Byaccompanying the development process, these individuals ensurethat users’ requirements are considered and implemented (Wale-Kolade et al., 2013). Conversely studies have shown that theintegration of usability activities into agile development projectsis not as seamless as has been portrayed in the literature (Ferreiraet al., 2012; Wale-Kolade et al., 2013). The same has also beenobserved to be true of the introduction of usability designers intoagile project teams (Lee et al., 2013). There are accounts of howusability designers lose leverage in developmental decision making(Barksdale et al., 2009; Kuusinen et al., 2012) and their decreasedvisibility over the course of the project (Isomursu et al., 2012). Theseobservations show how important it that usability designers areable to collaborate with their agile partners if integration goals areto be achieved (Kollmann et al., 2009; Brown et al., 2011; Raisonand Schmidt, 2013). More so as this collaboration between usabilitydesigners and agile project teams enables the clariﬁcation of designintent and design rationale, and also ensures designs created areimplementable (Ferreira et al., 2010, 2011).Studies that have examined usability designer–agile team col-laborations as part of their investigations into the integration ofusability activities have mostly focused on in-house agile devel-opment settings (Kollmann et al., 2009). These studies havehighlighted two ways that the collaboration between usabilitydesigners and agile team collaborations is being organised withinthese settings (Kollmann et al., 2009; Sharp et al., 2009; Ferreiraet al., 2010, 2012). In the ﬁrst usability designers are separatedfrom the developers and not immersed in the agile teams. Inthe second, usability designers are fully immersed into the agileteams. Team immersion in this sense refers to whether usabilitydesigners participate in sprint planning and in other team spe-ciﬁc agile activities (Ambler, 2008). In project settings where thenon-immersive approach has been adopted, it has been observedthat the absence of synchronisation points between the usabil-ity designers and project teams leads to the creation of designsthat are typically non-implementable (Ferreira et al., 2010, 2011).In those instances where the usability designers have the author-ity to demand changes and where such mismatches are crucial tothe progress of developers’ work, developers have been observedtaking the initiative to meet with the usability designers for clariﬁ-cation (Ferreira et al., 2011). Conversely in the immersed teams,usability has been observed to be a shared team responsibility(Brown et al., 2012). This has been attributed to how this arrange-ment ensures team members have a mutual awareness of how workshould proceed and a shared understanding of what constituteswork for each team member (Ferreira et al., 2012). Some in viewof this apparent seamlessness have asserted that the integration ofusability work into agile development in non-immersive settingsis a difﬁcult feat to achieve and that the immersive approach is anecessary precondition for integration (Silva da Silva et al., 2013).They also assert that without the mutual awareness that is a keyfeature of the immersive approach, usability work would end upbeing viewed as “irrelevant or a checkbox ticking exercise” (Raisonand Schmidt, 2013). 56 A.Y. Wale-Kolade / The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–66Other considerations that have been highlighted in these dis-cussions are whether appropriate collaborative spaces are availableand whether the project settings encourage these collaborationsbetween usability designers and agile teams (Brown et al., 2012).The importance of maintaining a reasonable balance between thenumber of usability designers and agile development teams in theproject has also been noted (Williams and Ferguson, 2007). It is alsoimportant that team members have a mutual understanding aboutwhat the product should be, and what its goals are from a technical,a business and a usability perspective (Kollmann et al., 2009). Con-versely on the part of the usability designers, it has been assertedthat they must be persuasive (Cajander et al., 2013). It is also impor-tant they are able to negotiate, communicate and be ﬂexible abouttheir beliefs (Kollmann et al., 2009).2.2. Agile methods in large projectsScrum is a project management framework founded on empir-ical process control theory within which people can addresscomplex adaptive problems in software development projects,while productively and creatively delivering products of the highestpossible value (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002). Transparency, inspec-tion and adaptation are the main goals of this framework (Schwaberand Sutherland, 2013). The Scrum method ensures this by describ-ing principles which capture these three themes. In terms oftransparency, Scrum requires that signiﬁcant aspects of the process(e.g. deﬁnition of “Done, daily stand-up) be deﬁned by a commonstandard so there is a shared understanding among participants.In inspection, Scrum artefacts and those which depict progresstowards a sprint goal (e.g. product backlog, sprint backlog) mustbe frequently inspected by skilled inspectors to detect unwanteddiscrepancies. Adaptation, exempliﬁed in activities such as sprintretrospectives, covers the adjustments made during Scrum to han-dle deviations observed during inspection. Scrum also emphasizesﬂexibility in how it does not deﬁne the software development tech-niques to be used during development (Abrahamsson et al., 2003).As such developers often use Extreme Programming (XP) practicessuch as pair programming in Scrum projects (Fitzgerald et al., 2006).The increased globalization of world business has resulted intrends such as outsourcing, offshoring and inter-organisationalsoftware development projects (Ågerfalk et al., 2009). The appealfor these project arrangements comes from their ability to provideorganisations with access to a broader skill base which facilitatesthe rapid creation of high quality software in a cost effective manner(Ågerfalk and Fitzgerald, 2006). In these project settings, scaled upversions of Scrum are typically used as these settings generate toomuch complexity for mainstream Scrum to manage (Schwaber andSutherland, 2013). There is a need for effective inter-team coor-dination and collaboration as these projects are characterised bycompeting priorities (Barton, 2009). Additionally team membersin these projects do not typically have a shared history of work-ing together (Herbsleb, 2007) hence there is a greater need fortransparency.One of such Scrum modiﬁcations used in these project typesis the Scrum of Scrums model (Sutherland et al., 2007). In thismodel, Scrum teams are set up to be cross-functional, isolated andindependent; and integrated through a Scrum of Scrums meeting.These meetings are held in the same format as the Scrum dailystand-ups, but attendance is limited to the Scrum Masters of thevarious teams. The information exchanged here allows insight intowhat is happening in the Scrum teams, challenges they are fac-ing and ensures synchronisation in the execution of the backlog(Paasivaara and Lassenius, 2010). An additional modiﬁcation is theMeta-Scrum which unlike the Scrum of Scrums is Product Ownerfocused (Barton, 2009). In this meeting, the goal is to ensure thatconsensus is reached among the stakeholders regarding how thebacklog would be prioritised.In large projects where these models are used, it is reasonableto expect that the integration of usability activities into this projecttype would not be without its challenges. Mainstream Scrum hasbeen criticised for its product short-sightedness, since its mainfocus is on functionality and how quickly such functionality canbe delivered (Singh, 2008; Lárusdóttir et al., 2012). Additionallythough seemingly user centric with its use of user stories, it doesnot adequately take into account the user perspective (Cajanderet al., 2013). There is also no recognition of the usability designerrole in Scrum as tasks pertaining to the speciﬁcation and gatheringof individual user stories are assigned to the product owner, who istypically an individual concerned with issues pertaining to market-ing, sales and not usability (Singh, 2008). Hence it is not expectedthat collaboration tensions that emerge when these individuals areintroduced into these large projects would be addressed by theScrum of Scrums model. It is therefore of interest to examine howusability activities are integrated in these large inter-organisationalagile projects.3. Case descriptionThe project which provides a context for our study centres onthe development of a pension handling software within CompanyXYZ in a Scandinavian country. Company XYZ is the country’s mainprovider of public occupational pensions and this project was ini-tiated due to the introduction of a new pension scheme in thiscountry. Company XYZ also saw this as an opportunity to revamptheir existing pension handling software and create one with amore standardised work ﬂow. There were three main contrac-tors involved in the project. In addition to Company XYZ, therewas Company Beta which supplied both usability designers anddevelopers, and Company Gamma which supplied only developers.Both software companies were unafﬁliated software consultingcompanies and this was the ﬁrst time all three companies werecollaborating with each other on a project.The project was the largest agile project in the country andspanned a period of four years (from 2008 to 2012). Two hun-dred individuals were involved in this project, none of which hadever participated in a project this size. During the project, a totalof twelve Scrum teams were formed. Six of these teams werefrom Company XYZ, while Beta and Gamma contributed threeScrum teams each. These teams were cross functional in nature andgrouped based on the application feature they were developing.These features included the software architecture, data warehous-ing, front end, back end development and integration with thegovernment platform. A typical Scrum team was composed of nineindividuals. The roles represented in these teams were a techni-cal architect, one Scrum Master who also worked as a developer,one business analyst, one tester and ﬁve to six developers. Teamcomposition remained mostly the same for the latter two years ofthe project as there were few exits of team members but therewas within team rotation among the developers in order to spreadcompetence.In Scrum, every team is supposed to have a Product Owner butthe size of the project meant that this role could not be limited toone individual; therefore it was split up into three categories. Therewas a sub project business Product Owner role which was occupiedby an individual from Company XYZ who acted as the head Prod-uct Owner for the project. There was the contractor level ProductOwner position where there were three Product Owner roles eachﬁlled by an individual from Company XYZ, Beta and Gamma. Thenthere was the team level Product Owner where the business ana-lyst in the Scrum team acted as a Product Owner. This team level A.Y. Wale-Kolade / The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–66 57Fig. 1. Illustration of project organisation.product owner role was in some cases also occupied by individ-uals from XYZ. To ensure coordination across the teams, a Scrum ofScrums and Meta-Scrum was introduced. The Scrum of Scrums washeld three times a week and the Scrum Masters from each teamparticipated in these meetings. Twice a week they held a Meta-Scrum meeting where the contractor level Product Owners wouldmeet with the main project manager, the project manager from thebusiness side, the project director, and some testers and architects.Unlike the main project manager who was responsible for overallproject planning and implementation, the project director mainlyacted as a liaison between the project implementation team andthe project steering committee. This project steering committeewas made up of XYZ’s top management, one employee represen-tative and one representative from the government ministry. Theproject manager from the business side, on the other hand, wasresponsible for ensuring the business interests of XYZ were beingsafeguarded.The project’s original start date was 2008. The focus at this timewas integration with the government platform and ﬁnalising plansfor the main project. This aspect was handled by Company XYZ. Inautumn 2008, XYZ sent out a public tender and in January 2009,the two software consulting companies joined the project. Projectgroups were split based on what company they came from andput in different parts of the building where the project was beingcarried out. Each Scrum team participated in site speciﬁc Scrumactivities but the format remained the same across all the Scrumteams. There were daily stand up meetings and iterations lastedthree weeks. Sprint planning meetings took place on the Mondaybefore the start of a sprint cycle and ended with a retrospectivemeeting on the Friday at the end of the three week print cycle. Pairprogramming was also used by the developers.The project master plan contained 308 epics (large user stories)which deﬁned the scope of the project. These were divided into11 functional areas and prioritised by importance relative to theeffective date of implementation of the pension regulations. Abouta week and a half ahead of sprint planning, these epics would bebroken down into smaller user stories by the Product Owners basedon considerations such as compliance with agreed product visionfor the release, and put into a single product backlog. Each Scrumteam would form their own Sprint backlog from this single productbacklog.There were twelve deliveries during the entire duration of theproject organised as three yearly deliveries. In order to verify their‘deﬁnition of done’ of the features developed in the sprint, a controlgate was introduced at the end of each Sprint. The focus at this pointwas ascertaining whether functionality requirements had been metand code quality. This veriﬁcation was done by the testers and busi-ness analysts from each of the Scrum teams. For accountabilitypurposes, this testing was set up such that no Scrum team testedtheir own deliveries at the control gate.There were only three usability designers in the project and theywere mainly involved with the Scrum teams handling the front end.In contrast to the small number of usability designers, there werefour Scrums teams involved in the development of the front end.Three of these were from Company Beta and the fourth was fromCompany Gamma. Fig. 1 is an illustration of how the Scrum teamswere organised.A lot of money had been allocated to the project but CompanyXYZ felt that the usability designers were an added cost. Addi-tionally, as has earlier been noted, this was the ﬁrst time all threecompanies were collaborating together on a project. How usabilityactivities were integrated into this environment in spite of thesetensions is the focus of our data analysis.3.1. Research designThe study was performed as an interview-based case study. Acase study is an empirical inquiry that investigates a contemporaryphenomenon in depth; and within its real world context whenthe boundaries between phenomenon and context are not clearly 58 A.Y. Wale-Kolade / The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–66Table 1Proﬁle of Participants.Main companies Proﬁle of company Number of scrumteams contributedRole in project IntervieweesXYZ Public occupational pensionsprovider6 Project leadership, administration, productownerships and analysis/design of the total solution(requirements phase and solution description)Main project managerBeta Information Technologyconsulting services3 Responsibility for the task ﬂow system 1 head usability designer, 2junior usability designersand 1 front end developerGamma Management consulting,technology services andoutsourcing3 Pensioners’ work area presenting information andthe whole2 front end developersevident (Yin, 2013). As a an exploratory tool, it is useful in theexamination of phenomenon where the researcher has less a prioriknowledge of what the variables of interest will be and how theywill be measured (Benbasat et al., 1987). It is also versatile, ableto manage data acquired from various sources such as documents,artefacts, interviews and observations (Yin, 2013).The research stance we adopt is interpretivism. The interpre-tive case study approach asserts that a researcher’s understandingof the phenomenon being examined is acquired through the mean-ings assigned to it by individuals (Walsham, 1995; Myers, 1997). Itis this viewing of case members as active participants in the con-struction of the case narrative that distinguishes this approach fromthe positivist case study approach which does not accord a similarrole to case members (Bygstad and Munkvold, 2010).3.2. Data collection and analysisData collection was carried out from February to May 2013using semi-structured interviews. Seven individuals participated inour study. These were the main project manager, a head usabilitydesigner, two junior usability designers and three front end deve-lopers. A proﬁle of our participants is provided in Table 1, whileTable 2 gives an overview of our interviews.The front end developers we interviewed had joined the projectat different times. The developer from Beta joined in 2009, anotherfrom Gamma joined in 2010 and the third also from Gamma joinedthe project in 2011. The mix of these developers was useful as itenabled us examine the variations in participants’ description ofthe project setting on their entry into the project. These variationswhich mostly pertained to the status of the software or the interac-tions between the Scrum teams in the project helped in obtaininga comprehensive picture of the project settings. For instance FEDBeta talked about initial schisms between them and the Gammafront end developers at the start of the project and how this hadled to the grouping of the Scrum teams according to their organisa-tions. This was not an occurrence that the front end developers fromGamma were aware of when they joined the project. The seven indi-viduals who participated in our study enabled us have coverage ofour research question. At project level, we interviewed the mainproject manager. With respect to the usability designer role, weinterviewed all the three usability designers that had been involvedin the project. At front end Scrum team level, we had a represen-tation from the two companies that supplied front end developers.Hence our interviewees represent for the most part the interac-tions between the usability designers and front end Scrum teams.To enhance the quality of our data we also examined secondarydata sources, mainly project related documents. The project washighly publicised and the organisations involved are well knownin the software industry, so it was relatively easy to source forinformation related to the project online. The documents we exam-ined included a 36 page ﬁnal report of the project which describedthe entirety of the project as well as challenges experienced inthe course of the project. We also examined project related pressreleases of the participating organisations. Furthermore XYZ, Betaand Gamma provided us with project slides, usability test reports.Document analysis served as our analytical tool for the analysis ofthese documents. This iterative process which combines elementsof contents analysis and thematic analysis aids in the understand-ing of the historical roots of speciﬁc issues and can also be usedto highlight the conditions that impinge upon the phenomena cur-rently under investigation (Bowen, 2009). Following this approachwe read through these documents and used the information thereto contextualise the data collected during the interviews.Our interviews were semi-structured and were conducted usingan interview guide. In the interview guide we asked each partic-ipant to reﬂect on their experiences in the project. The questionsrelated to this were also tailored to take into account the role playedby each interviewee in the project. The interviews were audiorecorded and later transcribed. The data, in textual format, wereloaded into Dedoose, a cloud-based tool and analysed using quali-tative contents analysis (Miles and Huberman, 1994). In qualitativecontent analysis, the systematic classiﬁcation process of coding andidentifying themes or patterns is used to subjectively interpret thecontent of text data (Hsieh and Shannon, 2005). This process is notlimited to the counting of words but also extends to the intenseexamination of language in order to classify large amounts of textdata into an efﬁcient number of categories that represent similarmeanings in order to provide understanding of the phenomenonunder study (Hsieh and Shannon, 2005). In the data analysis weexamined the transcripts for information about how collaborationissues between the usability designers and project teams wereaddressed in the project. This examination was done against thebackdrop of accounts of opposition to the integration of usabilityactivities, sources of such opposition and the basis for these, andhow such opposition was intercepted. The retrospective nature ofour data meant that we had to ensure convergence in the informa-tion being provided. To do this, the principal investigator adopteda feed forward approach where each interview was based on dataobtained from an earlier interview with a previous participant. Wealso conducted a few successive interviews. Those who were will-ing to participate in these successive interviews communicatedwith us predominantly by email, although we scheduled an addi-tional one hour long interview with the head usability designer. Thetactics we identiﬁed from this analytical process were those whichadequately answered our research question. These were selectedbased on their explanatory power and not the number of instancesthey were mentioned.4. AnalysisOur analysis resulted in the identiﬁcation of ﬁve tactics. Thesehave been summarised in Table 3 and we describe these in moredetail in the following sections. A.Y. Wale-Kolade / The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–66 59Table 2Overview of interviews.Interviewee Total length of interview Role assigned in projectProject manager (PM) 1 h In charge of project implementationHead usability designer Beta (HUD Beta)2
 h 2 minSupervising
 front end Scrum teams from Beta andindirect supervision of GammaJunior usability designer1 Beta (JUD1 Beta) 1 h Working with front end Scrum teams from BetaJunior usability designer2 Beta (JUD2 Beta) 1 h 11 min Working with front end Scrum teams from BetaFront end developer Beta (FED Beta) 1 h Member of front end Scrum team from BetaFront end developer 1 Gamma (FED1 Gamma) 1 h Member of front end Scrum team from GammaFront end developer 2 Gamma (FED2 Gamma) 1 h Member of front end Scrum team from GammaTable 3Summary of tactics.Tactic DescriptionNegotiating inclusion How the usability designers negotiated their inclusion in the project by being persistentPlacating the expert users How the usability designers placated the expert users by aligning themselves with the project short term goals ofmeeting the project deadline and long term goals of having an efﬁcient systemUpward inﬂuencing How the usability designers increased their inﬂuence in the project by ingratiating themselves with the front enddevelopersEstablishing credibility How the usability designers established their credibility by demonstrating their competence and making theirintentions visible in the projectDiffusing designsHow
 the usability designers diffused their designs to the non-collocated front end Scrum team as a means ofdemonstrating their authority4.1. Negotiating inclusionIn Company Beta, where the usability designers were employed,the usability designers enjoyed much leverage. There was a highpremium placed on their skill, and they had an established, sep-arate division for usability design in the company. Additionally,when responding to offers to participate in client-based develop-ment projects, Beta typically included usability designers as part ofthe resources they had to offer to clients. This approach in Beta wasunlike the existing approach in XYZ, where there was no usabil-ity designer role. According to the PM, this “competence” was notneeded, “because the things (in this organisation) that [were] veryimportant or hard to learn [and], where they [had] to maintain andhave people for a fair amount of time [were] the business rules and notif the button [was] here or there”.When Beta joined the project in late 2008, XYZ had not specif-ically asked for individuals with usability designer skills. The HUDBeta mentioned this was because XYZ for this project “wanted tohave more developers doing actual code than more usability people”.This led to initial negotiations between XYZ and Beta which resultedin company XYZ agreeing to include only one usability designerin the project. The individual in this case was the head usabilitydesigner who was then given the task of overall design of the userexperience involving concept development and graphical design.The agile nature of the project meant that if these usability designswere to be included in the sprint cycles, they were expected tobe completed one sprint ahead of the front end developers. In asmaller project, such a parallel approach to usability design mighthave been feasible, but in this large project as pointed out by JUD1Beta, “this was too much work for one usability person because therewere several [Scrum] teams and one usability person”. JUD 2 Beta cor-roborating this, talked about how at this point the head usabilitydesigner Beta was “basically an octopus in the project” as this indi-vidual had his hands in too many things. JUD 2 Beta in relation tothis further narrated:“There had only been one usability person in the ﬁrst few months ofthe ---- project. We had three [Scrum] teams from Company Betaworking with the user interface. The head usability designer wasthere by himself. It was a money issue basically - after about 3months he managed to sell the fact that they needed more person-nel.”Eventually two more usability designers were included in theproject. These were placed in the Scrum teams in Company Beta andgiven tasks related to providing detailed clariﬁcations of the designguidelines and developing site outlines and process ﬂows. The headusability designer was then taken out of the teams and made amember of a project management team in charge of coordinatingthe activities for the Scrum teams handling the development of thefront end.In summary, the head usability designer’s negotiation of inclu-sion facilitated the inclusion of more usability designers into theproject. The tactic worked because the head usability designer waspersistent. With this inclusion usability designing gained moreeffort, there was more focus on usability issues, and graduallyusability design became established as a necessary part of theproject. The negotiation of inclusion was in this way a signiﬁ-cant prerequisite for the integration of usability activities into theproject.4.2. Placating the expert usersXYZ wanted the new software to have a more standardised workﬂow and at the same time be easier to use. The existing softwarewas complex to navigate and required expertise that was limitedto a few individuals who through years of working with the appli-cation had developed ways to override the system. Their masterymeant that there was a high dependency on these expert usersin the organisation and that there was a skills barrier which newrecruits found difﬁcult to scale. This disparity in users’ skills wasnot something the usability designers had factored in when theystarted carrying out user research during the initial design phase.They had entered the project with preconceived notions of similar-ities between the system’s existing users.“We thought it would be easy because we had a couple of hundredof case workers. They are homogenous, they are users and all thesame, they can be any age, any sex, any background or skill set but 60 A.Y. Wale-Kolade / The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–66they are a very uniform group of users because they are experts inpensions”. (JUD2 Beta)However, as the usability designers soon found out, the exper-tise which they had assumed would be a unifying factor among theexisting system’s users turned out to be highly divisive.“We asked, this feature, how should it support your work ﬂow? Andthey said, oh it should be like this and I should see all the numbers,all the data and I should have full ﬂexibility. And we were like, areyou sure? Because that is really hard, and they went, sure it is hardfor you but I am an expert. And so we started [hearing] alarm bells”.(JUD2 Beta)It turned out that the expert users wanted to maintain theirstatus in the organisation, so their description of the work ﬂowswas based on their present use of the existing system. This pre-sented a dilemma for the usability designers who upon entry intothe project had recognised the complexity of the existing systemand were determined to ensure the new system was easier to use.They wanted to obtain access to other user groups in XYZ, butdirect negotiations with these expert users proved fruitless. Theexpert users felt their expertise and involvement in the projectmade them indispensable and they could not understand why theusability designers insisted that it was for these reasons the expertusers were not suitable resources. JUD2 Beta mentioned how theexpert users could not understand why the usability designers didnot want to accede to their demands, since according to these users,“we (expert users) pay you to build the system”. There was also no sup-port from XYZ’s management. JUD1 stated, “(XYZ’s) ﬁrst words whenwe came in and said we want to do usability tests, were, well use thepeople that were already in the project”. According to JUD2 Beta, XYZargued that they had “sacriﬁced their best people and they said you[usability designers] can’t have anyone else, no [censored word] way.This again presented a dilemma to the usability designers since,they (usability designers) “couldn’t use [these expert users] becausethey had already been part of the discussion[s] so they knew a lot moreabout the process”. (JUD1 Beta)It was a complex situation. These expert users had a central posi-tion in the organisation. Some of them were designated productowners in the project, hence it was impossible for the usabil-ity designers to simply bypass them. It was clear that a differentapproach was needed. The usability designers decided to adopt amore conciliatory stance towards the expert users. According tohead usability designer Beta, they tried to “compromise”, by high-lighting how a redesign of the system would make it “easier” forthese experts to do things the “normal way” and achieve a bet-ter work ﬂow. This tone also reﬂected in their negotiations withXYZ management where in asking for access to the less skilledusers, they emphasised that it would be an informal process andwould only last 5 min. They also offered to give the users whowould participate in these tests some rewards. Eventually theywere given access to other user groups in company XYZ. From thesesessions, they were able to gather proof that the requirements beingrequested by the expert users were going to be expensive and thatthey were not in line with the project goal of achieving a standard-ised and efﬁcient work ﬂow. Though the usability designers werenot able to conduct any evaluation of the system at the end of theproject, their efforts in this regard might otherwise be described assuccessful. This is as FED1 Gamma asserted, “Overall the users area lot happier with the new solution than the old solution and in mybooks that is a success”.In summary the usability designers’ decision to adopt a pla-catory approach allowed them to acquire a more comprehensiveoverview from the users regarding the system usability. This tac-tic worked because they were able to align themselves with theproject short term goals of meeting the project deadline and alsothe long term goals of having an efﬁcient system. This enabled themto move from being perceived as antagonists by the expert usersand XYZ management to being seen as allies.4.3. Upward inﬂuencingThe placing of the two usability designers with the Scrum teamsfrom Company Beta was because this Company was handling themajority of the development of the user interface. There was adownside however to this arrangement as it led to the usabilitydesigners having limited inﬂuence in the project. They had no rep-resentation at the Product Owner level and the Product Ownersthey had contact with were the team level Product Owners in theBeta Scrum teams company and not the contractor level ProductOwner or subproject business Product Owner. Therefore the extentto which they could inﬂuence the prioritisation of the backlog waslimited. Change requests they made based on the few usability teststhey carried out ended up being discarded on the basis of theirbeing large and unnecessary once they reached the backlog pri-oritisation phase. The application of Scrum in the project at thismoment was described by JUD2 Beta as a “series of mini-waterfalls”;since the product was being built incrementally and teams were notallowed to revisit previously developed features to improve thequality based on new information or feedback. The PM explain-ing the reasons why some of the changes the usability designerswere suggesting were being ignored, mentioned that, “there werethings that were designed in the user interface that the designer saidwe should have, that we took out because we saw that it took far toolong in the drawing and so they became, ohh this again”.This side-lining was also occurring at the team level, eventhough these usability designers were co-located with other mem-bers of the Beta Scrums teams. The usability designers were beingbypassed by the team level Product Owners in the development andcommunication of user stories to the front end developers. Theywere present in these teams but only as ﬂoor members. Their inputwas not considered critical during planning meetings and they werenot aware of what features the front end developers had decidedto develop in a sprint.“The problem of sitting with developers is that you are not a ScrumMaster, so the Product Owner deals with the Scrum Master. Theysay we want you (Scrum Master) to develop this and this for thisiteration. We don’t know as usability persons which developers aregoing to pick a certain task off the Scrum board. So the way it worksis the team agrees to some tasks, they break it down and put it downon a Scrum board. Developer picks up the note and says this is someweird graphical user interface [censored word]. We (developers)have to ask the graphical user interface guy and they ask me, howis this going to look and I say I don’t know”. (JUD2 Beta)To tackle this, the usability designers set up a separate productbacklog, which they (usability designers) called a “shadow backlog”.This backlog contained issues such as interface inconsistencies andomitted usability tasks that the usability designers hoped would beaddressed. This tactic turned out to be ineffective as this backlogwas also ignored. The goal in the project was to maintain a singlebacklog. This as detailed in the ﬁnal project report was because XYZconsidered the idea of each contractor having a separate backlog tobe contrary to the principles of agile development. They averredthat it was “most appropriate to gather all the tasks in one backlogaccording to a joint master plan”. (Final project report)JUD1 Beta noted how they “tried to argue for why these (theitems in the shadow backlog) [were] important and some battles[they] lost and some [they] won”. They realised from these occur-rences that they would need to change their approach in order fortheir suggestions to be implemented. The usability designers even-tually resorted to what they described as “ﬁxing things under the A.Y. Wale-Kolade / The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–66 61table” with the front end developers in the Beta Scrum teams. JUD2Beta elaborating on this mentioned,“We actually started bribing developers with candy and so on toget them to ﬁx. Yeah seriously it was like, can we just add the . . ..,just make the escape button active; the next time you are doingsomething with the code in that window? So yeah they did. It wasimpossible doing that through the normal channels.”This individual also noted how they even bought carrots for adeveloper who was vegetarian. The head usability designer in rela-tion to this mentioned how the front end developers who receivedthese items “worked extra hours to correct the usability things thatwe thought were important to do”.This approach might have as noted by the head usabilitydesigner been a “bit out of the normal procedure”, but it was nec-essary since according to this individual, “sometimes it was difﬁcultto even get very small changes”. FED Beta corroborating this, talkedabout how some front end developers in the Beta Scrum teamshad described the ﬁxes being presented to them by the usabilitydesigners as involving “pixel pushing”, on the basis that it entailedtiny details such as “oh no the button is supposed to be just a frac-tion of an inch to the left or the right or whatever”. This individualsupported the tactic employed by the usability designers on thisbasis, asserting, “I guess the ice cream was necessary to tackle thepixel pushing by some people because some people did not like it asmuch as others”. JUD2 Beta also justiﬁed their (usability designers)actions, mentioning how as consultants they could have chosen toclose their eyes to these things, but that “it was a sort of professionalpride thing and we did not want to go through the proper channelsbecause that would have taken weeks and we would not have gottenthings done”.This approach taken by the usability designers eventually paidoff. The “ﬁxes” made their impact on the project more visible,leading to their eventual inclusion in planning meetings. Projectmembers “saw that what [we] did was to improve the quality andmake the system better to work with and that helped with this situationin that project”. (JUD2 Beta)In summary upward inﬂuencing by the usability designerswas critical in enabling the usability designers create leverage forusability at the higher levels of the project hierarchy. The tacticworked because the usability designers successfully ingratiatedthemselves with the front end developers. This enabled them totransition from ﬂoor member status to active member status.4.4. Establishing credibilityBoth software consulting companies had no domain knowl-edge of pensions and the existing system was complex. FED Betatalked about how they (project team members) found the man-ner in which data was being presented to the users in the existingsystem “a lot more complicated than we ﬁrst thought it should be”.The usability designers felt the impact of these issues more, sincein the project they were responsible for the design of the task ﬂowand the user interface. However their late inclusion into the projectmeant that they did not have sufﬁcient time to understand thesystem.“It was incredibly hard coming after they have had a three monthadvance in understanding the project. It [was] like coming to acountry where people speak a language you have never heard of.There are so many words and terms and so on, that it was com-pletely incomprehensible. So it [was] like learning a new language”.(JUD2 Beta)They also had to ensure consistency since they had a number ofteams working in parallel. Furthermore due to the Scrum of Scrumsmodel that had been adopted; these teams were working indepen-dently of one another. The impact these issues had on the projectcame to light during the pilot test of the new system which wasconducted midway into the project. A lot of change requests weremade as there were inconsistencies observed and some of the fea-tures that had been assumed to be useful for the case workers werebeing rejected by them.“There were some of the things that were designed that the [usabil-ity] designers [thought], oh, this must be good for the case workers.But then when that was out in the pilot then came hundreds ofchanges, [like] can you remove that thing?”(PM)The client company began to have some reservations about thecompetency of the usability designers.“They went oh; you did not get it right the ﬁrst time. And we saidthis is the method, you make something and you try it, perhapssomething needs to be changed and then you need to change it. Butthen they went oh, there is no time for that we have the incrementsall planned until the third year (Usability designer 2 Beta).The PM was of the opinion that the usability designers had foundit difﬁcult to understand how to work with Scrum and to workwithin the time limitations of the project. This individual assertedthat the usability designers had not “know[n] how to have the designdone gradually in the beginning, how not to do too much [upfront]design but just to do enough and . . . what [was] good enough”. Since atthis point, the project deadline was fast approaching; the usabilitydesigners were relegated to a lesser role in the project.“The second year was actually us trying to sit on our hands becausewe were told to shut up and [censored word] don’t tell anyone tomake any changes because it messes up the schedule”. (Usabilitydesigner 2 Beta)The usability designers had to wait until after the project dead-line when the new system would be up and running before theywould be able to make any changes. They decided to focus ondeveloping a pattern library which would serve as a common userinterface guide for the front end developers and ensure that therewas consistency in how the application was being developed goingforward. This proved useful as this pattern library was eventuallyadopted in the latter part of the project as the checklist for thegraphical user interface.In addition, the usability designers began to put up sketcheson the walls to show the impact a certain action could have onthe work process and persona descriptions to ensure the frontend developers were focused on the user perspective. They alsoput up personas on the walls. Furthermore, they organised train-ing sessions for the Beta Scrum teams where they emphasised theimportance of usability. The head usability designer mentioned thatthese training sessions enabled them prove to the front end deve-lopers that they (usability designers) were not trying to “make lifecomplicated for them (developers)”. FED Beta when asked to assessthe contributions of the usability designers to the project said,“. . .If we did not have them there I do not know what we wouldhave ended up with. Actually I have no idea. . . . If the developerswould have done it themselves, I am not so sure if it would havebecome much to brag about really in terms of the user interface”.(FED Beta)In summary, the usability designers’ establishing of their credi-bility in the project changed how they were viewed in the project.They did this by concretizing their knowledge of the new systemthrough the usability artefacts they developed in the project. Thistactic worked because it made their intentions visible in the projectand created an aura of trust. In this way they were no longer seenas incompetent but competent. 62 A.Y. Wale-Kolade / The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–664.5. Diffusing designsThere was only one Scrum team from Gamma working on thefront end and there were no usability designers located in this team.The head usability designer assumed responsibility for this group,but the interaction between this individual and this Scrum teamwas not as structured as that of the Beta Scrum team. A closer inter-action was impossible since the head usability designer was locatedwith the Scrum teams from Beta. Further the limited number ofusability designers meant that he was the main person responsiblefor the design of the user interface both in the short and long term.At the time the front end developers from Company Gammajoined the project, the collaboration set up they met was a ‘bridgesolution’ whereby their team level Product Owner acted as an inter-mediary between their Scrum team and the usability designers. Theusability designers would draw sketches and pass it on to this indi-vidual who in turn would pass it on to the front end developers.This individual was also in charge of carrying out usability relatedactivities such as testing and veriﬁcation. The front end developersin this Scrum team therefore had no awareness of usability relatedactivities that had been conducted by the usability designers.“As a developer I was never in the usability loop so to say. We nevergot a result of the usability testing. I know they did usability testingbut we never got the results for it”. (FED1 Gamma)A consequence of this arrangement was that the Gamma frontend developers did not understand the reasoning behind the arte-facts which the usability designers were using to guide how thesystem should be developed. FED1 Gamma mentioned, “We justgot screen shots that said we were going to make this as a front endand this is the back end that is going to talk with it, so I don’t know ifit was from the interaction designers or where it came from”. This ledto the developers having some misgivings regarding the intentionsand competencies of the usability designers.“I am not sure why they need[ed] to have this documented in whatthey call guidelines because that is not really a guideline in myworld” (FED1 Gamma).These Gamma front end developers also talked about the dif-ﬁculties in sourcing for the guidelines developed by the usabilitydesigners.“You had to ﬁnd them by yourself on the wiki, so if anyone asked,how are you doing the front end work? You would just say check. Sothere was no information pushing only information pulling”. (FED1Gamma)Interestingly despite these issues, the usability designers expe-rienced a higher level of ‘cooperation’ from the Gamma team thanwhat they experienced in their collaboration with the Beta Scrumteam.“If you gave a sketch to the Company Gamma team, they made itlook exactly like it, but they didn’t necessarily use the same glasses.As long as it looked the same that was their ideal and maybe theydidn’t ask many questions either. Like if you (usability designer)made it that way, they made it exactly like that. With the Beta team,they made it., they approached it partly differently. Sometimes theyjust did it their own way or sometimes asked us, should we do thisinstead?” (JUD1 Beta)The usability designers attributed this to be due to the hierar-chical culture that they had observed in the Gamma organisation.JUD2 Beta described how in Gamma, there was a “follow the leader”approach which was unlike the “individualistic” approach in Betawhere it was “the company soul to encourage people to sort of thinkfor themselves and not be so rigid in following your leader or followingthe system”. Head usability designer corroborating this noted, “TheGamma people are more trained to follow what the leader say and theyare more hierarchical and as long as they looked upon me as one ofthe responsible people for this, they did what they were told and thecooperation was actually quite good”. The usability designers’ recog-nition of these differences explained their assigning of the headusability designer to this team and the indirect manner in whichdesigns were being passed on to them. The usability designers didnot anticipate that there would be any resistance on the part of thedevelopers and this assumption ended up being valid. For exam-ple, FED2 Gamma had this to say about the one time in the projectwhere this individual had met with the head usability designer. “Iimplemented the view as requested and didn’t argue”. (FED2 Gamma)In summary the usability designers’ tactic of diffusing designsensured an easier collaboration between the usability designersand the Gamma Scrum team. The tactic worked because it createdan aura of authority that ﬁt well with the hierarchical tendencies ofthe Gamma Scrum team. In this way whatever obstacles that mighthave arisen from their not being co-located with the Gamma Scrumteam or their organisational differences were eliminated.5. Discussion and implicationsWe have presented a case study of how usability activities wereintegrated into this large agile project. We have also identiﬁedthe tactics which facilitated this integration. These as described inour analysis include negotiating inclusion, placating expert users,upward inﬂuencing, establishing credibility and diffusing designs.It has been asserted that the onus is on usability designers to deﬁneand justify their roles in agile projects (McInerney and Maurer,2005) and these tactics may be considered a means through whichthis may be achieved. A similar tactic that has been noted in the lit-erature is the “Trojan horse” technique, where usability designerssubtly integrate usability activities using mediums such as usabil-ity workshops (Cajander et al., 2013). It would be useful to examinehow inﬂuential such work tactics are on the integration of usabilityactivities into agile development projects and further research onthis is encouraged.The existing literature on the integration of usability activitiesinto agile development has been criticised for being dominated bya process perspective where integration is depicted as a rational,mechanical process (Ferreira et al., 2011). There is the issue of howthis literature is dominated by theoretical reﬂections, experiencereports or academic- practitioner trials (Silva da Silva et al., 2011),with few rigorous studies of practice (Ferreira et al., 2011). Thestrength of this paper is that we have addressed these concerns. Wehave examined practice and the tactics we have identiﬁed showthe error in portraying the integration of usability activities intoagile development as being purely the outcome of a methodologicalprocess. For instance the practice of usability designers’ working inparallel sprints with Scrum teams is one that has been assertedto be necessary if usability designers are to work in agile projects(Fox et al., 2008; Wale-Kolade et al., 2013). However as we haveshown in our study, this recommendation fails to consider howchallenging it would be to implement this practice when there ismore than one Scrum team involved. Processes might provide arepeatable formula to create a quality product (Hartson and Pyla,2012), but (as is evident in this study) without an understanding ofwhat occurs in practical settings, the utility of proposed processesand tools as relates to the integration of usability are questionable(Ferreira et al., 2012). Increased globalization means that projectssuch as the one we examined are gradually becoming the norm.Our ﬁndings suggest that the usability-agile dilemma is one furtheraggravated in inter-organisational contexts. Thus there is room forfurther systematic investigation of this matter. For instance suchexaminations could be extended to projects where team members A.Y. Wale-Kolade / The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–66 63are geographically distributed. It would also be useful to examinethe speciﬁc usability activities being carried out in these contextsas a way of enhancing knowledge in this area.We have also carried out an interpretive study of a large inter-organisational agile project and in this way provided insight intothe intricacies surrounding the integration of usability activitiesinto this project setting. Speciﬁcally we have highlighted whatissues might be expected to arise when usability designers areintroduced into these types of projects. For instance there is thematter of how many usability designers should be allocated intosuch large projects, which the present literature with its focus onin house development projects is yet to address. We have also shedlight on how contextual issues inﬂuence the integration of usabilityactivities in a large scale inter-organisational agile project. Previ-ous literature has highlighted how the level of import organisationsplace on usability determines how and whether usability activi-ties are integrated (Ambler, 2008). Also how a shared work cultureand the mutual awareness between team members that is a conse-quence of this shared work culture, plays a critical role in ensuringthe collaboration between usability designers and agile projectteams (Ferreira et al., 2012). In this paper we see the effect theseissues had on the integration of usability activities in this inter-organisational agile project. Project team members had differinginterpretations of how the project should be organised and how itshould proceed. In a single organisational project, this might havebeen mitigated by participants having a shared work culture. Alsothe usability designers might not have had to expend so much effortas they would have been working with a much smaller number ofScrum teams. However the multiplicity of organisations involvedmeant that this was not the case.Further, though the project organisers had taken steps to ensureinter-Scrum team coordination by implementing the Scrum ofScrums model, this consideration was not extended to the collab-oration between the usability designers and the Scrum teams. Theusability designers were generally the sole advocates of usabil-ity as the client organisation did not place a high value on theusability designer role. ‘They had to ‘negotiate their inclusion’, ‘pla-cate the expert users’ ‘engage in ‘upward inﬂuencing’ ‘establishtheir credibility’, and ‘diffuse designs’ in order to create opti-mal conditions for the integration of usability activities. Previousresearch has examined the use of artefacts in the collaborationbetween usability designers and agile project teams (Brown et al.,2011). Our study shows how artefacts such as sketches wereused by the usability designers to achieve their goal of “ensuringtheir credibility”. In view of this, we propose that the examina-tion of such collaborative artefacts should be extended further toinvestigating the intentions behind these artefacts, for instancewhat tactic informs their selection, and their effectiveness in suchinstances.Although we have identiﬁed these tactics within the context ofa large inter-organisational agile development project, where theScrum of Scrums model was used, we believe that our ﬁndings arealso relevant to projects where mainstream Scrum models are used.The Scrum method is known for its lack of a clear picture of theresponsibility for usability (Lárusdóttir et al., 2012; Cajander et al.,2013), and for its strong focus on functionality (Singh, 2008). Ourstudy shows that this is also true of large projects even if the Scrummethod used is a scaled up version. The integration of usabilityactivities into agile development is clearly a difﬁcult process andour ﬁndings where we have highlighted ﬁve tactics being deployedto ensure this integration is proof of this difﬁculty. Thus we can gen-eralise that whether this integration of usability activities occurs ina project using mainstream Scrum or in a large project where theScrum of Scrums model is used, whatever variations might existwith regards to the tactics used may have more to do with thescope of effort needed to ensure this integration.Table 4Theoretical propositions regarding the integration of usability activities in agiledevelopment.Proposition 1 The beneﬁts resulting from the involvement of usabilitydesigners in agile projects are more discernible when theusability designers have the clout needed to make thisimpact.Proposition 2 Successful collaboration of usability designers anddevelopers is less a question of how they are located, butmore a question of how willing they are to alignthemselves.Proposition 3 User involvement is only successful to the extent thatusability designers are empowered and are responsible forhow to involve users.5.1. Theoretical implicationsThere are implications to be derived from our study when weconsider team arrangements that have been described in the lit-erature as optimal for the integration of usability activities intoagile development methods. These are the involvement of usabil-ity designers; the immersion of usability designers and developers;and the involvement of users (Wale-Kolade et al., 2013). On thebasis that these arrangements were also evident in our case study,the following theoretical propositions which we have listed inTable 4 be seen as applicable not only to large agile developmentprojects where the Scrum of Scrums model is used, but also in thosewhere mainstream Scrum models are used. These are elaborated inthe subsequent paragraphs.First, the literature emphasises that usability designers must beinvolved in the project. Their involvement ensures usability con-cerns are always at the fore (Wale-Kolade et al., 2013) and is inthis regard critical to the ensuring of usability (Lievesley and Yee,2006; Ambler, 2008). In our case study, the usability designerswere tied to the project, but the integration of usability activ-ities was not solely an outcome of their being involved in theproject. They had to ‘negotiate their inclusion’ in order to gaingreater access into the project. They had to ‘establish their credi-bility’ and ‘diffuse designs’ before they could be seen as valuableby the other team members. They had no clout in the projectwhich would have enabled them inﬂuence the manner in which theproject was being executed and had to resort to ‘upward inﬂuenc-ing’ in order to make any discernible impact. We can thus proposethat;The beneﬁts resulting from the involvement of usability designersin agile projects are more discernible when the usability designershave the clout needed to make this impact.Secondly, the immersion of usability designers into agile devel-opment teams has been described as useful in ensuring usabilityconcerns are given the primacy they deserve during requirementgathering activities and the development phase (Düchting et al.,2007). It creates a mutual awareness among project teams (Ferreiraet al., 2012) and ensures usability design suggestions are notmisinterpreted (Najaﬁ and Toyoshiba, 2008). It allows for eas-ier communication and collaboration between usability designersand developers (Ferreira et al., 2011; Silva da Silva et al., 2013).Where there is no immersion it has been asserted that usabilityis perceived to be irrelevant and considered a “checkbox tickingexercise” (Raison and Schmidt, 2013) and the usability designerbecomes an optional “add-on” (Cajander et al., 2013). An alterna-tive stance that has been noted is that when usability designersare immersed, their creativity is hampered as they become moreinvolved in software construction issues (Ferreira et al., 2010). Fur-ther that this arrangement calls for the usability designer to havea higher cross specialisation of skills in order that this individualmay be able to communicate with the developers (Wale-Kolade 64 A.Y. Wale-Kolade / The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–66et al., 2013). Our case study allows us evaluate both sides of thesearguments since both arrangements; immersed and non-immersedwere put into effect in the project. In terms of ensuring focuson usability, both arrangements were insufﬁcient in themselvesin ensuring integration. Usability activities were considered evenmore irrelevant in the immersed teams than in the non-immersedteams as seen in how the developers in the immersed teams wereless willing to accede to the usability designers. For these immersedteams, it took the usability designers ‘establishing their credibility’in order to ensure usability concerns were brought to the fore. Inthe non-immersed, it only required them to ‘diffuse designs’, asthis team even though they did not fully understand what theyhad been given, chose to accord credibility to the usability design-ers. On the other hand there were also beneﬁts to each of thesearrangements. We see this in how the usability designers were ableto succeed in ‘upward inﬂuencing’ by reason of their being with theimmersed teams. We also see it in how rather than being viewedas irrelevant by the non-immersed Scrum team, they were consid-ered individuals whose authority could not be questioned. A newenvironment was created for usability that was not an outcomeof whether the usability designers were immersed or not but onwhether in each case Scrum teams and usability designers werewilling to work together. Thus we can suggest that;Successful collaboration of usability designers and developers is lessa question of how they are located, but more a question of howwilling they are to align themselves.A third consideration has to do with the issue of user involve-ment. It is argued that it is a means to ensure that user needsare adequately taken into account (Blomkvist, 2005). It empowersend users by enabling them express their opinions about activities,practices and tasks (Bonacin et al., 2009). Conversely it has beennoted that this practice is unable to cater for the different mentalmodel of users regarding usability and can also lead to diminisheduser representativeness (Wale-Kolade et al., 2013). Our study pro-vides evidence of this latter observation. We see how the usabilitydesigners had to focus on ‘placating the expert users’ in order to beable to gain a more comprehensive overview of what was expectedfrom the system in terms of usability. The information the expertusers were providing was no doubt relevant since they were morefamiliar with the system, but this information was based on theirown mental models and not that of the less experienced users.The involvement of users without the intervention of the usabilitydesigners would have resulted in a usability that was only suitablefor a select group of individuals. Undoubtedly the involvement ofusers is a crucial part of usability, and it is impossible to adequatelytake into account every individual’s needs for usability. Thereforewhat can be derived from this is that beyond user involvement, theusability designers need to be empowered to make the necessaryadjustments when users are involved. Thus we can propose that;User involvement is only successful to the extent that usabilitydesigners are empowered and are responsible for how to involveusers.These three propositions may be seen as a means by whichoptimal conditions can be created for the integration of usabilityactivities in agile development projects irrespective of their size.They allude to the fact that the ideal arrangements described in theliterature concerning the involvement of designers, whether theyare immersed or not, and the involvement of users are insufﬁcientin themselves to guarantee the integration of usability activitiesnor usability designer–agile team collaborations. There is an inad-equacy in these arrangements which become evident when theyare implemented in large agile projects. Additionally in some casessuch as ours they may only exist to give off an impression of interestin usability issues.From a practitioner perspective, what relevance do our ﬁndingshave for these individuals? It has been asserted that for usabilitydesigners working in agile projects, it is important that they under-stand their job role (Kollmann et al., 2009). They must be able toadapt (Meingast et al., 2013); be able to argue and be persuasive(Cajander et al., 2013). Our ﬁndings corroborate each of these asser-tions. The usability designers’ understanding of their job role and itsimportance played a key role in enabling them establish their cred-ibility. We saw evidence of their adaptability in how they resortedto ‘placating the experts’ by making concessions when initial dis-cussions with these individuals were not fruitful. Also, it is evidentin how they ‘diffused designs’ due to their not being co-located withthe Gamma Scrum team. Persuasiveness was evident in how they‘negotiated their inclusion’, and in their ‘upwards inﬂuencing’.One issue we want to emphasise at this point pertains toresponsiveness. Responsiveness is at the heart of agile methods.Responsiveness means that there is an acknowledgement of thechaotic nature of software development and that there is a recog-nition of the need to be proactive, rather than rigid (Chow andCao, 2008). In our study, the usability designers had entered intothe project with preconceived notions of how the project wouldproceed based on their previous experiences in other projects. Anexample of this can be seen in how they had initially assumed thatall the end users in Company XYZ operated at the same skill levelas the expert users. Also they had never worked in a project aslarge as this. The resulting chaos which emerged from the usabil-ity designers not having their initial expectations fulﬁlled in theproject led to their deploying the ﬁve tactics that we have iden-tiﬁed. We have no means of ascertaining whether it would haverequired less effort on the part of the usability designers’ part tointegrate usability activities if from the start they had been moreproactive and recognised that the project would be difﬁcult. Buton the basis that it was the usability designers’ tactics that ensuredthe integration of usability activities and not just their performanceof their designated usability tasks, validates why usability design-ers need to embrace the change that is agile software development(Norman, 2006). Indeed agile methods impose new demands onthe usability designer role and it is the responsibility of usabilitydesigners to meet these demands (Nielsen and Madsen, 2012).5.2. LimitationsOur study is not without its limitations. There have been dis-cussions regarding the artiﬁciality of interviews in how it forcesindividuals to create opinions under time pressure (Myers andNewman, 2007). As our study was based on an already completedproject, our data could not be supplemented with data acquiredfrom participant observations. Participant observations would haveallowed us validate what our participants were saying. We triedto meet this criterion by basing the questions asked in successiveinterviews on data obtained from prior interviews, but we cannotguarantee that this was sufﬁcient. Further studies may follow a liveproject. Related to this, we also suggest that potential researchersshould consider employing an alternative research approach otherthan the case study approach that was used in this study. Forinstance action research known for how it combines theory gener-ation with researcher intervention (Sein et al., 2011) is a researchapproach whose utilisation could prove very valuable. This is asit would provide these potential researchers an opportunity tostudy the integration of usability activities into such large projectsin greater detail and also provide them with an avenue to effectchange.There is also the issue of the small number of participants whowere involved in this study. Indeed it would have been useful toincorporate the views from other project members such as theend users and other agile developers. Unfortunately it was difﬁcult A.Y. Wale-Kolade / The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–66 65to obtain further access due to concerns the client company hadabout their privacy. Conversely, some of the issues that have beenhighlighted here are not solely unique to inter-organisational agiledevelopment projects. For instance, with reference to how theusability designers were perceived in the project, it is known thatagile project teams consider usability designers retrogressive dueto their focus on periods for user studies prior to project start(Norman, 2006). Usability designers are also viewed as technicallyincompetent when they demonstrate a lack of understanding ofthe agile process (Kollmann et al., 2009). There is an acknowledgedscepticism towards the usability designer role within softwaredevelopment settings and it is a role that requires a person witha “great deal of stamina and backbone, and a strong belief in whathe/she is doing” (Boivie et al., 2006). Similarities between theseobservations concerning the challenges usability designers facewhen collaborating with agile project teams and those we havenoted in this study suggests we have observed a valid concerneven if the sample that has been examined is small. Moreover thefact that we examined this issue within an inter-organisationalagile project has enabled us broaden the scope of this discussion.Thus on this basis we argue that the evidence from our data iscompelling enough to warrant our investigation of this matter.However we admit that a more heterogeneous selection of par-ticipants would allow for more robust ﬁndings and incorporate abroader perspective, unlike in this study where our ﬁndings aremostly based on the perspective of the usability designers. Thuswe encourage researchers who might wish to explore our researchquestion further to take this matter regarding participant selectioninto consideration.6. ConclusionOur main interest in this study pertained to the integration ofusability activities in large inter-organisational agile projects. Ourstudy highlights how difﬁcult it is to integrate usability activitiesinto this project type. The complex nature of this project does notfoster the creation of the collaborative environment needed to inte-grate usability activities. Our ﬁndings suggest that it is possible tointegrate usability activities into these projects but only as longas the usability designers are able to put in the required effortneeded to ensure this integration. In this case study, this effortwas demonstrated in the form of the ﬁve collaboration tactics thatwere identiﬁed in this study. These as mentioned in the paper arenegotiating inclusion, upward inﬂuencing, placating expert users,establishing credibility and diffusing designs. Though these ﬁnd-ings are by no means conclusive, since they represent the usabilitydesigners’ perspective on the issue, they highlight the importantrole collaboration plays in the integration of usability activities intoagile projects.We have also highlighted the implications our ﬁndings have onteam arrangements in agile projects where usability designers areinvolved and the usability designer role. Based on which we havemade three propositions regarding how a collaborative environ-ment may be created for the integration of usability activities inlarge agile development projects. We thus call for further studiesto validate as well as elaborate more on these propositions. Forinstance regarding the issue of clout, what might this translate tofor usability designers in a large agile development project? Poten-tial future studies might also consider examining which usabilityactivities are being performed in large inter-organisational agileprojects in order to enhance knowledge in this area. In acknowl-edgement of the limitations we have identiﬁed in our study, suchresearch should involve: (a) live inter-organisational agile projects;(b) and incorporate a broad range of perspectives, including but notlimited to usability designers.ReferencesAbrahamsson, P., Warsta, J., et al., 2003. New directions on agile methods: a compar-ative analysis. In: 25th International Conference on Software Engineering 2003Proceedings.Abrahão, S., Juristo, N., et al., 2010. Interplay between usability and software devel-opment. J. Syst. Softw. 83 (11), 2015–2018.Adikari, S., McDonald, C., Campbell, J., 2009. Little design up-front: a design scienceapproach to integrating usability into agile requirements engineering. In: Jacko,J.A. (Ed.), Human-Computer Interaction. New Trends. Lecture Notes in ComputerScience, vol. 5610. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, pp. 549–558.Ambler, S.W., 2008. In: Law, E.L.-C., Hvannberg, E.T., Cockton, G. (Eds.), Tailo-ring Usability into Agile Software Development Projects Maturing Usability.Springer, London, pp. 75–95.Barksdale, J.T., Ragan, E.D., et al., 2009. Easing team politics in agile usability: aconcept mapping approach. In: Agile Conference, 2009, AGILE’09.Barton, B., 2009. All-out organizational scrum as an innovation value chain. In: 42ndHawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2009 (HICSS’09).Benbasat, I., Goldstein, D.K., et al., 1987. The case research strategy in studies ofinformation systems. MIS Q., 369–386.Blomkvist, S., 2005. Towards a model for bridging agile development anduser-centered design. In: Seffah, A., Gulliksen, J., Desmarais, M.C. (Eds.),Human-Centered Software Engineering—Integrating Usability in the SoftwareDevelopment Lifecycle, 8. Springer, The Netherlands, pp. 219–244.Boivie, I., Gulliksen, J., et al., 2006. The lonesome cowboy: a study of the usabilitydesigner role in systems development. Interact. Comput. 18 (4), 601–634.Bonacin, R., Baranauskas, M.C.C., et al., 2009. In: Filipe, J., Cordeiro, J. (Eds.), AnAgile Process Model for Inclusive Software Development Enterprise InformationSystems, 24. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, pp. 807–818.Bowen, G.A., 2009. Document analysis as a qualitative research method. Qual. Res.J. 9 (2), 27–40.Brown, J.M., Lindgaard, G., et al., 2011. Collaborative events and shared artefacts:agile interaction designers and developers working toward common aims. In:Agile Conference (AGILE), 2011.Brown, J.M., Lindgaard, G., et al., 2012. Joint implicit alignment work of interactiondesigners and software developers. In: Proceedings of the 7th Nordic Conferenceon Human-Computer Interaction: Making Sense Through Design, Copenhagen,Denmark. ACM, pp. 693–702.Bygstad, B., Munkvold, B.E., 2010. Exploring the role of informants in interpretivecase study research in IS. J. Inf. Technol. 26 (1), 32–45.Cajander, Å., Larusdottir, M., et al., 2013. Existing but not explicit – the user per-spective in scrum projects in practice. In: Kotzé, P., Marsden, G., Lindgaard, G.,Wesson, J., Winckler, M. (Eds.), Human-Computer Interaction – INTERACT 2013.Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 8119. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, pp.762–779.Chamberlain, S., Sharp, H., Maiden, N., 2006. Towards a framework for integratingagile development and user-centred design. In: Abrahamsson, P., Marchesi, M.,Succi, G. (Eds.), Extreme Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engineer-ing. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 4044. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg,pp. 143–153.Chow, T., Cao, D.-B., 2008. A survey study of critical success factors in agile softwareprojects. J. Syst. Softw. 81 (6), 961–971.Conboy, K., 2009. Agility from ﬁrst principles: reconstructing the concept of agilityin information systems development. Inf. Syst. Res. 20 (3), 329–354.Düchting, M., Zimmermann, D., et al., 2007. Incorporating user centered requirementengineering into agile software development. In: Jacko, J.A. (Ed.), Human-Computer Interaction. Interaction Design and Usability. Lecture Notes inComputer Science, 4550. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, pp. 58–67.Ferré, X., Juristo, N., et al., 2001. Usability basics for software developers. IEEE Softw.18 (1), 22–29.Ferreira, J., Sharp, H., et al., 2010. Values and assumptions shaping agile develop-ment and user experience design in practice. In: Sillitti, A., Martin, A., Wang, X.,Whitworth, E. (Eds.), Agile Processes in Software Engineering and Extreme Pro-gramming. Lecture Notes in Business Information Processing, vol. 48. Springer,Berlin/Heidelberg, pp. 178–183.Ferreira, J., Sharp, H., et al., 2011. User experience design and agile development:managing cooperation through articulation work. Softw. Pract. Exp. 41 (9),963–974.Ferreira, J., Sharp, H., et al., 2012. Agile development and user experience designintegration as an ongoing achievement in practice. In: Agile Conference (AGILE),2012.Fitzgerald, B., Hartnett, G., et al., 2006. Customising agile methods to software prac-tices at intel shannon. Eur. J. Inf. Syst. 15 (2), 200–213.Fox, D., Sillito, J., et al.,2008. Agile methods and user-centered design: how these twomethodologies are being successfully integrated in industry. In: Proceedings ofthe Agile 2008. IEEE Computer Society, pp. 63–72.Hartson, R., Pyla, P.S., 2012. The UX Book: Process and Guidelines for Ensuring aQuality User Experience. Elsevier.Herbsleb, J.D.,2007. Global software engineering: the future of socio-technical coor-dination. In: 2007 Future of Software Engineering. IEEE Computer Society, pp.188–198.Hsieh, H.-F., Shannon, S.E., 2005. Three approaches to qualitative content analysis.Qual. Health Res. 15 (9), 1277–1288.Hussain, Z., Slany, W., et al., 2009. Current state of agile user-centered design: a sur-vey. In: Holzinger, A., Miesenberger, K. (Eds.), HCI and usability for e-inclusion. 66 A.Y. Wale-Kolade / The Journal of Systems and Software 100 (2015) 54–66Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 5889. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, pp.416–427.ISO, 2006. Ergonomics of Human–System Interaction – Part 110: Dialogue Principles.9241-110. ISO, Geneva, Switzerland.Isomursu, M., Sirotkin, A., et al., 2012. User experience design goes agile in leantransformation – a case study. In: Agile Conference (AGILE), 2012, pp. 1–10.Jokela, T., Abrahamsson, P., 2004. Usability assessment of an extreme programmingproject: close co-operation with the customer does not equal to good usability.In: Bomarius, F., Iida, H. (Eds.), Product Focused Software Process Improvement.Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 3009. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, pp.393–407.Juristo, N., Moreno, A.M., Sanchez-Segura, M.-I., 2007. Analysing the impact of usabil-ity on software design. J. Syst. Softw. 80, 1506–1516.Kollmann, J., Sharp, H., et al., 2009. The importance of identity and vision to userexperience designers on agile projects. In: Agile Conference, 2009. AGILE’09.Kuusinen, K., Mikkonen, T., et al., 2012. Agile user experience development in alarge software organization: good expertise but limited impact. In: Winckler,M., Forbrig, P., Bernhaupt, R. (Eds.), Human-Centered Software Engineering.Lecture Notes in Computer Science, vol. 7623. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg,pp. 94–111.Lárusdóttir, M.K., Cajander, Å., et al., 2012. The big picture of UX is missing in scrumprojects. In: Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop on the InterplayBetween User Experience Evaluation and Software Development, in Conjunctionwith the 7th Nordic Conference on Human-computer Interaction, Copenhagen,Denmark. University of Leicester, UK.Lee, J.C., Judge, T.K., et al., 2011. Evaluating eXtreme scenario-based design in adistributed agile team. ACM.Lievesley, M.A., Yee, J.S.R., 2006. The role of the interaction designer in an agilesoftware development process. ACM.McInerney, P., Maurer, F., 2005. UCD in agile projects: dream team or odd couple?Interactions 12, 19–23.Meingast, M., Ballew, T., et al., 2013. Agile and UX: the road to integration thechallenges of the UX practitioner in an agile environment. In: Proceedings ofthe Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, vol. 57(1), pp.1002–1006.Miles, M.B., Huberman, A.M., 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis: An Expanded Source-book. SAGE Publications, United States of America.Misra, S.C., Kumar, V., et al., 2009. Identifying some important success factorsin adopting agile software development practices. J. Syst. Softw. 82 (11),1869–1890.Myers, M.D., 1997. Qualitative research in information systems. MIS Q. 21 (2),241–242.Myers, M.D., Newman, M., 2007. The qualitative interview in IS research: examiningthe craft. Inf. Org. 17 (1), 2–26.Najaﬁ, M., Toyoshiba, L., 2008. Two case studies of user experience design and agiledevelopment. In: Agile Conference’08, Toronto, ON.Nielsen, L., Madsen, S., 2012. The usability expert’s fear of agility: an empiricalstudy of global trends and emerging practices. In: Proceedings of the 7th NordicConference on Human–Computer Interaction: Making Sense Through Design,Copenhagen, Denmark. ACM, pp. 261–264.Norman, D., 2006. Why doing user observations ﬁrst is wrong. Interactions 13 (4),50-ff.Paasivaara, M., Lassenius, C., 2003. Collaboration practices in global inter-organizational software development projects. Softw. Process Improv. Pract. 8(4), 183–199.Paasivaara, M., Lassenius, C., 2010. Using scrum practices in GSD projects. In:ˇSmite,D., Moe, N.B., Ågerfalk, P.J. (Eds.), Agility Across Time and Space. Springer,Berlin/Heidelberg, pp. 259–278.Raison, C., Schmidt, S., 2013. Keeping user centred design (UCD) alive and well inyour organisation: taking an agile approach. In: Marcus, A. (Ed.), Design, UserExperience, and Usability. Design Philosophy, Methods, and Tools. Lecture Notesin Computer Science, 8012. Springer, Berlin Heidelberg, pp. 573–582.Schwaber, K., Beedle, M., 2002. Agile Software Development with Scrum. PrenticeHall, Upper Saddle River.Schwaber, K., Sutherland, J., 2013. The Scrum Guide – the Deﬁntive Guide to Scrum:The Rules of the Game.Sein, M.K., Henfridsson, O., et al., 2011. Action design research. MIS Q. 35 (1), 37–56.Sharp, H., Robinson, H., et al., 2009. The role of physical artefacts in agile softwaredevelopment: two complementary perspectives. Interact. Comput. 21 (1–2),108–116.Silva da Silva, T., Martin, A., et al., 2011. User-centered design and agile methods: asystematic review. In: Agile Conference (AGILE), Salt Lake City, UT.Silva da Silva, T., Selbach Silveira, M., et al., 2013. Ten lessons learned from integratinginteraction design and agile development. In: Agile Conference (AGILE), 2013.Singh, M., 2008. U-SCRUM: an agile methodology for promoting usability. In: Agile,2008. AGILE’08. Conference.Sutherland, J., Viktorov, A., Blount, J., Puntikov, N., 2007. Distributed Scrum: Agileproject management with outsourced development teams. In: HICSS 2007.40th Annual Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, January 3–6,Hawaii.Wale-Kolade, A., Nielsen, P., et al., 2013. Usability work in agile systems developmentpractice: a systematic review. In: Linger, H., Fisher, J., Barndenet, A., et, al. (Eds.),Building Sustainable Information Systems. Springer, US, pp. 569–582.Walsham, G., 1995. Interpretive case studies in is research: nature and method. Eur.J. Inf. Syst. 4 (2), 74–81.Williams, H., Ferguson, A., 2007. The UCD perspective: before and after agile. In:AGILE 2007.Vallon, R., Strobl, S., et al., 2013. Inter-organizational co-development with scrum:experiences and lessons learned from a distributed corporate developmentenvironment. In: Baumeister, H., Weber, B. (Eds.), Agile Processes in SoftwareEngineering and Extreme Programming. Lecture Notes in Business InformationProcessing, vol. 149. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, pp. 150–164.Vaughan, D., 1998. Rational choice, situated action, and the social control of organi-zations. Law Soc. Rev. 32 (1), 23–61.Yin, R.K., 2013. Case Study Research: Design and Methods. SAGE Publications Inc.Ågerfalk, P.J., Fitzgerald, B., 2006. Flexible and distributed software processes: oldpetunias in new bowls? CACM 49 (10), 26–34.Ågerfalk, P.J., Fitzgerald, B., et al., 2009. Introduction to the special issue: ﬂexibleand distributed information systems development: state of the art and researchchallenges. Inf. Syst. Res. 20 (3), 317–328.