 The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 1299Contents lists available at SciVerse
 ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
jo u rn al hom epage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jss“Leagile” software development: An experience report analysis of the applicationof lean approaches in agile software developmentXiaofeng Wanga,, Kieran Conboyb, Oisin CawleycaFree University of Bozen/Bolzano, ItalybSchool of Information Systems, Technology and Management, UNSW, Sydney 2052, AustraliacLero, The Irish Software Engineering Research Centre, Irelanda r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 1 September 2011Received in revised form 27 January 2012Accepted 31 January 2012Available online 15 February 2012Keywords:
Agile software developmentLean software developmentScrum
Leagile
Kanban
Experience reportSoftware engineeringa b s t r a c tIn recent years there has been a noticeable shift in attention from those who use agile software develop-ment toward lean software development, often labelled as a shift “from agile to lean”. However, the realitymay not be as simple or linear as this label implies. To provide a better understanding of lean softwaredevelopment approaches and how they are applied in agile software development, we have examined30 experience reports published in past agile software conferences in which experiences of applyinglean approaches in agile software development were reported. The analysis identiﬁed six types of leanapplication. The results of our study show that lean can be applied in agile processes in different man-ners for different purposes. Lean concepts, principles and practices are most often used for continuousagile process improvement, with the most recent introduction being the kanban approach, introducinga continuous, ﬂow-based substitute to time-boxed agile processes.© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.1. IntroductionAgile methods have become highly prevalent since the AgileManifesto1emerged in early 2001 as a response to the inefﬁciencyof existing software development methods in rapidly changingenvironments (Highsmith, 2002). In agile literature, agile methodsgenerally denote a family of methods under the umbrella of theAgile Alliance, including: eXtreme Programming (XP, Beck, 1999),Scrum (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002), Dynamic Systems Devel-opment Method (DSDM, http://www.dsdm.org), Crystal Methods(Cockburn, 2001), Feature-Driven Development (FDD, Coad andPalmer, 2002), Lean Development (Charette, 2003) and AdaptiveSoftware Development (ASD, Highsmith, 2002). Although differ-ing in speciﬁc techniques, these methods have much in common,including short iterative life cycles, quick and frequent feedbackfrom customers, and constant learning. Among them, Scrum andXP/Scrum hybrid are by far the most widely adopted in the pastdecade (VersionOne, 2010).Corresponding author at: Dominikanerplatz 3 piazza Domenicani, I-39100Bozen/Bolzano, Italy. Tel.: +39 0471 016 181.E-mail addresses: xiaofeng.wang@unibz.it, xiaofeng.wang@ul.ie (X. Wang),k.conboy@unsw.edu.au (K. Conboy), oisin.cawley@lero.ie (O. Cawley).1http://www.agilealliance.org.In recent years however the agile community has started tolook toward lean software development approaches, in additionto agile methods such as XP and Scrum. Emerging lean conferences(e.g. Lean Software and Systems Consortium conference series, LeanEnterprise Software and Systems conference) show that lean adop-tion is spreading. Lean approaches are claimed to be “the nextwave of software process”.2Even though originally lean softwaredevelopment was viewed as just another agile method (Highsmith,2002; Dybå and Dingsøyr, 2009), there is an increasing focus onlean and it is viewed as being a method category in itself ratherthan an instance of agile methods (Hibbs et al., 2009). More andmore people advocate “from agile to lean” (Hiranabe, 2008), andthe application of lean approaches in agile software development.Some claim that lean software development provides the theorybehind agile practices (Poppendieck and Poppendieck, 2003, 2006).Others argue that lean is a necessary progression for organisationsplanning to scale up agility from the project or team level to theorganisational level, which agile methods fail to address satisfy-ingly (Smits, 2007). “Scrumban” is a term coined for a softwareproduction model based on Scrum and kanban (Ladas, 2009). It isbelieved to be especially suited for maintenance projects or projectswith frequent and unexpected user stories or programming errors.2http://atlanta2010.leanssc.org/.0164-1212/$ – see front matter©  2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.doi:10.1016/j.jss.2012.01.061 1288X. Wang et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 1299In such cases the time-boxed sprints of the Scrum model are ofno appreciable use, but Scrum’s daily meetings and other practicescan be applied, depending on the team and the situation at hand.Using these methods, the team’s workﬂow is directed in a way thatallows for minimum earliest completion time for each user storyor programming error, but on the other hand ensures each teammember is constantly employed (Ladas, 2009).Despite the shifting focus of practice from agile softwaredevelopment represented by Scrum and XP to lean softwaredevelopment, few studies have been conducted that can offer agood understanding of the application of lean approaches in agilesoftware development, due to the fact that lean in software devel-opment is a nascent research area yet to be explored. Naylor et al.(1999) coin the term “leagility” whereby principles were estab-lished for combining both lean and agile in a supply chain strategy.We borrow the term and use “leagile” software development todenote the software development processes that include both agileand lean elements.The purposes of our study, consequently, are (1) to provide a bet-ter understanding of the application strategies of lean approaches inagile software development, and (2) to demonstrate how these strate-gies are being implemented in practice. To achieve these goals, wehave conducted a secondary data analysis of a set of experiencereports in which the real world application of lean approaches inagile software development is evidenced. These experience reportswere published in the past Agile and XP conference series. Patternsof lean application in agile software development that recurred inthese experience reports were identiﬁed. The results are intendedto be useful for both research and practice.The remaining part of the paper is organised as follows. Section2 introduces basic lean concepts and lean principles and practicesfor software development. This is followed by a section that reviewsthe relevant literature on the application of lean approaches in agilesoftware development. Section 4 describes the research approachemployed. Then the ﬁndings are reported in the next section, andfurther reﬂected upon in the discussion section. The paper endswith concluding remarks.2. Lean software developmentIt is well acknowledged that the terms ‘agile’ and ‘lean’ arepoorly deﬁned in the software development literature, and theuse of these terms is often poorly considered, multi-dimensional,ambiguous and inconsistent (Conboy, 2009). For the purpose of ourstudy, however, we need to make it as explicit as possible what wemean by lean software development. Corresponding to relativelywell-accepted agile values, principles and practices, we considerthat lean software development also involve three main elements:lean concepts, lean principles and lean practices.2.1. Lean conceptsLeanness, like agility, is not a term unique to software develop-ment. It has a much older origin rooted in other disciplines, withmost literature tracing the origins back to the Toyota ProductionSystem (TPS) in the 1950s (Ohno, 1988). However, it did not makea signiﬁcant impact in the mainstream literature until MIT’s (Mas-sachusetts Institute of Technology) 5-year study of the automotiveindustry identiﬁed lean as a source of huge productivity differencesbetween the US and Japan (Womack et al., 1990).Lean thinking is a way of thinking that enables organisations to“specify value, line up value-creating actions in the best sequence,conduct these activities without interruption whenever someonerequests them, and perform them more and more effectively”Table 1Lean principles relevant to software development.Lean SoftwareDevelopment
Principles
(Poppendieck andPoppendieck, 2003)aThe Principles ofProduct DevelopmentFlow (Reinertsen,2009)The Kanban Principles(Anderson, 2010)• Eliminate waste• Build quality in• Create knowledge• Defer commitment• Deliver fast• Respect people• Optimise the whole• Use an economicview
• Manage queues• Exploit variability• Reduce batch size• Apply WIP (Work inProgress) constraints• Control ﬂow underuncertainty
• Use fast feedback• Decentralise control• Visualise theworkﬂow
• Limit WIP• Manage ﬂow• Make process policiesexplicit
• Improvecollaboratively (usingmodels and thescientiﬁc method)aThese seven principles have been rephrased and rearranged by The Pop-pendiecks. The newest version can be seen at http://www.poppendieck.com/.(Womack and Jones, 1996). Five inherently interlinked guiding leanconcepts underpin lean thinking:•Value: It is deﬁned by the customer and it is paramount to havea clear understanding of what that is.•Value stream: A map that identiﬁes every step in the process andcategorises each step in terms of the value it adds.•Flow: It is important that the production process ﬂows continu-ously.•Pull: Customer orders pull product, ensuring nothing is builtbefore it is needed.•Perfection: Striving for perfection in the process by continuouslyidentifying and removing waste.2.2. Lean principlesThe primary focus and guiding principle of lean is the identi-ﬁcation and elimination of waste from the process with respectto customer value. In Japanese this waste is referred to as muda,although other terms such as mura (unevenness), and muri (over-burden) are also used. Lean thinking classiﬁes work into threecategories: value-adding activities, required non-value addingactivities, and non-value adding activities. By mapping out the pro-cess using a value stream map, those process steps which do notcontribute to creating value can be identiﬁed and eliminated. Itis worth noting that the concept of waste can be quite broad andcontext dependent. In the domain of software development, thetypes of waste can be interpreted as: extra features, waiting, taskswitching, extra processes, partially done work, movement, defects andunused employee creativity (Poppendieck and Poppendieck, 2003;Hibbs et al., 2009).The contemporary understanding of lean software developmentis largely driven by practitioners writings (e.g., Poppendieck andPoppendieck, 2003, 2006; Hibbs et al., 2009; Reinertsen, 2009;Anderson, 2010). Maintaining the core intent of lean, different leanprinciples for software development have been proposed and areconstantly evolving. Table 1 lists several sets of lean principlesbetter known in agile community. These sets of lean principlesoverlap to large extent which reﬂects the core and essence of leanapproaches.It is worth noting that the kanban approach is the most recentaddition to the agile and lean software development affray. Again,it gets its name from the world of lean manufacturing. A kanbansystem is “a production control system for just-in-time productionand making full use of workers’ capabilities” (Sugimori et al., 1977).The core objective of the kanban system is to minimise the amount X. Wang et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 12991289of WIP. Excess WIP is one form of waste from a lean perspective.Work should be “pulled” through the system as it is needed, asopposed to “pushing” it through. Only when a downstream pro-cess is ready and needs to do some more work does it pull workfrom an upstream process. The signalling between upstream anddownstream processes is typically done via some sort of colouredcard which physically travels between processes. The aim is to keepthe process ﬂowing at an even but continuous rate. This is achievedby controlling the number of kanban cards which are in circulationwithin the process.2.3. Lean practicesSome lean software development practices have already beenwell established in agile methods, and regarded as agile practicesas well, even though they have origins that can be traced backto pre-agile days. For example, back in the 1970s, Michael Fagan,while working for IBM, formalised the practice of code reviews in atechnique known as Fagan’s Inspections: “Because errors were iden-tiﬁed and corrected in groups [early in the process] rather than foundone-by-one during subsequent work and handled at the higher costincumbent in later rework, the overall amount of error rework wasminimised, even within the coding operation” (Fagan, 1976, p. 187).Code inspections support one of the cornerstones of what lean soft-ware development is founded on, ﬁnding and ﬁxing defects earlyin the development process.In order to help categorise the empirical data in terms of leanapproaches, we generated a list of what we considered to be leanspeciﬁc practices relevant to software development, as shown inTable 2. Due to the overlapping nature of lean and agile practices,we limited the practices to those we found were less represented inthe agile literature but were recurring themes within a lean context.This categorisation was somewhat subjective. However, the ﬁnallist was agreed by consensus among the researchers and offers agood starting point for cataloguing lean practices.3. Application of lean approaches in agile softwaredevelopmentAgile and lean are seen as just two different names for thesame thing in some software literature. In the study reported inJalali and Wohlin (2010), for example, no meaningful distinction ismade between the two. This study conducted a literature reviewof agile practices used in global software engineering. The fact thatthe search string “agile and lean” was used to denote agile prac-tices indicates a lack of distinction between the two. Barton (2009)claims that many organisations that have modiﬁed their softwaredevelopment system based on Scrum consider their work to be alean implementation. Barton argues that even in its simplest state,Scrum uses a lean ‘pull’ technique to smooth the ﬂow through thesystem and prevent overloading. Scrum also implements a processfor eliminating muda, or waste. If no distinction is made betweenagile and lean, the application of lean in agile context, if happens,is generally a non-purposeful act of the adopting organisation.Most literature, however, does consider the differences betweenagile and lean approaches, thus motivating an analysis of theirrelationship and a study that analyses the purposeful applicationof lean approaches in agile software development. Agile meth-ods are believed to be tactical in nature, and therefore the majorchanges required to become agile must be initiated from the topof the organisation. Organisational strategy becomes the contextwithin which agile processes can operate effectively. Without thisstrategic piece, agile development is “shunted aside by the organi-sational forces that seek equilibrium” (Highsmith, 2002). Dall’Agnolet al. (2003) also suggest that agile and lean address a differentTable 2Lean practices relevant to software development.Lean software development practices• Address bottlenecks (Liker, 2003; Goldratt, 1992, 1997; Middleton et al.,2005; Poppendieck and Poppendieck, 2003) Cumulative Flow Diagram (CFD)• Avoid too much local optimisation (Poppendieck and Poppendieck, 2003)• Defer decision making (Thimbleby, 1988; Poppendieck and Poppendieck,2003)• Develop appropriate incentives/rewards (Ambler and Kroll, 2007)• Hansei: relentless self-reﬂection, to acknowledge one’s own mistakesand to commit to making improvements (Liker and Hoseus, 2008).• Heijunka: workload levelling, production smoothing. It aims at reducingmuda (Liker, 2003; Middleton et al., 2005).• Hide individual performance (Poppendieck and Poppendieck, 2003)• Jidoka: intelligent automation, automation with a human touch. Peopleshould not serve machines but vice versa (Liker, 2003; Liker and Hoseus,2008).• Kaikaku: radical improvement within a limited time (Womack and Jones,1996).• Kaizen: continuous improvement to establish a smoother ﬂow (Liker,2003; Hibbs et al., 2009; Joyce and Schechter, 2004).• Kano analysis: link voice of the customer to requirements (Middletonet al., 2005; Raffo et al., 2010).• Make everything transparent (Womack and Jones, 1996): Make project status highly visible Visualise all work items• Measure and manage (Anderson and Garber, 2007) Employ queuing theory (Reinertsen, 1997; Goldratt, 1997, 1992) butmeasure the right things (Reinertsen, 1997) First-In-First-Out (FIFO) queue• Move variability downstream (Poppendieck and Poppendieck, 2003)• Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) cycle (Deming, 1986)• Poka-Yoke: defect detection and prevention (Robinson, 1997).• Pragmatic governance (enable ﬁrst, manage/control second) (Ambler andKroll, 2007)• Pull the andon cord: promote a “safe to failure” environment and instil a“stop the line” mentality (Poppendieck and Poppendieck, 2003;Womack et al., 1990)• Quality Function Deployment: transform the voice of the customer intoengineering characteristics and appropriate test methods (Raffo et al.,2010).• Reduce slack (Middleton, 2001)• Root cause analysis The 5 whys? (Womack et al., 1990)• Use pull systems Kanban board, Limitied WIP, CONWIP (Sugimori et al., 1977; Bradley,2007; Kniberg and Skarin, 2010) Batch control processing (Bradley, 2007), Minimal Marketable Feature(MMF)• Value stream mapping: analyse and design the workﬂow required tobring a software or service to a customer (Womack and Jones, 1996;Liker, 2003; Poppendieck and Poppendieck, 2003; Mujtaba et al., 2010).audience. They believe that XP describes a set of practices primar-ily designed for use by developers. It is aiming to ease the tensionoften exhibited between developer and customer due to conﬂictingaims. Instead, lean management is applied from an upper man-agement perspective, with the objective being the optimisationof activity across the whole entire organisation. Therefore leanmanagement is a top-down approach. Smits (2007) claims that“experience gathered during large scale implementation of agileconcepts in software development projects teaches us that the cur-rently popular agile software development methods (like Scrum)do not scale to programme, product and organisation level withoutchange. The fundamentals for changes to these methods are foundin lean principles, or: “the future of agile methods is found in itsorigins.” This claim is echoed by industry practitioners (reported inSerignese (2011)) who believe that “lean is both the precursor andfuture of agile”. Similarly, Hibbs et al. (2009) view agile methodsas mostly concerned with the speciﬁc practice of developing soft-ware and the project management that surrounds that softwaredevelopment. They do not generally concern themselves with thesurrounding business context in which the software development 1290X. Wang et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 1299Table 3The application of lean approaches in agile software development.Types of lean application in agile software developmentNon-purposeful combination of agile and lean in software developmentprocessesPurposeful application of lean approaches in agile software developmentLean approaches are applied to the business areas related to softwaredevelopment
Lean approaches are applied to software development processes directlyis taking place. Instead, lean principles can be applied to any scope,from the speciﬁc practice of developing software to the entireenterprise where software development is just one small part.Poppendieck and Poppendieck (2003, 2006) focus more on theapplication of lean in software development activities. They claimthat lean thinking is principles that guide ideas and insights aboutsoftware development discipline. Principles are viewed as under-lying truths that do not change over time or space, while practicesare the application of principles to a particular situation and shoulddiffer from one environment to the next and change as a situationevolves. They believe that lean development further expands thetheoretical foundations of agile software development by applyingwell-known and accepted lean principles to software development.Consequently they suggest use lean thinking as guiding principlesto develop and adapt agile practices. Morien (2005) also sees thatagile project management has roots in the lean thinking which pro-vides strength and credibility to the concept and practice of agileproject management. Along the same line, the study of Perera andFernando (2007) attempts to identify possible improvable parts inagile software development processes, and explores how lean prac-tices could be used to improve them. A hypothesis “agile softwareprocess’s development can be improved using lean practice tech-niques” is proposed in their study. They conducted a controlledexperiment with university student projects to test the hypothe-sis and obtained positive evidences to support it. They concludethat applying lean techniques help stabilise the agile developmentphase especially in later stages of the phase. Instead, Ambler (2009)proposes a governance framework built upon the lean principlesthat is claimed to enable agility at scale. Lean governance prac-tices such as aligning the team structure with the architecture,risk-based milestones, and staged programme delivery addresscomplexities inherent in large or distributed teams. Other practicessuch as continuous project monitoring, integrated lifecycle envi-ronment, and embedded compliance help to address the additionalcomplexity of regulated environments.Table 3 is a summary of the possible applications of leanapproaches in agile software development suggested in thereviewed literature. The limited yet increasing literature on leansoftware development depicts a fragmented picture of the strate-gies of lean application in agile software development. Theempirical evidences of such applications and their implementationare yet to be collected in a systematic manner. Our study is one ofthe earliest attempts to address this knowledge gap.4. Research approachTo explore how lean approaches have been applied in agile soft-ware development, we have conducted a secondary data analysisof the real world cases that contain the evidences of lean applica-tion in agile software development. Secondary data analysis is theanalysis of data that was either collected by individuals other thanthe researchers that conduct the study, or for some other purposethan the one currently being considered, or often a combination ofthe two. The sources of secondary data include newspapers, censusdata, maps, etc. The advantage of using secondary data is that theTable 4The source conferences and the numbers of the selected experience reports.Conference Number of experience reports selectedAgile 2004 2Agile 20064
Agile 20073
Agile 2008 5Agile 2009 4XP 2010 3Agile 2011 8XP 20111
Total 30data collection process can be unobtrusive, fast and inexpensive,even though it needs to be cautioned that there are issues relatedto data quality control, accuracy of data, etc., which need the atten-tion of the researchers. Secondary data analysis is frequently usedin social science research. If it is undertaken with care and diligence,it can provide a cost-effective way of gaining a broad understandingof research questions. It is also often considered a starting point forother research methods, helpful in designing subsequent primaryresearch and can provide a baseline with which to compare the pri-mary data analysis results (Boslaugh, 2007). Given the exploratorynature and early stage of our study, we consider secondary dataanalysis a feasible way to build initial understanding of the phe-nomenon under the study.Agile development has been the subject of several conferences,and some of these conferences have published experience reportswhich share industry experiences of agile software development.To obtain the secondary data needed for this study, we collectedthe experience reports that have been published in the agile relatedconferences from 2000 to 2011 (including the XP Conference series,Agile Conference series and XP/Agile Universe series) and that arepublicly available online (Agile 2010 experience reports and theproceedings of XP 2000, XP 2001, XP 2002 and XP Universe 2001are not publicly available online). For each experience report, weconducted a full-text search for any lean concept, principle or prac-tice as deﬁned in Section 2. If an experience report contained oneor more lean keywords, we then read through the report to decide:(i) if it has an agile software development context, and (ii) if itcontains explicit evidences of applying one or more lean concepts,lean principles and/or lean practices in the agile context. In total30 experience reports satisfy the selection criteria and have beenincluded in the secondary data analysis (see Appendix for a list ofthese experience reports). Table 4 shows the source conferencesand number of the selected experience reports per conference.The 30 selected experience reports focus on different aspects ofsoftware development. The angles and detail levels of the descrip-tion of lean application vary from one experience report to another.This diversity posed a challenge to qualitatively analyse these 30experience reports at the same depth and in a uniﬁed manner.We started with the initial classiﬁcation scheme of lean applica-tion in agile software development presented in Table 3. Combinedwith our understanding of lean approaches, it acted as a sense-making and categorisation device for the identiﬁcation of patternsof lean application in agile software development. Meanwhile, weused an open coding process and allowed more detailed patternsemerge from the collected data which enriched and extended theinitial classiﬁcation scheme. Some initial insights gained throughanalysing a subset of the reports has been reported in Wang (2011).The following section describes the ﬁndings of the analysis of all 30experience reports. X. Wang et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 12991291Table 5The six categories of lean application in agile software development.Type of lean application Type codeNon-purposeful combination of agile and lean in softwaredevelopment processesAPurposeful application of lean approaches in agile software developmentLean approaches are applied to the business areas related to software developmentAgile within, lean out-reach: using lean approaches tointeract with neighbouring business units while keepingagile development processes internallyBLean approaches are applied to software development processes directlyLean facilitating agile adoption: before or during thetransition processCLean within agile: using various lean elements toimprove agile processesDFrom agile to lean: comprehensive application of leanapproaches to transform agile processesESynchronising agile and lean: agile team and lean teamwork in parallel in a synchronised mannerF5. FindingsThe 28 organisations reported in the 30 experience reports (3experience reports regard the same company) range from small andmedium to large and multi-national. They operate in diverse busi-ness domains, such as software engineering, telecommunication,ﬁnance, healthcare and public administration. Lean approacheshave been applied to various agile projects of these organisations,in various manners and to various degrees. In some companies, leanapplication is limited to a single, or several agile teams or projects.In others instead, it is a company-wide endeavour. Table 5 showsthe six categories of lean application in agile software developmentidentiﬁed based on the analysis of the 30 experience reports. Thedistribution of the experience reports per application type is shownin Fig. 1.A more detailed distribution of the experience reports per typeper year is shown in Table 6.It can be seen that Type D, using lean to improve agile processes,is the most common and frequently appearing lean application typeover the past years, with almost a half of the selected experiencereports containing the relevant evidences. Another observation isthat, Type E seems to be an emerging trend of lean application in thelast several years. In the following sub-sections we present in moredepth what the six categories of lean application mean and howvarious lean concepts, principles and practices have been appliedin the cases reported in the experience reports.5.1. Non-purposeful combination of agile and leanThe reporter of [ER13] presented the agile practices that hepracticed in a project where he worked as a technical lead (Thecompany’s name was not revealed in the report). The practices inhis armoury included both agile practices (Keep/Problem/Try Ret-rospective, Estimate Retrospectives, Iteration Planning, etc.) andA B C D E F0246
81012
141561341Type of lea
 n appl
 ica
 tio
 nNumberofexperiencereportsFig. 1. The distribution of the selected experience reports per lean application type.lean practice (Task Kanban). Evidently he was practicing a com-bined approach of agile and lean practices, even though he regardedthem as agile practices in general. In this report lean and agile prac-tices were presented in parallel and no speciﬁc distinction betweenthe two was made. Therefore it is a case of non-purposeful combi-nation of agile and lean practices. It is interesting to mention thatthe Japanese background of the development team might be anexplanation of the natural and implicit adoption of lean practices.5.2. Agile within, lean out-reachFive experience reports are grouped under this category. Table 7lists the cases contained in these reports.In the Cardiac Rhythm Disease Management of Medtronic Inc.,when the software group adopted agile development, they quicklyrealised that not only were they learning something new, butthey also needed to learn how to communicate it with otherbusiness units ([ER5]). Lean concepts and principles became aconvenient choice as a communication tool with the product devel-opment organisation since the product development organisationhad already implemented a lean initiative. Therefore when com-municating with product development organisation, the softwaregroup emphasised the principle of eliminating waste, meanwhileimplemented customised agile practices like the Customer Role,Stories, Sprint Planning and Release Planning to put focus on value-added activities.The experience of Ericsson R&D in the Netherlands suggests thatagile software development should be implemented as a broader“lean” initiative ([ER12]), which can create involvement of neigh-bouring units, for example, service and delivery units, productmanagement, market units and customers. This foundation wouldbe an incentive for neighbouring units to cooperate and optimise asa whole, and the resistance to collaborate with agile developmentwould be reduced effectively. Their experience also suggests thatlean can help align management quickly:“In a bottom-up approach line and project management have lim-ited involvement. However, line and project managers are a key inmaking the change stick, helping people resolve impediments andconﬂicts, building a learning organization and, above all, showingwhat is meant with Agile and lean ways of working. Speaking thesame language and agreeing on principles like ‘build quality in’ andmany more is highly needed for successful cross unit cooperation.”([ER12], p. 158)An interesting case was reported in [ER2] where a companyapplied lean thinking and systems thinking on the customer busi-ness process in order to understand what features the developersshould develop that really delivered business values. Cyrus Inno-vation is a consulting group in New York City specializing in agilesoftware development, usability design and operational consulting.One of their customers – a restaurant chain – needed to improveaspects of their operations that were breaking due to their rapidgrowth. Their main objective was reducing operating expenses bycutting down on the food product wasted each day. Cyrus Innova-tion used XP for development and strongly believed in the power ofagile development; however they saw that agile alone was insufﬁ-cient to make every software project successful:“XP customer will tend to drive development without regardto how features impact the business system from a throughputperspective. . . If business managers do not adopt analytic tech-niques that are more synergistic with XP, the developers themselvessimply become a local optimization of the software developmentprocess. As a result, XP by itself cannot drive overall systemimprovement and thus by itself cannot make a company sustain-able.” ([ER2], p. 81) 1292X. Wang et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 1299Table 6The distribution of the selected experience reports per application type per year.A B C D E F2004 [ER2] [ER1]2005
2006[ER5]
 [ER3] [ER6][ER4]2007[ER7][ER9]
 [ER8]2008 [ER13] [ER12] [ER10] [ER11][ER14]2009 [ER17] [ER15] [ER16] [ER18]2010[ER19][ER20][ER21]
2011 [ER24] [ER28] [ER22][ER23][ER25][ER26][ER27] [ER29] [ER30]Projects must be coupled with a complimentary approach tostrategy in order to achieve the overall business goals. Rather thanaccepting whatever the customer demanded to deliver, the projectteam used lean thinking and techniques, including eliminatingwaste, value stream mapping, ﬂow, and theory of constraints, tobetter understand what really delivered business value to the cus-tomer. Then the development team used agile development to buildquality software that effectively contributed to overall businesssuccess.In DTE Energy, a Fortune 300 company, agile software devel-opment and project management encountered the legacy mindsetand culture of portfolio management ([ER14]), which meant thatthe annual budgeting cycle drove a mindset that scope, budget,and schedule must be established up front, often many monthsbefore project work began. Success meant delivering on that scopewithin the budget and schedule commitments. As the IT teams suc-cessfully applied agile methods at the project level, they beganto address their approach for managing portfolios of projects toincrease the amount of value they delivered with their businesspartners. Lean training was organised for the leadership team, andpotential applicable lean techniques identiﬁed. They also intro-duced lean terminology and concepts to help better understandthe constraints and how they could reorganise the way they pri-oritised their commitments and funded their work. As the wayforward, one overarching strategy in their IT was to leverage anexisting corporate system which is a combination of lean and SixSigma thinking, seeing, and doing tools and techniques based uponthe Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) cycle.Similarly Exilesoft, an offshore software development companyin Sri Lanka which caters to the Scandinavian and Australian mar-kets, applied lean to its Human Resource (HR) department ([ER24]).With the rapid change from a traditional project culture to an agileone and the speedy growth of the project organisation, support-ing functionalities such as HR and operations were stressed outand a high degree of negative stress and frustration was createdthroughout the company:“. . . software companies adapt agile concepts for their developmentteams rapidly. However, the lack of understanding of such conceptsby other facilitating entities of the organization, such as HR depart-ment, may create complexities and slow down the expected returnof such agile transformation by its production staff.” ([ER24], p.166)Based on the believe that employing the same agile conceptswithin the HR department would also deliver positive results andthat having one work culture across the organisation would removemany challenges faced by the company, the senior managementgroup launched an initiative to introduce agile concepts to its HRdepartment. However, due to the nature of the work in HR, feasi-bility of implementing Scrum was rejected, including the conceptsof time boxing, scheduled releases, story point estimation, sprintburn down, etc. Instead, kanban was seen a better ﬁt for the HRdepartment. Kanban supported everyday planning required forHR functions. It did not demand story point estimation/relativeestimation, and allowed to monitor cycle time and set limit towork-in-process, which solved one of the biggest issues in the HRdepartment, preventing it from committing to work on varioustasks which would exceed their capacity.In brief, the ﬁve cases show that the agile teams have usedpurposefully lean approaches to involve and interact with theirsurrounding environments while keeping the agile processes inter-nally. They have demonstrated lean approaches, especially the leanconcepts and principles, could help agile teams to better collaboratewith different stakeholders of software development, includingneighbouring business units and customers, and extending agilemindsets and practices to non development, organisational levelactivities.In the following sub-sections we show how lean approacheshave been used purposefully in software development activitiesdirectly and demonstrated their effectiveness as software develop-ment approaches.5.3. Lean facilitating agile adoptionSix experience reports contain evidences that lean concepts andprinciples have been utilised to facilitate agile adoption, eitherTable 7The cases in the “agile within, lean out-reach” category.Experience report no. Organisation name Business domain Lean elements applied[ER5] Medtronic Inc. Medical device Concept: ValuePrinciple: Eliminate waste[ER12] Ericsson Telecommunication Principle: Build quality in[ER2]Cyrus
 InnovationAgile
 software developmentconsulting groupConcept: FlowPrinciple: Eliminate wastePractice: Avoid too much local optimisation,Value stream mapping[ER14] DTE Energy Gas and electric utility services Lean conceptsaPractice: PDCA cycle[ER24]Exilesoft
 Software development Principle: Limit WIPPractice: Kanban boardaWhich speciﬁc lean concepts were applied is not explained in the report. X. Wang et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 12991293Table 8The cases in the “lean facilitating agile adoption” category.Experience report no.Organisation
 nameBusiness
 domainLean
 elements applied[ER3] Capital One Financial service Principle: Eliminate wastePractice: Value stream mapping, Root-causeanalysis[ER9] Systematic Software systems Principle: Build quality in, Create knowledge,Deliver fast[ER4] (not revealed) Automotive engineering consultancy and software Concept: Self funding transformationa, costaccountinga[ER7]Salesforce.comEnterprise
 software Principle: Respect people, Deliver fast[ER17]SEP
 Software solution for regulated industry Practice: Kanban board[ER28] Cisco Voice Technology Group Voice technology and service Concept: Value, FlowPrinciple: Principles of product ﬂowbPractice: Kanban boardaConsidered lean elements in the report but not included in our deﬁnition.bWhich speciﬁc principles were applied is not explained in the report.before or during agile transition initiatives. Table 8 shows the pro-ﬁles of the six cases.Capital One, a large Fortune 500 ﬁnancial services companyused the lens of lean to evaluate the current delivery process andstreamline the business values prior to agile transition ([ER3]). Leanprinciple, eliminate waste, and practices including value streammapping, root-cause analysis (5-whys) were applied to analysethe processes of a product or service type before Scrum was cho-sen as the adopted agile method. According to the experience ofthe company, lean principles and practices could help in achiev-ing a smoother transition and would increase the likelihood of asuccessful agile pilot with tangible business metrics.The experience of Capital One is echoed by that of Systematic,an independent software systems company ([ER9]). Systematicmade a strategic decision to use lean as the dominant paradigm forfurther improvements after achieving CMMI (Capability MaturityModel Integration) Level 5. The company identiﬁed Lean SoftwareDevelopment of Poppendieck and Poppendieck (2003) as the leandialect most relevant to Systematic. The analysis of systematicimprovement opportunities and lean causal dependencies led tothe decision to seek improvements based on the lean principlesof build integrity in, amplify learning and deliver fast. These leanthinking tools gave inspiration to consider Scrum and early testing.[ER4] describes an interesting experience of the bottom-up, self-funded agile adoption in an engineering consultancy and softwarecompany that is involved in the automotive industry “where analo-gous concepts under the umbrella term ‘lean’ are part of the landscape”and some of the companies they do business with were the origina-tors of lean. Therefore it is natural that the driving force behind a lotof what they did came from an awareness of lean. According to thereport, a self funding transformation is one of the key concepts they“stole” from lean. Another concept that they borrowed from leanis that of cost accounting, viewing your software team as a ﬁxedcost overhead. In addition, what inspired them to bootstrap agilepractices themselves include also the “inspect and adapt” cycle.Therefore, the success of this self-funded agile adoption can beattributed to the guidance of both lean and agile concepts.In contrast to the bottom-up, self-funded agile adoptiondescribed in [ER4], Salesforce.com took a completely differentapproach ([ER7]). Salesforce.com has completed an agile trans-formation of a two hundred person team within a three-monthtimeframe. During this large and fast “big-bang” agile rollout, leanprinciples, such as empowered teams and delivering customervalue early, were used as key communication tools to communi-cate the value of changing current behaviour. If the teams werefeeling that something was not working the way it should be, theycould refer back to the values and reject anything they thoughtdid not correlate with their core values. Lean principles help agilebehaviours to stick.This claim can be supported by the experience of SEP ([ER17]).SEP is a privately held software engineering company with morethan 70 employees. It offers full lifecycle software solutions toclients in the medical, aerospace, healthcare and national defencemarkets. In the process of adopting one of the agile methods, Fea-ture Driven Development, SEP found that it failed to have thedesired lasting impact across the entire organisation. However,things changed when a kanban system was implemented later onalongside the agile practices. Kanban provided a more effectivevehicle to introduce agile practices and principles in the company.The culture on project teams began to change as they learned thesystem. And more importantly, the attitudes of team memberschanged. The implementation of kanban helped the agile mindsetsto stick in the company.The agile transition in Cisco Voice Technology Group (VTG) wasalso a top-down organisational wide initiative ([ER28]). VTG is aglobal organisation with three business units, with a total of about2500 people within the larger Cisco Systems, Inc. When Scrumwas to be implemented in the organisation, it was realised that,even though “. . . it is often suggested to implement Scrum by usingScrum: create a backlog of process changes, prioritise, and start imple-menting”, the kanban approach was found more appropriate toimplement Scrum in VTG:“we had a vision and model we wanted to implement, we had abacklog of steps to take, and when problems occurred, we wouldprioritize the issue, put it on the backlog, and address it when itbecame the highest priority. Sometimes that meant addressing anissue immediately.” ([ER28], p. 274)An important lesson learned by VTG was that implementingagile methods into an organisation was “interrupt-driven, not plandriven. We had some interesting hurdles to clear, but once taken theybecame a strong driver in the change process.” Other lean concepts,such as value and ﬂow, and the principles of product developmentﬂow, also inspired and helped the different organisational units,including the executives, to comprehend the nature of the agiletransition happening in the organisation.As shown in these six cases, regardless the agile adoption style(top-down organisational undertaking or grass-root, bottom-upinitiative) or applied before or during agile adoption, lean con-cepts, principles and practices can smooth the agile transformationprocess and help agile mindsets to be institutionalised in adoptingorganisations.5.4. Lean within agileUsing various lean elements to improve agile processes is a pat-tern that appears repeatedly in 13 out of 30 experience reportsanalysed. Table 9 is a list of the 13 cases. 1294X. Wang et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 1299Table 9The cases in the “lean within agile” category.Experience report no. Organisation name Business domain Lean elements applied[ER1] Government of a major California county Public administration Principle: Reduce batch size[ER16]CanonicalOpen
 source solution, collaborative software systems Concept: Value streamPractice: Address bottlenecks,Kaizen[ER6] Wireless Data Services Global Services to mobile companies Principle: Eliminate waste[ER8] Sabre Airline Solutions Product development for airline industry Principle: Eliminate wastePractice: Value stream mapping[ER10]British
 TelecomTelecommunication
Principle: Eliminate waste[ER11](
not revealed)(not revealed) Principle: Eliminate waste[ER19]ASR
 Insurance Insurance Principle: Visualise the workﬂow,Limit WIP, Manage ﬂowPractice: Kanban board[ER23] Fundamo Mobile ﬁnancial services products Practice: Kanban board, CFD[ER27]SumTotal
 Des MoinesLearning
 management systemPractice: Value stream mapping,FIFO queue[ER26] (not revealed) Financial service Practice: Visualise all work items,Root cause analysis, Kaizen[ER22](
not revealed)Telecommunication
Practice: Use pull systems, Kanbanboard, Value stream mapping,Kaizen, Pull the andon cord[ER15, ER25] Systematic Software systems Practice: Kaizen, PDCA cycle, Rootcause analysis, JidokaLean concepts and principles have been used as thinking toolsto make sense and guide the use and adaptation of agile practicesin [ER1]. The Government Workﬂow Project, a project initiatedby the government of a major California county to automate theworkﬂow of key business processes in the criminal justice sys-tem, has adopted agile practices incrementally. The project teamended up performing more up-front analysis and using small batchsize for estimations as a response to frustrating velocity ﬂuctua-tions and inconsistent completion of features. Initially the team haddoubts that performing additional up-front analysis was againstagile principles. However, “in retrospect, the team realised this prac-tice implements the ‘smaller batch size’ principle of Lean SoftwareDevelopment, and in fact increased their agility”. Notice that lean wasused as a sense making tool retrospectively after a practice wasadapted. More lean principles have been applied in a distributedteam of 35 developers spanning 5 continents in Canonical ([ER16]).The lean principles that play an important role in the experience ofthis highly distributed agile team include end-to-end view of theprocess, removing bottlenecks in the process, and Kaizen whereprocess improvement experiments are encouraged.One of the lean principles, eliminating waste, is a recurred themein [ER6, ER8, ER10, ER11]. In Wireless Data Services Global, a serviceprovider to wireless companies and mobile phone manufactur-ers, the development teams “have experienced tremendous positiveeffects from utilizing Extreme Programming practices on developmentteams”. However, they “have yet to ﬁnd the agile path to regularlyproviding positive business value” ([ER6, p. 175]). Over the time, theyhave found a family of four agile practices that merged the XP prin-ciples of implementing the “highest value features ﬁrst”, and “don’tdo anything extra”, with lean principles such as “eliminate waste”to address the highlighted issues. The four practices – Value-basedInvestment Decisions, High Conﬁdence Stories First, IncrementalStory Delivery, and Story Ownership – embody both agile andlean principles and are believed to be most effective when appliedtogether. In [ER8], Sabre Airline Solutions, a company developingproducts for the airline industry, encountered agile plateau effect.In the effort of overcoming the plateau, the company chose toapply lean concepts, such as seeing waste and value chain mapping,to brainstorm the ways to improve quality, and develop qualityimprovement goals and action plans accordingly. [ER10] examinesthe use and adaptation of the “product owner team” practice in BT,British Telecom. Product owner team is used to manage the detailsof what should be built in a project implementing an up to 24 Mbpsservice over the 21CN network. The lean principle of eliminatingwaste and the seven types of waste help the company to “breakthe silo mentality and simplify the delivery by reducing the work inprogress and developing collaborative teams focused on customers’prioritised needs”. It is believed that the project was successful dueto “the collaborative efforts of the core team to eliminate waste – apply-ing one of the core principles of lean”. Similarly, in a mission-criticalcommercial-off-the-shelf upgrade project described in [ER11], leanthinking, especially eliminating waste, is used as the guidance tothe improvement of the manual testing process which is crucial tothe project.Kanban is another frequently used approach to improve agileprocesses. [ER19] reports the projects in the IT department of ASRInsurance, one of the top 3 insurance companies in the Netherlands.While most projects that used Scrum were successful, other Scrumteams were having some difﬁculties. The major reason was thatthese projects most of the time were involved in operations work orsmall maintenance. The work was hard to distribute properly oversprints and often needed to be changed more frequently than the 2-week sprints allowed. What the client wanted was more ﬂexibilityand more control over the immediate results. The company wantedto keep the agile mindset and at the same time do something moreappropriate for maintenance and operations so that they too cancooperate with the rest of the IT departments and projects. Kanbantechnique was adopted, together with the underlying principles –make work visible, limit work in progress and help work to ﬂow.As a result, much better understanding and cooperation betweendevelopers from different technologies as well as with the testerswas observed, even though the team encountered different teamand organisational challenges.A similar story is recounted in [ER23]. Fundamo is a providerin mobile ﬁnancial services products. The Product and Technologyteams faced heavy support tasks for multiple customers. Scrum wasused for the development work, while kanban was used for support.The teams started with a simple basic kanban board and allowed theboard to emerge and add complexity when necessary since “a lessformal process and kanban board, less reluctance to change”. Howeverthey did use a CFD (Cumulative Flow Diagram) from day one andrecorded the number of issues in each column at the same timeeach day after daily meeting. This diagram helped measure cycletime and make predictions around their defect ﬁx rate. They also X. Wang et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 12991295tried to achieve a better balance between demand and throughputby closely collaborating with Professional Service teams at weeklyprioritisation meetings where they reviewed the current outstand-ing issues and agreed on what they would tackle next. The meetingdrove the issues that they added to the kanban board. At the end,the kanban board advanced signiﬁcantly with more columns, bufferareas and WIP limits. Kanban allowed for issues to be added to thework queue at any time rather than on a ﬁxed cadence as in Scrum,and for releases to be decoupled from the sprint cadence so theteams have ﬂexibility to release a patch at any point rather than atthe end of the ﬁxed-length sprint. Kanban also provided a mech-anism to quantitatively measure the effects of any changes in theprocess so that they are able to quantify both their demand andthroughput and ensure these stay balanced by changing explicitpolicies.Metrics were also carefully implemented in [ER27] where theapplication of lean helped to better manage defect resolution pro-cess of SumTotal Des Moines, a Learning Management Systemprovider that uses a Software as a Service (SaaS) approach to deliv-ering its product to customers. The company has various issues withtheir defect resolution process. Defects were not getting resolvedfor a long time which upset the customers. The process did notlend to efﬁcient use of expensive developer time of the productionsupport team. With the help of the customer support team, the pro-duction support team was able to expose waste by creating a valuestream map of the old process. The exercise revealed that a defecttook roughly 4 days to ﬁx but spent 100 days waiting. To addressthese issues, a new main queue was used, which was a First-In-First-Out (FIFO) queue. A process to keep track of each defect as itﬂowed through the development process was established:“Each time a new defect was picked from the new FIFO queue, adeveloper pair was responsible for creating a card and placing it onthe board within the In Progress column. As defects ﬂowed out ofIn Progress into QA, the pair would move the card. Each day afterstand up the team lead would take count of the number of defectsin each category and mark them in a spreadsheet.” ([ER27], p. 271)In this process, the most important metric to collect was currentlead time; e.g. how long until a defect is ﬁxed, which provided pre-dictability to the customer support team. Each day the team leadwould count the number of defects in six categories: Backlog, InProgress, Blocked, In QA, Release Ready, and In Production. Thesenumbers helped the production team determine their cycle timesand lead times for defects while their CFD helped them visualisetheir defect ﬂow.Technical debt is a serious issue faced by many agile teams,which seems to accumulate with the progress of iterations. [ER26]shows how a very large Fortune 200 ﬁnancial services company,who had some successful pilots using agile and was in the midst ofa company roll out, started to address this issue by making tech-nical debt visible through so called “code Christmas trees” locatedin the walkway of the company. It evoked conversations and dis-cussions among developers and whoever is interested. To avoidpunitive uses of the information revealed by the code Christmastrees, root cause analysis techniques like ﬁsh bone diagrams and 5whys analysis were applied. The teams never stopped with a singleindividual when searching for the cause of problems. Meanwhile,the company kept experimenting with new adaptations of theirtrees since it was believed that “it is easy to overlook big, visibleproblems over time when they do not change materially.”Continuous improvement was the central theme of [ER22]. FFM(Field Force Management) project of one of the biggest inter-national telecom companies had been facing several challenges,including no scope deﬁned, no measurement of the team capability,“push scheduling” mentality was pervasive, the trust of businessstakeholders in the team was minimal, and most team memberswere junior with little experience and exposure to agile methods.While the team started to use agile requirements analysis, they setup a kanban board to track each story as it ﬂowed through the workﬂow. From the very beginning, they instilled the “Pull Scheduling”concept into the team, which managed the queue of items thatshould happen next; the team usually pulled an item off the top ofthe queue when planning work. The team pulled stories from thelist in each iteration based on team capacity and capability. Con-tinuous improvement opportunities were identiﬁed through theapplication of value stream mapping, which revealed that therewas too much waste in the deployment process ﬂow. Team depen-dences, or segregation of cross functional teams, were identiﬁedas a cause. With team dependencies, it would be very difﬁcult todeliver even a small feature set since it required a large amount ofcommunication and coordination among teams. The team had alsolearnt the importance to pull the “Andon” cord to “stop-the-line” ifa true iterative iteration (in which the development team producea releasable application) could not be achieved.Continuous improvement was also at the heart of Systematic’sexperience. The result of the pilots in Systematic reported in [ER9]conﬁrmed the general idea of using lean mindset as source for iden-tiﬁcation of new improvements. Actually that was what happenedin Systematic later on, which is the main subject of another twoexperience reports about the same company ([ER15, ER25]). View-ing lean as a “Scrum Troubleshooter”, Systematic used PDCA cyclewith an A3 problem solving technique and the 5 why root causeanalysis, to identify problems and opportunities for organisationalwide improvement. Senior management involvement is signiﬁcantin this case:“Many of the adjustments implemented are characterized by beingdesired but beyond the control of the projects. Had the projectsdriven these improvements on their own, they might have dis-carded the ideas for adjustments because of the need to involvesenior management or VP’s in the decision. When the problem solv-ing is initiated by senior management, the negative impact of theproblem is viewed both from the project perspective and also fromthe business unit or company perspective. In this larger problemsbuild high management larger perspective commitment, becausethe impact of the problem and the beneﬁt of the solution is visiblein a larger scale.” ([ER25], p. 174)However, Systematic’s most important learning from theimprovements during the past ﬁve years was the lean concept ofJidoka – respect that those who do a particular part of work, arethose who are best qualiﬁed to improve how this work is done.Make people responsible for solving their own problems and ensurethat management supports it.As shown in these 13 cases, continuous improvement, or Kaizen,is at the core of this type of lean application. Agile methods alsoadvocate continuous improvement, but do not answer how it canbe implemented. Lean approaches, instead, offer speciﬁc directions(eliminating waste in software development processes, focusing onﬂow, etc.) and speciﬁc practices (kanban, value stream mapping,root cause analysis, etc.) to improve agile processes continuously.5.5. From agile to leanFour experience reports contain the lean application cases thatcan be classiﬁed in this category. They are published recently(within 2009–2011). Table 10 is the proﬁles of these cases.Yahoo! runs websites visited by hundreds of millions of users aday. Hundreds of development teams at Yahoo! rely on one anotherfor code and services. Many of these teams have been using Scrum,including Yahoo! Sports team ([ER29]). Yahoo! Sports team useda lot of code written by other teams. Team interdependency wasa commonplace. It was said that “the worst customer for a Scrum 1296X. Wang et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 1299Table 10The cases in the “from agile to lean” category.Experience report no. Organisation name Business domain Lean elements applied[ER29] Yahoo! Internet services Concept: FlowPrinciple: Eliminate waste, Reduce batch sizePractice: MMF[ER18] Inkubook Online photobook Concept: PullPractice: Kanban board, Limited WIP, MMF[ER20] Codeweavers Financial and insurance web services Concept: FlowPractice: Value stream mapping, Kanban board, LimitedWIP, CONWIP, MMF[ER21](
not revealed)(not revealed)Concept: ValuePrinciple: Manage ﬂow, Limit WIP, Visualise the workﬂowPractice: Kaizen, Visualise all work items, Same-size workitemsaaConsidered lean elements in the report but not included in our deﬁnition.team is another Scrum team”. Different Scrum teams had differentsprint lengths, velocities and priorities. Often Scrum teams did notwant to be distracted during their sprint. However, sometimes asporting event would occur before another team could committo resolving a dependency, which forced the Sports team to ﬁnda solution themselves. Due to the intense release schedule, thehigh demands of the product, and the many dependencies on otherteams, the Sports team realised that they could not operate as usual.Among the transformational events that enabled the team to keeppace with the demands of the online sports world while main-taining team cohesion, motivation and high quality, an importantone was daily release. Before the 2010 World Cup, the Sports teamwas deploying large feature releases that occurred at least every 2week sprint. However, as the World cup event was set to begin, itbecame apparent that there would always be something that hadto be delivered daily. What enabled the team to achieve such anaggressive cadence, among other themes, was the concentration ofthe team efforts on two lean elements: a better ﬂow and smallerpieces of code. The team reviewed the timing of speciﬁc handoffsbetween teams everyday and made changes frequently to reducethe waste. They also focused on build automation as well as testautomation by having the developers and testers share test devel-opment responsibility and do their work in parallel. Over time theteam got better at identifying the MMF (Minimal Marketable Fea-ture) and delivering smaller increments of code to production to asmall subset of users.Inkubook is an emerging player in the online photobook indus-try. The journey of the Inkubook team to improve their softwaredevelopment process is documented in [ER18]. The team initiallyadopted Scrum “by the book”. However, they entered into a chaoticno process stage when the mandate arrived that a product wouldbe delivered in sixty days. When the schedule slowed down again,in order to avoid burnout and staff turnover, the team moved backto Scrum, but this time it was really a “ﬂow-based, iterationless ver-sion” of Scrum. After three months of being in the same “sprint”,the team recognised that ﬂow was working well for getting thingsdone and therefore they abandoned estimates, implicitly organiz-ing around a WIP limit of two MMFs. Finally, after several moremonths passed, the team accepted that they were using a work-limited, pull-based kanban approach and updated the usage andterminology to reﬂect that fact. According to the team, “the use of akanban implementation survived a round of layoffs, an extreme changein team and management composition, and is still being used today”.A similar case is reported in [ER20]. The title “From Chaos to Kan-ban, via Scrum” illustrates the evolutionary path of the softwaredevelopment team in Codeweavers. The company is a UK businessof approximately 20 people, delivering motor ﬁnance and insur-ance web services. The team comprises 8–10 co-located developers.Using simple inspect-and-adapt cycle to adopt one practice a time,the team adopted Scrum practices ﬁrst to tackle the chaos, thenused value stream mapping and adopted kanban board to have abetter visibility of upstream and downstream activities other thanwork in progress on the story board. Step by step following thekanban adoption, the team introduced limit to WIP, ﬁne tuned itwhile the team began batching tasks into MMFs. Along the way, theteam also adopted automated regression test and adapted stand-up meeting to hold it twice per day to ensure tasks were worked onas things developed. At the end, the development process assem-bles more a ﬂow-like lean process rather than a time-boxed Scrumprocess. Meanwhile, as the focus on ﬂow and throughput becamemore deeply ingrained in the development team, the developers’view of the value stream gradually increased, from focusing onlyon the “in development” column to downstream to ensure the codedeveloped was accepted and deployed to customers. Later still theylooked further down-stream, helping customers to adopt the newservices, and upstream, helping the business to decide what wasneeded and how to prioritise it. The focus was expanding evenfurther into the company’s sales and marketing functions.If the transition of Yahoo! Sports team, Inkubook andCodeweavers from agile to lean was an incremental or unplannedprocess, the experience documented in [ER21] was a more systemicmove. The software development team (not named in the report)had run a Scrum-based development process for several years.The practices included continuous integration, automated, nightlybuild and deployment to QA servers, and suites of automated unitand integration tests. In spite of the processes and practices in place,the team was still challenged by the issues such as frequent mid-iteration changes and non correlated work items. That is the reasonwhy the team decided to embark on a lean journey. After carefulresearch, the team arrived at a set of core concepts for their ﬂow-based development: schedule individual value-adding work items,deﬁne a workﬂow, limit work in process, same-size work items,establish holistic key performance indicators, visualise all the workand the entire workﬂow, and improve relentlessly. The team foundthat “it was fully possible to run agile software development withouttime-boxes by using a continuously updated work item priority queueinstead”. The team’s experience shows that WIP limit is a good con-trol variable compared to controlling capacity and scope of workunder high variability, and a single WIP limit (CONWIP) works wellfor the team.The four cases in this category demonstrate that a comprehen-sive application of lean approaches can transform agile processes.Starting with the application of lean techniques to improve agileprocesses, these organisations ended up in a situation in whichlean processes become dominant and agile practices play thesupporting role. X. Wang et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 129912975.6. Synchronising agile and lean[ER30] reports an interesting case of one agile team and onekanban team working in parallel in a synchronised manner toaddress different aspects of the same development process. Muchlike most systems development teams, the teams in WMS, spe-cialised in interactive entertainment, were constantly working tobalance large scale system feature upgrades that make up about60% of the work with small-scale changes and bugs that coverthe remainder of developers’ time. Over the time two coordinatedagile/kanban teams were formed. The agile team run in a typicalagile fashion. They were responsible for all large-scale projects thataffect the system including any architectural roadmap work thatmay lead to structural changes to the software as a whole. The kan-ban team instead were responsible for all small feature requestsalong with bugs. The team used a kanban board to manage thedevelopment process only, starting from the currently selected top5 priority items and spanning all the way to a deployed queue. Theymaintained a cycle time and lead time metric integrated with thestory point system of the company. WMS’s experience shows that:“. . . running both [agile and kanban] processes in synchronization,and not blending them, has been highly valuable for our organiza-tion... The random interruptions and ﬁre ﬁghting of supporting aproduct in the ﬁeld always seems to cause disruptions to Iterativeteams. By adding a synchronized Kanban team alongside an Itera-tive team we have been able to even out our iterations and createa productive and healthy work environment where we are able tomeet our customers’ needs.” ([ER30], p. 268)6. DiscussionAs shown in the ﬁndings section, there can be various waysto apply different lean concepts, principles and practices in agilesoftware development. Apart from one experience report thatdescribes non-purposeful combination of agile and lean practices,29 out of 30 experience reports demonstrate the application of leanapproaches in agile software development with speciﬁc objectivesand strategies. The ﬁve strategies identiﬁed are: agile within, leanout-reach; lean facilitating agile adoption; lean within agile; fromagile to lean; and synchronising agile and lean. With the ﬁrst twoand the last strategies, even though lean approaches are used tofacilitate agile process implementation and effective use withinlarger organisational contexts, agile processes remain relatively“pure” or intact. In contrast, the strategies of “lean within agile”and “from agile to lean” result in processes that blend both agileand lean elements, to various degrees.Among these ﬁve strategies, the most common one is where dif-ferent lean elements are used to improve existing agile softwaredevelopment processes, evidenced by 13 out of the 30 selectedexperience reports. As claimed in Poppendieck and Poppendieck(2003), lean concepts and principles have often been used as think-ing or sense making tools to guide the practice of agile softwaredevelopment. The commonly cited lean concept and principle inthese reports are value and eliminate waste. It can be argued thatthese two lean elements provide both target and route for con-tinuous agile process improvement. Another discernible patternacross these 13 experience reports is that, in the past, lean hadbeen used more as a thinking tool but in a less conscious manner;whereas in more recent years, the trend has been to adopt more andmore concrete lean practices, as a conscious choice of the adoptingorganisations.The kanban approach is also at the core of the strategy “fromagile to lean”. 3 out of the 4 experience reports in this categorycan be seen as detailed demonstrations of how kanban transformsagile processes. Although the kanban approach shares similaritiesto agile approaches, such as a prioritised feature list, it’s primaryconcern is to limit work in progress (WIP). However, there is asecond signiﬁcant difference between it and agile methods. Theconcept of a time-boxed (ﬁxed duration) iteration is no longer used.Instead, the kanban board is used to set clearly visible limits to thenumber of tasks allowed to be in progress at any given time. Thereis no ﬁxed number for each WIP limit but by measuring the leadtime of individual tasks, the WIP limits and process itself can beoptimised (Kniberg and Skarin, 2010). Kanban software develop-ment pursues the concept of continuous ﬂow or what (Hiranabe,2008) refers to as “Sustaining Kanban”.What has been seen through the experience reports analysis isthat the kanban approach suits particularly well to software main-tenance or support type activities where uncertainty is higher thanin normal development activities and change is more frequent thanthat allowed by agile iterations. Another point worth making is that,when an agile adopting organisation is mature enough in usingagile and especially lean practices, they have a tendency to moveaway from time-boxed agile processes to more ﬂow-based leanprocesses, as several experience reports have shown ([ER18, ER20,ER21]). It is also interesting to note that these experience reportswere recently published (2009 and 2010). This, together withrecently practitioners-authored kanban books/articles, might indi-cate that moving from time-boxed agile processes to ﬂow-basedlean processes is a recent tendency in agile software development.It is also worth noting that the lean concepts, principles andespecially lean practices applied in the 30 experience reports areonly a subset of what are deﬁned in the relevant literature (asdescribed in Section 2). Some lean elements, such as the princi-ple of waste elimination and the practicing of kanban, were foundto be more often applied than others. It might be an indication thatthese elements complement agile processes therefore are a betterﬁt within an agile context.Last but not least, even though the six types of lean applicationwere presented as distinctive, unrelated categories, and each expe-rience report was classiﬁed under one category only according toits primary focus, it does not mean that organisations can or douse lean in one manner only. The case of Systematic, the subject ofthree experience reports ([ER9] in 2007, [ER15] in 2009 and [ER25]in 2011) is a good example of an organisation applying lean in dif-ferent manners to suit different needs at different stages of agilematurity. Firstly the company used lean as a facilitating tool for asmooth Scrum adoption, then applied a lean mindset and analysistechniques as sources for continuous agile process improvement.7. ConclusionThe recent focus shift from agile methods such as XP and Scrumto a lean approach in software development has been noticeableand evokes the interests of both research and practice alike. Theobjective of our study has been to investigate how lean approacheshave been applied in agile software development. To explore thisphenomenon, we have conducted a secondary data analysis of 30experience reports containing real-world experiences of the appli-cation of lean approaches in agile software development. We haveidentiﬁed six types of lean application in these experience reportsand categorised them in a more systemic way.The ﬁndings of the study enrich our understanding of how leancan be applied in agile software development. Since the researchon the broad topic of lean software development is considered anascent area (Dingsøyr et al., 2008), we believe our study is animportant addition to this branch of research in general, and onthe topic of combining agile to lean in speciﬁc. The deﬁnition oflean approaches in software development in terms of lean con-cepts, principles and practices brings certain extent of clarity to 1298X. Wang et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 1299the understanding of lean software development. It contributesto a better conceptual basis for further studies on lean softwaredevelopment. The lean application types we identiﬁed can serve asa thematic map for the researchers who intend to conduct morein-depth study of the phenomenon of what is termed as “leagilesoftware development” in this paper. A signiﬁcant area for furtherresearch could be to provide operational guidance to help devel-opers (i) map the various potential “leagile processes” to their owncontext and (ii) implement the selected process combination.The practical implication of our study is that it reveals differ-ent strategies to apply lean concepts, principles and practices inagile software development. There is no one-type-ﬁts-all solution.Each organisation should reﬂect on its own development context,project objectives, and constraints as well as reﬂect on the variousaspects of agile and lean before embarking on the journey of “leag-ile software development”. The potential strategies summarised inthis study could provide them with some promising directions toexplore. However, how to effectively tailor these strategies to suitthe speciﬁc situation and needs of the organisation is a challengeyet to be addressed and therefore worth further studying.One limitation of the research is that, since “agile” and “lean”are very broad and often poorly deﬁned terms, their interpretationsin the experience reports are often vague and the terms can meandifferent things in different reports. Future research could examineagile and lean at the more detailed and operational practice level,comparing the commonality and contradiction of agile versus leanpractices. A detailed analysis of practice level comparisons was notpossible in this study as not all experience reports provided therequired level of detail.Another limitation of our study is related to the secondary dataanalysis method we applied, which leads to the weak basis of thedata source. It must be noted that researchers using secondary datamust be aware of issues related to data quality and accuracy. Sincethe collected experience reports represented secondary data, wehad no control on the quality of data and especially the level ofdetails we desired. The 30 experience reports included in the anal-ysis therefore were not equally informative and illuminative. Inaddition, the organisations covered in these reports vary in termsof sizes and business domains they operate, which may pose poten-tial threat to the validity of the ﬁndings reported in this study. Onepotential avenue for future research would be to conduct primarycase studies which allow to design a better sampling strategy, tocollect more speciﬁc and in-depth data, and to explore the issues,challenges and opportunities associated with the application oflean in agile software development.Appendix A. The list of experience reports included in thesecondary data analysis[ER1] Hodgetts, P., 2004. Refactoring the development process:experiences with the incremental adoption of agile practices. In:Agile Development Conference, pp. 106–113.[ER2] Rand, C., Eckfeldt, B., 2004. Aligning strategic planning withagile development: extending agile thinking to business improve-ment. In: Agile Development Conference, pp. 78–82.[ER3] Parnell-Klabo, E., 2006. Introducing lean principles with agilepractices at a fortune 500 company. In: Agile 2006 (Agile’06), pp.232–242.
[ER4] Poon, D., 2006. A self funding agile transformation. In: Agile2006 (Agile’06), pp. 342–350.[ER5] Weyrauch, K., 2006. What are we arguing about? A frame-work for deﬁning agile in our organization. In: Agile 2006(Agile’06), pp. 213–220.[ER6] Yap, M., 2006. Value based extreme programming. Agile2006 (Agile’06), pp. 175–184.[ER7] Fry, C., Greene, S., 2007. Large scale agile transformation inan on-demand world. In: Agile 2007 (Agile 2007), pp. 136–142.[ER8] Packlick, J., 2007. The agile maturity map a goal orientedapproach to agile improvement. In: Agile 2007 (Agile 2007), pp.266–271.
[ER9] Sutherland, J., Jakobsen, C.R., Johnson, K., 2007. Scrum andCMMI Level 5: the magic potion for code warriors. In: Agile 2007(Agile 2007), pp. 272–278.[ER10] Croix, A.D.S., Easton, A., 2008. The product owner team. In:Agile 2008 Conference, pp. 274–279.[ER11] Geras, A., 2008. Leading manual test efforts with agile meth-ods. In: Agile 2008 Conference, pp. 245–251.[ER12] Goos, J., Melisse, A., 2008. An ericsson example of enterpriseclass agility. In: Agile 2008 Conference, pp. 154–159.[ER13] Kinoshita, F., 2008. Practices of an agile team. In: Agile 2008Conference, pp. 373–377.[ER14] Thomas, J.C., Baker, S.W., 2008. Establishing an agile port-folio to align IT investments with business needs. In: Agile 2008Conference, pp. 252–258.[ER15] Jakobsen, Carsten Ruseng, Sutherland, Jeff, 2009. Scrum andCMMI going from good to great. In: Agile 2009 Conference, pp.333–337.
[ER16] Lacoste, F.J., 2009. Killing the gatekeeper: introducing acontinuous integration system. In: Agile 2009 Conference, pp.387–392.
[ER17] Shinkle, C.M., 2009. Applying the Dreyfus model of skillacquisition to the adoption of kanban systems at softwareengineering professionals (SEP). In: Agile 2009 Conference, pp.186–191.
[ER18] Willeke, E.R., 2009. The inkubook experience: a tale of ﬁveprocesses. In: Agile 2009 Conference, pp. 156–161.[ER19] Maassen, O., Sonnevelt, J., 2010. Kanban at an InsuranceCompany (are you sure?). In: Proceedings of the 11th InternationalConference on Agile Software Development (XP2010). SpringerVerlag, Trondheim, pp. 297–306.[ER20] Rutherford, K., et al., 2010. From Chaos to Kanban, viaScrum. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Conference onAgile Software Development (XP2010). Springer Verlag, Trond-heim, pp. 344–352.[ER21] Birkeland, J.O., 2010. From a timebox tangle to a moreﬂexible ﬂow. In: Proceedings of the 11th International Confer-ence on Agile Software Development (XP2010). Springer Verlag,Trondheim, Norway, pp. 325–334.[ER22] Zang, J.J., 2011. A never ending battle for continuousimprovement. In: Proceedings of the 12th International Confer-ence on Agile Processes in Software Engineering and ExtremeProgramming, pp. 282–289.[ER23] Greaves, K., 2011. Taming the customer support queue. In:Agile 2011 Conference. IEEE Comput. Soc., Salt Lake City, UT, pp.154–160.
[ER24] Wijewardena, T., 2011. Do you dare to ask your HR Managerto practice KANBAN? In: Agile 2011 Conference. IEEE Comput. Soc.,Salt Lake City, UT, pp. 161–167.[ER25] Jakobsen, C.R., Poppendieck, T., 2011. Lean as a scrum trou-bleshooter. In: Agile 2011 Conference. IEEE Comput. Soc., Salt LakeCity, UT, pp. 168–174.[ER26] Kaiser, M., Royse, G., 2011. Selling the investment to paydown technical debt the code christmas tree. In: Agile 2011 Con-ference. IEEE Comput. Soc., Salt Lake City, UT, pp. 175–180.[ER27] Prior, M., 2011. “You want to do what ?” Breaking the rulesto increase customer satisfaction. In: Agile 2011 Conference. IEEEComput. Soc., Salt Lake City, UT, pp. 269–273.[ER28] Smits, H., Rilliet, K., 2011. Agile experience report transitionand complexity at cisco voice technology group. In: Agile 2011Conference. IEEE Comput. Soc., Salt Lake City, UT, pp. 274–278. X. Wang et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 85 (2012) 1287– 12991299[ER29] Nottonson, K., 2011. Yahoo! Sports: sprint 100 & beyond.In: Agile 2011 Conference. IEEE Comput. Soc., Salt Lake City, UT,pp. 252–255.[ER30] Polk, R., 2011. Agile and kanban in coordination. In:Agile 2011 Conference. IEEE Comput. Soc., Salt Lake City, UT, pp.263–268.ReferencesAmbler, S.W., 2009. Scaling agile software development through lean governance.In: Proceedings of Software Development Governance SDG’09 – ICSE’09 Work-shop, Vancouver, Canada: IEEE Computer Society.Ambler, S.W., Kroll, P., 2007. Best practices for lean development governance. Avail-able from: http://www.ibm.com/developerworks/rational/library/jun07/kroll/(accessed on 01.09.11).Anderson, D., 2010. Kanban –Successful
 Evolutionary Change for Your TechnologyBusiness. Blue Hole Press.Anderson, D.J., Garber, R., 2007. A Kanban System for Sustaining Engineeringon Software Systems. Available from: http://www.agilemanagement.net/index.php/blog/A Kanban System for Sustaining Engineering (accessed on 01.09.11).Barton, B., 2009. All-out organizational scrum as an innovation value Chain. In: The42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, Waikoloa.Beck, K., 1999. Extreme Programming Explained. Addison Wesley, Reading, MA.Boslaugh, S., 2007. An introduction to secondary data analysis. In: Secondary DataSources for Public Health: A Practical Guide. Cambridge University Press.Bradley, R., 2007. Push to Pull: How Lean Concepts Improve a Data Migration. AGILE,13–17 August, pp. 365–370.Charette, R.N., 2003. Challenging the fundamental notions of software development.Cutter Consort. Exe. Rep. 4 (6).Coad, P., Palmer, S., 2002. Feature-Driven Development. Prentice Hall, EnglewoodCliffs, NJ.Cockburn, A., 2001. Crystal Clear: A Human-Powered Software DevelopmentMethodology for Small Teams. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.Conboy, K., 2009. Agility from ﬁrst principles: reconstructing the concept of agilityin information systems development. Inform. Syst. Res. 20 (3), 329–354.Dall’Agnol, M., Janes, A., Succi, G., Zaninotto, E., 2003. Lean management – ametaphor for extreme programming? In: Proceedings of the 4th InternationalConference XP2003, Genova, Italy, pp. 26–32.Deming, W.E., 1986. Out of the Crisis. MIT Center for Advanced Engineering Study.Dingsøyr, T., Dybå, T., Abrahamsson, P., 2008. A preliminary roadmap for empiricalresearch on agile software development. In: Proceedings of Agile 2008 Confer-ence, Toronto, pp. 83–94.Dybå, T., Dingsøyr, T., 2009. What do we know about agile software development?IEEE Software 26 (5), 6–9.Fagan, M.E., 1976. Design and code inspections to reduce errors in program devel-opment. IBM Syst. J. 15, 182–211.Goldratt, E.M., 1992. The Goal: A Process of Ongoing Improvement. North River Press.Goldratt, E.M., 1997. Critical Chain. Aldershot, Gower.Hibbs, C., Jewett, S., Sullivan, M., 2009. The Art of Lean Software Development: APractical and Incremental Approach. O’Reilly Media, Inc.Highsmith, J., 2002. Agile Software Development Ecosystems. Addison-WesleyLongman Publishing Co., Inc., Boston, MA, USA.Hiranabe, K., 2008. Kanban Applied to Software Development: from Agileto Lean. Available from: http://www.infoq.com/articles/hiranabe-lean-agile-kanban (accessed on 01.09.11).Jalali, S., Wohlin, C.,2010. Agile practices in global software engineering – a system-atic map. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Global SoftwareEngineering (ICGSE 2010). IEEE Computer Society, pp. 45–54.Joyce, M., Schechter, B., 2004. The lean enterprise – a management philosophy atlockheed martin. Defense Adv. Res. J.Kniberg, H., Skarin, M., 2010. Kanban and Scrum-Making the Most of Both. InfoQ.Ladas, C., 2009. Scrumban – Essays on Kanban Systems for Lean Software Develop-ment. Modus Cooperandi Press.Liker, J., 2003. The Toyota Way. McGraw-Hill.Liker, J.K., Hoseus, M., 2008. Toyota Culture: The Heart and Soul of the Toyota Way.McGraw-Hill, New York, NY, USA.Middleton, P., 2001. Lean software development: two case studies. Software Qual.J. 9, 241–252.Middleton, P., Flaxel, A., Cookson, A., 2005. Lean Software Management Case Study:Timberline Inc. Extreme Programming and Agile Processes in Software Engi-neering.Morien, R., 2005. Agile management and the Toyota way for software project man-agement. In: Proceedings of the 3rd IEEE International Conference on IndustrialInformatics, (INDIN’05), Perth, Western Australia: IEEE Computer Society, pp.516–522.Mujtaba, S., Feldt, R., Petersen, K., 2010. Waste and lead time reduction in a softwareproduct customization process with value stream maps. In: Software Engineer-ing Conference (ASWEC), 2010 21st Australian, 6–9 April, pp. 139–148.Naylor, J., Naim, M., Danny, B., 1999. Leagility: integrating the lean and agile man-ufacturing paradigm in the total supply chain. Eng. Costs Product. Econ. 62 (1),107–118.Ohno, T., 1988. The Toyota Production System: Beyond Large Scale Production. Pro-ductivity Press, Portland, OR.Perera, G.I.U.S., Fernando, M.S.D., 2007. Enhanced agile software development –hybrid paradigm with LEAN practice. In: Proceedings of 2nd International Con-ference on Industrial and Information Systems (ICIIS 2007), Peradeniya, SriLanka: IEEE Computer Society, pp. 239–244.Poppendieck, M., Poppendieck, T., 2003. Lean Software Development: An AgileToolkit. Addison Wesley Professional.Poppendieck, M., Poppendieck, T., 2006. Implementing Lean Software Developmentfrom Concept to Cash. Addison Wesley Professional.Raffo, D., Mehta, M., Anderson, D.J., Harmon, R., 2010. Integrating Lean principleswith value based software engineering. In: Technology Management for GlobalEconomic Growth (PICMET 2010), 18–22 July, pp. 1–10.Reinertsen, D., 1997. Managing the Design Factory: The Product Developer’s. ToolkitThe Free Press.Reinertsen, D.G., 2009. The Principles of Product Development Flow: Second Gener-ation Lean Product Development. Celeritas Publishing.Robinson, H., 1997. Using Poka-Yoke techniques for early defect detection. In: SixthInternational Conference on Software Testing Analysis and Review.Schwaber, K., Beedle, A., 2002. Agile Software Development with SCRUM. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.Serignese, K., 2011. A Sprinkle of Agile: A Dash of Lean. SPTechWeb.Smits, H., 2007. The impact of scaling on planning activities in an agile softwaredevelopment center. In: Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii International Confer-ence on System Sciences (HICSS’07), Waikoloa.Sugimori, Y., Kusunoki, K., Cho, F., Uchikawa, S., 1977. Toyota production system andKanban system Materialization of just-in-time and respect-for-human system.Int. J. Product. Res. 15, 553–564.Thimbleby, H., 1988. Delaying commitment (programming strategy). Software IEEE5, 78–86.VersionOne, 2010. 5th Annual State of Agile Development Survey. Available from:http://www.versionone.com/pdf/2010State of Agile Development SurveyResults.pdf (accessed on 01.09.11).Wang, X.,2011. The combination of agile and lean in software development: an expe-rience report analysis. In: Proceedings of Agile 2011 Conference. Salt Lake City,UT. IEEE Comput. Soc., pp. 1–9.Womack, J.P., Jones, D.T., 1996. Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth inYour Corporation. Simon & Schuster.Womack, J., Jones, D., ROOS, D., 1990. The Machine that Changed the World. RawsonAssociates, NY.Xiaofeng Wang is a researcher in Free University of Bozen/Bolzano. Her researchareas include software development process, methods, agile software develop-ment, and complex adaptive systems theory. Her doctoral study investigated theapplication of complex adaptive systems theory in the research of agile softwaredevelopment. Her publications include several journal and conference papers inmajor IS journal and conferences, including Information Systems Research (ISR),Journal of Information Technology (JIT), the International Conference on InformationSystems (ICIS) and the European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS).Kieran Conboy is an associate professor in Information Systems in UNSW, Australia.His doctoral research focused on agile methods for systems development as well asagility across other disciplines. Kieran’s other research interests include systemsanalysis and management accounting in systems development projects. Some ofhis research has been published in various journals and conferences such as Infor-mation Systems Research (ISR), European Journal of Information Systems (EJIS), theInternational Conference on Information Systems (ICIS). Prior to joining NUI Gal-way, Kieran was a management consultant with Accenture, where he worked on avariety of projects across Europe and the US.Oisin Cawley is currently a doctoral researcher with Lero – The Irish Software Engi-neering Research Centre at the University of Limerick in Ireland. Previously he hadbeen working for 17 years in software development for mostly multinational com-panies, and has held many positions including Global Software Development andApplication Support Manager. He holds a BSc in Computer Science from UniversityCollege Dublin, Ireland and an MBA from Dublin City University, Ireland. He is amember of the Irish Computer Society.