 The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
The Journal of Systems
 and Software
j ourna l ho mepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/jssCost, beneﬁts and quality of software development documentation:A systematic mappingJunji Zhia, Vahid Garousi-Yusifo˘glub,c,, Bo Sund,e, Golara Garousic,f,Shawn Shahnewazc, Guenther Ruhec,daDepartment of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Ontario, CanadabSystem and Software Quality Engineering Research Group (SySoQual), Department of Software Engineering, Atilim University,˙Incek, Ankara, TurkeycDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Calgary, Alberta, CanadadDepartment of Computer Science, University of Calgary, Alberta, CanadaeiSolutions Inc., Calgary, Alberta, CanadafgeoLOGIC Systems Ltd., Calgary, Alberta, Canadaa r t i c l e i n f oArticle history:Received 5 September 2012Received in revised form28 September 2014Accepted 28 September 2014Available online 22 October 2014Keywords:
Software documentationDocumentation beneﬁtSystematic mappinga b s t r a c tContext: Software documentation is an integral part of any software development process. Researchersand practitioners have expressed concerns about costs, beneﬁts and quality of software documentationin practice. On the one hand, there is a lack of a comprehensive model to evaluate the quality of docu-mentation. On the other hand, researchers and practitioners need to assess whether documentation costoutweighs its beneﬁt.Objectives: In this study, we aim to summarize the existing literature and provide an overview of the ﬁeldof software documentation cost, beneﬁt and quality.Method: We use the systematic-mapping methodology to map the existing body of knowledge related tosoftware documentation cost, beneﬁt and quality. To achieve our objectives, 11 Research Questions (RQ)are raised. The primary papers are carefully selected. After applying the inclusion and exclusion criteria,our study pool included a set of 69 papers from 1971 to 2011. A systematic map is developed and reﬁnediteratively.
Results: We present the results of a systematic mapping covering different research aspects related tosoftware documentation cost, beneﬁt and quality (RQ 1–11). Key ﬁndings include: (1) validation researchpapers are dominating (27 papers), followed by solution proposals (21 papers). (2) Most papers (61 outof 69) do not mention the development life-cycle model explicitly. Agile development is only mentionedin 6 papers. (3) Most papers include only one “System under Study” (SUS) which is mostly academicprototype. The average number of participants in survey-based papers is 106, the highest one havingapproximately 1000 participants. (4) In terms of focus of papers, 50 papers focused on documentationquality, followed by 37 papers on beneﬁt, and 12 papers on documentation cost. (5) The quality attributesof documentation that appear in most papers are, in order: completeness, consistency and accessibility.Additionally, improved meta-models for documentation cost, beneﬁt and quality are also presented.Furthermore, we have created an online paper repository of the primary papers analyzed and mappedduring this study.Conclusion: Our study results show that this research area is emerging but far from mature. Firstly, docu-mentation cost aspect seems to have been neglected in the existing literature and there are no systematicmethods or models to measure cost. Also, despite a substantial number of solutions proposed during thelast 40 years, more and stronger empirical evidences are still needed to enhance our understanding ofthis area. In particular, what we expect includes (1) more validation or evaluation studies; (2) studiesinvolving large-scale development projects, or from large number of study participants of various orga-nizations; (3) more industry-academia collaborations; (4) more estimation models or methods to assessdocumentation quality, beneﬁt and, especially, cost.© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.Corresponding author at: System and Software Quality Engineering Research Group (SySoQual), Department of Software Engineering, Atilim University,˙Incek, Ankara,Turkey. Tel.: +90 (312) 586-8774.E-mail addresses: zhij@cs.toronto.edu (J. Zhi), vahid.garousi@atilim.edu.tr (V. Garousi-Yusifo˘glu), sbo@ucalgary.ca (B. Sun), golara.garousi@gmail.com (G. Garousi),smshahne@ucalgary.ca (S. Shahnewaz), ruhe@ucalgary.ca (G. Ruhe).http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jss.2014.09.0420164-1212/© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved. 176 J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–1981. IntroductionSoftware documentation is an integral part of any softwaredevelopment process (Bayer and Muthig, 2006). In fact, softwaredocumentation has become a popular sub-domain in software engi-neering (Cook and Visconti, 1994) to the extent that there arespecial interest groups such as the ACM Special Interest Group onDesign of Communication (SIGDOC).A literature search in the beginning of this study (Fall 2013)yielded 500+ papers on software documentation. A large portionof this set proposes various types of documentation managementsystems or formats. Another portion of the paper set focuses oncost, beneﬁts and quality of documentation, the subjects which wefocus on in this study.In our study, we target the documents that are software develop-ment related. We call them technical and refer to those documentsthat (1) are produced during the software development lifecycleand (2) whose target audience(s) are software developer(s). Thetypes of documents within the scope of our investigation typicallyinclude requirement, design, implementation and test documentsas well as code comments. Product or user manuals may also beproduced during development lifecycle, but are excluded in ourinvestigation because it violates the second criterion, i.e., their tar-get audiences are not software developers. We deﬁne the termcost as the value of effort or time that has been used to producea software artifact (e.g., code, or documentation).A considerable share of software projects’ costs are spent on doc-umentation, e.g., a ratio of 11% was reported in (Sanchez-Rosadoet al., 2009). This indicates that the effort consumed in documen-tation is one signiﬁcant cost drivers during software developmentprocesses. It is natural and expected that, when cost is spent indeveloping an artifact, that artifact should be used and providesbeneﬁt at some point in the development or maintenance phase(Mira, 2005; Tilley and Huang, 2003; Lethbridge et al., 2003). Thebeneﬁts could be reﬂected in many aspects, e.g., shortened taskduration, improved code quality, higher productivity, or any otherimprovements related to software development. In terms of doc-umentation quality, we deﬁne it as the character of documentswith respect to ﬁneness which is often inﬂuenced by how muchtime/effort is spent on and affects the beneﬁts practitioners getfrom the documents. Therefore, the aspect of document quality isalso included in our scope of study.On the other hand, the traditional view of software documen-tation is undergoing the challenge of Agile development methods(Ambler, 2011; Rubin and Rubin, 2011; Rueping, 2003; Stettina andHeijstek, 2011). As the Agile manifesto (Beck et al., 2012) pointsout: “Working software [is valued] over comprehensive documen-tation”. The manifesto also mentions that, while there is value in theitems on the right (i.e., documentation), we value the items on theleft (i.e., working software) more. Does this mean documentationis no longer important (Stettina and Heijstek, 2011)? Practition-ers start to question whether the cost of creating and maintainingdocumentation outweighs its potential beneﬁt (Rueping, 2003;Stettina and Heijstek, 2011). To answer such a question, one needsto be able to quantitatively measure the cost and beneﬁt of docu-mentation.During the past three to four decades, researchers, in increas-ing numbers, have proposed different techniques for analyzing cost,beneﬁt and quality of documentation. As the research area maturesand the number of related papers increases, we feel it is importantto summarize the current state-of-the-art and provide an overviewof the trends in this specialized ﬁeld. To address that goal, wepresent in this paper a systematic mapping of the literature in thisarea.According to Petersen et al. (2008), a systematic mapping (SM)is a method to review, classify, and structure papers related toa speciﬁc research ﬁeld in software engineering. According toKitchenham et al. (2011): “mapping papers can save time andeffort for researchers and provide baselines to assist new researchefforts”. The goal is to obtain an overview of existing approaches,outlining the coverage of the research ﬁeld in different facets of theclassiﬁcation scheme that we develop in this paper. Identiﬁed gapsin the ﬁeld serve as a valuable basis for future research directions.Using an empirical study, Kitchenham et al. (2010) reported thatSM papers also have educational values and would provide youngresearchers and students with useful and transferable researchskills and are a useful ﬁrst step for postgraduate PhD candidates.Unlike a Systematic Literature Review (SLR) (Kitchenham andCharters, 2007), ﬁnding evidence for impact of a proposed approachis not the main focus in a systematic mapping (Petersen et al., 2008).However, the two methods have many overlaps and the resultsof a systematic mapping can be fed into a more rigorous system-atic review study to support evidence-based software engineering(Kitchenham and Charters, 2007).Systematic mapping papers generally consist of ﬁve stepsincluding: (1) a deﬁnition of research questions, (2) conducting thesearch for relevant papers, (3) screening of papers, (4) key-wordingof abstracts, and (5) data extraction and mapping (Petersen et al.,2008), which we follow in this paper.As far as we are concerned, we have not been able to ﬁnd anystudy to synthesize or to systematically map the existing papers onsoftware documentation cost, beneﬁt and quality. Our study aimsto survey the existing literature for purpose of identifying researchtrends. We hope that this paper contributes a summary of the areathat could be useful for follow-up future papers. Also, the need forthis SM was motivated in the context of a multi-year industrial col-laborative research and development project in which the authorsare involved in, which aims to minimize the cost and amount ofdocumentation across the software development life-cycle for oneof our industrial partners.The main questions we intend to answer in this study are:(1) How do researchers assess the quality of documentation?(2) What are the cost-related attributes of software documenta-tion?(3) What beneﬁt does documentation bring to software practition-ers?During our SM study, we have extracted the attributes or metricsto measure these three aspects. For document quality aspect, weextracted more than 13 attributes that cover different aspects ofdocument quality, including up-to-date-ness, completeness, etc.For beneﬁt aspect, we also gathered three main categories (e.g.,development aid, maintenance aid, etc.) and two metrics (e.g., tasktime reduction, etc.). In terms of document cost, we also extractedtwo main categories (i.e., production or maintenance cost, etc.)and one quantitative metric (i.e., document size). The results arepresented in detail in Sections 6.8–6.10.The main contributions of this paper are two-fold:•A uniﬁed meta-model for documentation quality incorporatingand consolidating all the individual and partial parts proposed byprevious researchers, and also a meta-model for documentationusage process and beneﬁt (Section 5.2).•A systematic map (Section 5) developed for the area of documen-tation cost, beneﬁt, and quality and consequently the systematicmapping of the existing research in this area (Section 6).Also, we published an online paper repository which has beencreated during this systematic study (Zhi et al., 2012). Futureresearchers or practitioners can ﬁnd related works in the area J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198 177of software documentation cost, beneﬁt and quality by using ourrepository.The remainder of paper is organized as followed. Section 2 dis-cusses background and related work. In Section 3, we describe ourresearch method, including the overall SM process, the goal andresearch questions tackled in this study. Section 4 discusses in detailthe paper selection process. Section 5 presents the systematic mapwhich has been built through an iterative selection and synthesisprocess. Section 6 presents the results of the systematic mapping.Validity aspects of this study are discussed in Section 7. Finally, Sec-tion 8 summarizes and concludes this study and states the futurework directions. The reference section at the end of the paper isdivided into two parts: primary papers of the systematic mappingare listed ﬁrst and then the other references used in this study.2. Background and related workBefore presenting our SM study and results, we discuss in thissection the following background information and related work:•What is software documentation?•Systematic mappings and literature-review studies in softwareengineering.•Existing work in formalizing software documentation.2.1. What is software documentation?In the thesis of Andrew Forward (Forward, 2002), softwaredocumentation is deﬁned as “an artifact whose purpose is tocommunicate information about the software system to whichit belongs”. In this deﬁnition, documentation is stressed for theusage of communication among software engineers. Parnas (2011)deﬁnes document as “a written description that has an ofﬁcial sta-tus or authority and may be used as evidence”. Such description isexpected to provide precise information about the systems. Parnaspoints out that the word document is used very generally, refer-ring to any information accompanying the software, even if it isimprecise or incomplete. Parnas also classiﬁed documents into dif-ferent types for different purposes. For example, speciﬁcations inthe forms of “assertions or program functions” may be useful fordevelopers, but might not be signiﬁcant for other users. One exam-ple of “other users” is testers who may only concern the black-boxfunctionalities of the program rather than the detailed implemen-tation. This clariﬁcation is helpful for our discussion in this papersince it provides rationale for the attribute scheme to be describedin Section 5.From the above discussion, we can see that the meaning of doc-umentation is many-fold. Thus it is difﬁcult to draw a deﬁnitionin a single sentence. Instead, we conclude the above-mentioneddeﬁnitions by listing several aspects of documentation below:•Documentation is a written description of software systems.•Documentation is expected to provide precise information aboutthe systems.•Documentation can refer to the product manual that developerscreated for non-developer users.•Development (or technical) documentation is created for the pur-pose of communication among software engineers.•Documentation can refer to different artifacts, including require-ments, design, code comment, test cases, etc.•Documentation can be presented in different formats, varyingfrom the traditional written text to graphical models (e.g., thoseusing UML), from static text to dynamic hypertext systems.Our study is targeting the cost, beneﬁt and quality of docu-mentation in development phases. By ‘development phase’, werefer to the phases that exist in the process of developing softwareproducts, including requirement, design or test, etc. (Pﬂeeger andAtlee, 2010). As discussed in Section 1, we are only concerned withdevelopment (or technical) documentation. Such documentationincludes the document types that are commonly used in devel-opment phases, such as requirement, design, test, process controldocuments, etc. In this paper, architecture documentation, whichspeciﬁes how software systems are structured, is generally consid-ered as a type of design. These types of document either describe thetechnical details of the system or specify how the system should bebuilt. On the other hand, we excluded those papers only discussingnon-development-related documentation (e.g., user manuals).Some researchers and professionals believe that source codeitself can be viewed as one type of documentation. However, inthis paper we do not bear this view. We intend to narrow our scopeof documentation. Otherwise, the cost or quality of documentationwill include the source code quality, which will be too broad to beaddressed in one single study.2.2. Systematic mappings and literature-review studies insoftware engineeringResearch proceeds by learning from and being inspired by exist-ing research works. When a research area grows and owns a largenumber of existing papers, it requires a substantial effort to readall the literature before conducting new research. Summarizing theexisting literature and providing an overview for a certain area ishelpful for new researchers (e.g., new Master or PhD students),identifying research trends and shedding lights on future direc-tions.Like many other research ﬁelds, software engineering has itsmethodologies for conducting secondary studies. Petersen et al.(2008) presented a guideline paper on how to conduct systematicmapping (SM) studies in software engineering. This paper providesinsights on building classiﬁcation schemes and structuring a partic-ular sub-domain of interest in software engineering. The techniquedescribed by Petersen et al. was applied in our SM study.Kitchenham et al. (2009) reported a review on SLR papers insoftware engineering. 20 relevant papers are collected and ana-lyzed. The authors concluded that the potential value of SLR papersis demonstrated by the series of papers. Yet none of these papersfocused on software documentation. As a more ‘open’ form of SLR(Budgen et al., 2008), SM study method also attracts attentionamong some researchers. Budgen et al. (2008) conducted an infor-mal review on the SM papers on software engineering and reporteda summary of these papers. In total, six SM papers were examinedand studied. We also browsed the Software Engineering EvidenceMap (Software Engineering Evidence Map, 2012) which listed 41SLR or SM papers. The areas that these papers cover include Soft-ware Testing (Jia and Harman, 2011, 2012; Zhang, 2012), SoftwareEngineering Management, etc. Again, none of these papers con-centrate their discussion on documentation issues. Hopefully, ourSM study in this paper may address this gap and to lay a founda-tion for more comprehensive secondary studies, such as SystematicLiterature Review (SLR) in the future in the area of software docu-mentation.2.3. Existing work in formalizing software documentationResearchers have formalized the documentation process, cost,beneﬁt and quality attributes. We were able to ﬁnd a few existingworks (Arthur and Stevens, 1989; Meng et al., 2006; Palazzolo andUtt, 2000; Visconti and Cook, 1993) in this subject. In this paper,we present a formalized view on the documentation process, cost, 178 J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198beneﬁt and quality (Section 5.2). We discuss below the existingwork and also how our extended models differ from the previouswork.Arthur and Stevens (1989) reported a case study on assessing theadequacy of project documentation based on a taxonomic structurefor documentation characteristics. They deﬁned Document Qual-ity Indicators (DQI) to decompose the quality into factor level andform a hierarchical model. Based on the characteristics they col-lected, our proposed model incorporates other attributes that arenot included in the Arthur and Stevens’ model, such as up-to-date-ness and content duplication. In other words, our work offers amore comprehensive model of document quality characteristics.Visconti and Cook (1993) proposed a 4-level DocumentationProcess Maturity model. Their model aims to evaluate the docu-ment process maturity and to address the low quality issues ofdocumentation. In their model, each level is identiﬁed with a name,keywords, key process areas, key practice, key indicators, etc. Theyalso proposed an intermediate set of goals toward higher levels ofprocess maturity. However, their maturity model does not solve theproblem of measuring the document quality directly. Our study, incontrast, decomposes the document quality concept into differentattributes and lays a foundation for further concrete, quantitativemeasurement of document quality.Palazzolo and Utt (2000) integrated the documentation devel-opment process into the Rational Uniﬁed Process (RUP). Intheir model, they identiﬁed the workers (e.g., technical writers,information architects), the artifacts (e.g., concept, task and docu-mentation) and the documentation development work-ﬂow. Whilethey focus their discussion on the process of developing documen-tation, our proposed model emphasizes the relationships amongthe entities in the process: software personnel, tasks and doc-umentation, so as to investigate the cost or beneﬁt of softwaredocumentation.Meng et al. (2006) proposed a software comprehension modelwhere document is modeled as “descriptions of the documentedartifacts”. The authors aim to use such a process model to describecomprehension tasks in different contexts. Their proposed modelis similar to the one which we present (see Fig. 2) in this paper inseveral aspects: (1) Both models consider tasks as the main activ-ity that motivates software engineers to consult documents; (2)Documents are considered as main information sources in bothmodels. However, since their model concentrates on program com-prehension, the authors do not elaborate on and types of documentsor types of tasks as we do in this paper. For example, we dif-ferentiate tasks into two main categories: maintenance tasks andpre-maintenance tasks, and for each category we include corre-sponding sub-categories (see Fig. 2). Also, types of documentationartifacts are elaborated in our model. A document can be presentedin textual or visual form, or as code comments. Such elaborationsare necessary to study the documentation usage process in detailand thus to investigate the beneﬁt or cost of documentation.3. Research methodIn the following, an overview of our research method and thenthe goal and research questions of our study are presented.3.1. OverviewThis SM is carried out in reference to the guidelines providedby Petersen et al. (2008), and Kitchenham and Charters (2007). Indesigning the methodology for this SM, methods (e.g., deriving con-cise research questions and research methodology) from severalother SMs such as (Ali et al., 2010; Elberzhager et al., 2012; Garousi,2012) were also incorporated.Our SM study process is outlined as a UML activity diagram inFig. 1. The process consists of several phases (activities) which aredescribed throughout Sections 4–6. The Research Questions (RQs)appearing in Fig. 1 are discussed in the next section.3.2. Goal and research questionsThe goal of this study is to systematically review the state-of-the-art in analyzing cost, beneﬁt, and quality of softwaredocumentation within the software development lifecycle (SDLC),to classify the papers in this area and to ﬁnd out the recenttrends in this ﬁeld from the perspective of researchers andpractitioners.In simpler terms, the goal is to understand the software docu-mentation research with regard to the following three attributes:cost, beneﬁt, and quality. We are also interested in understandinghow the research area has evolved over time with regards to thoseattributes.Based on the above goal, the following research questionsare raised. Main topics, question bodies and rationale for eachresearch question (RQ) are presented as below. Classiﬁcations usedto answer each of the questions are discussed in Section 5.•RQ 1 – Number of papers by research facet: What type ofresearch methods are used in the papers? A paper could be sim-ply a solution proposal, while other papers take experimentalresearch approaches (with various levels of rigor) (Petersen et al.,2008). The rationale behind this RQ is that knowing the break-down of the research area with respect to (w.r.t.) research facettypes will provide us with the maturity of the ﬁeld and papers inusing empirical approaches.•RQ 2 – Number of papers by contribution facet: Whattypes of contributions are made by the papers? How manypapers present documentation methods/techniques, tools, mod-els, metrics, or processes? Knowing the breakdown of thepapers w.r.t. contribution facet types will provide us with thelist of each contribution type (e.g., documentation tools pre-sented in the previous papers) which could be used in follow-uppapers.•RQ 3 – Types of development life-cycle model: In what type ofdevelopment life-cycle model (e.g., waterfall or Agile) is the doc-umentation applied? Knowing the breakdown of the papers withrespect to development phases in which documentation is usedwill provide us with the ratio of the processes using or studyingdocumentation.•RQ 4 – Type of artifact: What are the artifact types for whichdocumentation is made? Artifacts types may include require-ment, design, test, process and code. The answer to this RQ canhelp us understand for what purposes most documentation isdeveloped.•RQ 5 – Documentation formats: In what format is the docu-mentation presented? Possible formats include formatted text,models (e.g., UML), code comments, speciﬁc tools, etc. Addressingthis RQ will help us gain knowledge about the type of formatsmost documentation is expressed.•RQ 6 – Objects under study: What are the attributes of theobjects under study? Some papers have studied the documen-tation issues in the context of case-papers, while others haveinvolved participants in surveys to solicit their input in study-ing the documentation issues. This question intends to analyzethe attributes of those objects, e.g., size and scale of case studysystems, and number of participants involved in surveys. Therationale behind this RQ is to characterize the size and scale ofthe case papers in papers which have involved software systemsor survey participants. J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198 179Initial 
Attributes Relevant  ar
ticles  foun d in databases  (1 20 studie
s)Appl
ication 
of inclusion cr
iter iaArticles 
fr om specific  ven uesArticles  by  browsin g personal web pages
Final selec
ti on(69 
st udies)
Article  sele
cti on (Sect
io n 4)Att ribute 
Identifi
cat ion
Classifi cation
  Sch
eme/Ma p (Section 
5)Attribute Generalization
an d Iterative Refi
ne mentFinal 
Ma pSystem atic mapping 
(S ect ion 6)System atic  mappin gSystemati c Mapping re
sultsRQ 1-11IEEEXplo
reACM  Digi
ta l Libr
ar yGoogle 
Scholar
Microsoft 
Academic
Search
CiteSeerX
Referenced 
articl esScience 
Direc tAppl
ication of exclusio
n criteriaFiltere d set(51 studie s)Action
Database
Entity
Multiple 
En tities
Legends
Fig. 1. Our research process.•RQ 7 – Focus of papers: Among all papers devoted to docu-mentation, what is the percentage of papers that focus on theseaspects of interest: cost, beneﬁt and quality? Addressing this RQwill reveal which of the above aspects have received most of theattention in the community, thus, enabling us to ﬁnd the less-developed areas for conducting new research.•RQ 8 – Software documentation cost attributes and metrics:What attributes and metrics related to the cost of documenta-tion have been studied? Addressing this RQ will provide the listof most-popular attributes and metrics, along with the level ofresearch activity on each, which could be used for future papers.•RQ 9 – Software documentation usage and beneﬁt attributesand metrics: What attributes and metrics related to theusage/beneﬁt of documentation have been studied? Addressingthis RQ will provide same beneﬁts as RQ 8.•RQ 10 – Software documentation quality attributes andmetrics: What attributes and metrics related to the qualityof documentation have been studied? Addressing this RQ willprovide same beneﬁts as RQ 8 and RQ 9.•RQ 11 – Industry’s involvement: What are industry’s involve-ment related to software documentation cost, beneﬁt andquality? Addressing this RQ will assess the degree of softwareindustry’s involvement in and its contribution to the body ofknowledge in this ﬁeld.4. Paper selectionRecall from Fig. 1 that the ﬁrst phase of our SM process is selec-tion of relevant papers. For the paper selection phase of our SM, weexplain the following steps in order:•Source selection and search keywords (Section 4.1).•Exclusion criteria (Section 4.2).•Inclusion criteria (Section 4.3).•Final pool of papers and the online repository (Section 4.4).4.1. Source selection and search keywordsTo ﬁnd the relevant primary papers, we searched the followingsix major online search academic paper search engines: (1) IEEEXplore,1(2) ACM Digital Library,2(3) Google Scholar,3(4) MicrosoftAcademic Search,4(5) CiteSeerX,5and (6) Science Direct.6To ensure that we include as many relevant papers as possiblein the pool of selected papers, we followed a rigorous procedureto construct the search string. First, we searched the IEEE StandardGlossary of Software Engineering Terminology (IEEE Standard 610.12-1990) for the deﬁnitions of document and documentation. Based onthe deﬁnitions of those terms, we identiﬁed the following key-words: project plan, speciﬁcation, test plan, user manual, technicaldocumentation, design documentation, architecture document, archi-tecture documentation, requirement document, and design document.Since user manual is not our focus in this study, we excluded thisterm. These terms form our noun set S1. Next, since our aspects ofinterest are cost, beneﬁt, and quality, which forms our second set ofterms, S2. Also, in order to narrow our results related to softwareor computer systems, we identiﬁed a set of modiﬁers S3includingsoftware, computer, and system. Finally, each search string is con-structed with pattern {String = s3s1s2s1 S1, s2 S2, s3 S3}. Forexample, the following search strings were generated with thismethod: software document cost, software document beneﬁt, andsoftware document quality.In our search phase, we beneﬁted from the guidelines pre-sented by Zhang et al. (2011). With these search strings, wefound 120 papers as our initial pool of potentially-relevantpapers. Only papers written in English language were consid-ered. Most papers’ full-text PDF ﬁles were electronically available.For those not available online, we ordered them via the Univer-sity of Calgary’s Interlibrary Loan system. We received a dozenof those cases, but ﬁve papers (Bayer, 2004; Comer, 1983; Prauseet al., 2007; Robles et al., 2006; Tausworthe, 1976) could not beaccessed even after we ordered them. Finally, only papers pub-lished/available by the end of March 2012 were included in ourpool.1http://ieeexplore.ieee.org.2http://dl.acm.org.3http://scholar.google.com.4http://academic.research.microsoft.com.5http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu.6http://www.sciencedirect.com. 180 J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–1984.2. Exclusion of unrelated papersThe next step in our paper selection process was to exclude theirrelevant papers. Speciﬁcally, our focus was on papers that dis-cussed cost, beneﬁt and quality of software documentation appliedduring any software development phase (e.g., requirement, design,etc.).The study s will be excluded if the report or paper p of s meetsall the criteria as below:•p has no content that explicitly discusses any known form ofcost related to technical software documentation, which can use(1) quantitative metrics such as money, time, or (2) subjectivemetrics, such as survey responses, perceived mental efforts, etc.or (3) any other metrics associated with costs, such as documentsize;•p has no content that explicitly discusses any known form of ben-eﬁt related to technical software documentation, which can use(1) quantitative metrics such as money or time, or (2) subjectivemetrics, such as survey responses which are commonly seen inempirical studies to provide subjective measurements from theperspective of practitioners, (3) any other metrics associated withdocumentation beneﬁt;•p has no content that explicitly discusses any known form ofquality aspects related to technical software documentation. Thetarget quality aspects can be any characteristic related to docu-ments that are discussed in the context of software development,such as document structure and document’s up-to-date-ness.To apply this exclusion criterion to the initial pool (120 papers),a voting phase was conducted among the ﬁrst four authors of thispaper. They inspected the papers in the initial pool and assigned avote on a 9-point scale to each paper, with ‘9’ indicating a strongopinion in favor of including a paper, and ‘1’ indicating a strongopinion in favor of excluding a paper. Thus, the maximum voteon a paper could be 36 marks. We decided to use a threshold ofaverage score of 5 out of 9, i.e., vote value of 4 × 5 = 20 in total, forthe decision on paper inclusion/exclusion.For each paper inspected, we reviewed its title, abstract and key-words. If a vote could not be made based on this information, a morein-depth evaluation was conducted. In case of a wide variance valueamong the votes for a study, authors carefully discussed such casesto ensure quality of the votes. Based on the results of the joint vot-ing, the size of the pool of selected papers decreased from 120 to51. The excluded papers are Alan and Roger (1983), Alberto et al.(2005), Ambler (2002), Ashley (2004), Azmi and Ibrahim (2011),Bauer and Parnas (1995), Benson and Tom (1988), Berglund (2000),Berglund and Priestley (2001), Bethke et al. (1991), Bill et al. (1988),Thomas and Tilley (2001), Clark et al. (1989), Clear (2003), Clementset al. (2003), Courtois and Parnas (1993), Parnas et al. (1988), Parnas(2005), Delanghe (2000), Forward and Lethbridge (2014), Frenchet al. (1997), Galdo et al. (1986), Gerth et al. (2014), Guillemette(1986), Haneef (1998), Hargis (2000), Hargis et al. (2004), Horowitzand Williamson (1985), Hyland-Wood et al. (2008), Jazzar andScacchi (1995), Johnson and Rey (1994), Kalus and Torsten (1996),Landes et al. (1999), Landis et al. (1988), Liu (2001), Lobato et al.(2010), Luqi et al. (2003), Lutsky et al. (2000), Magyar (2000),Marcus and Maletic (2005), Marovac (1994), Marovac (1998),Medina (1984), Van der Meij (2000), Metzger et al. (2007), Moallem(2003), MacKinnon and Murphy (2004), Odenthal and Quibeldey-Cirkel (1997), Peters and Parnas (1998), Phoha (1997), Powell et al.(1996), Price (1984), Price and Korman (1993), Rob (2003), de Rosiset al. (1999), Ruth (1997), Sabou (2004), Tilley (1993), Tang et al.(2011), Taulavuori et al. (2004), Visconti and Cook (2002), Waltersand Beck (1992), Wang et al. (2009), Wingkvist et al. (2010b), Wise(1993), Briand (2003)4.3. Inclusion of additional papersTo minimize the risk of missing relevant papers, similar to pre-vious SM papers and SLRs, we included additional papers manuallyvia:•Personal web pages of active researchers in the ﬁeld of interest.•References found in papers already in the pool.•Speciﬁc venues.To identify the additional personal web pages, we ranked theauthor names by the number of times they appear in the authorlist. The authors ranked top 10% were identiﬁed as active authorsand then we browsed their personal webpages to look for additionalpapers.Also, we examined the reference lists of the 51 papers that weobtained in the search phase and looked for new relevant papers.We did so to include those relevant papers that we might havemissed when using search engines.To identify the speciﬁc venues, we ranked the venues by thenumber of papers belonging to them. The top 10% venues areInternational Conference on Design of communication (SIGDOC),International Conference on Software Maintenance (ICSM), Journalof Systems and Software (JSS) and IEEE Transactions on SoftwareEngineering (TSE). However, we found that the only venue focusingon the area of software documentation was the SIGDOC.All papers found in the additional venues that were not yet inthe pool of selected papers but seemed to be candidates for inclu-sion were fed into the voting mechanism described in Section 4.2,and went through the same procedure as explained above. Afterthis phase, we believe that we have included the relevant papersthat we missed using search engines. By relevant papers, we referto those papers that have a certain number of citations and thusshould appear in the reference list of at least one of included papers.4.4. Final pool of papers and the online repositoryAfter the above-mentioned phrases, the pool was ﬁnalized with69 papers (Tryggeseth, 1997; Sametinger, 1991; Forward, 2002;Dzidek et al., 2008; Arisholm et al., 2006; Soloway et al., 1988;Schreck et al., 2007; Sheppard et al., 1981; Aguiar and David,2005; Ambler, 2011; Arthur et al., 1988; Arthur and Stevens, 1989;Bachmann et al., 2000; Bayer and Muthig, 2006; Blum, 1988; deBoer and van Vliet, 2009; Cioch et al., 1996; Cook and Visconti,1994; Correia, 2008; Correia et al., 2009; Curtis et al., 1989; Daset al., 2007; Dautovic et al., 2011; Ericsson et al., 2011; Flettonand Munro, 1988; Huang and Tilley, 2003; Jansen et al., 2009,2008; Kanter et al., 2008; Katzenelson, 1971; Kylmkoski, 2003;Lehner, 1993; Maarek and Benyfj, 1989; MacKinnon and Murphy,2003; Meng et al., 2006; Mira, 2005; Palazzolo and Utt, 2000;Parnas, 2011; Parnas et al., 1994; Parnas and Vilkomir, 2007;Pemberton et al., 1996; Pendharkar and Rodger, 2002; Poshyvanykand Marcus, 2007; Robert, 1985; Rubin and Rubin, 2011; Rueping,2003; Sametinger, 1994; Sanchez-Rosado et al., 2009; Schoeffel,1976; Schoonewille et al., 2011; Tilley and Huang, 2003; Sheppardet al., 1982; Sommerville, 2001; de Souza et al., 2005, 2006; Stettinaand Heijstek, 2011; Su, 2010; Tang et al., 2005; Tilley, 2009; Tilleyand Hausi, 1991; Tilley et al., 1992; Lethbridge et al., 2003; Trese andTilley, 2007; Visconti and Cook, 1993, 2004; Wayne and Carolyn,2007; Wingkvist et al., 2010a, 2011; Wong and Tilley, 2002). Thereader can refer to full reference list of all 69 primary papers. Theﬁnal pool of selected papers has been published as an online reposi-tory using Google Docs. It has been analyzed through our systematic J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198 181mapping study, and is accessible publically online (Zhi et al., 2012).We plan to update the online repository at least once a year in thefuture and to add new relevant papers as published.5. Development of the systematic mapIterative development of our systematic map (classiﬁcationscheme) is discussed in Section 5.1. Section 5.2 presents themeta-models summarizing and formalizing the concepts related todocumentation cost, beneﬁt and quality. Those meta-models havehelped us to carefully develop our ﬁnal systematic map, as reportedin Section 5.3. Section 5.4 presents our data extraction approach.5.1. Iterative map developmentTo develop our systematic map, we followed the processdescribed in Fig. 1. We analyzed the papers in the pool and identi-ﬁed the initial list of attributes related to cost, beneﬁt and qualityof software documentation. We used iterative reﬁnement to derivethe ﬁnal map. To increase the preciseness of our classiﬁcationscheme, we utilized the “observer triangulation” method (Runesonet al., 2012) in designing the systematic map.We recorded the primary papers in a shared spreadsheet hostedat online Google Docs system to facilitate further analysis. The fol-lowing information was recorded for each paper: (1) paper title,(3) authors, (2) paper venue, (4) year of paper, (5) authors’ countryof afﬁliation and (6) authors afﬁliation (i.e., government, academia,industry or a combination).With the relevant papers identiﬁed and recorded, our next stepwas to categorize the papers in order to begin building a completepicture of the research that has been conducted to investigate cost,beneﬁt and quality of documentation. Though we did not a prioridevelop a categorization scheme for this project, we were broadlyinterested in the attributes or metrics related to cost, beneﬁt andquality of software documentation reported on by the papers.We reﬁned these broad interests into a categorization schemeusing an iterative approach that involved all six of the authors of thispaper. The ﬁrst author of this paper conducted an initial pass overthe data, and based on (at least) the title, abstract and introductionof the papers created a set of initial categories and assigned papersto those categories. As a group, we then discussed and reviewedthe results of this ﬁrst analytic pass and reﬁned the categorization.Next the rest of the researchers conducted a second pass over thedata, to revisit the categorization. When the assignment of papersto categories could not be clearly determined just based on thetitle, abstract and introduction, further details of the paper wereconsidered. In this process, both the categories and the assignmentof papers to categories, were further discussed and reﬁned. At theend, every paper was reviewed by at least two researchers.5.2. Formalizing cost, beneﬁt and quality of documentationIn this section, we present the meta-models incorporating allthe extracted attributes related to documentation cost, beneﬁt andquality which were developed during our SM process. As discussedin Section 2.3, our three meta-models consolidate and extendthe existing documentation models in the literature (Arthur andStevens, 1989; Meng et al., 2006; Palazzolo and Utt, 2000; Viscontiand Cook, 1993).The model presented in this section provides a uniﬁed descrip-tion of the documentation process. Also, the framework is helpfulto capture and illustrate the concepts that will be discussed in latersections. We view it as an independent contribution of this paperin addition to the SM results.5.2.1. Documentation cost and beneﬁtIn order to investigate the cost or beneﬁt of documentation,we constructed the relationship model between each entity dur-ing the documentation process. In the design of this meta-model,we have beneﬁtted from the UML meta-model infrastructure (UMLmeta-model Infrastructure speciﬁcation, 2012). Fig. 2 shows thedocumentation development usage, beneﬁt and cost meta-model.In our model, a software practitioner needs to perform develop-ment (called “pre-maintenance” in Fig. 2) or maintenance tasks.Each task consumes certain number of effort units (e.g., man-month) and thus effort unit is modeled as an attribute of task. Thesetasks are classiﬁed into two categories: pre-maintenance tasks andmaintenance tasks. The former category refers to the tasks per-formed prior to maintenance phase, including requirement, design,implementation, and testing. Note that architecture is considered apart of design and it is not illustrated in Fig. 2.Maintenance tasks are further categorized using the classi-ﬁcation proposed by Lientz et al. (1978): corrective, perfective,adaptive and preventive maintenance tasks. In our model, all main-tenance tasks consist of two steps: comprehension of the programand subsequent manipulation or modiﬁcation. The software prac-titioner creates or maintains a document entity, which is a taskincurring effort (cost). This is where the cost of documentation isincurred.While performing the tasks, the software practitioner needs theinvolvement of existing artifacts. The usual types of artifacts includerequirements, design, code and test suites. Documents are modeledas a subclass of artifact. In terms of the format, documents can bepresented in pure textual or in combination with visual models (e.g.,UML models), or in the form of code comments.Besides, the software practitioner might also need to commu-nicate with other team members and/or consult with documentsto get the task done. In other words, documents might serve as acommunication aid among developers or maintainers.During the documentation usage phase, the typical softwarepractitioner uses the documentation and may perceive the bene-ﬁts and quality of documentation. In other words, documentationbeneﬁts come during the usage process. Also, in the usage pro-cess, a certain amount of costs are incurred, including the time andefforts of reading documents. Figs. 3 and 4 present the meta-modelfor documentation beneﬁt and quality. Note that most elementsin these two meta-models have their correspondents in their datascheme that we derived in Section 5.1. For example, the beneﬁtmetric Perceived Importance in Fig. 3 is also one beneﬁt attributethat is included in Table 1.In the meta-model of Fig. 3, we have classiﬁed beneﬁts intofour categories: (1) maintenance aid, (2) development aid, (3)management decision aid, and (4) other. For both maintenanceaid and development aid, comprehension aid is an integral aspect.This is because many aspects of a software need to be understood(i.e., comprehended) in order to be properly modiﬁed, includingits “functionality, architecture, and a myriad of design details”(Arisholm et al., 2006). We classiﬁed those aspects as architecturecomprehension, and code comprehension. For instance, 19 papers inthe repository considered documentation as an aid to comprehendcode or system structure (see Section 6.9 for details).Several researchers have argued and shown that documentationcan also play an important role in management decision-makingprocess (Katzenelson, 1971). To include this aspect into ourmapping, we created a category named management decisionaid. In particular, some researchers proposed that some docu-ments aid management decisions by classiﬁcation of responsibility(Katzenelson, 1971).Several papers proposed metrics to quantitatively measure doc-umentation beneﬁt. Among all the papers in the repository, wefound two main metrics that have been used to measure beneﬁts 182 J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198e.g., man hours,man monthcommunicates withperformsinvolvesconsultsperceivestraces(refers) tohasTeam memberSoftware practitionerTaskeffort: E ffort unitPre-maintenance taskRequirementManipulationCorrectiveTextualCodecommentVisual(i.e., model)PerfectiveAdaptivePreventiveComprehensionDesignImplementationTestingMaintenance taskArtifactDocumentQuality of docmay bemay beUsage costBenefit of docincursperceivesis acreates or maintainsRefers to Qualitymeta-modelRefers to Benefit
meta-modelActual usage of 
documentation can be
calculated from the actual
# of documents used.RequirementDesignCodeTestFig. 2. A meta-model for documentation development, usage-and cost process.quantitatively: reduction in effort and perceived importance. Reduc-tion in effort refers to that software practitioner would beneﬁtin a way that would save his/her effort (e.g., less time spent ona particular maintenance task) with the aid of documentation.Perceived importance is used by several papers (de Souza et al., 2006;Stettina and Heijstek, 2011; Wayne and Carolyn, 2007), describingsoftware practitioners perception of the importance of documenta-tion. The latter metric is often measured using questionnaire-basedsurveys.5.2.2. Documentation qualityTo help us classify quality-related attributes, we constructed auniﬁed model which incorporates all quality attributes (as shownin Fig. 4). A typical software practitioner would usually utilize atype of documentation management system or infrastructure toaccess (retrieve) software documents. Examples of documenta-tion management systems include online systems (e.g., Wiki), orconventional desktop word processing tools (e.g., Microsoft Word)(Barker, 1990). Each document entity has various attributes: title,author(s), abstract, keywords, format, structure and contents. Notethat document structure is believed to have impacts on documentquality based on the common sense that, given other attributes thesame, a well-structured document is probably easier to read thannon-well-structured ones.We created an abstract class named “Quality” that refers tohigh-level encapsulation of quality for any entity in the context.Documentation Quality, as a type of Quality, denotes the intrinsicquality of a document. In our model, software document Format andStructure are assumed to have impact on Documentation Quality.Document content is an integral part of a document objectand has its own quality attributes. We modeled the quality ofcontent using Content Quality, which has several attributes as itssubclass: accessibility, accuracy, author-related, completeness, con-sistency, correctness, information organization, format, readability,similarity, spelling and grammar, traceability, trustworthiness, up-to-date-ness. Accuracy is a sub-class of correctness. This is based on theis measured byperceivesBenefit of docBenefit metricReduction ineffort (time)PerceivedimportanceSoftware practitionerClassification ofresponsibilitye.g., document
reuse, defect
reductionMaintenance aidOtherDevelopment aidManagementdecision aidComprehensionaidVisualization ofsystem complexityArchitecturecomprehensionCodecomprehensionFig. 3. A meta-model for documentation beneﬁt. J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198 183TitleDocumentDocumentationSystem(Infrastructure)Software practitionerAuthorsAbstractDoc qualityContent quality<<abstract>>qualityKeywordsusesto retrieveAccuracyFormatStructureContentshasimpactsimpactsAccessibilityAuthor-relatedConsistencyCorrectnessDuplicationInformationcompletenessReadabilitySimilaritySpelling andGrammarTraceabilityTrustworthinessUp-to-datednesse.g., pseudo code,flow chart, UML, etc.e.g., Wiki,Word filesFig. 4. A meta-model for documentation quality.fact that correctness is the premise of accuracy. In other words, anaccurate document must be correct, but a correct document can bevery general or described in a high-level manner and not necessar-ily accurate, e.g., a general sentence such as “The system consists ofmany components” instead of accurate description such as “SystemXSD consists of three modules and ﬁve sub-systems”. We includedthe author-related attributes in the model because, in practice, theauthoring process of documents is an important factor which couldimpact documents quality (Kylmkoski, 2003).5.3. Final systematic mapTable 1 shows the ﬁnal systematic map that we developed fol-lowing the process described in Section 5.2. In the table, for each RQ(column 1), the corresponding attributes (column 2), the attribute’spotential value set (column 3) and whether it is a multiple choiceor a single-choice attribute (column 4), are shown. The last col-umn indicates whether, for each attribute, multiple selections canbe applied. For example, for RQ 2 (research fact type), the corre-sponding value in the last column is ‘S’ (Single), indicating that onestudy can only have one research facet type. It is either a solu-tion proposal, a validation research, or any other option listed inthe scheme. In contrast, for RQ 1 (contribution type) for example,the corresponding value in the last column is ‘M’ (Multiple), whichindicates that one study can contribute more than one type ofoptions (e.g., method, tool, etc.). Sections 5.3.1–5.3.10 present thedetails about each attribute scheme listed in Table 1.5.3.1. Type of paper: contribution facetThe ﬁrst set of categories in our scheme is related to the con-tribution facet of the study. The term “contribution facet” is takenfrom Petersen et al. (2008). The term describes the types of con-tributions such as being a method/technique, tool, model, metric,process, survey or empirical results. We also added another type:survey or empirical results, since we found that many papers con-tribute such results. If a study could not be categorized into anyabove-mentioned types, it would be placed under “Other”.5.3.2. Type of paper: research facetThe second set of categories in our scheme deal with the natureof the research reported in each paper. Similar to “contributionfacet”, the term “research facet” is deﬁned by Petersen et al. (2008)to classify the research into several categories, including validation,evaluation, etc. The aim of this mapping is to provide insights intothe level of empirical foundation used in this domain. The “researchtype” categories include (Petersen et al., 2008):•Solution proposal: a paper in this category proposes a solutionto a problem. The solution can be either novel or a signiﬁcantextension of an existing technique. The potential beneﬁts and theapplicability of the solution are shown only by a small exampleor a good line of argumentation.•Validation research: a paper in this category provides prelimi-nary empirical evidence for the proposed techniques or tools.These papers either proposed a novel technique/approach andits limited application in a certain context to demonstrate itseffectiveness, or conducted a survey or interview among a certainnumber of participants to answer a particular research question.More formal experimental methods (e.g., hypothesis testing, con-trol experiment) or results are further needed to build relevanttheories.•Evaluation research: these papers go further than “Validationresearch” by using strict and formal experimental methods in 184 J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198Table 1Final systematic map developed and used in our study.RQ Attribute Value set (M)ultiple/
(S)ingle1 Type of paper –Contribution
facet{Method/technique, tool,model, metric, process,survey or empirical results,other}M2 Type of paper –Research facet{Solution proposal,validation research,evaluation research,experience papers,philosophical papers,opinion papers, other}S3 Developmentlife-cycle
model{Waterfall, iterative, agile,not mentioned explicitly,other}S4 Target artifactof
documentation{Requirement, design,code, test, process, quality,generic, other}M5 Documentationformat{Formatted text, models,code comments, speciﬁcdocumentation tool,generic, other}M6 Attributes ofobjects understudy:
– Number ofsystems
– System types– LOC ofsystems
– Number oforganizations
– Number ofhuman
subjectsNumber of systems:Integer
System types ,{Open-source, commercial,government, academicexperimental}LOC: IntegerNumber of organizations:Integer
Number of humansubjects: IntegerS7 Focus {Documentation cost,documentation
usage/beneﬁt,
documentation quality}M8 Documentationcost attributes{Development cost,maintenance cost, usagecost, document size, other}M9 Documentationusage andbeneﬁt
attributes{Development aid,management decision aid,maintenance aid,architecture/design
comprehension, codecomprehension, perceivedimportance, reduction ineffort (time), actual usage,other}M10 Documentationquality
attributes{Accessibility, accuracy,author-related,
completeness, consistency,correctness, informationorganization/structure,
format, readability,similarity, spelling andgrammar, traceability,trustworthiness,
up-to-date-ness, other}M11 Industryinvolvement{Academic, industry,government, joint}Sevaluating novel techniques or tools in practice. Hence, thesepapers provide more convincing empirical evidence and are help-ful to build theories. Comparing the deﬁnition of Validation andEvaluation research, we may notice that they can be categorizedas empirical research, yet the main difference lies in empiricalmethods used. If one empirical papers employs such strict andformal methods as hypothesis testing or control experiment, thenwe categorized it as Evaluation research. In other cases whereless rigorous methods are used in the study, e.g., a questionnairesurvey or a qualitative interview, we categorize such papers asValidation research.•Philosophical papers: These papers sketch a new way of lookingat existing things by structuring the area in form of a taxonomyor conceptual framework.•Opinion papers: These papers express the personal opinion of theauthor(s) around whether a certain technique is good or bad, orhow things should been done. They do not signiﬁcantly rely onrelated work or research methodologies.•Experience papers: Experience papers explain how somethinghas been done in practice, based on the personal experience ofthe author(s).•Field study: A study that aims to gather data about softwareengineering in real scientiﬁc software environments. Examplesdata collection methods used include questionnaires, interviews,focus groups, and participant observation.•Other: A catch-all category in the event that the work reportedin a paper does not ﬁt into any of the above research types.5.3.3. Development life-cycle modelThe next attribute in our map deals with the types ofdevelopment life-cycle model applied. The justiﬁcation for thiscategorization is that in different development life-cycle modelsthere might be different requirements on documentation qualityor different cost-beneﬁt analysis. Extracting such data is helpful toestablish the relationship on the variable pair <Development life-cycle models, cost/beneﬁt/quality of documentation>.5.3.4. Target artifact of documentationThis attribute speciﬁes the target artifact for which documen-tation is made, e.g., a requirement document. If a study did notspecify what type of artifact it is discussing, it was classiﬁed under“Generic”.5.3.5. Documentation formatThis attribute is intended to investigate what type of format doc-umentation is presented. By ‘format’, it refers to the speciﬁc formthat documentation is presented. Documentation can be presentedusing static, manually written text, models (including graphicalmodeling language such as UML, etc.) and code comments. It canalso be automatic, such as electronic documents presented with theaid of speciﬁc tools support (e.g., Javadoc, etc.). If one paper doesnot mention explicitly the documentation format, it falls into thecategory “Generic”.5.3.6. Objects under studyMost primary papers had objects under study which were eithersoftware systems or human subjects. These objects varied depend-ing on the research type of the paper. Often for solution proposalsor some experimental papers, authors introduced or applied theirapproach in a novel software tool for the purpose of illustration orvalidation. For the other empirical papers that conducted a ques-tionnaire survey or interview, the objects were human participants(usually software practitioners). Characterizing the primary papersby the objects under study in each paper enabled us to assess theirlevel of evidence and experience, for the purpose of generalizationvalidity. For example, a given paper which quantitatively and qual-itatively discusses the challenges of software documentation withexperience based on 18 organizations (Mira, 2005) will providehigher degree of evidence than another paper which reports similarchallenges based on two organizations only (Das et al., 2007).For each study, we collected, if any, the information includ-ing: number of systems under study, whether the system isopen-source, commercial, government-related, or for academicexperimental purposes. Also, lines of codes (LOC), number of J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198 185Table 2Documentation cost attributes.Cost attribute DescriptionDevelopment cost Time or effort spent on creating,developing and producing a documentMaintenance cost Time or effort spent on modifying orupdating a documentUsage cost Time or effort spent on using (mainlyreading) documentationDocument size (length) Metrics used to measure the size ofdocuments, e.g., number of wordsOther Any attributes that do not ﬁt in theabove-mentioned category of costattributesparticipating organizations, and number of human subjects (when-ever provided) were collected.5.3.7. Focus of studySince the purpose of this study is to investigate the cost, beneﬁtor quality of documentation, it is necessary to know the focus ofeach study on any aspects of above mentioned types. Note that thisquestion is multiple-selection, which indicates that one study canfocus on one or more aspect of these types.5.3.8. Documentation cost attributesThe process for extracting attributes related to documentationcost was iterative. Two rounds of reviews among the authors wereconducted. After the reﬁnement process, we derived the attributescheme presented in Table 2. Note that our deﬁnition of ‘costattribute’ is a general concept which includes the strictly costaspects (e.g., time spent, etc.) and also the cost drivers (e.g., docu-ment size) that have impacts on the actual cost measurements. Notethat the reason of including document size in our cost scheme isbased on the belief that document size is one of the factors impact-ing documentation costs. Generally, the larger a document is, themore maintenance or producing cost is associated with that docu-ment.5.3.9. Documentation beneﬁt attributes and metricsSimilar to extracting documentation cost attributes (Section5.3.8), the process of extracting attributes related to documentationbeneﬁt was iterative. Two rounds of reviews among the authorswere conducted to ensure the accuracy of the extracted attributes.After the reﬁnement process, we derived the attribute scheme pre-sented in Table 3.5.3.10. Documentation quality attributesFor constructing this scheme, the authors applied an iterativeprocess. At the ﬁrst round, we extracted the data related to docu-mentation quality from each included paper. In order to minimizethe personal bias, our data were extracted from the explicit textualdescription in the papers. We ensured not to introduce any self-invented attributes other than those proposed by the authors ofthe primary papers.Extracted data were checked by undergoing at least two roundsof reviews by other authors than the extractor. Then we appliedattribute aggregation or clustering. During the aggregation step,all data were put together and synonyms were merged. This is toavoid the situation that there are more than one attributes in theﬁnal scheme refer to one highly similar aspect, e.g., Accuracy andPreciseness.However, there are still some pairs of attributes that have cer-tain semantic overlaps. Through the discussion of the author, it isdecided that we kept all those groups of attributes that have onlyminor overlaps. For example, Consistency may also mean contentorganization consistency, format consistency, etc. which overlapsTable 3Documentation beneﬁt attributes.Beneﬁt attribute DescriptionDevelopment aid Attributes related to how documentation aids thepre-maintenance tasks.Managementdecision aidAttributes related to how managers beneﬁt fromdocumentation during decision-making process,such as using documents to classify responsibilitiesamong developers.Maintenance aid Attributes related to how documentation aids themaintenance tasks.ArchitecturecomprehensionAttributes related to how documentation aidssoftware practitioners understand systemarchitecture or design rationale.CodecomprehensionAttributes related to how documentation aidssoftware practitioners understand code-leveldetails of the system.PerceivedimportanceMeasures describing to what extent softwarepractitioners perceive documentation is important.Reduction in effort Measures describing to what extent the effort isreduced or saved with the use of documentation.Actual usage Metrics used to measure the actual usage ofdocumentation, such as number of visit perdocument, documentation consultation frequency,etc.Other Any attributes that do not ﬁt in theabove-mentioned category of beneﬁt attributes.with the attributes Information Organization and Format. Becausethe three attributes emphasize different quality aspects, it is notappropriate to merge any two of them, thus three of them werekept in the ﬁnal scheme.Note that if one quality-related attribute appeared only oncein existing literature, we classiﬁed it into the category of ‘Other’.The results of this step were a list of quality attributes related tosoftware documentation. In Table 4, we present the ﬁnal attributescheme and provide the description of the attributes and how andwhy such attribute impacts documentation quality.5.4. Data extractionTo extract data, the papers in our pool were reviewed with thefocus of each RQ and the required information was extracted. Toincrease the preciseness of our classiﬁcation scheme, we utilizedthe “observer triangulation” method (Runeson et al., 2012) in dataextraction (mapping) phases.For RQ 8–10 (quality, beneﬁt and cost attributes), each attributewas assigned a two-point scale value (1–2) to annotate the degreeof empirical evidence. More speciﬁcally, if the attribute underquestion (e.g., beneﬁt of documentation in development aid) wasdiscussed in a paper together with quantitative empirical evidence(e.g., survey data, controlled experiment, etc.), then the attributewas assigned a degree of two. In contrast, if that attribute was onlymentioned or discussed in a qualitative manner without any quan-titative validation, evidence or evaluation, then such attribute wasassigned the degree of one.6. Results of systematic mapping (RQ 1–11)This section presents results related to RQ 1–11.6.1. Mapping the papers by contribution facet (RQ 1)Fig. 5 shows the distribution of the type of papers by contribu-tion facet, for all the 69 papers included in our study. Based on theircontributions, some papers could be classiﬁed under more than onefacet. For example, Lehner’s study (Lehner, 1993) makes three con-tributions: (1) a measurement method, (2) a tool, and (3) a metricto measure document comprehensibility and readability. 186 J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198Table 4Documentation quality attributes.Quality attributesDescription
Accessibility Accessibility measures describe the extent to which the content of documentation or document itself can be accessed or retrieved bythe software practitioners. Synonyms include ‘availability’, ‘information hiding’ and ‘easiness to ﬁnd’. The attribute impacts howpractitioners actually use the documentation. In our repository, quite a few papers discuss how this attribute impacts documentationquality, both quantitatively (Forward, 2002; Dautovic et al., 2011; Wayne and Carolyn, 2007) and qualitatively (Sametinger, 1991;Arthur and Stevens, 1989; Correia, 2008; Das et al., 2007; Ericsson et al., 2011; Parnas, 2011; Parnas and Vilkomir, 2007; Sametinger,1994; Sommerville, 2001; Wingkvist et al., 2010a, 2011).Accuracy Accuracy measures describe the accuracy or preciseness of documentation content. Synonyms include ‘preciseness’. The precisenessof documentation content is generally believed to have impacts on how easy it is for the exact information to be conveyed to thepractitioners. If a document is written in a way that the phrasing is vague or the descriptions are too abstract without presentingconcrete, exact examples, then it may create barriers for practitioners to retrieve the information and thus impacts thedocumentation quality (Parnas, 2011; Parnas et al., 1994; Parnas and Vilkomir, 2007).Author-related This attribute refers to those attributes related to document authors, including traces of who created the documents, authorcollaboration, etc. In practice, the authoring process is important for guarantee document quality (Kylmkoski, 2003).Completeness Completeness measures describe how complete document contents are in terms of supporting development/maintenance tasks.Software documentation is expected to contain all the information needed for the systems or modules described, so that whenpractitioners read documentation, they can retrieve the information needed for their tasks. If any necessary piece of information ismissing, the documentation is perceived not being able to serve its purpose and not being useful in the scenario of need (Mira, 2005;de Souza et al., 2005).Consistency Consistency measures describe the extent to which documentation, including information presented in documents, document format,etc. are consistent and have no conﬂict with each other. Synonyms include ‘uniformity’ and ‘integrity’. If the documentation contentsare presented inconsistently with conﬂicting elements, it may confuse practitioners and results in unnecessary mental efforts toresolve those artifacts during the usage of such documentation (Forward, 2002; Mira, 2005).Correctness Correctness measures describe whether the information provided in the documentation is correct or is in conﬂict with factualinformation. If the document presents incorrect information, it is likely to mislead practitioners and creates unnecessary barriers forthem to ﬁnish the tasks. This attribute is included based on common sense.InformationorganizationThis attribute describe the extent to which information is organized in documents. If the documentation is organized in a way that isclear and in a structure that is natural to practitioners to understand, such documentation is like to be perceived as in high quality.Format This attribute refers to quality of documents’ format, including writing style, description perspective, use of diagram or examples,spatial arrangement, etc. This attribute is included because practitioners may prefer certain types of writing styles which are easierfor them to understand and use. For example, the decision of choosing to use graphical elements in the documentation is empiricallyinvestigated to have impacts on the programming understanding (Tilley and Huang, 2003).Readability Readability measures describe how easy documents can be read. Synonyms include ‘clarity’. This is a subjective quality attributes thatis up to the practitioners to decide. Several papers in our repository provide empirical evidence related to this quality attribute(Schreck et al., 2007; Lehner, 1993; de Souza et al., 2005).Similarity Similarity measures the similarity level in different documents and whether information is duplicated. Some papers use the followingnotions instead: ‘uniqueness’ and ‘duplication’. Content duplication results in redundancy in the documentation content and leads tounnecessary mental efforts to read and process them.Spelling and grammar This attribute refers to those attributes related to the grammatical aspects of documents. If a technical document is presented with alarge number of spelling and grammatical errors, it will impact how practitioners read that document.Traceability Traceability measures describe the extent to which the document modiﬁcation is able to be tracked; relevant information includeswhen/where/why the modiﬁcation is performed and who performed. This attribute deals with the evolution of softwaredocumentation which requires special attention in technical documentation. This is because documentation needs to be keptup-to-date together with the software systems or code. The traceability attribute ensures that during the evolution, all the changes tothe documentation should be justiﬁed and veriﬁable.Trustworthiness Trustworthiness measures describe the extent to which software practitioners perceive the documents are trustworthy and reliable.Similar to Readability, such attribute is subjective and up to the practitioners to evaluate.Up-to-date-ness Up-to-date-ness measures describe the extent to which the documents are kept updated during the evolution of software systems.Similar to the description of the attribute Traceability, technical documentation is expected to evolve together with software systems.In ideal case, each version of new software release is accompanied with a corresponding version of technical documents.Documentation contents that describe the past release of software systems may provide incorrect information, or miss newinformation, regarding the new system and thus mislead practitioners.Other Several other attributes related to documentation quality were mentioned in several papers, including abstractness (Parnas andVilkomir, 2007), perceived goodness (Wayne and Carolyn, 2007), etc.Fig. 5 indicates that proposing new techniques or improvingan existing technique has attracted the most research with 26papers (38%). 20 papers (29%) contributed survey/empirical results.There were six papers (9%) which could not be categorized into theﬁve contribution facets of our scheme, thus we categorized themunder ‘Other’. The contributions of the papers in the category of‘Other’ include a new experimental methodology (Tilley and Huang,2003), general guidelines for producing documents (Parnas, 2011;Robert, 1985; Schoeffel, 1976; Sommerville, 2001) and a summaryof lessons learned (Tilley, 2009).The annual trend of the same data is shown in Fig. 6. In recentyears, there is a focus on a mix of different contribution facets. Interms of time, the earliest study (Katzenelson, 1971) in our paperpool was published in 1971. This study is entitled “Documentationand the management of a software project—a case study”. It is a casestudy in a university software project, conducted by Katezenelson.The results show that documentation assisted project participantsin making code-related decisions. The study concluded that docu-mentation played an important role in the success of the students’projects.Readers may notice that Figs. 5 and 6 look slightly different interms of the sizes of stacks. This is because the contribution facet ofa study is multiple-choice while the research facet is single-choice.6.2. Mapping the papers by research facet (RQ 2)Based on the classiﬁcation scheme described in Section 5.3, weclassiﬁed the papers into ﬁve categories. Fig. 7 shows the classiﬁca-tion of the 69 selected papers according to the type of research theyreport. Exact paper references have also been provided under theﬁgure. Note that each paper was categorized in a single category.Nearly one third of all papers (21 out of 69) relate to presenta-tions of solution proposals without further validation or evaluation.Moreover, a large ratio of papers is validation research (27 papers). J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198 187Fig. 5. Frequency of contribution types mentioned in paper.Fig. 6. Trend of contribution facets mentioned in papers over time.Fig. 7. Frequency of research types in papers. 188 J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198Fig. 8. Trend of research facet used in papers over time.In contrast, 11 papers (16%) are evaluation research. The remaining10 papers are opinion papers (7 papers) or experience papers (3papers). There is no secondary study or philosophical study papersin our repository.We assume that papers presenting solution proposals are basedin an understanding of the speciﬁc conditions and problems relatedto this area. Such papers contribute novel ideas instead of empir-ical evidence. However, because the repository size (69 papers) isrelatively small, more empirical evidence, especially evidence fromrigorous experiments, are needed to help this research area growto maturity.Fig. 8 shows the annual trend of the papers per research facetduring the past 40 years. From the ﬁgure the numbers of papersabout software documentation cost, beneﬁt and quality are gen-erally increasing since around year 1988. The reason may be thatthe number of software engineering related papers has generallyincreased since that time. Furthermore, in two other recent SMpapers authored by our colleagues (Banerjee et al., 2013; Garousiet al., 2013) in the areas of GUI and web application testing, theauthors observe the increasing trends of the number of papers aswell.During the late 1990s, there is a short period of decrease in papernumbers (around 1971–1999). Since 2005, there have been at leastfour papers in this area each year, indicating a constant interestamong researcher in this area.In terms of annual trend of research facets, in recent years(after around 2004), more and more papers are conducting vali-dation or evaluation empirical papers and the share of pure solutionproposals are decreasing. This demonstrates the growing researchinterests to empirically validating idea proposals in this area.6.3. Types of development life-cycle model (RQ 3)Most of the papers (61 papers, 88%) do not explicitly mentionthe type of development life-cycle model used. Agile developmentis only mentioned in six papers (Forward, 2002; Ambler, 2011;Rubin and Rubin, 2011; Rueping, 2003; Stettina and Heijstek, 2011;Wong and Tilley, 2002) the earliest of which were published in 2002(Forward, 2002; Wong and Tilley, 2002). Considering that “Agile”is a concept that started to gain popularity since the late 1990s, wecould probably infer that the papers published before that periodcould be considered to have followed traditional waterfall or iter-ative development processes.6.4. Target artifact of documentation (RQ 4)Fig. 9 shows the distribution of documentation artifacts men-tioned by the papers. If one paper discusses any of the commontypes of artifact such as requirement or design documents, codecomments, software quality related documents (e.g., processFig. 9. Target artifacts of documentation. J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198 189Fig. 10. Frequency of documentation formats.record, Q/A documents, etc.), that paper is classiﬁed under the cor-responding type(s). Note that one paper could discuss more thanone type of artifact. Similar to Section 6.2, if the paper does notmention explicitly what type of documentation artifact, or its typeof documentation could not be categorized into any type of above-mentioned types, it is placed under the ‘Generic’ category.We can observe that design, code and requirement documen-tation types, in descending order, are three dominating types. Thehistogram also shows that 22 papers do not provide explicit type ofdocumentation. In contrast, process related types (test, process orquality documents) are less frequently discussed among the papers.6.5. Documentation format (RQ 5)Fig. 10 shows the distribution of documentation formats. Thedistribution seems to be a ﬁne mix, except the code commentstype. Three types of format, including formatted text (20 papers),models (21 papers), and speciﬁc documentation tools (19 papers)had nearly the equal share of papers. 17 papers (25%) are classi-ﬁed as “Generic”. Interestingly, code comments as a documentationformat received a very small share (6 papers, 9%).When comparing Fig. 10 with Fig. 9, we can see that while alarge number of papers (29 papers) are discussing documentationartifacts related to code, format of code documentation is not usu-ally in the form of code comments (in only 8 papers), and perhapsother documentation formats are used for code (external formatssuch as word documents).6.6. Objects under study (RQ 6)6.6.1. Software systems discussedWhere a given primary study provided information about thesoftware system(s) under study, we extracted the following threepieces of information: (1) number of systems discussed in eachpaper, (2) system type (academic, commercial, open-source, gov-ernmental), and (3) size in LOC. The results of each attribute arepresented next.6.6.1.1. Number of systems under study. Fig. 11 shows the numberof systems. In total, there were 25 papers in the repository thatdiscussed systems under study. Among them, 16 papers have onlyone system for analysis. In contrast, the number of papers whichhave two or more systems under study dropped sharply. Fivepapers (7%) studied two systems under study and three papers hadthree. One extraordinary study (Cook and Visconti, 1994) analyzes14 systems.6.6.1.2. Types of systems. Fig. 12 shows the distribution of type ofsystems under study (SUS). Note that the categories of system typeare differentiated by who sponsors the development of the system.For example, if a system is developed for academic experimentalpurposes, then it may have different requirements on documen-tation from those sponsored to fulﬁll commercial needs. From theﬁgure, we can see that most systems (12 out of 25) are for academicexperimental purposes. Eight papers involve commercial systemswhile three papers mentioned documentation in the context ofopen-source systems. Only two papers discussed systems relatedto governmental applications.6.6.1.3. Size in LOC. In our two other recent SM papers (i.e.,(Banerjee et al., 2013; Garousi et al., 2013)), we plotted LOCOne system under study: [1-4, 6, 7, 14, 15, 17, 23, 27, 28, 30, 42, 43, 51] Two systems under study: [5, 24, 35, 41, 67] Three systems under study: [8, 21, 68] 10+ systems under study:  [18] 141210864201816
1412108
642
0Number of Systems Under StudyFrequencyFig. 11. Frequency of number of systems under study. 190 J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198Fig. 12. Type of systems under study.sizes with the year of paper. Similarly, we intended to investigatewhether there is a rising LOC trend from older to new papers. In ourrepository, only eight papers (8 out of 69, 12%) report the LOC infor-mation of their systems under study. Note that most papers do notspeciﬁcally provide the exact LOC number in their paper. Based onthe limited statistics of those eight papers, there is a slight increasein LOC sizes with increase in years. We calculated the Pearsoncorrelation coefﬁcient between the paired variable (year, averageLOC size) and the value is 0.38. This indicates that the systemsLOC size does not increase strictly over time, but there is a weakcorrelation. Nevertheless, we spotted an extraordinary case in onestudy conducted in 2007 (Schreck et al., 2007), which analyzed asystem with over 1,600,000 LOC. If more papers had reported theLOC size of their SUSs, the analysis would have been more statis-tically representative. This calls for the attention of the researchcommunity that researchers may need a standard template forreporting and provide precise parameters about their papers so asto enable comparison and statistics gathering.6.6.2. Survey participantsAs discussed in Section 6.1 (RQ 2), 20 papers (29%) contributedsurvey/empirical results. Out of those 20 papers, only 18 of them(26%) report the number of their survey participants. Fig. 13 showsthe histogram of number of subjects in those papers.From the chart, we can see that the number of participants inmost survey papers is below 160. Papers with participant numbersbelow 40 are dominant. Interestingly, one study (Kylmkoski, 2003)has approximately 1000 participants. The histogram shows thatsurveys with large number of participants are rare, since invitingand involving large population of participants is practically chal-lenging. This is something that we have also experienced in ourown surveys in other topics (e.g., testing practices (Garousi andVarma, 2010)).6.6.3. Participating organizationsIn terms of the organizations where survey participants werefrom, the results vary. Fig. 14 shows the histogram of number oforganizations and its occurrence frequency. Exact number of orga-nizations is not provided in those papers. In total, 13 papers (19%)reported that number.Not surprisingly, most participants in the selected paperswere from one or two organizations. There are also a fewcross-organization papers. Another interesting study is that of Vis-conti et al. (Visconti and Cook, 2004) which reported the results ofassessing documentation process among “91 projects at 41 differ-ent companies over a seven year period”.960800
640
480
3201600543210Number of Subjects Under Study (for Survey Papers)FrequencyFig. 13. Frequency of number of subjects under study in survey papers.3630241812606543
210Number of Organizations Under StudyFrequencyFig. 14. Frequency of number of organizations.Fig. 15. Focus of papers.6.7. Focus on documentation cost, beneﬁt and quality (RQ 7)The histogram in Fig. 15 shows the distribution of papers thatdiscuss each of the three documentation aspects of our interest.From the chart, we can see that 48 papers (71%) discuss documen-tation quality, followed by 37 papers (54%) on beneﬁt. Surprisingly,and only 12 papers (18%) related to documentation cost. Moredetailed interpretations of the results will be presented in Sections6.8–6.10.6.8. Documentation cost attributes (RQ 8)Fig. 16 shows the distribution of papers that discuss documen-tation cost attributes. The data were collected based on the costattribute scheme described in Section 5.3.8.Among the papers in the pool, only six papers discuss the devel-opment or production cost of software documentation. Four papers J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198 191Fig. 16. Documentation cost attributes.concern with documentation maintenance costs. The remainingtwo papers (Parnas, 2011; Robert, 1985) have general discussionson document recording, storing, producing cost, etc. From thisstatistics there are a very limited number of papers on documenta-tion cost. In other words, documentation’s cost aspects seemed tobe neglected in the community.In terms of cost metrics, six papers used document size to mea-sure the cost. Among the two papers that fell into “Other” category,one discusses the “waste of time caused by unstructured docu-ments or incorrect information” (Parnas, 2011).In terms of degree of evidence (Section 5.4), 12 out of 19 papersreport quantitative empirical results. Such a ratio (63%) shows that,although there were a small number of papers on documentationcost, existing papers have provided high levels of empirical evi-dence by quantitatively measuring documentation cost.We did not ﬁnd any paper that addresses the aspect of doc-umentation usage costs. Nevertheless, we modeled this aspect inour meta-model (Fig. 2). The lack of papers regarding this aspectindicates a future research opportunity. We expect to see moreempirical evidences that investigate what is the actual cost whileusing software documentation.Overall, it seems that, to date, there are only a handful of paperson documentation cost. This is worth the attention of research com-munity. The authors believe that future research in this area shouldfocus on cost measurement and control. Documentation, as a majorinvestment, needs proper tuning so that overall software life-cyclecosts are optimized.6.9. Documentation beneﬁt attributes (RQ 9)Fig. 17 shows software documentation beneﬁt attributes andtheir degree of evidence. The data were collected under the ben-eﬁt attribute scheme described in Section 5.3.9. From the chart,29 papers (42%) considered documentation as an aid to softwaremaintenance, which is the dominating attribute. However, amongthese 29 papers, only two papers (Arisholm et al., 2006; Curtis et al.,1989) reach two in degree of evidence. 16 papers (55%) discusseddocumentation as a development aid. 10 papers are related to doc-umentation as an aid to comprehend system architecture while 14papers are on low-level code comprehension. The ratio of papersthat reached the degree of two in empirical evidence is relativelysmall (6 out of 24).Four survey studies (5%) are conducted to survey the perceivedimportance of documentation among professionals. Only threepapers are related to how documentation saved time of develo-pers. Among these three, only (Dzidek et al., 2008) measures thereduction quantitatively. The paper (Dzidek et al., 2008) reports acontrolled experiment on the beneﬁt of using UML to save timein the context of maintaining object-oriented software. The metricused in (Dzidek et al., 2008) to measure savings in performing thetasks was time, which aligns with our model in Section 5.2.1.In terms of actual usage, all three papers (Forward, 2002; deSouza et al., 2005; Wingkvist et al., 2011) reach two in degree ofevidence. The metrics used in those papers include actual usagepercentage (de Souza et al., 2005), number of visits per document(Wingkvist et al., 2011) and mean consultation number (Forward,2002).Overall, the limited number of papers reaching two in degreeof evidence indicates that most papers discussed documentationbeneﬁt in a qualitative manner. This is probably due to the difﬁcultyof measuring how exactly documentation aids development tasksin actual projects.6.10. Documentation quality attributes (RQ 10)Fig. 18 shows software documentation quality attributesand their degree of evidence. Note that the data were col-lected under the quality attribute scheme described in Section5.3.10.As the ﬁgure shows, the quality attributes of documentationwhich attract most attention of previous researchers is “com-pleteness” (17 papers, 28%). It might indicate that incompletedocumentation has been one of difﬁculties that most researchers orprofessionals have attempted to address. Following the attribute ofcompleteness are “consistency” (16 papers) and “accessibility” (14papers). Besides, there are a certain number of papers on documen-tation format (13 papers, 19%) and up-to-date-ness (12 papers). Interms of degree of evidence, six papers out of 13 on documen-tation format reached two. Papers such as (Curtis et al., 1989;Sheppard et al., 1982) have provided strong empirical evidence for 192 J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198the document format and its inﬂuence. There are also ﬁve and fourempirical papers that have the degree of two on completeness andup-to-date-ness, respectively. In total, 47 out of all 132 degreesshown in Fig. 18 (35%) reached the maturity degree of two. It indi-cates that, for the documentation quality aspect, researchers haveput efforts to empirically evaluate this particular aspect.6.11. Industry’s involvement (RQ 11)This RQ aims to investigate industry’s involvement in study-ing documentation cost, beneﬁt and quality. Since documentationissues are a constant challenge in industrial projects, it is impor-tant to connect the efforts of industry and academia in thissubject.To address this RQ, we ﬁrst investigated author afﬁliations tosee the level of industry-academia collaborations of the papers inour pool. Fig. 19 shows the distribution of authors of the 69 selectedpapers by afﬁliation type. We identiﬁed four categories of authors’afﬁliations: (1) papers whose authors are all academic researchers,(2) papers authored by industry practitioners (3) papers from gov-ernmental research groups such as NASA, and (4) collaborativework (papers jointly authored by groups of authors afﬁliated withtwo or three different categories). As Fig. 19 shows, papers fromacademia (57 papers, 83%) are the most frequent. Among the othergroups, the number of papers written solely by practitioners (7papers, 10%) is higher compared to papers reported by govern-mental research groups (no papers) and joint papers (3 papers,4%).There are in total seven papers (Ambler, 2011; Kylmkoski, 2003;MacKinnon and Murphy, 2003; Palazzolo and Utt, 2000; Robert,1985; Rueping, 2003; Sheppard et al., 1982) authored by practition-ers. The aspects concerned in these papers include documentationprocess in agile development (Ambler, 2011; Rueping, 2003),document quality from the perspective of document authoringprocess(Kylmkoski, 2003), the usage of UML diagrams (MacKinnonand Murphy, 2003), documentation standard (Robert, 1985), doc-ument notations and spatial arrangements (Sheppard et al., 1982),and documentation development process (Palazzolo and Utt,2000).However, compared with the number of papers by academiain this area, the industrial involvement are relatively in short. Wehope that industry involvement will continue to increase so as toenrich the literature and help mature this ﬁeld.7. Threats to validityThe discussion of threats to validity is important to judge thestrengths and limitations of our SM study. For our study, the fol-lowing issues may introduce threats to validity: selection of searchdatabases, deﬁnition of search terms and time frame, researcherbias with regards to exclusion/inclusion, and incorrect data extrac-tion (classiﬁcation). Using the standard classiﬁcation scheme ofvalidity threats suggested in Wohlin et al. (2000), we discuss theseissues in relation to four types of threats to validity: (1) conclusionvalidity, (2) construct validity, (3) internal validity, and (4) externalvalidity.7.1. Conclusion validityConclusion validity refers to the degree to which conclusions wereach about the relationships are reasonable. In Section 8, we drawour conclusions about the research landscape in this area, includingthe academic trend, the topics that have been frequently discussedor thoroughly studied, and the emerging areas that deserve atten-tion. These conclusions are based on our statistical data from thepaper repository, i.e., the number of papers focusing on a certainaspects, e.g., research facet, contribution facet, etc. The conclusionvalidity issue lies in whether there is a relationship between theFig. 17. Documentation beneﬁt attributes. J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198 193Fig. 18. Documentation quality attributes.number of papers and the actual academic focus and efforts. Thereare risks that the relationship does not exist.7.2. Construct validityConstruct validity is related to selecting the right variables tomeasure the phenomenon of interest. The construct validity issuein our study lies in the comprehensiveness of the categorizationscheme that we used for the data extraction. One example ques-tion that readers may raise is: Are those beneﬁts attributes (Fig. 3)the correct ones and comprehensive enough to measure all docu-ment beneﬁts? To mitigate this issue, all the attributes are extractedFig. 19. Histogram of author afﬁliations.based on the collected papers and the process of extraction andconstructing schemes had been undergone several reviews by allauthors. In such a way, we minimized the number of attributes thatwe might have missed in the papers. Second, we have constructedthe formalized models for the three aspects (Section 5.2) in order tocover as many attributes as we can from a theoretical standpoint.7.3. Internal validityThe internal validity concerns with how well the causal rela-tionship is warranted. In our study, we attempted to establishrelationships between various attributes extracted from the papersand the academic ﬁeld landscape under study (cost, beneﬁts andquality of software development documentation). The internalvalidity issues are mainly in the papers’ selection process. More spe-cially, the issues include: (1) potentially missing relevant papers,and (2) researchers’ bias in papers inclusion/exclusion. We discussthese two issues in the following paragraphs.The ﬁrst issue is the completeness of our paper repository. Tomitigate this risk, we chose to use the popular academic searchengines, including IEEE Xplore, ACM Digital Library, etc. Also, weattempted to use various combinations of the topics of interest andtheir synonyms related to software documentation, or software doc-umentation (Section 4.1). These string constructs were extractedfrom the IEEE Standard Glossary of Software Engineering Terminol-ogy. Finally, we examined the reference list of the known papersas well (Section 4.3) to ﬁnd the ones that did not show up in our 194 J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198initial search efforts. Even if we have done our best in conductinga systematic search, it is possible that we may have missed somerelevant papers during our search phase. For example, it is possiblethat some research projects or studies in this area may not havebeen reported or they may not have been indexed in the searchengines, or have been indexed using a different set of keywordsthat were not included in our keyword set.The second issue is in the inclusion/exclusion criteria that relyon the researchers’ judgment and experience. Personal bias may beintroduced during this process. To mitigate this issue, we applieda few strategies to increase the reliability of our decisions withrespect to inclusion/exclusion criteria, as discussed next. First,each of the four researchers examined candidate papers indepen-dently and followed the voting process described in Section 4.With regards to data extraction, we split the ﬁnal pool of papers inthree equally large sub-pools and assigned one researcher to eachsub-pool plus an additional reviewer. In case of disagreementsabout inclusion/exclusion criteria or speciﬁc classiﬁcation deci-sions, a second reviewer was involved. In all such cases, thisprocedure yielded consensus.7.4. External validityExternal validity is concerned with to what extent we can gen-eralize the results of our SM study. As described in Section 4, ourselected literature under study was all written in English language.Papers written in other languages were excluded. One issue liesin that whether the papers included in our repository is able torepresent all the relevant works in the area of software documen-tation cost/beneﬁt/quality. One threat stems from the keywordsused, databases we selected and inclusion/exclusion criteria. Asdiscussed in Section 7.1, we followed a comprehensive search pro-cedure to make sure our repository was as inclusive as possible. Webelieve that relevant literature we selected in our pool containedsufﬁcient information to represent the knowledge reported by pre-vious researchers or professionals, including those non-Englishauthors.Also, note that the classiﬁcation schemes that we derived areonly applicable in the ﬁeld of software documentation cost, bene-ﬁt and quality. Additional related papers and future papers can becategorized using our schemes.8. Summary, conclusions and future work8.1. Addressing RQsIn this study, we addressed eleven research questions (RQ 1 toRQ 11). Below we list the main result(s) of each RQ:•RQ 1 – Number of papers by research facet: What type ofresearch methods are used in the papers?In terms of contribution facet, most selected papers (about 38%)proposed new techniques or improved an existing one. A certainproportion (29%) of papers (20 out of 69) contributes empiricalevidences.•RQ 2 – Number of papers by contribution facet: What types ofcontributions are made by the papers?Validation research papers are dominating (27 papers or 40%),followed by solution proposals (21 papers, or 31%); evaluationresearch papers only cover 16% of all papers, followed by opinionpapers and experience papers.•RQ 3 – Types of development life-cycle model: In what type ofdevelopment life-cycle model is the documentation applied?Most papers did not mention development cycle explicitly.Agile development was only mentioned in 6 papers.•RQ 4 – Type of artifact: What are the artifact types for whichdocumentation is made?Design, code and requirement, with paper number decreasingin order, are three dominating types of documentation; softwarequality related types (test, process or quality documents) are lessfrequently discussed among our selected papers.•RQ 5 – Documentation formats: In what format is the documen-tation presented?Three types of format, including formatted text (20 papers),models (21 papers), and tool support (19 papers) had nearly theequal share of papers; documentation mentioned as code com-ments received a very small share (6 papers).•RQ 6 – Objects under study: What are the attributes of the objectsunder study?Most papers had only one SUS. Most SUS’s (12 of 25 papers,48%) were academic prototypes. Unlike what one would expect,the trend of SUS size does not increase strictly over time. The aver-age number of participants in survey-based papers was 106, thehighest one having approximately 1000 participants (Kylmkoski,2003). Most participants in survey-based papers were from oneor two organizations.•RQ 7 – Focus of papers: Among all papers devoted to documenta-tion, what is the percentage of papers that have focused on theseaspects of interest: cost, beneﬁt and quality?In terms of focus of papers, 50 papers (72%) discuss documen-tation quality, followed by 37 papers (54%) on beneﬁt, and 12papers (17%) focusing on documentation cost.•RQ 8 – Software documentation cost attributes and metrics:What attributes and metrics related to the cost of documentationhave been studied?Only six papers (8%) discuss the development or productioncost of software documentation. Four papers (6%) address docu-mentation maintenance costs. In terms of degree of evidence inthis category of papers (documentation costs), 12 out of 19 papersreached the maturity degree of two (i.e., full empirical evaluationof the attribute).•RQ 9 – Software documentation usage and beneﬁt attributesand metrics: What attributes and metrics related to theusage/beneﬁt of documentation have been studied?In terms of documentation usage, 29 papers (42%) studied doc-umentation as an aid to software maintenance. 10 papers (14%)were related to documentation as an aid to comprehend sys-tem architecture during development. 14 papers (20%) were oncode-level comprehension.•RQ 10 – Software documentation quality attributes andmetrics: What attributes and metrics related to the quality ofdocumentation have been studied?The quality attributes of documentation that attracted mostattention of previous researchers is “completeness”, followed by“consistency” and “accessibility”.•RQ 11 – Industry’s involvement: What are industry’s involve-ment related to software documentation cost, beneﬁt andquality?Papers where all authors are afﬁliated with universities (83%)are dominating, compared with the number of papers fromindustry (10%), governmental research centers (0%) or joint col-laborations (4%).8.2. Summary and conclusionsThe above-mentioned results of our systematic mapping canhelp new (e.g., PhD students) or established researchers as wellas practitioners to obtain an overview of the research space(approaches, metrics, tools and models) in this ﬁeld. From RQ 1 to2 we can see that the majority of existing papers focus on propos-ing a new approach or techniques (around 40%) and presenting J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198 195preliminary validation results on their proposal (29% of all paperscontributing empirical evidences). We can infer from such a ratiocomparison that a certain number of approaches/techniques pro-posed have not been reportedly validated in empirical evidences.Also, the lack of papers contributing documentation processes ormetrics lets us speculate why these aspects have been neglectedin existing literature and what factors lead to such facts. Amongthe empirical papers, only a small portion of them offer substantialevidences (RQ 6), such as study results reported from large-scaledevelopment projects, or from large number of study participantsof various organizations. Stronger empirical evidences are stillneeded to enhance the understanding and to establish profoundtheories of this ﬁeld.On the other hand, our results reveal that in most existing dis-cussion development documents are mostly in certain types (e.g.,design, requirement, etc. from RQ 4). Software quality related doc-ument types, such as test, process or quality documents, attractedlittle attention. More research concerning these types may be wor-thy of consideration. In terms of documentation formats (RQ 5),certain formats, such as text, models, tools, etc. are discussedfrequently in collected papers. Questions such as “Are require-ment documents mostly textual?”, “Do practitioners write designdocuments using graphical models?” might be raised about therelationship between documentation types and format. This is oneinteresting topic worthy of future research. Besides, most exist-ing research does not discuss documentation in an explicitly-givencontext of development cycles (RQ 3). As people’s understanding ofsoftware development evolves, future researchers or practitionersmight need to redeﬁne the role and boundary of documentationaccording to different SDLC contexts. Speciﬁcally, research on doc-umentation in Agile development practice could be an interestingresearch direction, based on the fact that only six papers have inves-tigated this aspect so far.Also, the results would help to identify the emerging areas inthis ﬁeld and also the areas that require more attention from theresearch community. As the results in RQ 7–8 reveal, one importantaspect of documentation, the cost, seems to be neglected in exist-ing literature. There are many unanswered questions regarding costmetrics or measurement, such as: “Is document size a good docu-ment cost metric?”, “What factors lead to the cost?” or “What arethe underlying cost-drivers in a system development or mainte-nance context?” This is a strong contrast to other related researchareas which have matured with rich literature, such as softwareeffort estimation. As the future project management requires moreaccurate cost control over development process, effort consumedin documentation as one signiﬁcant cost drivers will need to betuned properly. Therefore, more papers dedicated to understanddocumentation behaviors and leading toward a documentationcost estimation model will be expected. In terms of documentationbeneﬁts (RQ 9), only a limited number of papers provided strongempirical evidences and the majorities only discussed beneﬁts in aqualitative manner. Although there were a few controlled experi-ments reported on how documentation or UML saved maintainers’time or improved code quality, an aggregation of these empiricalevidences and more novel evidences are still needed to achievea well-established theory so as to achieve better understanding ofthe process and to generate meaningful beneﬁt measurements. Thistrend prediction can also be applied to documentation quality (RQ10). As the results show, the majorities of papers concerning doc-umentation quality attributes have only qualitative discussion. Onthe one hand, there is a general lack of models to comprehensivelyand meaningfully incorporate the different aspects of software doc-umentation. To address this issue, we proposed a quality modelin Section 5.2.2. On the other hand, current proposed metricsare still far from mature to actually measure document quality.Again, more empirical evidences are worthy of investigation tovalidate existing models and to investigate how quality-relatedmeasurements of software documentation would generate con-crete beneﬁts for practitioners.Recall from Section 1 that the need for this SM was motivatedin the context of a multi-year industrial collaborative researchand development project, which aims to minimize the cost andamount of documentation across the software development life-cycle for one of our industrial partners. The results of this SM havealready started to beneﬁt our research team in that project byproviding to us a summary of what has been done in each of the fol-lowing sub-areas: cost, beneﬁts and quality of technical softwaredocumentation. The results of the SM have enabled us to adapt(re-use) some of the existing techniques, thus preventing us from“re-inventing the wheel”, and to develop novel methods, modelsand techniques in this area. Speciﬁcally, formalized models of doc-umentation cost, beneﬁt, and quality that we developed during thisSM (Section 5.2) have been very beneﬁcial for our team membersin a formal analysis of the subject matter.In terms of industry’s involvement in the ﬁeld, a certain num-ber of papers concerning practical aspects of documentation (e.g.,tool building, standard selection, etc.) are reported by our indus-trial colleagues. We hope that such trend of industry involvementwill continue to enrich the literature and help mature this ﬁeld.AcknowledgementsThis work was supported by the NSERC CRD grant #CRDPJ414157-11, and NSERC ENGAGE grant # EGP-413039. VahidGarousi was additionally supported by Atilim University and theScientiﬁc and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TÜB˙ITAK).We would also thank the anonymous reviewers for their insightfulcomments that helped us improve this article.Primary PapersAguiar, A., David, G., 2005. WikiWiki weaving heterogeneous software artifacts. In:Presented at the Proceedings of the International Symposium on Wikis, SanDiego, CA.Ambler, S., 2011. Agile/Lean Documentation: Strategies for Agile Soft-ware Development. Available: http://www.agilemodeling.com/essays/agileDocumentation.htm (Accessed: June 2012).Arisholm, E., Briand, L.C., Hove, S.E., Labiche, Y., 2006. The impact of UML documen-tation on software maintenance: an experimental evaluation. IEEE Trans. Softw.Eng. 32, 365–381.Arthur, J.D., Stevens, K.T., 1989. Assessing the adequacy of documentation throughdocument quality indicators. In: Proceedings of the International Conference onSoftware Maintenance, Miami, FL, pp. 40–49.Arthur, J.D., Nance, R.E., Stevens, K.T., 1988. Prospects for Automated DocumentationAnalysis in Support of Software Quality Assurance. Systems Research Center,Virginia Polytechnic and State University, Blacksburg, VA.Bachmann, F., Bass, L., Carriere, J., Clements, P.C., Garlan, D., Ivers, J., Nord, R., Lit-tle, R., 2000. Software architecture documentation in practice: documentingarchitectural layers: special report CMU/SEI-2000-SR-004. Software Engineer-ing Institute, Carnegie Mellon University.Bayer, J., Muthig, D., 2006. A view-based approach for improving software doc-umentation practices. In: Proceedings of the 13th Annual IEEE InternationalSymposium and Workshop on Engineering of Computer Based Systems, Wash-ington, DC, USA, pp. 269–278.Blum, B.I., 1988. Documentation for maintenance: a hypertext design. In:Proceedings of the Conference on Software Maintenance, Scottsdale, AZ, pp.23–31.Cioch, F.A., Palazzolo, M., Lohrer, S., 1996. A documentation suite for maintenanceprogrammers. In: Proceedings of the International Conference on SoftwareMaintenance, Monterey, CA, pp. 286–295.Cook, C., Visconti, M., 1994. Documentation is important. CrossTalk 7, 26–30.Correia, F.F., 2008. Extending and integrating wikis to improve software documen-tation. In: Presented at the 4th International Symposium on Wikis.Correia, F.F., Aguiar, A., Ferreira, H.S., Flores, N., 2009. Patterns for consistent softwaredocumentation. In: Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Pattern Languages ofPrograms, Chicago, IL, pp. 12:1–12:7.Curtis, B., Sheppard, S.B., Elizabeth, K.-B., Bailey, J., Deborah, A.B.-D., 1989. Experi-mental evaluation of software documentation formats. J. Syst. Softw. 9, 167–207.Das, S., Lutters, W.G., Seaman, C.B., 2007. Understanding documentation value insoftware maintenance. In: Proceedings of the Symposium on Computer HumanInteraction for the Management of Information Technology, Cambridge, MA. 196 J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198Dautovic, A., Plösch, R., Saft, M., 2011. Automated quality defect detection in softwaredevelopment documents. In: 5th International Workshop on Software Qualityand Maintainability, Oldenburg, Germany.de Boer, R.C., van Vliet, H., 2009. Writing and reading software documentation:how the development process may affect understanding. In: Presented at theProceedings of the Workshop on Cooperative and Human Aspects on SoftwareEngineering.de Souza, S.C.B., Anquetil, N., de Oliveira, K.M., 2005. A study of the documentationessential to software maintenance. In: Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Interna-tional Conference on Design of Communication, Coventry, United Kingdom, pp.68–75.de Souza, S., Anquetil, N., de Oliveira, K., 2006. Which documentation for softwaremaintenance? J. Braz. Comput. Soc. 12, 31–44.Dzidek, W.J., Arisholm, E., Briand, L.C., 2008. A realistic empirical evaluation of thecosts and beneﬁts of uml in software maintenance. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 34,407–432.Ericsson, M., Wingkvist, A., Löwe, W., 2011. A software infrastructure for informa-tion quality assessment. In: Proceedings of the 16th International Conferenceon Information Quality, Adelaide, Australia.Fletton, N.T., Munro, M., 1988. Redocumenting software systems using hyper-text technology. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Software Maintenance,Phoenix, Arizona, pp. 54–59.Forward, A., 2002. Software Documentation – Building and Maintaining Artefactsof Communication. University of Ottawa, Master in Computer Science, Ottawa-Carleton Institute for Computer Science.Huang, S., Tilley, S., 2003. Towards a documentation maturity model. In: Proceedingsof the 21st Annual International Conference on Documentation, San Francisco,CA, USA, pp. 93–99.Jansen, A., Bosch, J., Avgeriou, P., 2008. Documenting after the fact: recovering archi-tectural design decisions. J. Syst. Softw. 81, 536–557.Jansen, A., Avgeriou, P., van der Ven, J.S., 2009. Enriching software architecture doc-umentation. J. Syst. Softw. 82, 1232–1248.Kanter, H., Muscarello, T., Ralston, C., 2008. Measuring the readability of softwarerequirement speciﬁcations: an empirical study. J. Inform. Syst. Control 1, 1–6.Katzenelson, J., 1971. Documentation and the management of a software project—acase study. J. Softw.: Pract. Exp. 1, 147–157.Kylmkoski, R., 2003. Efﬁcient authoring of software documentation using RaPiD7.In: Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Software Engineering,Portland, OR.Lehner, F., 1993. Quality control in software documentation based on measurementof text comprehension and text comprehensibility. Inform. Process. Manag. 25,551–568.Lethbridge, T.C., Singer, J., Forward, A., 2003. How software engineers use documen-tation: the state of the practice. J. IEEE Softw. 20, 35–39.Maarek, Y.S., Benyfj, D.M., 1989. The use of lexical afﬁnities in require-ments extraction. In: Proceedings of Fifth IEEE International Workshopon Software Speciﬁcation and Design, Pittsburgh, PA, United States,pp. 196–202.MacKinnon, N., Murphy, S., 2003. Designing UML diagrams for technical docu-mentation. In: Proceedings of the 21st Annual International Conference onDocumentation, San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 105–112.Meng, W.J., Rilling, J., Zhang, Y., Witte, R., Mudur, S., Charland, P., 2006. A context-driven software comprehension process model. In: 2nd International IEEEWorkshop on Software Evolvability, Philadelphia, PA, pp. 50–57.Mira, K.-M., 2005. A survey of documentation practice within corrective mainte-nance. Empir. Softw. Eng. 10, 31–55.Palazzolo, M., Utt, M.H., 2000. A uniﬁed process for software and documentationdevelopment. In: Presented at the Proceedings of IEEE Professional Commu-nication Society International Professional Communication Conference andProceedings of the 18th Annual ACM International Conference on ComputerDocumentation: Technology and Teamwork, Cambridge, MA.Parnas, D.L., 2011. Precise documentation: the key to better software. In:The Future of Software Engineering. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,pp. 125–148.Parnas, D.L., Vilkomir, S.A., 2007. Precise documentation of critical software. In:Proceedings of the 10th IEEE High Assurance Systems Engineering Symposium,HASE ‘07.Parnas, D.L., Madey, J., Llewski, M., 1994. Precise documentation of well-structuredprograms. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 20, 948–976.Pemberton, L., Gorman, L., Hartley, A., Power, R., 1996. Computer support for pro-ducing software documentation: some possible futures. In: The New WritingEnvironment: Writers at Work in a World of Technology. Springer, pp. 59–71.Pendharkar, P.C., Rodger, J.A., 2002. An empirical study of factors impacting thesize of object-oriented component code documentation. In: Proceedings of the20th Annual International Conference on Computer Documentation, Toronto,Ontario, Canada, pp. 152–156.Poshyvanyk, D., Marcus, A., 2007. Using traceability links to assess and maintainthe quality of software documentation. In: Proceedings of the 4th ACM Inter-national Workshop on Traceability in Emerging Forms of Software Engineering,Lexington, KY, USA, pp. 27–30.Robert, P., 1985. Selecting software documentation standards. IEEE Softw., 90–91.Rubin, E., Rubin, H., 2011. Supporting agile software development through activedocumentation. Acad. J. Requir. Eng. 16, 117–132.Rueping, A., 2003. Agile Documentation: A Pattern Guide to Producing LightweightDocuments for Software Projects, 1st ed. John Wiley & Sons Inc., New York, NY,USA.Sametinger, J., 1991. DOgMA: A Tool for the Documentation & Maintenance of Soft-ware Systems. Doctoral Dissertation. Johannes Kepler University of Linz, Austria,9783853698686.Sametinger, J., 1994. Object-oriented documentation. ACM SIGDOC Asterisk J. Com-put. Doc. 18, 3–14.Sanchez-Rosado, I., Rodrguez-Soria, P., Martn-Herrera, B., JosCuadrado-Gallego, J.,Martínez-Herráiz, J., González, A., 2009. Assessing the documentation devel-opment effort in software projects. In: International Conferences on SoftwareProcess and Product Measurement.Schoeffel, W.L., 1976. An Air Force Guide to Software Documentation Requirements:Defense Technical Information Center. NTIS AO-A027 051.Schoonewille, H.H., Heijstek, W., Chaudron, M., Kühne, T., 2011. A cognitive per-spective on developer comprehension of software design documentation. In:Proceedings of the 29th ACM International Conference on Design of Communi-cation, Pisa, Italy, pp. 211–218.Schreck, D., Dallmeier, V., Zimmermann, T., 2007. How documentation evolves overtime. In: Proceedings of the 9th International Workshop on Principles of Soft-ware Evolution: In Conjunction with the 6th ESEC/FSE Joint Meeting, Dubrovnik,Croatia, pp. 4–10.Sheppard, S.B., Bailey, J.W., Kruesi, E., 1981. The effects of the symbology and spatialarrangement of software documentation in a modiﬁcation task. In: Proceedingsof the 5th International Conference on Software Engineering, San Diego, CA,United States, pp. 207–214.Sheppard, S.B., Kruesi, E., Bailey, W.J., 1982. An empirical evaluation of softwaredocumentation formats. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Human factors inComputing Systems, Gaithersburg, MD, United States, pp. 121–124.Soloway, E., Lampert, R., Letovsky, S., Littman, D., Pinto, J., 1988. Designing documen-tation to compensate for delocalized plans. J. Commun. ACM 31, 1259–1267.Sommerville, I., 2001. Software Documentation. In: Revised Version of Chapter 30From his Book Software Engineering, 4th ed. Pearson Education Ltd.Stettina, C.J., Heijstek, W., 2011. Necessary and neglected? An empirical study ofinternal documentation in agile software development teams. In: Proceedingsof the 29th ACM International Conference on Design of Communication, Pisa,Italy, pp. 159–166.Su, M.T., 2010. Capturing exploration to improve software architecture documenta-tion. In: Proceedings of the 4th European Conference on Software Architecture:Companion Volume, Copenhagen, Denmark, pp. 17–22.Tang, A., Babar, M.A., Gorton, I., Han, J., 2005. A survey of the use and documenta-tion of architecture design rationale. In: Presented at the Proceedings of the 5thWorking IEEE/IFIP Conference on Software Architecture.Tilley, S., 2009. Documenting software systems with views VI: lessons learnedfrom 15 years of research & practice. In: Proceedings of the 27th ACM Inter-national Conference on Design of Communication, Bloomington, IN, USA,pp. 239–244.Tilley, S., Hausi, M., 1991. INFO: a simple document annotation facility. In:Proceedings of the 9th Annual International Conference on Systems Documen-tation, Chicago, IL, United States, pp. 30–36.Tilley, S., Huang, S., 2003. A qualitative assessment of the efﬁcacy of UML diagramsas a form of graphical documentation in aiding program understanding. In:Presented at the Proceedings of the 21st Annual International Conference onDocumentation, San Francisco, CA, USA.Tilley, S.R., Müller, H.A., Orgun, M.A., 1992. Documenting software systems withviews. In: Proceedings of the 10th Annual International Conference on SystemsDocumentation, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada, pp. 211–219.Trese, T., Tilley, S., 2007. Documenting software systems with views V: towardsvisual documentation of design patterns as an aid to program understanding.In: Proceedings of the 25th Annual ACM International Conference on Design ofCommunication, El Paso, TX, USA, pp. 103–112.Tryggeseth, E., 1997. Report from an experiment: impact of documentation on main-tenance. J. Empir. Softw. Eng. 2, 201–207.Visconti, M., Cook, C., 1993. Software system documentation process maturitymodel. In: Proceedings of the ACM Conference on Computer Science, Indianapo-lis, IN, United States, pp. 352–357.Visconti, M., Cook, C., 2004. Assessing the state of software documentation prac-tices. Product focused software process improvement, vol. 3009. Springer,Berlin/Heidelberg, pp. 485–496.Wayne, G.L., Carolyn, B.S., 2007. Revealing actual documentation usage in softwaremaintenance through war stories. Inform. Softw. Technol. 49, 576–587.Wingkvist, A., Ericsson, M., Lincke, R., Lowe, W., 2010a. A metrics-based approach totechnical documentation quality. In: Proceedings of the 7th International Con-ference on the Quality of Information and Communications Technology., pp.476–481.Wingkvist, A., Ericsson, M., Löwe, W., 2011. A visualization-based approach topresent and assess technical documentation quality. Electron. J. Inform. Syst.Eval. 14, 150–159.Wong, K., Tilley, S.R., 2002. Connecting technical communicators with technicaldevelopers. In: Proceedings of the 20th Annual International Conference onComputer Documentation, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, pp. 258–262.Unavailable PapersBayer, J., 2004. View-based Software Documentation: Fraunhofer. IRB Verlag,Stuttgart.Comer, E.R., 1983. Rigorous software engineering standards through progressivedocumentation. In: Second Software Engineering Standards Application Work-shop, IEEE. J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198 197Prause, C., Kuck, J., Apelt, S., Oppermann, R., Cremers, A.B., 2007. Interconnectingdocumentation-harnessing the different powers of current documentation toolsin software development. In: Ninth ICEIS, pp. 63–68.Robles, G., Barahona, J.M.G., Prieto, J.L., 2006. Assessing and evaluating documen-tation in Libre software projects. In: Workshop on Evaluation Frameworks forOpen Source Software (EFOSS 2006), Como, Italy.Excluded PapersAlan, S.N., Roger, M.S., 1983. Playback: a method for evaluating the usability ofsoftware and its documentation. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference onHuman Factors in Computing Systems, Boston, MA, United States, pp. 78–82.Alberto, S., Martina, C., Barbara, R., Giancarlo, S., 2005. Managing uncertainty inrequirements: a survey in documentation-driven and agile companies. In:Proceedings of the 11th IEEE International Software Metrics Symposium, Wash-ington, DC, USA, pp. 17–27.Ali, S., Briand, L.C., Hemmati, H., Panesar-Walawege, R.K., 2010. A systematic reviewof the application and empirical investigation of search-based test-case gener-ation. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 36, 742–762.Ambler, S.W., 2002. Agile Modeling: Effective Practices for EXtreme Programmingand the Uniﬁed Process. John Wiley and Sons Inc., New York.Ashley, W., 2004. The documentation of quality engineering: applying use casesto drive change in software engineering models. In: Proceedings of the 22ndAnnual International Conference on Design of Communication: The Engineeringof Quality Documentation, Memphis, TN, USA, pp. 4–13.Azmi, A., Ibrahim, S., 2011. Test management traceability model to support soft-ware testing documentation. In: Proceedings of the International Conference onDigital Information and Communication Technology and its Application, Dijon,France, pp. 21–32.Barker, T.T., 1990. Software documentation: from instruction to integration. IEEETrans. Prof. Commun. 33.Bauer, B.J., Parnas, D.L., 1995. Applying mathematical software documentation: anexperience report. In: Proceedings of the 10th Annual Conference on ComputerAssurance, Gaithersburg, MD, pp. 273–284.Beck, K., Beedle, M., Bennekum, A.v., Cockburn, A., Cunningham, W., Fowler, M., Gren-ning, J., Highsmith, J., Hunt, A., Jeffries, R., Kern, J., Marick, B., Martin, R.C., Mellor,S., Schwaber, K., Sutherland, J., Thomas, D., 2012. Manifesto for Agile SoftwareDevelopment, http://www.agilemanifesto.org (Last accessed: 29.06.12).Benson, H.S., Tom, G., 1988. Letting software engineers do software engineering orfreeing software engineers from the shackles of documentation. In: Proceedingsof the 6th Annual International Conference on Systems Documentation, AnnArbor, MI, United States, pp. 81–92.Berglund, E., 2000. Writing for adaptable documentation. In: Proceedings of IEEEProfessional Communication Society International Professional CommunicationConference and Proceedings of the 18th Annual ACM International Conferenceon Computer Documentation: Technology & Teamwork, Cambridge, MA, pp.497–508.Berglund, E., Priestley, M., 2001. Open-source documentation: in search of user-driven, just-in-time writing. In: Proceedings of the 19th Annual InternationalConference on Computer Documentation, Sante Fe, NM, USA, pp. 132–141.Bethke, F.J., Dean, W.M., Kaiser, P.H., Ort, E., Pessin, F.H., 1991. Improving the usabilityof programming papers. IBM Syst. J. 20, 306–320.Bill, C., Herb, K., Neil, I., 1988. A ﬁeld study of the software design process for largesystems. CACM 31, 1268–1287.Briand, L.C., 2003. Software documentation: how much is enough? In: Seventh Euro-pean Conference on Software Maintenance and Reengineering, Benevento, Italy,pp. 13–15.Clark, P.G., Lobsitz, R.M., Shields, J.D., 1989. Documenting the evolution of an infor-mation system. In: Proceedings of the IEEE 1989 National Aerospace, ElectronicsConference, Dayton, OH, pp. 1819–1826.Clear, T., 2003. Documentation and Agile Methods: Striking a Balance, vol. 35. ACMSpecial Interest Group on Computer Science Education Bulletin, pp. 12–13.Clements, P., Garlan, D., Little, R., Nord, R., Stafford, J., 2003. Documenting soft-ware architectures: views and beyond. In: Proceedings of the 25th InternationalConference on Software Engineering, Portland, OR, pp. 740–741.Courtois, P.J., Parnas, D.L., 1993. Documentation for safety critical software. In:Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Software Engineering, Bal-timore, MD, United States, pp. 315–323.de Rosis, F., de Carolis, B., Pizzutilo, S., 1999. Software Documentation with AnimatedAgents (Unpublished).Delanghe, S., 2000. Using learning styles in software documentation. IEEE Trans.Prof. Commun. 43, 201–205.Forward, A., Lethbridge, T.C., 2014. Software Engineering Documentation Pri-orities: An Industrial Study [Online]. Available: http://citeseerx.ist.psu.edu/viewdoc/download?doi=10.1.1.112.7359&rep=rep1&type=pdfFrench, J.C., Knight, J.C., Powell, A.L., 1997. Applying hypertext structures to softwaredocumentation. Inform. Process. Manag. 33, 219–231.Galdo, E.M.D., Williges, R.C., Williges, B.H., Wixon, D.R., 1986. An evaluation of criti-cal incidents for software documentation design. In: Proceedings of the HumanFactors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, Anaheim, CA, pp. 19–23.Gerth, T., Schachtschabel, R., Schönefeld, R., Unpublished.Guillemette, R.A., 1986. Application software documentation: a reader measure, vol.17. Special Interest Group of the ACM on Management Information SystemsDatabase, pp. 40.Haneef, N.J., 1998. Software documentation and readability: a proposed processimprovement. ACM SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes 23, 75–77.Hargis, G., 2000. Readability and computer documentation. ACM J. Comput. Doc. 24,122–131.Hargis, G., Carey, M., Hernandez, A.K., Hughes, P., Longo, D., Rouiller, S., Wilde, E.,2004. Developing Quality Technical Information: A Handbook for Writers andEditors, 2nd ed. Prentice Hall, PTR Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA.Horowitz, E., Williamson, R., 1985. SODOS: a software documentation supportenvironment – its use. In: Proceedings of the 8th International Conference onSoftware Engineering, London, England, pp. 8–14.Hyland-Wood, D., Carrington, D., Kaplan, S., 2008. Towards a software maintenancemethodology using Semantic Web techniques and paradigmatic documentationmodelling. Softw. IET 2, 337–347.Jazzar, A., Scacchi, W., 1995. Understanding the requirements for information systemdocumentation: an empirical investigation. In: Proceedings of Conference onOrganizational Computing Systems, Milpitas, CA, United States, pp. 268–279.Johnson, W.L., Rey, M.D., 1994. Dynamic (re)generation of software documenta-tion. In: Proceedings of the 4th Systems Reengineering Technology Workshop,Monterey, CA, USA, pp. 57–66.Kalus, D., Torsten, K., 1996. A pragmatic approach to software documentation. Tech-nical report, Technische Universitat Berlin, Germany.Landes, D., Schneider, K., Houdek, F., 1999. Organizational learning and experiencedocumentation in industrial software projects. Int. J. Hum. Comput. Stud. 51,643–661.Landis, L.D., Hyland, P.M., Gilbert, A.L., Fine, A.J., 1988. Documentation in a soft-ware maintenance environment. In: Proceedings of the Conference on SoftwareMaintenance, Scottsdale, AZ, pp. 66–73.Liu, S., 2001. Generating Test Cases from Software Documentation. MSc. Thesis,Master of Engineering, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,McMaster University.Lobato, L.L., O’Leary, P., de Almeida, E.S., de Lemos Meira, S.R., 2010. The importanceof documentation, design and reuse in risk management for SPL. In: Proceedingsof the 28th ACM International Conference on Design of Communication, Carlos,Paulo, Brazil, pp. 143–150.Luqi, X., Liang, L., Zhang, V., Berzins, 2003. Software documentation-driven man-ufacturing: viaduct between software engineering and virtual engineering. In:Proceedings of the 27th Annual International Conference on Computer Softwareand Applications, Dallas, TX, pp. 472–477.Lutsky, P., Logananthara, R., Palm, G., Ali, M., 2000. Information Extraction for Vali-dation of Software Documentation Intelligent Problem Solving, Methodologiesand Approaches, vol. 1821. Springer, Berlin/Heidelberg, pp. 29–60.MacKinnon, N., Murphy, S., 2004. Designing UML diagrams for technical documen-tation: continuing the collaborative approach to publishing class diagrams. In:Proceedings of the 22nd Annual International Conference on Design of Com-munication: The Engineering of Quality Documentation, Memphis, TN, USA, pp.120–127.Magyar, M., 2000. Automating software documentation: a case study. In:Proceedings of the IEEE Professional Communication Society International Pro-fessional Communication Conference and Proceedings of the 18th Annual ACMInternational Conference on Computer documentation: Technology & Team-work, Cambridge, MA, pp. 549–558.Marcus, A., Maletic, J.I., 2005. Recovery of traceability links between software doc-umentation and source code. Int. J. Softw. Eng. Knowl. Eng. 15, 811–836.Marovac, N., 1994. Guidelines for embedded software documentation. ACM SIGSOFTSoftw. Eng. Notes 19, 22–28.Marovac, N., 1998. Embedded documentation for semi-automatic programconstruction and software reuse. ACM SIGSOFT Softw. Eng. Notes 23,70–74.Medina, E.A., 1984. Some aspects of software documentation. In: Proceedings of the3rd Annual International Conference on Systems Documentation, Mexico City,Mexico, pp. 57–59.Metzger, A., Heymans, P., Pohl, K., Schobbens, P.-Y., Saval, G., 2007. Disambiguat-ing the documentation of variability in software product lines: a separation ofconcerns, formalization and automated analysis. In: Proceedings of the 15thIEEE International Conference on Requirements Engineering, Delhi, India, pp.243–253.Moallem, A., 2003. Usability of Software Online Documentation: A User Study.Available: http://sjsulug.engr.sjsu.edu/amoallem/papers/834 HCI UsabilityAMoallem.pdfOdenthal, G., Quibeldey-Cirkel, K., 1997. Using patterns for design and docu-mentation. In: Proceedings of the European Conference of Object OrientedProgramming, Berlin, pp. 511–529.Parnas, D.L., 2005. A family of mathematical methods for professional software doc-umentation. In: Proceedings of the 5th international Conference on IntegratedFormal Methods, Eindhoven, The Netherlands, pp. 1–4.Parnas, D.L., Smith, D., Pearce, T., 1988. Making formal software documentation morepractical: a progress report. Technical Report, Dept. of Computing & InformationScience, Queens University, Canada.Peters, D.K., Parnas, D.L., 1998. Using test oracles generated from program docu-mentation. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 24, 161–173.Phoha, V., 1997. A standard for software documentation. IEEE Comput. 30, 97–98.Powell, A.L., French, J.C., Knight, J.C., 1996. A systematic approach to creating andmaintaining software documentation. In: Proceedings of the ACM symposiumon Applied Computing, Philadelphia, PA, United States, pp. 201–208.Price, J., 1984. How to Write a Computer Manual: A Handbook of Software Docu-mentation. Benjamin/Cummings Pub. Co.Price, J., Korman, H., 1993. How to Communicate Technical Information: A Handbookof Software and Hardware Documentation. Benjamin/Cummings Pub. Co. 198 J. Zhi et al. / The Journal of Systems and Software 99 (2015) 175–198Rob, P., 2003. Optimizing your documentation with the help of technical support.In: Proceedings of the 21st Annual international Conference on Documentation,San Francisco, CA, USA, pp. 6–11.Ruth, A., 1997. Evaluating Generalized Tabular Expressions In Software Documen-tation. Master of Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, McMaster University,Hamilton.Sabou, M., 2004. Extracting ontologies from software documentation: a semi-automatic method and its evaluation. In: Proceedings of the Workshop onOntology Learning and Population (ECAI-OLP), Valencia, Spain.Tang, A., Liang, P., van Vliet, H., 2011. Software architecture documentation: the roadahead. In: 9th Working IEEE/IFIP Conference on Software Architecture, Boulder,CO, pp. 252–255.Taulavuori, A., Niemela, E., Kallio, P., 2004. Component documentation – a key issuein software product lines. Inform. Softw. Technol. 46, 535–546.Tausworthe, R.C., 1976. Standard Classiﬁcation of Software Documentation. JetPropulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, CA.Thomas, B., Tilley, S., 2001. Documentation for software engineers: what is neededto aid system understanding? In: Proceedings of the 19th Annual InternationalConference on Computer Documentation, Sante Fe, NM, USA, pp. 235–236.Tilley, S.R., 1993. Documenting-in-the-large vs. documenting-in-the-small. In:Proceedings of the Conference of the Centre for Advanced Studies on Collab-orative Research: Distributed Computing, vol. 2, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, pp.1083–1090.Van der Meij, H., 2000. The role and design of screen images in software documen-tation. J. Comput. Assist. Learn. 16, 294–306.Visconti, M., Cook, C.R., 2002. An overview of industrial software documentationpractice. In: Proceedings of the 12th International Conference of the ChileanComputer Science Society, Valparaiso, Chile, pp. 179–186.Walters, N.J., Beck, C.E., 1992. A discourse analysis of software documentation: impli-cations for the profession. IEEE Trans. Prof. Commun. 35, 156–167.Wang, X., Lai, G., Liu, C., 2009. Recovering relationships between documentationand source code based on the characteristics of software engineering. Electron.Notes Theor. Comput. Sci. 243, 121–137.Wingkvist, A., Löwe, W., Ericsson, M., Lincke, R., 2010b. Analysis and visualizationof information quality of technical documentation. In: Proceedings of the 4thEuropean Conference on Information Management and Evaluation, Reading, UK,pp. 388–396.Wise, M.R., 1993. Using graphics in software documentation. J. Soc. Tech. Commun.40, 677–681.Other ReferencesBanerjee, I., Nguyen, B.N., Garousi, V., Memon, A.M., 2013. Graphical user interface(GUI) testing: systematic mapping and repository. Inform. Softw. Technol. 55(10), 1679–1694.Budgen, D., Turner, M., Brereton, P., Kitchenham, B., 2008. Using mapping studies insoftware engineering. Evidence-Based Softw. Eng. 8, 195–204.Elberzhager, F., Münch, J., Nha, V.T.N., 2012. A systematic mapping study on thecombination of static and dynamic quality assurance techniques. Inform. Softw.Technol. 54, 1–15.Garousi, V., 2012. Classiﬁcation and trend analysis of UML books (1997–2009). J.Softw. Syst. Model. (SoSyM) 11 (2), 273–285.Garousi, V., Varma, T., 2010. A replicated survey of software testing practices in theCanadian Province of Alberta: what has changed from 2004 to 2009? J. Syst.Softw. 83 (November), 2251–2262.Garousi, V., Mesbah, A., Betin-Can, A., Mirshokraie, S., 2013. A systematic mappingstudy of web application testing. Inform. Softw. Technol. 55, 1374–1396.Jia, Y., Harman, M., 2011. An analysis and survey of the development of mutationtesting. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 37, 649–678.Jia, Y., Harman, M., 2012. Mutation testing repository. http://www.dcs.kcl.ac.uk/pg/jiayue/repository (Last accessed: April 2012).Kitchenham, B., Charters, S., 2007. Guidelines for performing systematic literaturereviews in software engineering. Evidence-Based Softw. Eng., Technical report,EBSE Technical Report EBSE-2007-01.Kitchenham, B., Brereton, O.P., Budgen, D., Turner, M., Bailey, J., Linkman, S., 2009.Systematic literature reviews in software engineering – a systematic literaturereview. Inform. Softw. Technol. 51, 7–15.Kitchenham, B., Brereton, P., Budgen, D., 2010. The educational value of mappingstudies of software engineering literature. In: ICSE 2010 Education Theme, pp.1–7.Kitchenham, B.A., Budgen, D., Brereton, P., 2011. Using mapping papers as the basisfor further research – a participant–observer case study. Inform. Softw. Technol.53, 638–651.Lientz, B.P., Swanson, E.B., Tompkins, G.E., 1978. Characteristics of application soft-ware maintenance. Commun. ACM, 466–471.Petersen, K., Feldt, R., Mujtaba, S., Mattsson, M., 2008. Systematic mapping papersin software engineering. In: Presented at the 12th International Conference onEvaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering (EASE).Pﬂeeger, S.L., Atlee, J.M., 2010. Software Engineering: Theory and Practice, 4th ed.Pearson.Runeson, P., Host, M., Rainer, A., Regnell, B., 2012. Case Study Research in SoftwareEngineering: Guidelines and Examples. John Wiley & Sons.Software Engineering Evidence Map, 2012. http://www.dur.ac.uk/ebse/evidence.php (Last Accessed: August 2012).UML meta-model Infrastructure speciﬁcation, 2012. http://www.omg.org/spec/UML/2.4.1/Infrastructure/PDF (Last accessed: August 2012).Wohlin, C., Runeson, P., Höst, M., Ohlsson, M.C., Regnell, B., Wesslén, A., 2000.Experimentation in software engineering: an introduction. Kluwer AcademicPublishers.Zhang, Y., 2012. Repository of papers on search based software engineer-ing. http://crestweb.cs.ucl.ac.uk/resources/sbse repository (Last accessed: April2012).Zhang, H., Babar, M.A., Tell, P., 2011. Identifying relevant papers in software engi-neering. Inform. Softw. Technol. 53.Zhi, J., Garousi, V., Sun, B., Garousi, G., Shahnewaz, S., Ruhe, G., 2012. Cost,Beneﬁts, Usage and Quality of Technical Software Documentation Sys-tem Mapping Repository (Online), http://www.softqual.ucalgary.ca/projects/SM/doc cost beneﬁt usage quality (Last accessed: 29.06.12).Junji Zhi is a PhD student in Computer Systems and Networks Research Group,Department of Computer Science, University of Toronto, Canada. He completed hisM. Sc. degree at University of Calgary from 2011 to 2013. Junji’s research interestsinclude cloud computing, software testing and software documentation. For moreinformation, please visit: http://www.cs.toronto.edu/zhij/.Vahid Garousi is an Associate Professor of Software Engineering in Atilim Univer-sity in Ankara, Turkey. He served as an Associate Professor of Software Engineeringin the University of Calgary, Canada from 2006 until 2014. Vahid completed his PhDin Software Engineering in Carleton University, Canada, in 2006, and his M. Sc. inthe University of Waterloo, Canada, in 2003. He is a practicing software engineeringconsultant and coach, and has provided consultancy and corporate training servicesin Canada and Turkey in the areas of software testing and quality assurance, model-driven development, and software maintenance. During his career, Vahid has beenactive in initiating a number of major R&D software testing and software engineer-ing projects in Canada and Turkey. During year 2013, he was a Visiting AssociateProfessor in the Middle East Technical University (METU) in Ankara, Turkey. He hasbeen involved as an organizing or program committee member in many softwareengineering conference, such as ICST, ICSP, CSEE&T, and MoDELS. He is a member ofthe IEEE and the IEEE Computer Society, and is also a licensed professional engineer(PEng) in the Canadian province of Alberta. He has been selected a Distinguished Vis-itor (speaker) for the IEEE Computer Society’s Distinguished Visitors Program (DVP)for the period of 2012–2015. Among his awards is the Alberta Ingenuity New FacultyAward in June 2007. For more information, visit: www.atilim.edu.tr/vahid.garousi.Bo Sun is a Data Management Consultant at iSolutions Inc. He completed his M. Sc.Degree at University of Calgary from 2010 to 2012.Golara Garousi is a software engineer at geoLOGIC Systems in Calgary, Canada. Shereceived her M. Sc. in software engineering from the University of Calgary, Canadain 2012. Her research interests are software development documentation, softwareengineering decision support and software quality assurance.Shawn Shahnewaz is Master student at the Department of Electrical and ComputerEngineering, University of Calgary since 2012.Guenther Ruhe holds an Industrial Research Chair in Software Engineering atUniversity of Calgary. From 1996 until 2001, he was the deputy director of the Fraun-hofer Institute for Experimental Software Engineering (Fh IESE). Ruhe received aniCORE research award for the period 2001 to 2007. Since 2007, he had served asan Associate Editor of the Journal of Information and Software Technology, pub-lished by Elsevier. His main research interests are in the areas of Product ReleasePlanning, Software Project Management, Empirical Software Engineering as well asSearch-based Software Engineering. He is a Senior member of IEEE and a memberof the ACM. Dr. Ruhe is the Founder and CEO of Expert Decisions Inc., a Universityof Calgary spin-off company created in 2003.