 0018-9162/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEE44ComputerCOVER FEATURE
Published by the IEEE Computer SocietyAgility throughDiscipline: 
A Debate Kent says: There are those who see agility insoftware development as a tradeoff, a sort
of shaving of the wing spars. By giving up

safety or rigor or accountability, we can

go faster. From inside Extreme Program-
ming, though, Òagility or safetyÓ or Òagility or dis-

ciplineÓ look like false dichotomies. From inside
Extreme Programming, it seems that the only way
to achieve the results we seek is to

view the world in Òboth-andÓ

terms instead of Òeither-orÓ terms.

Why this disconnect?My dictionary (www.m-w.com)
defines discipline as: 3. a field of
study; 4. training that corrects,
molds, or perfects the mental fac-
ulties or moral character; 5. (a)
control gained by enforcing obedience or order; (b)
orderly or prescribed conduct or pattern of behav-
ior; (c) self-control; 6. a rule or system of rules gov-

erning conduct or activity.
LetÕs take a look at each of these deÞnitions in the
context of a prototypical Extreme Programming
team.A Þeld of study
. Extreme Programming describesa set of skills developers or customers should mas-
ter on the way to becoming effective members of a

software development team.
Training that corrects, molds, or perfects the men-
tal faculties or moral character. 
I wonÕt make any
claims for moral character, but test-driven devel-

opment, refactoring, pair programming, continu-
ous integration, and weekly planning (with
estimation and tracking) all contribute to Òperfect-
ingÓ mental faculties.Control gained by enforcing obedience or order.
Extreme Programming fails on this account. The
team is responsible for its own rules. In fact, the Þrstrule of XP is ÒTheyÕre just rules.Ó This rule is not anexcuse for unilateral behavior but a reminder that

the team must maintain awareness of its own rules

and continually reÞne them in the light of experi-

ence.Orderly or prescribed conduct or pattern ofbehavior. 
The team members know what to expect
of each other, so the teamÕs behavior is orderly.
However, the people doing the pre-

scribing are the people doing the
doing.A rule or system of rules govern-
ing conduct or activity. 
ExtremeProgramming certainly is this. XP
teams are conscious of their collec-
tive rules for planning, develop-
ment, integration, and deploy-ment. As many rules as possible are embedded in
tools. For example, the rule that says no code can
be released without all the tests passing can be
embedded in a script that automatically runs the

tests and only releases changes if the tests all pass.If Extreme Programming is said to be undisci-
plined, it is only in the sense of Òcontrol gained by
enforcing obedience or order.Ó If this narrow deÞ-

nition of discipline is used, I say hooray for undis-
ciplined processes. Efforts to force developers and
customers to work according to a procedure devel-
oped by those not immediately responsible for
results have uniformly failed. However, given a

broader view of discipline, Extreme Programming

is far more disciplined than most processes, pro-
viding a clearer collective picture of what activities

are expected and more opportunities for learning.
Indeed, without conforming to these positive senses
of Òdiscipline,Ó the social contract of Extreme

Programming would rapidly disintegrate.ÑKent BeckKent Beck
Three Rivers InstituteBarry BoehmUniversity of 
Southern CaliforniaAgility is onlypossible through
greater discipline
on the part of 
everyone involved. 
ÑKent Beck June 200345Barry says: Once upon a time, in the landof Metaphor, there lived a monkey and

an elephant. They both lived on one side
of a wide, swiftly ßowing river. On both

sides of the river there were many fruittrees. The monkey was very agile. He could climb

to the top of the fruit trees and eat as much fruit as

he needed. The elephant was very tall. He could
reach up with his trunk and eat as
much fruit as he needed.But the trees grew taller. Soon the
elephant could not reach enough
fruit to eat. But he was strong and
self-sufÞcient. He found that when

he was hungry, he could just pull

down a tree and have fruit to eat.The monkey watched the elephantpull down most of the fruit trees. He was not happy.

He said to the elephant, ÒDonÕt do that! I will climb

up the trees and get fruit for you.ÓThe elephant said, Ò I am hungry. I am strong. I
can do things for myself.ÓThe monkey said, ÒYou dumb elephant. Soon
there will be no trees or fruit for you either.Ó
The elephant said, ÒI only work on one problemat a time. Things may change. Maybe more fruit
trees will come. Or maybe the trees will get shorter.

If they donÕt, IÕll work out a solution then.Ó
The monkey had to agree. He only worked onone problem at a time too.Soon there were no more fruit trees left on theirside of the river. The elephant said, ÒI have a solu-

tion. I will go across the river and pull down trees

over there.ÓThe monkey said, ÒYou dumb elephant. That
didnÕt work on this side of the river, and it wonÕt

work on the other side of the river. You will starve

us both. LetÕs duke it out. I am agile and will run

rings around you.ÓThe elephant said, ÒThat is Þne with me. I am
big and strong and I will pulverize you.ÓSo they began to duke it out. The monkey ranrings around the elephant. But he was not able to
stop the elephant from trying to pulverize him. 
The elephant thrashed around with his strongtrunk and legs, trying to pulverize the monkey. But

the monkey was too agile, and the elephant missed
every time. It was a hot day. Soon the monkey and the ele-
phant got tired. They sat down and tried to Þgure
out what to do next.
The monkey said, ÒI am agile. I will just scamperacross the river and bring back some fruit.Ó He got a running start toward the river and wentscamper, scamper, scamper É splott! The river
started to carry him away.
ÒThat dumb monkey!Ó said the elephant. Hewaded into the river, picked up the monkey, put him

on his back, and waded back to shore. They sat and

thought for a long time while the monkey dried out. Finally the monkey said, ÒMaybe this is a solu-tion. You can carry me across the river on your
back. When we get across, I can
climb the trees and get enough
food for us both.Ó The elephant thought for amoment and then answered, ÒThat
sounds like it is worth a try.Ó So

they tried it, and it worked.
And they lived happily ever after,
until the end of their days.Some morals to the story:
¥Monkeys can do things elephants canÕt do.

¥Elephants can do things monkeys canÕt do.

¥Working on one problem at a time may not be
a good idea.¥Duking it out may not be a good idea.

¥Finding a collaborative win-win solution may
be a good idea.ÑBarry BoehmKENT BECKÕS RESPONSE TO BARRY BOEHM
The primary moral I take from Barry BoehmÕs
story is that he sees the discussion of what he calls
Òplan-orientedÓ methods in contrast to what I
might call Òreality-orientedÓ methods as a compe-
tition. IÕm afraid I just donÕt see it that way. Since

he introduced the story form, IÕll respond in kind,
although I canÕt hope to compete with the charm

of two cute creatures learning to get along.Once there was a dinosaur and a furry little
mammal, a bit like a mouse. Then an ice age
began. The dinosaur couldnÕt regulate its internal

temperature, and so it died. The mouse, with its

more adaptable metabolism, survived.The dinosaur and the mouse werenÕt in compe-
tition. They ate different things, lived in different
places. Certainly, the passing of the dinosaur

opened up many opportunities for the furry little

creature to thrive, but the passing of dinosaur had
nothing to do with the mouse. If it hadnÕt been a

mouse taking over, it would have been cockroaches.
The agilists are reacting to the business, technol-ogy, and social environment as we see it. If your cli-

mate matches the conditions under which Barry

BoehmÕs advice works, well, by all means, follow it.

If itÕs getting chilly, though, think about what else

might work better.
You donÕt broaden
the deÞnition of ÒdisciplineÓ by rejecting
parts of it.
ÑBarry Boehm
 BARRY BOEHMÕS RESPONSE TO KENT BECK
Kent Beck is right in saying that agility and dis-cipline are not opposites. He is also right in saying
that XP requires a signiÞcant amount of discipline.

He has also been right in recognizing that larger
projects may need different types of discipline than
those in XP. In 
Extreme Programming Explained(Addison-Wesley, 2000, p. 157), Kent says, ÒSize

clearly matters. You probably couldnÕt run an XP

project with a hundred programmers. Nor fifty.

Nor twenty, probably. Ten is deÞnitely doable.Ó
As Jim Highsmith points out in Agile SoftwareDevelopment Ecosystems(Addison-Wesley, 2002,
p. 358), about 60 percent of the worldÕs software
projects have 10 or fewer people. But when project
percentages are multiplied by project sizes to deter-
mine the relative amount of work being done, these
small projects only account for about 17 percent
of the worldÕs software work.
What other disciplines do the people doing theother 83 percent of the work invoke? A good exam-
ple is The ThoughtWorks lease management case

study that Amr Elssamadisy and Gregory Schalliol
describe in ÒRecognizing and Responding to ÔBad
SmellsÕ in Extreme Programming,Ó (
Proc. ICSE2002, pp. 617-622). In order to get XP to worksuccessfully on a 50-person project, they found it
important to Ò... insist upon including the devel-

opment and constant updating of a more tradi-
tional picture or graphic of the overall application

É ,Ó Òcreate a precise list of tasks that 
mustbecompleted É and then police it rigorously and hon-
estly,Ó and use a factory pattern rather than sim-

ple design for foreseeable new features.
Does this sound like Òcontrol gained by enforc-ing obedience or order?Ó You bet. 
IÕm not sure where Kent got the data to sub-stantiate his statement, ÒEfforts to force develop-
ers and customers to work according to a
procedure developed by those not immediately
responsible for results have uniformly failed.Ó
Requiring US Department of Defense contractors
to achieve CMM Level 3 to compete on contracts
has been such an effort, and it has produced quite
a few success stories. For data, see the SEI Report
CMU/SEI-2001-SR-014, ÒThe 2001 High
Maturity WorkshopÓ (www.sei. cmu.edu/publica-

tions), and my forthcoming book with Richard

Turner, 
Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guidefor the Perplexed(Addison-Wesley, 2003). 
But what is most needed is not rhetorical Òduk-
ing it out,Ó but efforts to synthesize the best from

agile and plan-driven methods to address our
future challenges of simultaneously achieving high

software dependability, agility, and scalability. 
Which brings us back to the monkey and the elephant.Kent Beckis the director of the Three Rivers 
Institute in southern Oregon. Contact him at

kent@threeriversinstitute.org.Barry Boehm
is director of the University of South-ern California Center for Software Engineering.
Contact him at boehm@sunset.usc.edu.
46Computer

IEEEEver wonder what all the XP hype isabout? Read these articles to get the

inside story from developers who have

Òbeen there, done thatÓ with XP:
The XP Programmer: The Few-Minutes Programmer Introducing XP into GreenÞeld 
Projects: Lessons Learned 
Assessing XP at a European Internet Company 
Exploring XP for ScientiÞc Research 

Ever wonder what all the XP hype isabout? Read these articles to get the

inside story from developers who have

Òbeen there, done thatÓ with XP:
The XP Programmer: The Few-Minutes Programmer Introducing XP into GreenÞeld 
Projects: Lessons Learned 
Assessing XP at a European Internet Company 
Exploring XP for ScientiÞc Research 