 Figure 1. The evolution of the Waterfall Model (a) and its long development cycles (analysis, design, implementation, test) to 
the shorter, iterative devel-
opment cycles within, for example, the Spiral Model (b) to Extreme ProgrammingÕs (c) blending of all these activities, a little
 at a time, throughout the
entire software development process.0018-9162/99/$10.00 © 1999 IEEE70ComputerIn the beginning was the waterfall (Figure 1a). We
would get the users to tell us once and for all
exactly what they wanted. We would design the

system that would deliver those features. We

would code it. We would test to make sure the
features were delivered. All would be well.All was not well. The users didnÕt tell us once and
for all exactly what they wanted. They didnÕt know.

They contradicted themselves. They changed their
minds. And the users werenÕt the only problem. We

programmers could think we were making great
progress only to discover three-fourths of the way
through that we were one-third of the way through.If long development cycles were bad because theycouldnÕt adapt to changes, perhaps what we needed

was to make shorter development cycles. As Figure 1bshows, the waterfall begat iterations.The waterfall model didnÕt just appear. It was a
rational reaction to the shocking measurement that
the cost of changing a piece of software rose dramat-
ically over time. If thatÕs true, then you want to make

the biggest, most far-reaching decisions as early in the

life cycle as possible to avoid paying big bucks for
them.The academic software engineering communitytook the high cost of changing software as a challenge,
creating technologies like relational databases, mod-
ular programming, and information hiding. What if
all that hard work paid off? What if we got good at
reducing the costs of ongoing changes? What if we
didnÕt have to settle for taking a cleaver to the water-

fall?What if we could throw it in a blender?
Extreme Programming turns the conventional software process sideways.
Rather than planning, analyzing, and designing for the far-ßung future, XP

programmers do all of these activitiesÑa little at a timeÑthroughout 

development.Cover Feature
Embracing Change with
Extreme
ProgrammingKent BeckFirst ClassSoftwareCover FeatureAnalysisDesignImplementationTest
Time
ScopeIterativeWaterfall
XP(c)(b)(a) October 199971We might get a picture like the one shown in Figure1c. ItÕs called Extreme Programming.ANATOMY OF XPXP turns the conventional software process side-ways. Rather than planning, analyzing, and design-ing for the far-ßung future, XP exploits the reductionin the cost of changing software to do all of theseactivities a little at a time, throughout software devel-opment. (The ÒXP PracticesÓ sidebar will give you a
quick grasp of the practices and philosophy underly-ing XP. These practices are designed to work together,and trying to examine any one soon leads you to therest. The ÒRoots of XPÓ sidebar on page 73traces thehistorical antecedents of these practices.)XP development cycleFigure 2 shows XP at timescales ranging from yearsto days. The customer picks the next release by choos-ing the most valuable features (called storiesin XP)from among all the possible stories, as informed bythe costs of the stories and the measured speed of theteam in implementing stories.The customer picks the next iterationÕs stories bychoosing the most valuable stories remaining in therelease, again informed by the costs of the stories andthe teamÕs speed. The programmers turn the storiesinto smaller-grained tasks, which they individuallyXP PracticesHere is a quick summary of each of themajor practices in XP.Planning game. Customers decide thescope and timing of releases basedon estimates provided by program-mers. Programmers implement onlythe functionality demanded by the
stories in this iteration.Small releases. The system is put intoproduction in a few months, beforesolving the whole problem. Newreleases are made oftenÑanywherefrom daily to monthly.Metaphor. The shape of the system isdefined by a metaphor or set of
metaphors shared between the cus-tomer and programmers.Simple design. At every moment, thedesign runs all the tests, communi-cates everything the programmerswant to communicate, contains noduplicate code, and has the fewestpossible classes and methods. This
rule can be summarized as, ÒSayeverything once and only once.ÓTests. Programmers write unit testsminute by minute. These tests are col-lected and they must all run correctly.Customers write functional tests for
the stories in an iteration. These tests
should also all run, although practi-cally speaking, sometimes a business
decision must be made comparing the
cost of shipping a known defect and
the cost of delay.Refactoring. The design of the systemis evolved through transformationsof the existing design that keep all
the tests running.Pair programming. All productioncode is written by two people at one
screen/keyboard/mouse.Continuous integration. New code isintegrated with the current systemafter no more than a few hours.When integrating, the system is builtfrom scratch and all tests must passor the changes are discarded.Collective ownership. Every program-mer improves any code anywhere inthe system at any time if they see the
opportunity.On-site customer. A customer sits withthe team full-time.40-hour weeks. No one can work asecond consecutive week of over-time. Even isolated overtime usedtoo frequently is a sign of deeperproblems that must be addressed.Open workspace. The team works in alarge room with small cubicles aroundthe periphery. Pair programmers workon computers set up in the center.Just rules. By being part of an Extremeteam, you sign up to follow the rules.But theyÕre just the rules. The teamcan change the rules at any time aslong as they agree on how they willassess the effects of the change.accept responsibility for.Then the programmer turns a task into a set of testcases that will demonstrate that the task is Þnished.Working with a partner, the programmer makes thetest cases run, evolving the design in the meantime tomaintain the simplest possible design for the system
as a whole.StoriesXP considers the period before a system Þrst goesinto production to be a dangerous anomaly in the lifeof the project and to be gotten over as quickly as pos-sible. However, every project has to start somewhere.The Þrst decisions to make about the project arewhat it could do and what it should do Þrst. These deci-sions are typically the province of analysis, hence thethin blue analysis rectangle at the top of Figure 1c. YoucanÕt program until you know what youÕre program-ming.You put the overall analysis together in terms ofstories, which you can think of as the amount of a use
case that will Þt on an index card. Each story must bebusiness-oriented, testable, and estimable.A month is a good long time to come up with thestories for a 10 person-year project. ItÕs true that itisnÕt enough to explore all of the possible issues thor-oughly. But forever isnÕt long enough to explore all ofthe issues thoroughly if you never implement. 72ComputerReleaseNotice in Figure 2 that we donÕt implement all ofthe stories at Þrst. Instead, the customer chooses thesmallest set of the most valuable stories that make sense
together. First we implement those and put them intoproduction. After that weÕll implement all the rest.Picking the scope for a release is a little like shop-ping for groceries. You go to the store with $100 inyour pocket. You think about your priorities. You lookat the prices on the items. You decide what to buy.In the planning game (the XP planning process), theitems are the stories. The prices are the estimates onthe stories. The budget is calculated by measuring the
teamÕs output in terms of estimated stories deliveredper unit time.The customer can either load up a cart (pick a set ofstories) and have the programmers calculate the Þnishdate or pick a date and have the programmers calcu-late the budget, then choose stories until they add up.IterationThe goal of each iteration is to put into productionsome new stories that are tested and ready to go. Theprocess starts with a plan that sets out the stories to beimplemented and breaks out how the team willaccomplish it. While the team is implementing, the
customer is specifying functional tests. At the end of
the iteration, the tests should run and the team shouldbe ready for the next iteration.Iteration planning starts by again asking the cus-tomer to pick the most valuable stories, this time outof the stories remaining to be implemented in thisrelease. The team breaks the stories down into tasks,units of implementation that one person could imple-ment in a few days. If there are technical tasks, likeupgrading to a new version of a database, they get put
on the list too.Next, programmers sign up for the tasks they wantto be responsible for implementing. After all the tasksare spoken for, the programmer responsible for a taskestimates it, this time in ideal programming days.EveryoneÕs task estimates are added up, and if someprogrammers are over and some are under, the under-committed programmers take more tasks.Over the course of the iteration, the programmersimplement their tasks. As they complete each task, they
integrate its code and tests with the current system. Alltests must run or the code cannot be integrated.As the customer delivers the functional tests dur-ing the iteration, they are added to the suite. At theend of the iteration, all unit tests and all functional
tests run.TaskTo implement a task, the responsible programmerÞrst Þnds a partner because all production code is writ-ten with two people at one machine. If there is anyquestion about the scope or implementation approach,the partners will have a short (15-minute) meeting withthe customer and/or with the programmers mostknowledgeable about the code most likely to be
touched during implementation.ReleaseYearsMonthsWeeksDaysIterationImplementationStoriesTasksTestsFigure 2. XP according to various timescales. At the scale of months and years, you have the stories in this release and thenthe stories in future releases. At the scale of weeks and months, you have stories in this iteration and then the stories remain-ing in this release. At the scale of days and weeks, you have the task you are working on now and then the rest of the tasks inthe iteration. And at the scale of minutes and days, you have the test case you are working on now and then the rest of the testcases that you can imagine. From this meeting, the partners condense the list oftest cases that need to run before the task is done. Theypick a test case from the list that they are conÞdentthey can implement and that will teach them some-thing about the task. They code up the test case. If the
test case already runs, they go on. Normally, though,there is work to be done.When we have a test case and it doesnÕt run, either¥we can see a clean way to make it run, in whichcase we make it run; or¥we can see an ugly way to make it run, but wecan imagine a new design in which it could be
made to run cleanly, in which case we refactorthe system to make it run cleanly; or¥we can see an ugly way to make it run, but wecanÕt imagine any refactoring, in which case wemake it run the ugly way.After the test case runs, if we see how to refactorthe system to make it even cleaner, we do so.Perhaps during the implementation of this test casewe imagine another test case that should also run. Wenote the new test case on our list and continue.
Perhaps we spot a bigger refactoring that doesnÕt Þtinto the scope of our current test. We also note thatand continue. The goal is to remain focused so we cando a good job and at the same time not lose the ben-eÞts of the insights that come during intense interac-tion with code.TestIf there is a technique at the heart of XP, it is unittesting. As you saw above, unit testing is part ofevery programmerÕs daily business. In XP, however,two twists on conventional testing strategies make tests
far more effective: Programmers write their own testsand they write these tests before they code. If pro-gramming is about learning, and learning is about get-ting lots of feedback as quickly as possible, then youOctober 199973Roots of XPThe individual practices in XP are notby any means new. Many people havecome to similar conclusions about the
best way to deliver software in environ-ments where requirements change vio-lently.1-3The strict split between business andtechnical decision making in XP comes
from the work of the architect Christo-pher Alexander, in particular his workThe Timeless Way of Building,4where hesays that the people who occupy a struc-ture should (in conjunction with a build-ing professional) be the ones to make thehigh-impact decisions about it.XPÕs rapid evolution of a plan inresponse to business or technical changesechoes the Scr
um methodology
5and WardCunninghamÕs Episodes pattern language.6The emphasis on specifying and sched-uling projects from the perspective of fea-tures comes from Ivar JacobsonÕs workon use cases.7Tom Gilb is the guru of evolutionarydelivery. His recent writings on EVO8focus on getting the software into pro-duction in a matter of weeks, then grow-ing it from there.Barry BoehmÕs Spiral Model was theinitial response to the waterfall.9DaveThomas and his colleagues at ObjectTechnology International have long beenchampions of exploiting powerful tech-nology with their JIT method.10XPÕs use of metaphors comes fromGeorge Lakoff and Mark JohnsonÕsbooks, the latest of which is Philosophy inthe Flesh.11It also comes from RichardCoyne, who links metaphor with soft-ware development from the perspectiveof postmodern philosophy.12Finally, XPÕs attitude toward the effectsof office space on programmers comesfrom Jim Coplien,13 Tom DeMarco, andTim Lister,14who talk about the impor-tance of the physical environment on pro-grammers.References1.J. Wood and D. Silver, Joint ApplicationDevelopment, John Wiley & Sons, NewYork, 1995.2.J. Martin, Rapid Application Development,Prentice Hall,Upper Saddle River, N.J.,1992.3.J. Stapleton, Dynamic Systems Develop-ment Method, Addison Wesley Longman,Reading, Mass., 1997.4.C. Alexander, The Timeless Way of Build-ing, Oxford University Press, New York,1979.5.H. Takeuchi and I. Nonaka, ÒThe NewProduct Development Game,Ó HarvardBusiness Rev., Jan./Feb. 1986, pp. 137-146.6.W. Cunningham, ÒEpisodes: A PatternLanguage of Competitive Development,Ó
Pattern Languages of Program Design 2,J. Vlissides, ed., Addison-Wesley, NewYork, 1996.7.I. Jacobsen, Object-Oriented SoftwareEngineering, Addison-Wesley, New York,1994.8.T. Gilb, Principles of Software Engineer-ing Management, Addison-Wesley, Wok-ingham, UK, 1988.9.B. Boehm, ÒA Spiral Model of SoftwareDevelopment and Enhancement,Ó Com-puter, May 1988, pp. 61-72.10.D. Thomas, ÒWeb Time Software Devel-opment,Ó Software Development, Oct.1998, p. 80.11.G. Lakoff and M. Johnson, Philosophy inthe Flesh, Basic Books, New York, 1998.12.R. Coyne, Designing Information Tech-nology in the Postmodern Age, MITPress, Cambridge, Mass., 1995.13.J.O. Coplien, ÒA Generative DevelopmentProcess Pattern Language,Ó The PatternsHandbook, L. Rising, ed., Cambridge Uni-versity Press, New York, 1998, pp. 243-300. 14.T. DeMarco and T. Lister, Peopleware,Dorset House, New York, 1999. 74Computercan learn much from tests written by someone else daysor weeks after the code. XP primarily addresses theaccepted wisdom that programmers canÕt possibly testtheir own code by having you write code in pairs.Some methodologies, like Cleanroom,1prohibitprogrammers testing or in some cases even com-piling their own programs. The usual process has aprogrammer write some code, compile it, makesure it works, then pass it on to a testing organiza-tion. The bench testing takes the form of single-stepping through the code and watching variables,or interpreting the results of print statements, orpoking a few buttons to make sure the list itemturns green.The XP testing strategy doesnÕt ask any more workthan the usual bench testing strategies. It just changes
the form of the tests. Instead of activities that evapo-rate into the ether as soon as they are Þnished, yourecord the tests in a permanent form. These tests willrun automatically today, and this afternoon after weall integrate, and tomorrow, and next week, and nextyear. The conÞ
dence they embody accumulates, so anXP team gains conÞdence in the behavior of its sys-tem over time.As I mentioned earlier, tests also come from the cus-tomers. At the beginning of an iteration, the customers
think about what would convince them that the sto-ries for an iteration are completed. These thoughts areconverted into systemwide tests, either directly by thecustomer using a textual or graphical scripting lan-guage or by the programmers using their own testingtools. These tests, too, accumulate conÞdence, but inthis case they accumulate the customerÕs conÞdencein the correct operation of the system.WHEN SOMETHING GOES WRONGTalking about how a method works when it worksperfectly is about like describing precisely how youwill descend a monstrous patch of white water. Whatis interesting is precisely what you will do when theunexpected or undesired happens. Here are some com-mon failures and possible Extreme reactions.Acxiom: Working toward a Common GoalJim Hannula, AcxiomOn top of a data warehouse, Acxiombuilt a campaign management applica-tion using Fort”Õs distributed OO devel-opment tool. The small development
teamÑconsisting of 10 developersÑbuilt
the application by relying on sound OOprinciples and a strong team developmentapproach.During the Þnal two years of the appli-cationÕs three years of development, theteamÑcomprised of managers, business
analysts, developers, testers, and techni-cal writersÑused Extreme Programmingtechniques, which proved to be instru-mental in our success.We know we have a good design if itÕssimple. Some of our past designs tried
even to account for future iterations ofour application. We discovered that wewere not very good at that. If we use pat-terns and communicate well, we candevelop a sound application that is ßexi-ble and can still be modiÞed in the future.Refactoring is a major part of ourdevelopment effort. It was evident to usthat if we were afraid to change somecode because we did not know what itdid, we were not very good developers.We were letting the code control us. If wedonÕt know what the code does now, webreak it and Þnd out. It is better to imple-ment a solid piece of code than it is to let
a piece of code control the application.Unit testing was a hard piece to imple-ment because Fort” did not have a ready-built testing framework. We developedour own testing framework and have been
successful implementing it. Recently we
started using Java as a development lan-guage and now use JUnit as a testing tool.The key to XP is setting developer andteam expectations. We have found alldevelopers on the team must buy into
Extreme or it doesnÕt work. We tellprospective developers if they do notwant to follow our development style,
this is not a good team for them. One per-son not buying in to the approach willbring down the whole team. XP focuses
on the team working together to come up
with new ideas to develop the system. When we Þrst started with XP, some ofthe developers did not want to follow it.
They felt that it would hurt their devel-opment style and that they would not be
as productive. What happened was thattheir pieces of the application were pro-ducing the most problem reports. Sincethey were not developing in pairs, twopeople had not designed the subsystem
and their skills were falling behind theother developers who were learning fromeach other. Two well-trained developersworking together and with the rest of theteam will always outperform one Òintel-ligentÓ developer working alone.A misconception about XP is that it sti-ßes your creativity and individual growth.ItÕs actually quite the contrary. XP stimu-lates growth and creativity and encouragesteam members to take chances. The key is
to decide the direction of the corporationand stand behind the hard decisions.XP is not extreme to our team. ItÕs amethod that uses a common-sense devel-opment approach. Everyone works to-gether toward a common goal.Team: managers, business ana-  lysts, developers, testers, andtechnical writersApplication: campaign manage-ment dbaseTime: three years October 199975UnderestimationFrom time to time you will commit to more thanyou can accomplish. You must reduce the occurrenceof underestimation as much as possible by getting lotsof practice estimating. If you are overcommited, youÞrst try to solve the problem in the family. Have youslipped away from the practices? Are you testing, pair-ing, refactoring, and integrating as well as you can?Are you delivering more than the customer needs inplaces? If you canÕt Þnd any way to go faster, you have toask the customer for relief. Staying committed to morework than you can conÞdently complete is a recipe forfrustration, slipping quality, and burnout. DonÕt dothat. Re-estimate based on what youÕve learned, thenask the customer to reschedule. We can only completetwo out of three stories, so which two should we Þn-ish and which one goes in the next iteration or release?Is there a story that has more critical parts and lesscritical parts so we can split it and deliver the mostimportant parts now and the less important parts later?Uncooperative customersWhat if you get a customer who just wonÕt play thegame? They wonÕt specify tests, they wonÕt decide onpriorities, they wonÕt write stories. First, by complet-ing functionality iteration after iteration, and by giving
the customer clear control over development, you aretrying to build a trust relationship with the customer.If trust begins to break down, Þgure out if itÕs yourfault. Can you do a better job of communicating?If you canÕt solve the problem on your own, you haveto ask the customer for help. Extreme programmerssimply donÕt go ahead based on their own guesses.Explain or demonstrate the consequences to the cus-tomer. If they donÕt change, make your concerns morevisible. If no one cares enough to solve the problem,perhaps the project isnÕt a high enough priority to go on.DaimlerChrysler: The Best Team in the WorldChet Hendrickson, DaimlerChryslerThe C3 project began in January 1995under a Þxed-priced contract that calledfor a joint team of Chrysler and contractpartner employees. Most of the develop-ment work had been completed by early
1996. Our contract partners had used avery GUI-centered development method-ology, which had ignored automated test-ing. As a result, we had a payroll systemthat had a lot of very cool GUIs, calculatedmost employeesÕ pay incorrectly, andwould need about 100 days to generate
the monthly payroll. Most of us knew theprogram we had written would never gointo production.We sought Kent Beck to help with per-formance tuning. He found what he hadoften found when brought in to do per-formance tuning: poorly factored code, norepeatable tests, and a management thathad lost conÞdence in the project. He wentto Chrysler Information Services manage-ment and told them what he had found,
and that he knew how to Þx it. Throw allthe existing code away! The Þrst full XPproject was born.We brought Kent in as head coach; hewould spend about a week per month
with us. Ron Jeffries was brought in asKentÕs full-time eyes and ears. The Þxed-price contract was cancelled, and about
one-half of the Chrysler developers werereassigned. Martin Fowler, who had beenadvising the Chrysler side of the project allalong and clashing with the fixed-price
contractor, came in to help the customersdevelop user stories. From there, we fol-lowed Kent as he made up the rules of XP.A commitment schedule was developed,
iterations were laid out, rules for testingwere established, and paired programmingwas tried and accepted as the standard.At the end of 33 weeks, we had a sys-tem that was ready to begin performancetuning and parallel testing. Ready to begin
tuning because it was well factored andbacked up by a full battery of unit tests.And, ready to begin parallel testingbecause a suite of functional tests had
shown the customers that the requiredfunctionality was present.That increment of C3 launched in May1997, not as soon as we had hoped. Wewere slowed by two factors. First, we haddecided to replace only the internals of thepayroll system. We left all of the externalinterfaces intact. Matching up the outputfrom our new system to the old payrollmaster ended up being a much larger taskthen we had originally estimated. Second,
we decided not to launch during any pay
period with special processing require-ments, such as W-2 processing, proÞt shar-ing, or general merit pay increases. Thiseffectively eliminates November throughApril.Since the launch of the monthly system,weÕve added several new features, and wehave enhanced the system to pay the
biweekly paid population. We have beenpaying a pilot group since August 1998and will roll out the rest before the Y2Kcode freeze in November 1999.Looking back on this long developmentexperience, I can say that when we have
fallen short of keeping our promises toour management and our customers, it
has been because we have strayed fromthe principles of XP. When we have dri-ven our development with tests, when we
have written code in pairs, when we have
done the simplest thing that could possi-bly work, we have been the best softwaredevelopment team on the face of the
earth.Team: 10 programmers, 15 totalApplication: large-scale payroll  systemTime: four years TurnoverWhat if someone leaves? WonÕt you be stuck with-out documents and reviews? First, a certain amount ofturnover is good for the team and for the people on theteam. However, youÕd like people to leave for positivereasons. If programmers go home at the end of everyweek seeing the concrete things they have accom-plished for the customer, they are less likely to get frus-trated and leave.When someone leaves an XP project, it isnÕt likethey can take away any secrets that only they know.Two people were watching every line go into the sys-tem. And whatever information does walk out thedoor, it canÕt hurt the team too much because they canrun the tests to ensure that they havenÕt broken any-thing out of ignorance.New people on an XP team spend the Þrst coupleof iterations just pairing with more experienced peo-ple, reading tests, and talking with the customer. Whenthey feel ready, they can accept responsibility for tasks.Over the course of the next few iterations, their per-sonal velocity will rise as they demonstrate that they
can deliver their tasks on time. After a few months,
they are indistinguishable from the old salts.Programmers that donÕt work out with the teamare a problem, too. XP is an intensely social activity,and not everyone can learn it. It also requires aban-doning old habits, which can be difÞcult, especiallyfor high-status programmers. In the end, though, themany forms of feedback in XP make it clear who isworking out and who isnÕt. Someone who consis-tently doesnÕt complete tasks, whose integrationscause problems for other people, who doesnÕt refac-tor, pair, or test É. Everyone on the team knows thescore. And the team is better off without that person,no matter how skilled.Changing requirementsThe bugaboo of most software development is justnot a problem in XP. By designing for today, an XP sys-tem is equally prepared to go any direction tomorrow.Things that are like what youÕve already done will beeasier, just by the nature of refactoring to satisfy Òonceand only once,Ó but those are precisely the things thatare most likely to happen. However, should a radicallynew requirement arise, you wonÕt have to unwind (orlive with) a lot of mechanism built on speculation.I didnÕt initially realize the extent to which XP canadapt to changing requirements. The Þrst version ofXP assigned stories to all the iterations in a release,as part of release planning. The team discovered thatthey could get better results with less planning by onlyasking the customer to pick which stories should be
in the present iteration. If a new story comes up, you76ComputerFord Motor: A Unique Combination of Agility and QualityDon Wells, Ford MotorFinance Systems at Ford Motor hasbeen developing the Vehicle Costing andProfit System (VCAPS), an analysis toolthat produces reports on production rev-enues, expenses, net income, and profit.The input is a bill of materials, Þxed costsand expenses, and variable costs such as
labor hours. VCAPS assembles this data
into detailed cost analysis reports to sup-port corporate-level forecasting and deci-sion making.Ford started VCAPS in 1993 and builtit with VisualWorks and GemStoneSmalltalk. VCAPS is now being main-tained with a small staff and is to bereplaced with a newer system.The VCAPS project challenged us twoways. First, the analysts wanted modiÞca-tions and new functionality before eachrun. Constantly changing requirementskept us in reaction mode. We never caughtup. Second, the system needed to be runin a limited span of time. But the system
took a long time to process and requiredlengthy manual input before producingÞnal output. A bug could waste precioustime by requiring a rerun.XP offered us a unique combination:agility to meet the volatile requirements ontime and quality to avoid the dreaded rerun.We began XP with the planning game.It was a failure. Customers and manage-ment were unaccustomed to negotiatingschedules. The commitment schedule pro-duced was perceived as lacking credibilityand utility. We had to swap in MicrosoftProject schedules, which could be modi-Þed without large meetings and could pro-duce the kinds of artifacts managementwas used to seeing and taking action on.We continued by adding a few unit tests.Automated unit testing was an enormoussuccess. After a year, we had 40 percenttest coverage and management had mea-sured a 40 percent drop in bug reports. XPwas being noticed.We solved problems by adding XP prac-tices. Tests enabled continuous integrationand small releases.  These allowed us to
roll in collective ownership and refactor-ing. We were working toward simpledesign. Building momentum, we tried pair
programming. We had to work hard to getpair programming going. Our developersfound it awkward; it took a while tobecome comfortable. After a year and a half, the decrease insystem failures had reduced the number ofemergency releases to a point where cus-tomers and managers noticed far greatersystem stability. Overall, XP was very suc-cessful in our environment.Team: 12 programmers, 17 totalApplication: cost analysis systemTime: six years October 199977Tariff System: Tests You Can ReadRob Mee, Independent consultantTariff System is a subsystem of a largeSmalltalk/GemStone project at a majorinternational container-shipping company.Using XP practices, Tariff System wastaken from inception to production inthree months by a team of three. Theresulting system proved to be unusuallystable and easy to maintain.At the outset of the project, the teamresolved to adhere to several core XP prac-tices: always program in pairs, use the sim-plest design possible, refactor aggressively,and write extensive unit tests. All of these
practices were very effective. One XP ideathat initially seemed far-fetched was writ-ing tests before writing the code that sat-isÞed them. We were surprised to Þnd thatin fact this helped bring our designs into
focus, enabling us to work more quickly.Another practice we employed from thebeginning was collecting requirementsfrom users in the form of user stories. Wehad mixed results with this. As program-mers focused on coding, we found the roleof facilitating and negotiating with users
difÞcult. More important was the fact thatusers needed lots of help writing stories
that were both relevant and unambiguous.In the end, we felt that perhaps XP wasmissing a project role. We needed some-one from the development team whoseprimary focusÑand particular talentÑwas interacting with users.In our efforts to refactor test cases and Þx-tures, we discovered that creating little lan-guages for our major domain objects
dramatically improved the readability andbrevity of our test code. It also practicallyeliminated the time we spent thinking about
how to create object instances when writingtests. We deÞned grammars for about ten ofour domain classes. HereÕs a simple exam-ple used to construct a Service Offering:newFromString: Ôfrom Oakland toTokyo shipping toys: 20ft containers $500;40ft containers $1000Õ. The  constr
uctor uses a parser, automati-cally generated from a grammar, to pro-duce the domain object. The code to
instantiate this object using standard con-structors would have taken many lines,would have been difficult to read, andwould have distracted from the test caseitself.Eventually, we discovered that wecould combine the individual domain lan-guages into a larger description of the sys-tem as a whole, which proved to be avaluable tool in the expression of func-tional tests.donÕt have to shufße the remainder of the iterations,you just put it in the pile. One or two weeks later, ifthe story still seems urgent, the customer will pick it.Planning one iteration at a time also introduces apleasing self-similarity. At the scale of months andyears, you have the stories in this release and then thestories in future releases. At the scale of weeks andmonths, you have stories in this iteration and then the
stories remaining in this release. At the scale of daysand weeks, you have the task you are working on nowand then the rest of the tasks in the iteration. And atthe scale of minutes and days, you have the test case
you are working on now and then the rest of the testcases that you can imagine.XP is by no means a Þnished, polished idea. Thelimits of its application are not clear. To try ittoday would require courage, ßexibility, and awillingness to abandon the project should your useof XP be failing.My strategy is first to try XP where it is clearlyapplicable: outsourced or in-house development ofsmall- to medium-sized systems where requirementsare vague and likely to change. When we begin torefine XP, we can begin to try to reduce the cost ofchange in more challenging environments.If you want to try XP, for goodness sake donÕt tryto swallow it all at once. Pick the worst problem inyour current process and try solving it the XP way.When it isnÕt your worst problem any more, rinse andrepeat. As you go along, if you Þnd that any of yourold practices arenÕt helping, stop doing them.This adoption process gives you a chance to buildyour own development styleÑwhich you will have to
do in any caseÑto mitigate the risks should XP not
work for you and to continue delivering as you
change. vReference1.S. Prowell et al., Cleanroom Software Engineering,Addison Wesley Longman, Reading, Mass., 1999.Kent Beckowns and operates First Class Software,your typical one-person consulting company mas-querading behind a fancy name and an answering
machine. In addition to two books and 50 articles, heis the author of the forthcoming Extreme Program-ming Explained:Embrace Change(Addison WesleyLongman, Reading, Mass., 2000). Contact him at
kentbeck@csi.com.Team: three developersApplication: shipping tariff cal-culation systemTime: three months