 0018-9162/02/$17.00 © 2002 IEEE64ComputerGet Ready for Agile Methods,
with CareFaced with the conßicting pressures of accel-erated product development and users who
demand that increasingly vital systems be
made ever more dependable, software
development has been thrown into turmoil.Traditionalists advocate using extensive planning,

codified processes, and rigorous reuse to make

development an efficient and predictable activity
that gradually matures toward perfection. Mean-

while, a new generation of developers cites the

crushing weight of corporate bureaucracy, the rapid

pace of information technology change, and the
dehumanizing effects of detailed plan-driven devel-
opment as cause for revolution. In their rallying cry,

the Manifesto for Agile Software Development
(http://www.agileAlliance.org), and in columns
1,2such as those the ÒOngoing DebateÓ sidebar
describes, these developers call for a revitalized
approach to development that dispenses with all
but the essentials. Unsurprisingly, many developers

who favor plan-driven methods have reacted to the

manifesto with scathing criticism.
Real-world examples argue for and against agilemethods. Responding to change has been cited as
the critical technical success factor in the Internet
browser battle between Microsoft and Netscape.
But overresponding to change has been cited as the
source of many software disasters, such as the $3
billion overrun of the US Federal Aviation

AdministrationÕs Advanced Automation System for

national air trafÞc control.
I believe that both agile and plan-driven ap-proaches have a responsible center and overinter-
preting radical fringes. Although each approach has
a home ground of project characteristics within
which it performs very well, and much better than

the other, outside each approachÕs home ground, a

combined approach is feasible and preferable. THE PLANNING SPECTRUMWe can place various agile and plan-driven devel-
opment approaches along a spectrum of increasing
emphasis on plans, as Figure 1 shows. In this con-
text, the term ÒplanÓ includes documented process
procedures that involve tasks and milestone plans,and product development strategies that involve
requirements, designs, and architectural plans.Compared to unplanned and undisciplined hack-
ing, agile methods emphasize a fair amount of plan-
ning. Their general view, though, places more value

on the planning process than the resulting docu-
mentation,1so these methods often appear less planoriented than they really are. Although hard-core
hackers can use agile principles to claim that the

work they do is agile, in general these methods have
criteria, such as Extreme ProgrammingÕs 12 prac-

tices, that help determine whether an organization
is using an agile method or not.Another encouraging trend is that the buzz of
agile methods such as XP is drawing many young
programmers away from the cowboy role model
and toward the more responsible agile methods.Although many of their advocates consider the agile and plan-drivensoftware development methods polar opposites, synthesizing the two can

provide developers with a comprehensive spectrum of tools and options.
Barry BoehmUniversity of Southern CaliforniaSOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT
 The price that XP pays for this beneÞt, however, is
a reluctance by more conservative managers to

sanction a method called Òextreme.Ó3Plan-driven methods also have a responsible cen-ter focused on major milestones and their overall
content, rather than on micromilestones (or inch
pebbles) locked into an ironbound contract. Ex-
cessively prespeciÞed plans overconstrain the devel-
opment team even at minor levels of change in

personnel, technology, or commercial off-the-shelf

upgrades. Such plans also provide a source of major
contention, rework, and delay at high-change lev-

els. On the other hand, when reviewing projects

using the risk-driven spiral model, I find that to
keep from losing their way, such projects, particu-

larly larger ones, need to have at least three major
anchor-point milestones to serve as project progress

indicators and stakeholder commitment points.4Figure 1 also shows the location of the currentsoftware Capability Maturity Model and its suc-
cessor, the Capability Maturity Model Integrated,

in the planning spectrum. Its proponents often use
the software CMM in an overly restrictive and
bureaucratic way, but it can be interpreted to

include some forms of milestone risk-driven mod-

els. Software CMM leaders are also showing how
liberal versus literal interpretations can include
major portions of XP as being software CMM-

compliant.5We can also interpret the CMMI,
which adds process areas for risk management,
integrated teaming, and an organizational envi-
ronment for integration, to include agile methods.COMPARING THE METHODS
The agile and plan-driven approaches each havestrengths and weaknesses, as a direct comparison
of several key areas shows.DevelopersAlistair Cockburn and Jim Highsmith emphasizeseveral critical people factors for agile methods: ami-
cability, talent, skill, and communication.
2LarryConstantineÕs independent assessment identiÞes a

potential problem for agile methods: ÒThere are only
so many Kent Becks in the world to lead the team.
All of the agile methods put a premium on having
premium people.ÉÓ
6When you work with premium people, High-
smith and CockburnÕs statement that ÒA few

designers sitting together can produce a better
design than each could produce aloneÓ1rings true.
Without premium people, however, youÕre more

likely to get a design-by-committee mess. A signif-
icant consideration here is the unavoidable statis-tic that 49.9999 percent of the worldÕs software
developers are below average.This is not to say that agile methods require uni-formly high-capability people. Many agile projects

have succeeded with mixes of experienced and
junior people, as have plan-driven projects. TheJanuary 2002
65In the Software Management column in ComputerÕs September and
November 2001 issues, Jim Highsmith and Alistair Cockburn summa-
rized and rationalized the shared value propositions embodied in the
Manifesto for Agile Software Development. The developers of several

emerging software development methods, such as Adaptive Software
Development (ASD), Agile Modeling, Crystal Methods, Dynamic System
Development Methodology (DSDM), Extreme Programming (XP),
Feature Driven Development, Lean Development, and Scrum emphasize

the following values:¥individuals and interactions over processes and tools, ¥working software over comprehensive documentation,¥customer collaboration over contract negotiation,¥responding to change over following a plan.That is, while there is value in the items on the right, agile method pro-
ponents value the items on the left more.Although their advocates have used each of these agile methods suc-cessfully in practice, critics who prefer process-based methods remain
skeptical. In a letter1to Computer, Steven Rakitin indicates that in hisexperience, the items on the right are essential, while those on the leftserve only as easy excuses for hackers to keep on irresponsibly throwing
code together with no regard for engineering discipline. He provides
Òhacker interpretationsÓ that turn agile value propositions such as

Òresponding to change over following a planÓ into chaos generators.
RakitinÕs hacker interpretation of Òresponding to change over following

a planÓ is roughly ÒGreat! Now I have a reason to avoid planning and to
just code up whatever comes next.ÓReference1.S. Rakitin, ÒManifesto Elicits Cynicism,Ó 
Computer, Dec. 2001, p. 4.Ongoing DebateFigure 1. The planning spectrum. Unplanned and undisciplined hacking occupiesthe extreme left, while micromanaged milestone planning, also known as inch-
pebble planning, occupies the extreme right.Milestonerisk-drivenmodelsMilestoneplan-drivenmodelsInch-pebbleironboundcontractAdaptiveSWdevelopmentXPHackersSoftware CMMCMMAgile methods–– 66Computermain difference is that agile methods derivemuch of their agility by relying on the tacit
knowledge embodied in the team, rather than

writing the knowledge down in plans.7When the teamÕs tacit knowledge is sufÞ-
cient for the applicationÕs life-cycle needs,

things work Þne. But there is also the risk that
the team will make irrecoverable architec-
tural mistakes because of unrecognized short-
falls in its tacit knowledge. Plan-driven
methods reduce this risk by investing in life-

cycle architectures and plans, and using these

to facilitate external-expert reviews. In doing
so, however, they accept a risk that rapid

change will make the plans obsolete or very
expensive to keep up to date.CustomersIn USCÕs rapid-development electronic services
projects, we have found that unless customer par-
ticipants are committed, knowledgeable, collabo-
rative, representative, and empowered, the
developed products generally do not transition into
use successfully, even though they may satisfy the

customer. Participants in the XP 2001 ÒCustomer

Involvement in XPÓ workshop reached similar con-
clusions.8Agile methods work best when such cus-tomers operate in dedicated mode with the

development team, and when their tacit knowledge
is sufficient for the full span of the application.

Again, though, these methods risk tacit knowledge
shortfalls, which the plan-driven methods reduce
via documentation and use of architecture review
boards and independent expert project reviews to
compensate for onsite customer shortfalls.RequirementsHighsmith and Cockburn emphasize that agileapproaches Òare most applicable to turbulent, high-
change environments.Ó According to their world
view, organizations are complex adaptive systems

in which requirements are emergent rather than

prespecifiable.1However, while agile manifesto
tenets such as the second principleÑwelcome
changing requirements, even late in developmentÑ
offer great potential for success, developers can mis-
apply them, with disastrous results.Plan-driven methods work best when developerscan determine the requirements in advanceÑ
including via prototypingÑand when the require-
ments remain relatively stable, with change rates
on the order of one percent per month. In the

increasingly frequent situations in which the
requirements change at a much higher rate thanthis, the traditional emphasis on having complete,consistent, precise, testable, and traceable require-
ments will encounter difÞcult to insurmountable
requirements-update problems. Yet this emphasis

is vital for stable, safety-critical embedded soft-
ware.ArchitectureThe agile manifesto values working softwareover comprehensive documentation, and empha-

sizes simplicity: maximizing the amount of work
not done. This principle can be interpreted in many

ways. Most are quite good, but some interpreta-
tions can cause problems. For example, based on
the YAGNI precept: ÒYou ArenÕt Going to Need

It,Ó XP advocates doing extra work to get rid of
architectural features that do not support the sys-
temÕs current version. This approach works fine

when future requirements are largely unpredictable.
However, in situations where future requirements

are predictable, this practice not only throws away
valuable architectural support for them, it also cre-
ates problems with customers who want develop-
ers to believe that their priorities and evolution
requirements are worth accommodating. Some
agile methods such as Crystal and DSDM do more
architectural preplanning.As with requirements, plan-driven methods that
emphasize heavyweight architecture and design
documentation will encounter difficult to insur-
mountable problems in keeping up with rapidly
changing requirements. On the other hand, if the
architecture anticipates and accommodates re-
quirements changes, plan-driven methods can keep
even million-line applications within budget and
schedule. Walker Royce provided a good example

of such an effort in his description of the CCPDS-

R project.9RefactoringWith great developers and small systems, the
assumption that refactoring is essentially free is
valid. If so, the YAGNI approach is low-risk.

However, empirical evidence indicates that with

less-than-great developers, refactoring effort
increases with the number of requirements or sto-
ries. For very large systems, our Pareto analysis of
rework costs at TRW indicated that the 20 percent

of the problems causing 80 percent of the rework
came largely from Òarchitecture-breakers,Ó such as
architecture discontinuities to accommodate per-
formance, fault-tolerance, or security problems, in
which no amount of refactoring could put Humpty
Dumpty back together again.Agile methods derivemuch of their agilityby relying on thetacit knowledgeembodied in the
team, rather thanwriting theknowledge down in plans. SizeCockburn and Highsmith conclude that ÒAgiledevelopment is more difÞcult for larger teams,Ó but
they cite occasional successful larger agile projects
with up to 250 people.2Larry Constantine findsagile methods highly attractive for small projects,
but he concludes that ÒThe tightly coordinated
teamwork needed for these methods to succeed
becomes increasingly difficult beyond 15 or 20
developers.Ó6Plan-driven methods scale better to large projects
like the million-line CCPDS-R project. But a

bureaucratic, plan-driven organization that requires
an average of a person-month just to get a project
authorized and started wonÕt be very efÞcient on

small projects.Primary objective
The Þrst principle of the agile manifesto states thatÒOur highest priority is to satisfy the customer
through early and continuous delivery of valuable
software.Ó ÒEarlyÓ and ÒcontinuousÓ are reasonably
compatible goals for small systems developed by
great people. But overfocus on early results in large
systems can lead to major rework when the archi-
tecture doesnÕt scale up. In such cases, a good deal of

planning will be necessary, in the spirit of the eighth

principle of Lean Programming: ÒBan Local
Optimization.Ó10Some agile methods are experi-menting with concepts similar to the Òsoftware archi-

tecture skeletonÓ used in the CCPDS-R project.Plan-driven methods are most needed in high-
assurance software. Scott Ambler, the originator of

agile modeling, says, ÒI would be leery of applying
agile modeling to life-critical systems.Ó11Anothermajor set of objectives for the more traditional

plan-driven methods, and for the software CMM,
has been predictability, repeatability, and opti-

mization. But in a world involving frequent, radi-
cal changes, having processes as repeatable and
optimized as a dinosaurÕs may not be a good objec-

tive. Fortunately, the CMMI and associated risk-

driven methods provide a way to migrate toward
more adaptability.
BALANCING AGILITY AND DISCIPLINEParticularly in the e-services sector, companies
with a large customer base donÕt need just rapid

value or high assuranceÑthey need both. Pure
agility or pure plan-driven discipline alone canÕt

meet these needs. A mix of each is needed.
Martin FowlerÕs ÒIs Design Dead?Ó
12essay andJim HighsmithÕs 
Adaptive Software Development
13book describe ways for combining agile and plan-driven methods. Risk management offers anotherapproach that can help balance agility and disci-
pline and answer questions such as ÒHow much is
enough?Ó4I apply risk management here to addressthe question ÒHow much planning is enough?ÓA central concept in risk management involves
determining the risk exposure for a given course of
action. To determine RE, you assess the probabil-

ity of loss, P(L), involved in a course of action, the
corresponding size of loss, S(L), and then compute
the risk exposure as the expected loss: RE = P(L) 
S(L). Loss can include proÞts, reputation, quality of
life, or other value-related attributes.
Figure 2 shows risk exposure proÞles for a sam-ple e-services company with¥a sizable installed base and thus the desire for
high assurance,¥a rapidly changing marketplace and thus the
desire for agility and rapid value, and¥an internationally distributed development
team with a mix of skill levels and thus the

need for some level of documented plans.The black curve in Figure 2 shows the variationin risk exposure from inadequate plans as a func-
tion of the companyÕs level of investment in its pro-

jectsÕ process and product plans. At the left, a

minimal investment corresponds to a high P(L) that
the plans will have loss-causing gaps, ambiguities,
and inconsistencies. It also corresponds to a high
S(L) that these deÞciencies will cause major project
oversights, delays, and rework costs. At the right,

we see that the more thorough the plans, the less

probability that plan inadequacies will cause prob-
lems, and the smaller the size of the associated
losses.The red curve in Figure 2 shows the variation inRE from market share erosion caused by delays inJanuary 2002
67Figure 2. Risk exposure (RE) proÞle. This planning detail for a sample e-services
company shows the probability of loss P(L) and size of loss S(L) for several signiÞ-
cant factors.High P(L): inadequate plans
High S(L): major problems

(oversights, delays, rework)High P(L): plan breakage, delay
High S(L): value capture delays
Sweet spotTime and effort invested in plans
RE = P(L)  S(L)Low P(L): few plan 
 delays

Low S(L): early value 

 capture
Low P(L): thorough 
 plans

Low S(L): minor 

 problems
 68Computerproduct introduction. Spending minimal time in
planning will get at least a demo product into the
marketplace early, enabling early value capture.

Spending too much time in planning carries a high
loss probability because of the time lost to planning
and because rapid changes will cause delays via plan
breakage. Longer planning times will also cause
higher-sized losses because the delays will let stronger

competitors capture most of the market share.
The blue curve in Figure 2 shows the sum of the
risk exposures from inadequate plans and market
share erosion. The very low and very high invest-
ments in plans have high overall risk exposures,
and the sweet spot when overall risk exposure is

minimized occurs in the middle, indicating Òhow
much planning is enoughÓ for this companyÕs oper-

ating proÞle.With the sample company situation as a refer-
ence point, we can run comparative risk exposure

proÞles for companies occupying the home ground
of either agile methods or plan-driven methods, as
summarized in Table 1.
For example, Figure 3 shows the comparative REprofile for an e-services company with a small

installed base, a rapidly changing marketplace, a
collocated team of highly capable and collabora-
tive developers and customers, and less need for
high assurance. With this proÞle, the major change

in risk exposure from Figure 2 involves less rework
loss from minimal plans because the team can

rapidly replan and refactor, thus the companyÕs

sweet spot moves to the left, toward agile methods.Figure 4 shows the corresponding RE proÞle fora company in the plan-driven home ground, with

a more stable product line of larger, more safety-

critical systems. Here, the major difference from
Figure 2 involves more rework loss from minimal
plans, with a resulting shift of the companyÕs sweet

spot toward higher investments in plans.ASSESSING RISK EXPOSUREIn practice, quantifying estimates of P(L) and S(L)is difÞcult. But if youÕre combining agile and plan-

driven methods, you can use each methodÕs home-

ground attributes to determine relative risks. So,
for example, if your company or project Þts an agile
home-ground profile except for having a mix of
equally important customers with less-than-ideal

development representatives, you can reduce your
risk exposure by conducting stakeholder require-
ments negotiations among the developers and cus-
tomers. Then you can document the results to
minimize the risk of future customer misunder-
standings.Or, if your project fits a plan-driven home-
ground proÞle except for highly volatile user inter-
Figure 3. Comparative RE proÞle for an agile home-ground company with a smallinstalled base and less need for high assurance.Mainstreamsweet spotTime and effort invested in plans
RE = P(L) S(L)Agilesweet spotLow S(L): easy reworkTable 1. Home ground for agile and plan-driven methods.
Home-ground areaAgile methodsPlan-driven methods
DevelopersAgile, knowledgeable, collocated, and collaborativePlan-oriented; adequate skills; access to external knowledge
CustomersDedicated, knowledgeable, collocated, collaborative,Access to knowledgeable, collaborative, representative, and 
representative, and empoweredempowered customers
RequirementsLargely emergent; rapid changeKnowable early; largely stable
ArchitectureDesigned for current requirementsDesigned for current and foreseeable requirements
RefactoringInexpensiveExpensive
SizeSmaller teams and productsLarger teams and products

Primary objectiveRapid valueHigh assurance
Figure 4. Comparative RE proÞle for a plan-driven home-ground company that produces large, safety-critical systems.Higher S(L):
large system reworkMainstreamsweetspotTime and effort invested in plans
RE = P(L)  S(L)Plan-drivensweet spot face requirements, you can use risk-driven speciÞ-cations4to document those requirements that posea high risk if they remain unspeciÞed, such as crit-
ical message formats, but to avoid documenting
volatile user interface requirements whose speciÞ-
cation would be high risk. Risk-driven spiral meth-
ods and frameworks such as the Rational UniÞed
Process (RUP),9Model-Based Architecting andSoftware Engineering (MBASE),14and the CMMIprovide guidelines for finding a good balance of
discipline and flexibility, although the current

CMMI approach needs more explicit support for
agility.
Agile and plan-driven methods both form part
of the planning spectrum. Despite certain
extreme terminology, each is part of the
responsible center rather than the radical fringe.
Indeed, agile methods perform a valuable service

by drawing erstwhile cowboy programmers toward
a more responsible center.
Both agile and plan-driven methods have a homeground of project characteristics in which each
clearly works best, and where the other will have
difÞculties. Hybrid approaches that combine both
methods are feasible and necessary for projects that
combine a mix of agile and plan-driven home-
ground characteristics. Risk analysis of your pro-
jectÕs characteristics versus a given methodÕs

home-ground characteristics can help determine
the best balance of agile and plan-driven disciplines.Although information technology trends aremoving us closer to agile methodsÕ emergent
requirements and rapid change home-ground char-
acteristics, increasing dependability concerns call
for measures best implemented with plan-based
solutions. To meet these disparate needs, organi-

zations must carefully evolve toward the best bal-
ance of agile and plan-driven methods that Þts their

situation. I expect we will see agile methods used

increasingly for projects such as Þnancial services;
electronic commerce; air trafÞc control; and dis-

tributed, mobile, semiautomated, network-centric
military or medical systems. AcknowledgmentsThis work was supported by the NationalScience Foundation, the Department of Defense
Software Intensive Systems Directorate, and the
Affiliates of the USC Center for Software Engi-
neering, http://sunset.usc.edu.References1.J. Highsmith and A. Cockburn, ÒAgile Software
Development: The Business of Innovation,Ó Com-puter, Sept. 2001, pp. 120-122.2.A. Cockburn and J. Highsmith, ÒAgile Software
Development: The People Factor,Ó 
Computer, Nov.
2001, pp. 131-133.3.L. Copeland, ÒDevelopers Approach Extreme Pro-
gramming with Caution,Ó Computerworld, 22 Oct.2001, p. 7.4.B. Boehm and W. Hansen, ÒThe Spiral Model as a
Tool for Evolutionary Acquisition,Ó 
CrossTalk
, May2001, pp. 2-11; http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/crosstalk/

crostalk.html (current Dec. 2001).5.M. Paulk, ÒExtreme Programming from a CMM Per-
spective,Ó IEEE Software, Nov.-Dec. 2001, pp. 19-
26.6.L. Constantine, ÒMethodological Agility,Ó 
SoftwareDevelopment, June 2001, pp. 67-69.7.A. Cockburn, ÒAgile Software Development Joins
the ÔWould-Be Crowd,ÕÓ 
Cutter IT J., vol. 15, no. 1,2002, pp. 6-12.8.A. van Deursen, ÒCustomer Involvement in Extreme
Programming: XP2001 Workshop Report,Ó 
ACMSoftware Eng. Notes, Nov. 2001, pp. 70-73.
9.W.E. Royce, 
Software Project Management: A Uni-Þed Framework, Addison Wesley Longman, Read-
ing, Mass., 1998.10.M. Poppendieck, ÒLean Programming: Part 2,Ó 
Soft-ware Development, June 2001, pp. 71-75.11.S. Ambler, ÒWhen Does(nÕt) Agile Modeling Make
Sense?Ó; http://www.agilemodeling.com/essays/when

DoesAMWork.htm (current Dec. 2001).
12.M. Fowler, ÒIs Design Dead?Ó 
Extreme Program-ming Explained, G. Succi and M. Marchesi, eds.,
Addison Wesley Longman, Reading, Mass., 2001.
13.J. Highsmith, 
Adaptive Software Development,Dorset House, New York, 2000.
14.B. Boehm and D. Port, ÒBalancing Discipline and
Flexibility with the Spiral Model and MBASE,Ó
CrossTalk
, Dec. 2001, pp. 23-28; http://www.stsc.
hill.af.mil/crosstalk/crostalk.html (current Dec.

2001).Barry Boehm
is director of the University of South-ern California Center for Software Engineering.

Contact him at boehm@sunset.usc.edu.
January 2002
69