 0018-9162/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEJune 200357COVER FEATURE
Published by the IEEE Computer SocietyUsing Risk to BalanceAgile and Plan-
Driven MethodsMethodologies such as Extreme Pro-gramming (XP), Scrum, and agile
software development promise in-
creased customer satisfaction, lower
defect rates, faster development times,and a solution to rapidly changing requirements.
Plan-driven approaches such as Cleanroom, the
Personal Software Process, or methods based on

the Capability Maturity Model promise pre-
dictability, stability, and high assurance.
However, both agile and planned approaches
have situation-dependent shortcomings that, if left
unaddressed, can lead to project failure. The chal-

lenge is to balance the two approaches to take
advantage of their strengths in a given situation
while compensating for their weaknesses.We present a risk-based approach for structuring
projects to incorporate both agile and plan-driven
approaches in proportion to a projectÕs needs. We

drew this material from our book, Balancing Agilityand Discipline: A Guide for the Perplexed, to bepublished in 2003.1METHOD OVERVIEWOur method uses risk analysis and a unifiedprocess framework to tailor risk-based processes

into an overall development strategy. This method

enhances the ability of key development team mem-
bers to understand their environment and organi-
zational capabilities and to identify and collaborate

with the projectÕs stakeholders. 
We use risk analysis to deÞne and address risks
particularly associated with agile and plan-drivenmethods. The Risk-Based Spiral Model AnchorPoints2provide the framework for this process.Both the Rational UniÞed Process3(RUP) and theModel-Based Architecting and Software Engi-
neering (Mbase) process4have adopted theseanchor points, which are essentially an integrated
set of decision criteria for stakeholder commitment

at speciÞc points in the development process. Our
method consists of Þve steps.
Step 1First, we apply risk analysis to speciÞc risk areasassociated with agile and plan-driven methods. We

identify three speciÞc risk categories: environmen-

tal, agile, and plan-driven. While not a simple task, Step 1 provides the basisfor making decisions about the development strat-
egy later in the process. If we uncover too much

uncertainty about some risk categories, spending
resources early to buy information about the pro-
ject aspects that create the uncertainty may prove
prudent.The candidate risks we describe are just thatÑcandidates for consideration. They are neither com-

plete nor always applicable, but serve as guides to
stimulate participantsÕ thinking. Step 2Next, we evaluate the risk analysis results todetermine if the project at hand is appropriate for
either purely agile or purely plan-driven methods.
In these cases, the project characteristics fall
squarely in the home ground of one approach orA tailorable, risk-based approach lets project developers enjoy the 
beneÞts of both agile and plan-driven methods, while mitigating many 
of their drawbacks.Barry Boehm University of Southern CaliforniaRichardTurner
George Washington
University 58Computerthe other, as described in the ÒAgile and Plan-
Driven Home Grounds and Environmental
DimensionsÓ sidebar, so we proceed to Step 4. 
Step 3We move to this step if our risk analysis shows
that the project has no clear agile or plan-driven

home ground. It also applies to cases in which parts
of the system have such different risks that they fall

into different home grounds. If possible, the project team develops an archi-tecture that supports using agile methods where
their strengths can be best applied and their risks
minimized. Plan-driven methods perform the
remainder of the work and are considered the
default when no suitable architecture can be cre-
ated. This step can sometimes uncover a new riskor opportunity that requires backtracking to an ear-lier step.Step 4In this step, we focus on developing an overallproject strategy that addresses the identiÞed risks.
This involves identifying risk resolution strategies
for each risk and integrating them. The speciÞcs of the process will depend primar-
ily on the developer organizationÕs capabilities and

experience in the general application area. A suc-
cessful and experienced development team will

have highly capable people responsible for deÞn-
ing, designing, developing, and deploying the appli-
cation. Such a team could also take advantage of
reusable process assets and product patterns to
establish the strategy. Less experienced in-house or
Table A. Agile and plan-driven home grounds.
Project characteristics Agile home ground Plan-driven home ground  
Application Primary goals Rapid value, responding to change Predictability, stability, high assurance  
Size Smaller teams and projects Larger teams and projects  
Environment Turbulent, high change, project focused Stable, low change, project and organization focused  
Management  Customer relations Dedicated onsite customers, focused As-needed customer interactions, focused on contract 
on prioritized increments provisions 
Planning and control Internalized plans, qualitative control Documented plans, quantitative control  
Communications Tacit interpersonal knowledge Explicit documented knowledge  
Technical  

Requirements Prioritized informal stories and test cases, Formalized project, capability, interface, quality, foreseeable 
undergoing unforeseeable change evolution requirements  
Development Simple design, short increments, Extensive design, longer increments, refactoring assumed 
refactoring assumed inexpensive expensive  
Test Executable test cases define requirements, testing Documented test plans and procedures  
Personnel  Customers Dedicated, colocated Crack* performers Crack* performers, not always colocated  

Developers At least 30% full-time Cockburn Level 2 50% Cockburn Level 3s early; 10% throughout; 30% 
and 3 experts; no Level 1B or Level Ð1 personnel** Level 1BÕs workable; no Level Ð1s**  
Culture Comfort and empowerment via many degrees Comfort and empowerment via framework of policies 
of freedom (thriving on chaos)and procedures (thriving on order) 
* Collaborative, representative, authorized, committed, and knowledgeable.** See the ÒCockburnÕs Three Levels of Software Understanding, Slightly RevisedÓ sidebar. These numbers will vary with the appl
icationÕs complexity.
The home grounds for the agile and plan-driven methodsencompass the sets of conditions under which they are most likely
to succeed. The more a particular projectÕs conditions differ from

the home ground conditions, the more risk in using one approach
in its pure form and the more valuable blending in some of the

opposite methodÕs complementary practices becomes.
Table A describes the home grounds we have observed.

Analysis of these home grounds and the general characteris-tics of agile and plan-driven methods led us to deÞne the Þve
critical factors that describe a project environment and help
determine method balance, as Table B shows.
As shown, these factors can be summarized graphically in thepolar chart shown in Figure A. Of the five axes, Size and
Criticality represent the factors Alistair Cockburn uses to dis-tinguish between the lighter-weight Crystal methods
1towardthe graphÕs center and the heavier-weight Crystal methods that

appear toward the periphery. The Culture axis reßects that agile

methods will succeed better in a culture that Òthrives on chaosÓ2than in one that Òthrives on order,Ó while the opposite is true

for plan-based methods.The other two axes are asymmetrical in that both agile andplan-driven methods will likely succeed at one end, while only
one of them will likely succeed at the other. For dynamism, agile

methods work well with both high and low change rates, but
plan-driven methods work best with low change rates. The per-
sonnel scale refers to the extended Cockburn method skill rat-Agile and Plan-Driven Home Grounds and Environmental Dimensions external developers must perform additional learn-ing-curve and asset-buildup activities to ensure suc-

cess. We advocate using the Life Cycle Architecture
anchor point milestone criterion2to exit from Step 4. Step 5No decision is ideal for all time and, as this step
indicates, the management team must constantly
monitor and evaluate the performance of its
selected processes while keeping an eye on the envi-
ronment. This step resembles the agile practice of reßec-tion. If a process indicates some strain, developersmust backtrack, revalidate, and perhaps adjust the
levels of the agile or plan-driven methods estab-lished initially. 
Adjustments should be made as soon as strainarises. On a more positive note, monitoring can
also identify opportunities to improve value to the
customer, shorten time to delivery, and improve

stakeholder involvement.The ßowchart in Figure 1 summarizes these Þvesteps.A SAMPLE APPLICATION FAMILY
When illustrating the practical application of ourrisk-based method, we Þrst establish a realistic con-
text by introducing a family of representative cur-
rent and future software applications. For each of
these three representative systems, the project risks

suggest using a different mix of agile and plan-dri-
ven process components.June 200359ing scale described in the ÒCockburnÕs Three Levels of Software
Understanding, Slightly RevisedÓ sidebar and places it in a
framework relative to the applicationÕs complexity. This cap-

tures the situation in which a developer might be a Level 2 in an
organization developing simple applications, but a Level 1A in
an organization developing highly complex applications. Here,
the asymmetry is that while plan-driven methods can work well
with both high and low skill levels, agile methods require a richer
mix of higher-level skills.
References1.A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development, Addison-Wesley, 2002.
2.T. Peters, 
Thriving on Chaos, HarperCollins, 1991.(Percent level 1B)   (Percent level 2 and 3)
Personnel4030201001520253035Criticality(Loss due to impactof defects)31030100300103050709050301051Size(Number of personnel)Culture(Percent thriving on chaos versus order)
Dynamism(Percent requirements-
change/month)ComfortManylivesSinglelifeEssentialfundsDiscretionary
fundsAgilePlan-drivenFigure A. Polar chart. The Þve axes represent the factors we use todistinguish between the lighter-weight agile methods toward the

graphÕs center and the heavier-weight plan-driven methods that

appear toward the periphery.
Table B. The Þve critical agility and plan-driven factors.
Factor Agility discriminators Plan-driven discriminators  
Size Well matched to small products and teams; reliance on Methods evolved to handle large products and teams; hard to tailor
tacit knowledge limits scalability. down to small projects.  
Criticality Untested on safety-critical products; potential difficulties Methods evolved to handle highly critical products; ha
rd to tailor downwith simple design and lack of documentation. efficiently to low-criticality products.  
Dynamism Simple design and continuous refactoring are excellent Detailed plans and 
Òbig design up frontÓ excellent for highly stable
for highly dynamic environments, but present a source of environment, but a source of expensive rework for highly dynamic 
potentially expensive rework for highly stable environments. environments.  
Personnel Require continuous presence of a critical mass of scarce Need a critical mass of scarce Cockburn Level 2 and 3 expert
s duringCockburn Level 2 or 3 experts; risky to use nonagileproject definition, but can work with fewer later in the project
Ñunless  Level 1B people. the environment is highly dynamic. Can usually accommodate some 
Level 1B people.  Culture Thrive in a culture where people feel comfortable and Thrive in a culture where people feel comfortable and empowered b
y empowered by having many degrees of freedom; thrive having their roles defined by clear policies and procedures; thrive on

on chaos.order.  
 60ComputerStep 1.Risk
analysisStep 3.
Architecture
analysisStep 5.
Execute and monitorMonitor progress andrisk/opportunities,readjust balance andprocess as appropriateNote: Feedback loopspresent, but omittedfor simplicityDeliver incrementalcapabilitiesaccording tostrategyArchitect application
to encapsulateagile partsAgility risksdominateRate the projectÕsenvironmental,agility-oriented, andplan-driven risksNoYes
Plan-driven risksdominateStep 2.Risk
comparisonStep 4.Tailor life cycle
Buy informationvia prototyping,data collection,and analysisGo risk-basedagile for agile parts;go risk-basedplan-drivenelsewhereGo risk-basedplan-drivenGo risk-basedagileUncertainaboutratings?Comparethe agile andplan-drivenrisksNeither dominateTailor life-cycle process 
around risk patternsand anchor pointcommitment milestonesFigure 1. Risk-basedmethod summary.

Developers can use
a Þve-step process
to determine if agile
methods, plan-
driven methods, or a
combination of the
two will work best
for their project.Drawing on the three levels of understanding in the martialart AikidoÑShu-Ha-RiÑAlistair Cockburn identified three
levels of software method understanding that can help sort out

what people with various skill levels can be expected to do
within a given method framework.1We have taken the liberty of splitting CockburnÕs Level 1 into
Levels 1A, 1B, and 1 to address distinctions between agile andplan-driven methods and deal with the problem of method dis-
rupters, as Table C shows. The Level 
1 people should berapidly identiÞed and transferred to other work.Level 1B people function well in performing straightforwardsoftware development in a stable situation, but will likely slow
an agile team trying to cope with rapid change, particularly if

they form a majority of the team. The 1Bs can form a well-per-

forming majority in a stable, well-structured, plan-driven team.
Level 1A people can function well on agile or plan-driventeams that have enough Level 2 people available to guide them.
When agilists refer to being able to succeed on agile teams with
ratios of Þve Level 1 people per Level 2 person, they are gen-
erally referring to Level 1A people.Level 2 people can function well in managing a small, prece-dented agile or plan-driven project but need the guidance of
Level 3 people on a large or unprecedented project. Some Level
2s can become Level 3s with experience, others cannot.Reference1.A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development
, Addison-Wesley, 2002.
Table C. Levels of software method understanding and use.
Level Characteristics  3 Able to revise a method, breaking its rules to fit an unprecedented 
new situation.  2 Able to tailor a method to fit a precedented new situation.  
1A With training, able to perform discretionary method steps such as 
sizing stories to fit increments, composing patterns, compound 
refactoring, or complex COTS integration. With experience, can become Level 2.  1B With training, able to perform procedural method steps such as 
coding a simple method, simple refactoring, following coding 
standards and CM procedures, or running tests. With experience, canmaster some Level 1A skills.  Ð1 May have technical skills, but unable or unwilling to collaborate or 
follow shared methods.  CockburnÕs Three Levels of Software Understanding, Slightly Revised
 Agent-based planning systems5are emergingsoftware applications that involve using software
agents to¥search for and locate desired information
across a network;¥analyze the information and determine choices
such as best-buy recommendations;¥develop plans for implementing a course of
action involving the chosen elements, includ-
ing functions such as dependency analysis and
constraint satisfaction; and¥monitor implementation of the plans to iden-
tify potential difÞculties in realizing them. Agent-based planning systems can provide signiÞ-cant improvements in operational efficiency,

human-error reduction, speed of execution, adapt-

ability to changing situations, and support of com-

plex collaborative enterprises. On the other hand, research and early applica-tions are still addressing several agent-based sys-
tems risks. These risks include verification and
validation of agent behavior, scalability of multi-

agent behavior, commonsense reasoning about bad

data or unexpected events, and the ability to
degrade gracefully versus failing catastrophically.
Given these characteristics, balancing risks andopportunities in agent-based systems is challeng-

ing, with the difficulty varying considerably
depending on the applicationÕs scale and criticality.

To explore the full range of this challenge, we chose

the following three representative applications:¥Small, relatively noncritical.This agent-basedplanning system for managing events such as
conferences or conventions is based on risk
patterns observed in small Web-services appli-

cations. ¥Intermediate.An agent-based planning systemfor supply-chain management across a net-
work of producers and consumers, this appli-
cation is based on risk patterns derived from
the ThoughtWorks experience with scaling up
XP techniques to a 50-person project in alease-management application.6¥Very large, highly critical.
This agent-basedplanning system for national crisis manage-
ment is based on risk patterns observed in the
US Defense Advanced Research Project
Agency and the US Army Future Combat

Systems programÑan agent-oriented, net-
work-centric system of systems being devel-
oped by more than 2,000 people.Table 1 summarizes each application with
respect to the major agile and plan-driven home-
ground characteristics.We focus on the intermediate application and use
it to examine how the smaller and larger applica-
tionsÕ risk patterns determine different balances of

agile and plan-driven methods. INTERMEDIATE APPLICATION
SupplyChain.com is a commercial softwarehouse that specializes in developing turnkey agent-
based supply-chain management systems for, and

in collaboration with, large manufacturing com-

panies. These client companies generally work
with complex networks of suppliers feeding their
manufacturing processes and distributors dis-
pensing their manufactured products. SupplyChain.
comÕs experience has made it a leader in this area,

but its market sector is too dynamic and driven by

customer-specific considerations to allow much

use of prebuilt plug-and-play application com-
ponents.As Table 1 shows, SupplyChain.comÕs applica-
tions typically involve distributed, multiorganiza-
tion teams of about 50 people. Its primary objective
is to provide a rapid increase in value to the man-

ufacturing company through increases in supply-
chain speed, dependability, and adaptability. Parts

of SupplyChain.comÕs applications are relatively

stable; others are highly volatile. A few key COTS
packages drive their architectures, but they also
evolve continually. The risk of system failure

involves major business losses.June 200361Table 1. Summary of three sample agent-based planning system applications.
Team FailurePrimary 
Applicationsize Team type risks Clients Requirements Architecture Refactoringobjective 
Event planning 5 In-house venture Venture Single, Goals generallyProvided byInexpensiveRapid value  
startup, capital, colocated, known, details single COTS with skilled
colocated manual effort representative emergent package people 
Supply-chain 50 Distributed, often Major Multiple Some partsProvided by More expensive,Rapid value  

management multiorganization business success-critical relatively stable, small number with mix of increase, 
losses stakeholders others volatile, of COTS people skills dependability, 
emergent packagesadaptability
National crisis 500 Highly distributed, Large loss ManySome parts System of Feasible only Rapid response,

management multiorganization of life success-critical relatively stable, systems, many within some safety, security, 
stakeholders others volatile, COTS packages subsystems scalability, 
emergent adaptability  
 62ComputerClearly, the program has agile aspects such as
rapid value and volatility, as well as plan-driven

aspects such as scalability and criticality. Thus, we

can apply our five-step process to determine an

appropriate strategy for this project.Project risk ratingsThe project team begins Step 1 of its balancing
analysis by assessing the major sources of Supply-
Chain.comÕs environmental, agile, and plan-driven

risks.Environmental risks.The project faces signifi-cant technical risks, including uncertainties about
agent-based systems and the existence of many sep-
arately evolving supplier and distributor networks
that must be coordinated.
Agile risks.Reconciling a 50-person projectÕs
inherent diseconomies of scale with the desire to
maintain system dependability across constant-
increment delivery intervals is difÞcult. Reconciling

the desire of agile developers to follow the Òyou
arenÕt going to need itÓ (Yagni) principle and sim-

ple design directives with the knowledge that parts
of the application will be stable and would thus
beneÞt from anticipatory architectures will also be

difÞcult. SupplyChain.comÕs relatively stable work-

force makes it relatively unlikely that key person-

nel turnover will disrupt the projectÕs reliance on

tacit knowledge. Plan-driven risks.These risks largely involveincurring extensive delays through rework of elab-

orate plans and speciÞcations in a rapidly evolving,
time-critical marketplace. Adapting elaborate plans
and speciÞcations to rapid changes in technology,

organizations, and market conditions would prob-
ably be slow and expensive. The inability to deliver

new capabilities rapidly enough to keep pace with
the competition can lead to loss of market share.
Overreliance on prespeciÞed requirements in areas
where requirements can emerge through user famil-iarization and experience can affect the projectarchitecture and plans unpredictably.
Compare agile and plan-driven risksIn Step 2, the team Þrst determines whether agileor plan-driven risks dominate the project. Figure 2

shows how SupplyChain.com looks on a home-
ground critical-factor polar chart.The selective application of plan-driven planningand architecting techniques can address the primary
agile risks of scalability, criticality, and simple design.

The selective application of agile methods within an
overall plan-driven framework could address the
combined plan-driven risks of rapid change, need
for rapid response, and emerging requirements.
Either an experienced agile team or a suitably agile
RUP or Team Software Process team would be most

likely to succeed in implementing this strategy. 
Given SupplyChain.comÕs culture and environ-
ment, the team decides to apply a risk-based agile

approach. If, however, the companyÕs environment

included a more stable, well-understood, Þnancially
critical marketplace and a high rate of agile per-
sonnel turnover, the risk-based plan-driven

approach would be preferable.Individual risk-resolution strategiesBecause Step 2 resulted in a risk-based agile deci-sion, the project team can bypass Step 3 and begin
Step 4 by identifying a resolution strategy for each
risk.Many separately evolving networks. Proceeding toorapidly, without the involvement of success-critical

stakeholders, presents a major risk. Concentrating
on supply-chain logistics management without
considering Þnancial stakeholders and concerns is
an example of such a risk. Techniques such as the

DMR Consulting GroupÕs Results Chain
7helpidentify missing success-critical initiatives and
stakeholders. Accepting unqualified stakeholder representa-tives as team members presents another major risk.
Stakeholder representatives should be Crackper-formers: collaborative, representative, authorized,committed, and knowledgeable. Shortfalls in anyof these capabilities can lead to frustration, delay,

and wasted project effort, not to mention an unac-

ceptable product. Generally, project teams beneÞt

more from a part-time Crack performer than from

a full-time non-Crack performer. 
A third major risk involves the difÞculty of coor-dinating interface protocols among dynamically
evolving supplier and distributor networks with
different internal-evolution strategies. Establishing(Percent level 1B)   (Percent level 2 and 3)
Personnel4030201001520253035Criticality(Loss due to impactof defects)31030100300103050709050301051Size(Number of personnel)Culture(Percent thriving on chaos versus order)
Dynamism(Percent requirements-
change/month)ComfortManylivesSinglelifeEssentialfundsDiscretionary
fundsFigure 2. Homeground chart for
SupplyChain.com,
an intermediate-
sized, agent-based
application. mutual commitments to relatively stable interfaceprotocols and continuing to monitor and evolve
mutually satisfactory changes requires considerable
up-front effort.Technical uncertainties. 
The set of technical risksassociated with agent-based systems provides a
major source of uncertainty. Before committing to

a specific agent-coordination approach or pack-

age, the project team must determine critical agent
and agent-coordination objectives, constraints,
and priorities, then use them in evaluating the

agent technology candidates via appropriate com-
binations of reference checking, analysis, bench-
marking, and prototyping.The set of technical risks associated with the per-formance and interoperability of COTS packages
used across the supply chainÕs stakeholder organi-

zations presents a similar source of uncertainty. The

team needs similar risk-assessment strategies to

establish satisfactory COTS package combinations.
For both these technical uncertainty areas, the team
must maintain a continuous watch to assess emerg-

ing technology risks and opportunities.Diseconomies of scale. Most agilists with whom wehave discussed this issue blanch at the idea of
lengthening the release interval as the application
gets larger and the effort required to develop and
integrate new storiesÑscenarios describing desiredoperational capabilitiesÑincreases. But something
must be done to avoid the problems with integra-
tion schedules and the strain on shared responsi-
bility and tacit knowledge that come with the

increasing number of stories implemented and the
lengthening refactoring times. One approach that may help conserve the releaseinterval is to make later stories more granular and

amenable to timeboxing. However, in larger, multi-

team applications, this requires further coordination
to ensure that one teamÕs application component

does not need features dropped by another team. Foreseeable change versus simple design. The supply-chain application will have some foresee-
able sources of change, such as new data and oper-
ations involved in supply-chain transactions.
Developers can use factory patterns to create a

framework for accommodating such sources much
more readily than with simple design and contin-
uous refactoring. More generally, developers can handle foresee-
able sources of change architecturally by using the
information-hiding technique of encapsulating the
change sources within individual modules,8thuseliminating the ripple effects that such changes
cause.Personnel turnover and tacit knowledge loss.Within the development team, rotating peo-

ple across programming pairs or across fea-
ture teams can reduce tacit knowledge losses.
The loss of key supply-chain stakeholder
representatives can be equally critical, but
keeping alternate representatives involved
can reduce the impact of such losses. 
SupplyChain.com and its operationalstakeholders reduced the probability of loss
as well as the size of loss due to personnel

turnover by establishing signiÞcant bonuses
for successful project completion. Prespecified plans and specifications. Delaysand reduced competitiveness can result from
relying on elaborate prespeciÞed plans and
specifications. One effective approach to

dealing with the risks of overspecification
uses a risk-based approach to speciÞcations:
9¥DonÕt
write speciÞcations when the risk of notusing them is low and the risk of using them
is high. A good example is a written graphical
user interface speciÞcation. With a good GUI-

builder tool, the risk of not writing speciÞca-
tions is low. With extensive GUI iterations,

the risk of expensive speciÞcation rework is

high.¥Dowrite speciÞcations when the risk of usingthem is low and the risk of not using them 
is high. A good example is a written 
supply-chain interface protocol speciÞcation
achieved through extensive stakeholder nego-
tiations.A similar approach can apply to risk-basedprocess plans. For the various organizations mak-
ing commitments to the timing of introducing new
operational interfaces and business workßows, not
developing top-level milestone plans and critical-
path dependencies would be risky. On the other

hand, with an experienced team and rapidly chang-
ing circumstances, using a heavyweight earned-
value management system would add more risk of
delay than it would subtract.Risk-based testing is another area in which plan-ning can save downstream time and effort. Most

projects spend as much time and effort testing the
low-risk parts of the code as they spend testing the
high-risk parts. Focusing the test effort on the high-
risk partsÑagent coordination, potentially critical
failure modes, and highest-value business work-
ßowsÑcan generate project time and effort savings

and avoid high-cost operational losses.June 200363Focusing test efforton the high-riskpartsÑagent coordination, potentially criticalfailure modes, andhighest-value businessworkßowsÑcan generate project time and effort savings. 64ComputerRisk-based strategy for system developmentContinuing with Step 4, the project team imple-ments the overall project strategy summarized in
Figure 3. This strategy integrates the individual risk
resolution approaches. Figure 3 uses horizontal
swim lanes to describe participant groups, rectan-

gles overlaying lanes to show the project activities
of the participant groups involved, shaded areas to
identify phases, and ovals to show decision
pointsÑthe spiral anchor point milestones.2In thiscase, there are three primary participant groups:¥The operational stakeholders include a largely
dedicated manufacturing-company represen-
tative, a part-time supplier-company repre-

sentative, and a part-time distributor-company

representative. Each is a Crack performer who
has an alternate to ensure representation con-
tinuity. These stakeholders can also call on as-

needed specialists from other parts of the

organizations they represent.¥The SupplyChain.com project manager and
three Cockburn Level 2 or 3 SupplyChain.com
staff members form a risk-and-opportunity
management team that maintains a continuous

watch for emerging project risks or opportuni-
ties. When such risks or opportunities arise, the

risk management team initiates actions such as
prototyping, COTS evaluation, change-pro-
posal evaluation, or complex refactoring to
explore options and develop an appropriate
response to the risk or opportunity. When no

major risks or opportunities are active, these
staff members contribute to one of the devel-
opment teamsÑoften in a mentoring role.¥A group of agile feature teams operate con-
currently to develop the features involved in
each increment of system capability. The teams

primarily focus on particular application areas
such as supplier or distributor transactions and

manufacturing support. Their team leaders are
Cockburn Level 2 personnel. The team mem-

bers are mixes of Level 2 and Level 1A per-

sonnel, with no Level 1B personnel. Personnel
rotate across teams. There will be a ramp-up of
team members from the manufacturing com-

pany when it eventually takes over continuing
software development.The risk patterns for projects of this scale andcomplexity make it best to organize them into three

primary phases, with team leaders representing
their teams in the Þrst two phases. 
Phase 1, roughly corresponding to a RUP orMbase inception phase, involves rapid teambuild-
ing and development of a shared system vision
among the stakeholders. Techniques used in this

phase include prototyping key user features, COTS
evaluation, brainstorming, results-chain develop-
ment, and negotiation of a mutually satisfactory set
of strategic project objectives and priorities.Phase 2, roughly corresponding to a RUP orMbase elaboration phase, establishes¥the overall operational concept and life-cycle
strategy;¥a set of key COTS, reuse, and architecture 
decisions, including development of high-risk
components;¥a full project organization; and
Design, development, and deployment¥ Elaborate supply
 chain operational

 concept,

 prototypes,

 transition  

 strategy

¥ Evaluate and
 determine COTS,

 reuse, and

 architecture

 choices

¥ Develop high-risk
 components

¥ Prioritize and
 sequence desired

 capabilities,

 outstanding risks

¥ Establish project
 organization,

 overall process,

 and feature  

 teams
¥ Monitor project progress,
 risk resolution, and new

 technology developments

¥ Identify and work critical
 project-level actions
¥ Develop benefits-
 realization results

 chains

¥ Identify missing
 stakeholders

¥ Enhance
 understanding

¥ Explore goals,
 options,

 technology,

 prototypes,

 risks
¥ Communicate
 proposed

 redirections

¥ Prepare for
 and execute

 acceptance

 tests,

 installation,

 operational

 evolution
¥ Analyze
 feedback

 on current

 version

¥ Reprioritize
 features

¥ Prepare
 strategy

 for next

 increment
CommittoproceedProject manager andrisk management teamAgile featureteamOperational stakeholders¥ Use risk to determine content
 of artifacts
Systemsdefinition andarchitectingTeambuilding
and sharedvisionStartup¥ Ensure representative
 exercise of incremental

 capabilities

¥ Monitor progress and
 new operational

 development
¥ Develop and integrate
 new feature increments
CommittoproceedStaff andorganize tocover allsuccess-criticalrisk areasFurnishCrack teamrepresentativesand alternatesPhase 1Phase 2Phase 3Figure 3. OverallSupplyChain.com
project strategy.

Horizontal swim
lanes describe 
participant groups,
rectangles overlay-
ing lanes show the
project activities 
of the participant
groups, shaded
areas identify
phases, and ovals
show decision
points. ¥an initial set of top-priority features to develop
in Increment 1.Both Phases 1 and 2 conclude with a review bysenior experts and stakeholder representatives,
securing full stakeholder commitment to support
the next phase. If not, the project is terminated or

backtracked to Phase 1 or earlier Phase 2 activities.In situations involving cohesive, domain-experi-enced development teams with more than 40 per-

cent Cockburn Level 2 and 3 people, Crack
customers with a clear set of business objectives,
and mature domain architectures and COTS prod-
ucts, the activities in Phases 1 and 2 can be com-
bined and completed in a week. If most of these
conditions do not hold, a better estimate would be
three months each for Phases 1 and 2.In Phase 3, the feature teams develop successiveincrements of prioritized system capability in par-

allel. The operational stakeholders ensure that the
teams exercise and iterate each increment based on
feedback from representative users. The entire team
collaborates to discover and deal with emerging
risks and opportunities, make and evaluate change
proposals, and support each incrementÕs transition

into operational use. A Þnal shared task is to prepare the strategy forthe next increment, consolidating lessons learned,
planning for process improvement, and perhaps
backtracking to earlier phases.APPLYING THE METHOD FAMILY-WIDE
Figure 4 summarizes the results of applying Step1 to each project in the agent-based family.
For the small, event-management application,the plan-driven risks clearly dominate the agile
risks, with several plan-driven showstoppers. Step
2 thus leads this application to adopt an agile
approach. Its process is a simple two-phase version
of Figure 3, with two swim lanes representing a sin-
gle agile team and its stakeholders.Some aspects of the very large national crisismanagement applicationÑits size and complex-
ityÑclearly represent showstoppers for pure agile
methods such as simple design. But other aspectsÑ
rapid change and emergent requirementsÑare
higher risks for plan-driven methods than for agile.
Step 3 then applies, leading to a strategy that encap-
sulates the agile parts of this application, using risk-
based agile methods in the agile parts, and applying

risk-based plan-driven methods elsewhere. Its
resulting risk-driven process is a more complex

three-phase version of Figure 3, with the develop-

ment swim lane broken into separate swim lanes
for agile and plan-driven feature teams. Further
details can be found in our book.1Developers can use our tailorable process to
balance agile and plan-driven methods in a
customized software development strategy.
This process can help organizations and projects
take advantage of both the agile and plan-driven
methodsÕ beneÞts, while mitigating many of their
drawbacks.Versions of this process are currently being used
June 200365   Risk ratings
Risk items  Event Managers  SupplyChain.com  NISCM
E-Tech
: Technology uncertainties.  
  E-Coord: Many stakeholders.    E-Cmplx: Complex system of systems.       
A-Scale: Scalability.    ÑA-Yagni
: Use of simple design.    ÑA-Churn: Personnel turnover.  
  A-Skill: Not enough people skilled in   Ñ              agile methods.  
   
P-Change: Rapid change.    P-Speed: Need for rapid results.    P-Emerge: Emergent requirements.    P-Skill: Not enough people skilled in                 plan-driven methods. EnvironmentalrisksRisk rating scaleMinimal riskModerate riskSerious but manageable riskVery serious but manageable risk
Showstopper riskRisks of usingplan-driven methodsRisks of usingagile methodsFigure 4. Pertinentrisk items and risk
ratings for a range
of agent-based 
systems. 66Computeron several small projects and for the planning andrisk management of a very large project. A related
approach, called Code Science or AgilePlus, has
been used successfully on more than a dozen pro-
jects of up to 400,000 source lines of code.10,11Thisapproach uses most of the XP practices along with

a componentized architecture, risk-based situation
audits, business analyses, and on-demand auto-
matic document generation. References1.B. Boehm and R. Turner, 
Balancing Agility and Dis-cipline: A Guide for the Perplexed, Addison-Wesley,
2003.2.B. Boehm, ÒAnchoring the Software Process,Ó 
IEEESoftware, July 1996, pp. 73-82.3.I. Jacobson, G. Booch, and J. Rumbaugh, 
The UniÞedSoftware Development Process, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
4.B. Boehm and D. Port, ÒBalancing Discipline and
Flexibility with the Spiral Model and MBASE,Ó
Crosstalk, Dec. 2001, pp. 23-28.5.G. Anthes, ÒAgents of Change,Ó 
Computerworld, 27Jan. 2003, pp. 26-27.6.A. Elssamadisy and G. Schalliol, ÒRecognizing and
Responding to ÔBad SmellsÕ in Extreme Program-ming,Ó Proc. IntÕl Conf. Software Eng., IEEE CSPress, 2002, pp. 617-622.7.J. Thorp, 
The Information Paradox, McGraw-Hill,1998.8.D. Parnas, ÒDesigning Software for Ease of Exten-
sion and Contraction,Ó IEEE Trans. Software Eng.
,Mar. 1979, pp. 128-137.
9.B. Boehm and W. Hansen, ÒThe Spiral Model as a
Tool for Evolutionary Acquisition,Ó 
Crosstalk, May2001, pp. 4-11.10.J. Manzo, ÒOdyssey and Other Code Science Success
Stories,Ó Crosstalk, Oct. 2002, pp. 19-21, 30.11.J. Manzo, ÒAgile Development Methods, the Myths,
and the Reality: A User Perspective,Ó Proc. USC-CSEAgile Methods Workshop
, USC Center for SoftwareEngineering, 2003; http://sunset.usc.edu/events/past.
Barry Boehm
is director of the University of South-ern California Center for Software Engineering.
Contact him at boehm@sunset.usc.edu.
Richard Turner
is a member of the EngineeringManagement and Systems Engineering faculty at
the George Washington University in Washington,

D.C. Contact him at rich.turner@osd.mil.
SETINDUSTRYSTANDARDScomputer.org/standards/
HELP SHAPE FUTURE TECHNOLOGIES ¥JOIN AN IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY STANDARDS WORKING GROUP AT IEEEComputer Society members work together to deÞne standards like 
IEEE 802, 1003, 1394, 1284, and many more.
802.11
FireWire
token rings
gigabit Ethernetwireless networks

