 100ComputerSTANDARDS
Parts of the software and ITengineering community har-
bor many misconceptionsassociated with standards,especially process standards.The most common are that standards
are rigid, obsolete, and plain boring.
Standards are also perceived as beingthe antithesis of agility. 
Yet standards create markets by
enabling interoperability and econo-
mies of scale through component and
interface standardization. In the IT ser-
vice industry, standards also enable
interoperability between organizationsthrough process and competency
benchmarking and standardization. These beneﬁts derive from interop-erability between people and organi-
zations that share a common vocabu-
lary, compatible work processes, and

the ability to benchmark individuals
and organizations. Thus, we see a
growing need for standards in areas
such as processes, methods and good
practices, bodies of knowledge, and
formalisms.STANDARDS DEFINED
Using the International Organi-zation for Standardization (ISO) def-inition as a baseline, standards are“guideline documentation that reﬂectsagreements on products, practices, or
operations by nationally or interna-tionally recognized industrial, profes-sional, trade associations or govern-
mental bodies.”Standards are referred to as guide-line documents because they are notcompulsory unless mandated so by an
individual, an organization, or the
market. They are agreements because
they often reflect a specific level of
consensus.Many types of standards exist andcan be elaborated inside an organiza-
tion; a professional society such as 
the IEEE, the International Council 
on Systems Engineering (INCOSE), or 

the IT Service Management Forum
(itSMF); an industrial consortium such
as the Object Management Group
(OMG), the Organization for the
Advancement of Structured Informa-
tion Standards (OASIS), and others;
formal national bodies such as the
Americal National Standards Institute(ANSI), the Standards Council of
Canada (SCC), and others; or interna-
tional organizations such as ISO, the
International Electrotechnical Commis-sion(IEC), and 
the International Tele-
communication Union (ITU).A given standard might be devel-oped in one environment—market,professional, industry, national—and
then migrate into a formal interna-
tional standard. Market, professional,
and industry standards might also rep-resent an international consensus or defacto state that differs from formal
international standards in the degree
of breadth and formality that this con-
sensus embodies.STANDARDS LIMITATIONS
Standards are usually elaboratedthrough a consensus process. Thismeans that a group of experts createsthe document through a series of iter-ations. Consensus is built among these
experts from successful compromises
reached through multiple negotiation
sessions. Afterward, the documentundergoes review by a larger body of
experts and organizational represen-
tatives, with the goal of reaching a
greater level of consensus to meet the
ﬁnal publishing criteria.All of this underscores the fact that standards, like any other human
creations, are far from perfect. Also,
because they represent the consensus of
a collection of individuals and organi-
zations, they do not necessarily repre-
sent the state of the art or the most
optimal solution in a given area. Rather,

standards are conventions or baselines
that a collection of people or organiza-
tions reach at a given point. This applies
to all types of IT standards.AGILITY
Either as a philosophy or, more
explicitly, as a collection of concepts
embedded into methodologies, agilityhas been a popular topic in the soft-ware and IT engineering world for
many years. Succinctly, an agile ap-

proach to development is essentially a
result-focused method that iterativelymanages changes and risks. An agile
method also actively involves cus-
tomers, making them in effect part of
the development team. Agility is often contrasted toprocess-oriented approaches in whicha rigid, documentation-heavy method-ology is followed with very detailed
specifications, and the relationships
between developers and the customer
are formal and sometimes adversarial.As with many such concepts, theagility characteristic is not binary, as

Figure 1 shows (modiﬁed from P. Kroll
Engineering involves choosing
the right tool,which implies an 
understanding of both the tools andthe problem.Such behavior is agile.
Standards, Agility,
and EngineeringFrançois Coallier, 
École de technologie supérieure September 2007101and maintainability. These attributes
are not only important for embedded
software systems, but also for moderninformation systems. Delivering thosequality attributes can, in many cases,
be much more challenging than deliv-
ering the functionality. All of this points

out that engineering IT systems is muchmore involved than doing classical pro-
gramming.Many IT systems that engineers buildcan be safety-critical or, in the case of

ﬁnancials and electronic commerce sys-
tems, ﬁnancially critical. In many cases,the best way to minimize risks whendeveloping such systems, and any other
type of software systems is through
reuse or incrementally improving
proven solutions. This means that engi-
neering is by nature a profession where
reuse—be it of proven standardized
components, interface speciﬁcations
and protocols, development methods,
or architectural patterns—is a way 
of life. Practicing reuse does not mean thatengineering is boring technical workwithout any challenges. On the con-
trary, it requires a deep understand-

ing of the problem to be solved and
its applicable solution paths. Both
analytic and holistic systems thinking
are necessary. Reuse does not mean

the absence of innovation—it means
that innovation and risks must be
balanced within the project’s context.
and P. Kruchten’s 
The Rational UniﬁedProcess Made Easy—A Practitioner’s
Guide to the RUP, Addison-Wesley,
2003).In Figure 1, the x-axis represents thedegree of documentation and formal-
ity associated with a development
process. “High ceremony” means
many formal, documented meetings
and heavy, process-driven documen-

tation, while “low ceremony” means
less formal meetings whose sole docu-
mentation might be in the form of
updated process artifacts and more,lighter, outcome-driven documenta-

tion.In Quadrant II, the process-basedapproaches have much in common
with industrial engineering practices.In Quadrant III, the focus shifts to
people and their skills. At the upper-

hand corner of Quadrant II, a ﬁxed-
cost contract is in place, and lawyerscan be involved when the developers
and customer communicate about 
the project. At the lower corner of
Quadrant III, “pay as you go pro-jects” reside. In these, the customer
forms part of the team. While agile
methods are positioned in Quadrant
III, extreme programming (XP) is usu-
ally positioned in the lower corner of
this quadrant.Agility is thus both a philosophyand a nonbinary attribute of a devel-
opment process.ENGINEERINGWhile the objective of science is tounderstand nature, engineering’s
objective is to build useful thingsusing science. Put another way, scien-
tists do reverse engineering while
engineers do forward engineering.
Engineers must not only build things,
they must also do so within bud-getary, schedule, resource, regulatory,

and operational constraints.When developing IT systems, engi-neers must not only deliver functional-
ities but also all those other “ities”
commonly referred to as either “non-functional requirements” or “qualityattributes.” The quality attributes in-
clude performance, reliability, avail-

ability, security, usability, scalability,
ENGINEERING AND STANDARDS
The relationship between engineer-ing and standards should now be obvi-ous. Because standards facilitate reuseand, usually, document proven and
generally acceptable practices, they are
an intimate part of every engineer’s pro-

fessional practice. Standards also con-
stitute a signiﬁcant part of an engineer’s
teaching and training curriculum.In software engineering, the rela-tionship with standards goes deeper.

While the foundations of software
engineering include ﬁelds such as com-
puter science, systems engineering,and project management, standardshave played a significant role in the
development and codiﬁcation of this
rather young engineering discipline. The US National Bureau ofStandards published the ﬁrst software
engineering standard barely eight
years after the term “software engi-
neering” was coined in 1968. The
same year this standard was pub-
lished, the IEEE created its software
engineering standards committee. In1987, the joint ISO and IEC standardsubcommittee (ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC7,
or SC7) was then created.The IEEE Computer Society andSC7 have been working together to
harmonize their respective collection
of software and systems engineering
standards and to continue joint devel-
opment. Noteworthy has been theWaterfall
IterativeHigh ceremonyLow ceremonyPeoplefocusProcessfocusIVIIIIIIFigure 1.The spectrum of development approaches.The 
x-axis represents the degree ofdocumentation and formality associated with a development process:High ceremony
involves many formal,documented meetings;low ceremony involves less formal
meetings with less documentation. The people dimension of agilityinvolves being able to choose the righttool, which implies an understandingof both the tools and the problem.This means having the right knowl-
edge, skills, and experience. The hor-
ror stories that circulate about
wasteful work generated by standardsare generally more a result of poor
engineering and management skills
than a problem with the standard.Not only are standards and agilitymutually compatible, both con-
cepts are also key components ofany engineering discipline. François Coallieris a professor and chair of the Department of Software and IT Engineering, École de technologiesupérieure, Montréal. He is also thechairman of the ISO/IEC JTC 1/SC7,Software and Systems Engineering sub-committee. Contact him at francois.coallier@etsmtl.ca.102ComputerSTANDARDS
IEEE’s publication of the 
Guide to theSoftware Engineering Body of
Knowledge(SWEBOK Guide) in 2004,followed closely by its adoption as atechnical report by ISO and the IEC as
TR 19759:2005. As of August 2007,
there are 101 published SC7 standards,
with approximately 50 from the IEEECS, focusing on the area of software
and systems engineering.These standards are still evolving,with new ones being elaborated that
cover new areas. Six new proposals
for software and systems engineeringas well as IT service management arecurrently under consideration at SC7.AGILITY AND STANDARDS
Some developers perceive standardsas the antithesis of agility. This view
is difficult to understand because allagile methodologies, including XP, are
documented processes. The difference
between an agile method and a non-
agile one is a matter of content, but 
it is also a function of the way themethodology’s components are ap-

plied in a given project.A project where safety-critical soft-ware is developed can be agile even if
many of the project artifacts must beproduced because of regulatory con-
straints. The agility in such a case can be
in the collaborative nature of the cus-
tomer relationship, a people-focused
work environment, or other factors. Many process standards also havebuilt-in provisions that, implicitly,

enable their use in an agile context.
These take the form of a tailoring
clause. While machine-to-machine
interface standards provide rather
straightforward engineering speciﬁca-tions and constraints, the process stan-
dards used as a baseline to define a
methodology are very different.ENGINEERING AND AGILITY
Engineers are, in principle, prag-matic professionals strongly focusedon their work’s outcome. This implies
agility. The multitude of patterns,
regardless of their nature, that engi-
neers learn through formal training
and their professional career are all
part of a toolbox. This is true also forprocess patterns and methods. Compe-
tent engineers who understand the
contents of their toolbox and who also
understand the nature of the problem
that must be solved should use the
proper tools. Such behavior is agile.Editor: John Harauz, Jonic Systems Engineering Inc., Willowdale, Ont., Canada; j.harauz@computer.org
IT Professional magazine
gives builders andmanagers of enterprise systems the “how to” and“what for” articles at your ﬁngertips, so you can

delve into and fully understand issues surrounding:
• Enterprise architecture and standards• Information systems
• Network management• Programming languages• Project management
• Training and education
• Web systems
• Wireless applications• And much, much more …Giving You
the Edgewww.computer.org/itpro
