 November 2001131SOFTWARE MANAGEMENT
In a previous article (ÒAgile SoftwareDevelopment: The Business of Inno-
vation,Ó Computer, Sept. 2001, pp.120-122), we introduced agile soft-

ware development through the prob-
lem it addresses and the way in which it
addresses the problem. Here, we describe
the effects of working in an agile style. AGILE RECAPPEDOver recent decades, while marketforces, systems requirements, implemen-
tation technology, and project staff were

changing at a steadily increasing rate, a
different development style showed its
advantages over the traditional one. This
agilestyle of development directly ad-dresses the problems of rapid change. A dominant idea in agile developmentis that the team can be more effective in

responding to change if it can ¥reduce the cost of moving informa-
tion between people, and¥reduce the elapsed time between
making a decision to seeing the con-
sequences of that decision. To reduce the cost of moving infor-
mation between people, the agile team
works to¥place people physically closer,
¥replace documents with talking in
person and at whiteboards, and¥improve the teamÕs amicabilityÑits
sense of community and moraleÑ
so that people are more inclined to
relay valuable information quickly.
To reduce the time from decision to
feedback, the agile team ¥makes user experts available to the
team or, even better, part of the team

and¥works incrementally.
Making user experts available as partof the team gives developers rapid feed-
back on the implications to the user of
their design choices. The user experts,
seeing the growing software in its earliest
stages, learn both what the developers

misunderstood and also which of their
requests do not work as well in practice
as they had thought. The term agile,coined by a group of
people experienced in developing software

this way, has two distinct connotations. 
The Þrst is the idea that the businessand technology worlds have become tur-
bulent, high speed, and uncertain, requir-
ing a process to both create change and
respond rapidly to change. The Þrst connotation implies the sec-ond one: An agile process requires
responsive people and organizations.
Agile development focuses on the talentsand skills of individuals and moldsprocess to speciÞc people and teams, not
the other way around.AGILE IS FOR PEOPLEThe most important implication to
managers working in the agile manner is
that it places more emphasis on people
factors in the project: amicability, talent,

skill, and communication. These qualities become a primary con-cern for the would-be agile team. Skill
development is important, so that each
person can deliver more value with time.The attention to the human issues
gives agile projects a particular feel. It isnot simply a matter of reducing paper-work and hoping that everything else will

fall into place. To paraphrase one devel-

oper, ÒA small, rigorous methodology

may lookthe same as an agile method-ology, but it wonÕt 
feelthe same.Ó The agile group concept grows to spanteams, organizations, and other working
relationships. It is very difÞcult for agile
people to function well in a rigid organi-
zationÑand vice versa.INDIVIDUAL COMPETENCEAgile development teams focus onindividual competency as a critical fac-
tor in project success. 
If the people on the project are goodenough, they can use almost any process
and accomplish their assignment. If they
are not good enough, no process will
repair their inadequacyÑÒpeople trump
processÓ is one way to say this.However, lack of user and executive
support can kill a projectÑÒpolitics
trump people.Ó Inadequate support can
keep even good people from accom-

plishing the job. The ÒCHAOS Chronicles Version II,Ó
a recent update of the Chaos ReportAgile SoftwareDevelopment: 
The People FactorAlistair Cockburn, Humans and Technology
Jim Highsmith, Cutter ConsortiumAgile development focuses on the talents and skills of
individuals, molding the
process to speciÞc people 

and teams. 132ComputerSoftware Managementfrom the Standish Group (http://www.
pm2go.com), outlines a recipe for suc-
cess that includes 10 items. The Þrst three

items are executive support, user involve-
ment, and experienced project manage-
ment. These items are certainly key, and we
agree with having them in the top 10.

However, Òcompetent staffÓ is buried

inside the tenth item: ÒOther.Ó
While it is true that Òpolitics trump peo-ple,Ó it is equally true that the developers

wonÕt succeed in producing a system if

they lack the basic competency for the job. Interestingly, people working together
with good communication and interac-
tion can operate at noticeably higher lev-

els than when they use their individual
talents. We see this time and again in

brainstorming and joint problem-solving
sessions.Therefore, agile project teams focus onincreasing both individual competencies
and collaboration levels.In Now, Discover Your Strengths
,(Simon & Schuster, New York, 2001),

Marcus Buckingham and Curt Coffman
discuss the outcome of a long-running
research program by the Gallup organi-
zation, in which 80,000 managers in 400

companies were interviewed over a 25-
year period In this book, they highlight
the interplay between talent, skill, and
knowledge. Regarding high-performance
working environments, they write:
The larger, establishment camp is com-
prised of those organizations that leg-
islate the processof performance. ÉThey try to teach each employee to
walk the same path. This [people-based] type of organiza-tion focuses not on the steps of the

journey but on the end of the journey.
The distinction between the two campsis real. Step-by-step organizations are
designed to battle the inherent indi-
viduality of each employee. Strength-
based organizations are designed to
capitalize on it.Extending their ideas, itÕs not that orga-
nizations that employ rigorous processes
value people less than agile ones, itÕs that
they view peopleÑand how to improve
their performanceÑdifferently. Rigorous

processes are designed to standardize
people to the organization, while agile

processes are designed to capitalize on
each individual and each teamÕs unique

strengths: One-size-Þts-oneÑevery pro-
cess must be selected, tailored, and
adapted to the individuals on a particu-
lar project team.Too often, software engineering and
rigorous process adherents confuse
process and competence. Process can
provide a useful framework for groups
of individuals to work together, but

process per se cannot overcome a lack of
competency, while competency can

surely overcome the vagaries of a
processÑagain, Òpeople trump process.Ó When you look under the cover of XP,
Scrum, Adaptive Software Development,
Crystal Methods, Feature-Driven De-
velopment (FDD), or Dynamic Systems
Development Methodology (DSDM), the
emphasis on people and their talent, skill,
and knowledge becomes evident. This is a competency attitude, not anelitist one. Whether itÕs the practices of

pair programming and mentoring in XP
or chief programmers and inspections in
FDD, the goal remains consistentÑ
working jointly to improve the knowl-
edge and skill of individuals. A recent
book by Pete McBreen, an agile devel-

opment practitioner, is therefore appro-

priately titled not software engineeringbut Software Craftsmanship(Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 2001).
TEAM COMPETENCEAgile teams are characterized by self-organization and intense collaboration,
within and across organizational bound-
aries.Self-organizing teams are not leaderlessteams; they are teams that can organize
again and again, in various conÞgura-
tions, to meet challenges as they arise.Agility requires that teams have a com-
mon focus, mutual trust, and respect; a
collaborative, but speedy, decision-mak-

ing process; and the ability to deal with

ambiguity. 
We distinguish collaboration from
communication. Communication is the

sending and receiving of information.
Collaboration is actively working to-
gether to deliver a work product or make
a decision. The DSDM manual, for example,
identiÞes the differences between tradi-
tional and agile project managers, one of
which is: ÒA traditional project manager
will normally focus on agreeing to a
detailed contract with customers about
the totality of the system to be delivered

along with the costs and timescales. In a
DSDM project, the project manager is
focused on setting up a collaborative
relationship with the customers.ÓScrum projects are characterized byintense 15 to 30 minute daily meetings in
which participants constantly adjust to
the realities of high-change projects. All too often, project teams are giventhe ultimate accountability for product
delivery, while staff groupsÑproject

ofÞces, process management, data admin-
istratorsÑare given decision power. In

order to innovate and react to change,
agile teams reßect a better alignment of
accountability and responsibility. It is

again an emphasis, at the team level, on
competency rather than process.AGILE ORGANIZATIONS
An agile team working within a rigidorganization has as difficult a time as
agile individuals working within a rigid
team. Many project teams we have inter-
viewed report that when they responded
to customersÕ requests and to technology

platform changes to deliver usable value

to the customer, their management

admonished them for lack of confor-

mance to the original plan.Agile organizations and agile man-agers understand that demanding cer-
tainty in the face of uncertainty is

dysfunctional. Agile companies practice
leadership-collaboration rather than
command-control management. They set

goals and constraints, providing bound-
aries within which innovation can ßour-Agile processes are
designed to capitalize oneach individual and eachteamÕs unique strengths.
 November 2001133ish. They are macromanagers rather thanmicromanagers. They understand that
who makes decisions isnÕt as important

as collaboration on information to make
informed decisions. They understand
that agility depends on trusting individ-
uals to apply their competency in effec-
tive ways.Doug DeCarlo has labeled traditionalproject management ÒNewtonian neu-

rosis.Ó In this context, neurosis means
attacking complex, nonlinear problems
with simplistic, linear processes.
AGILE ECOSYSTEMSA project is built from people havingdiffering personalities and differing skills,
working in a physical environment
within an organizational culture. The
people, environment, and organizational
culture all inßuence one another. When

a strong person leaves, the organization
rearranges itself to compensate; when the
team spreads itself across multiple ßoors,
communications change; and so on. The
project is an ecosystem.Using the term ecosystemto conveythe totality of the project at hand brings
us to the discussion of processes and
ecosystems and Þtting the two together.
Installing a process within an ecosys-tem offers two choices: Fit the ecosystem
to the process or fit the process to the
ecosystem. In reality, both the process

and ecosystem change, but the agile
approach honors the ecosystem and rec-
ognizes that not every process will work
in every ecosystem.AGILE EFFECTIVENESSNearly 200 people from a wide rangeof organizations in North America,

Europe, Australia, India, and other loca-

tions responded to a survey of agile and
rigorous methodologies conducted by
the Cutter Consortium in 2001. This sur-
vey showed three interesting results.First, compared to a similar study con-ducted late in 2000, many more organi-
zations said they were using at least one
agile methodology. 
Second, agile methodologies showedslightly better delivery performance than
rigorous methodologies in terms of busi-
ness performance, customer satisfaction,
and quality. 
Third, agile methodologies scored bet-ter than rigorous methodologies in terms
of employee morale. This is particularly
surprising in that 54 percent of the respon-
dents were IT and executive managers and

only 12 percent were developers. One study is, of course, only one study,
and we should view the conclusions
accordingly. However, these preliminary

results reßect the effectiveness and con-
tribution of agile approaches to morale. AGILE DOMAINSAgile development is not for everyone.Imposing agile principles on process-cen-
tric, noncollaborative, optimizing organi-
zations is likely to fail. Imposing a change-
embracing process on sedate project
teams may not be reasonable. Attempting
to get close user collaboration with orga-
nizations that have little time to spend
with developers wonÕt work. 
Agile development is more difficult
with larger teams. The average project
has only nine people, well within the
reach of the most basic agile processes.
Nevertheless, it is interesting to occa-
sionally Þnd successful agile projects with
120 or even 250 people.Agile development excels in ex-
ploratory problem domainsÑ
extreme, complex, high-changeprojectsÑand operates best in a people-
centered, collaborative, organizational
culture. This approach has proved to be
effective at solving many problems and at
forging attractive work environments in
many organizations. While it is not suited

for everyone, it is suited for many. 
Alistair Cockburnis Consulting Fellowat Humans and Technology. Contact him

at arc@acm.org.Jim Highsmithis director of the CutterConsortiumÕs e-Project Management

Practice. Contact him at jimh@

adaptivesd.com. Editor: Barry Boehm, Computer Science
Department, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90089;
boehm@sunset.usc.eduInnovative technology for computer professionalsHow to ReachComputerWritersWe welcome submissions. For
detailed information, write for a

ContributorsÕ Guide (computer@
computer.org) or visit our Web site:

http://computer.org/computer/.
News IdeasContact Lee Garber at lgarber@
computer.org with ideas for news

features or news briefs.Products and BooksSend product announcements to
products@computer.org. Contact

Stephanie Kawada at skawada@
computer.org with book announce-

ments.Letters to the EditorPlease provide an e-mail address or
daytime phone number with your 
letter. Send letters to 
Letters,Computer,
10662 Los Vaqueros
Cir., PO Box 3014, Los Alamitos,

CA 90720-1314; fax +1 714 821
4010; computer@computer.org.
On the Web
Visit http://computer.org for infor-

mation about joining and getting
involved with the Society and 
Computer.Magazine Change of Address
Send change-of-address requests for magazine subscriptions to
address.change@ieee.org. Make
sure to specify Computer.Missing or Damaged CopiesIf you are missing an issue orreceived a damaged copy, contact

membership@computer.org.
Reprint PermissionTo obtain permission to reprint 

an article, contact William Hagen,

IEEE Copyrights and Trademarks

Manager, at whagen@ieee.org. 

To buy a reprint, send a query to

computer@computer.org or a fax 

to +1 714 821 4010.