 90ComputerIn ComputerÕs January 2002 issue,
Barry Boehm presented a fresh look at
a set of software development methods
often referred to as agile or extreme
programming (ÒGet Ready for Agile
Methods, with Care,Ó Jan. 2002, pp.
64-69). This favorable assessment by
one of the software establishmentÕs

leading lights prompted the latest of
several e-mail dialogues between
Boehm and software luminary Tom

DeMarco, who strongly advocates that
the software establishment begin mov-
ing toward agile methods. Michael Lutz, Area EditorFRAMING THE DEBATE
Tom DeMarco:
Barry, I was delighted
to see you leap into the agile methods
fray. Before you came along, the matter

seemed to be framed as a debate over
the resolution that agile methods are
good and should be adopted in place of
our current Þxed processes.Those on the pro sideÑJimHighsmith and othersÑargued that
the current approaches are broken and
should be replaced. Those on the con
sideÑSteven Rakitin, for exampleÑ
said that agileapproaches are just

hacking by another name and that we
shouldnÕt abandon our disciplined

processes now that weÕre Þnally getting
them right. I look at these two camps as the res-olutionÕs Trotskyites and czarists: The

Þrst camp argues for revolution while
the second camp remains determined
to retreat Ònot one millimeterÓ from
the line drawn in the sand at CMMLevel 3.621. Your article found a sen-
sible middle ground, identifying some
baby to be saved and some bathwater
to be replaced.Barry Boehm:
Well, Tom, IÕve been
delighted to capitalize on your neat
characterization of the Òagile methods
frayÓ in terms of ClausewitzÕs coun-

terpoint between armor and mobility
in military operations. Unfortunately,

what we see in both software develop-
ment and military operations is a ten-
dency for the pendulum to swing back
and forth between extremes. Yet in

most cases, we need a balance between
armor and discipline and between
mobility and agility. Actually, though,

I would say that the leaders in both the
agile and plan-driven camps occupy
various places in the responsible mid-
dle. ItÕs only the overenthusiastic fol-

lowers who overinterpret ÒdisciplineÓ
and ÒagilityÓ to unhealthy degrees.DeMarco:
Amen to that. ItÕs fortu-
nate that our ÞeldÕs practitioners are

better at Þnding the sensible middle
ground than are the professional advo-
cates.Since you are our industryÕs Þrst
champion of risk management, I dowish you had presented agile versus tra-ditional process in terms of risk. The
agile methods provide a tradeoff
between speed and risk. So they are not
inherently good or bad, but they trade
off between one thing that is good,
speed, and another that is bad, risk. Inchoosing an agile approach, the man-
ager says, ÒI will sacriÞce some sure-
ness about eventual successful
completion to improve my odds of fast
successful completion.Ó This tradeoff
makes good sense provided that speedreally is that important and that every-body understands the increased risk.Boehm:I tried using risk in the arti-cle to help determine Òhow much plan-
ning or agility is enoughÓ by addressing
the risks of doing too much or too lit-
tle of each in given situations. But I def-
initely agree that your speed versus risk
tradeoff is another important dimen-

sion to consider. Trading off explicit

knowledge captured in documentation

for tacit interpersonal knowledge is the
main way agile methods achieve more
speed while bounding risk.MAN OR SUPERMAN?DeMarco:
I detected a strange falsenote in your use of the term Òpremium
people.Ó This phrase sounds so unlike
you that I wondered if it might have
been your evil twin who wrote those

words. What are premium people, Barry?Are they NietzcheÕs supermen? Are

they the Alphas that Aldous Huxley
wrote about in Brave New World
?Boehm:I didnÕt intend much more
with that term than what you have
observed about the limited supply of
software talentÑthat organizationsThe Agile Methods FrayTom DeMarco, 
Atlantic Systems GuildBarry Boehm, 
University of Southern CaliforniaTwo of softwareÕs leading 
practitioners debate the
particulars of implementing

agile methods.SOFTWARE TECHNOLOGIES
 low on the talent scale will occupy amore dangerous speed-versus-risk
tradeoff curve than organizations high
on the talent scale.DeMarco:
I would feel entirely com-fortable with what you wrote if you had
replaced each occurrence of the term
Òpremium peopleÓ with Òsuperbly
trained people.Ó The difference is obvi-
ous: premiumimplies an innate condi-tion while superbly trainedimplies anacquiredÑor acquirableÑcondition.For example, I gave myself the lux-ury of sitting in on one of Kent BeckÕs

XP immersion weeks and came away
impressed by how much people grew
during the experience. He teaches an
approach to the key implementation
stepsÑspeciÞcation, versioning, design
partitioning, testing, and so onÑas an
exercise in skill-building. When they
finish that week, the course partici-
pants have powerful new capabilities
to produce a better design than each
could produce alone.Boehm:KentÕs XP training is great.
But with XP and more disciplined new
methodsÑsuch as the Personal and
Team Software ProcessesÑreporting

early success rates, I think weÕre still
seeing how they work with early
adopters. We have yet to determine

how these methods work with the late
majority and laggards, although good
mentoring seems to help both.In another dimension, I would saythat XP training is a necessary but not
sufÞcient condition for success in many
applications. Most application projects
also need at least one person with both
strong software skills and strong appli-
cation domain skillsÑBill CurtisÕs

Òkeeper of the holy visionÓÑand the
domain skills take a lot longer than a
week to acquire.A discussion I had recently withAlistair Cockburn at our USC-CSE
Agile Methods workshop tackled the
question, ÒWhat do you do if you have
only one expert who has both strong
software skills and strong application
domain skills, but you have Þve pro-
jects that need her skills?Ó Putting her
on one of the projects makes that oneagile, but it makes the other four risky.
Sharing her across all Þve projects will
require making some knowledge
explicit through documentation. IÕve
encountered situations like this fairly
frequently.
DeMarco:
This example misses thepoint. Part of our 20-year-long obses-

sion with process is that we have tried
to invest at the organizational level
instead of the individual level. WeÕve

spent big bucks teaching the organiza-
tion how to build systems. If agile
means anything to me, it means invest-
ing heavily in individual skill-building
rather than organizational rule sets.Most of the companies I visit that donÕt
have enough Òsuperbly trained peo-
pleÓ today donÕt have them because

they havenÕt even tried. Once they

begin to focus their energies on build-
ing individual skill sets, weÕll come to
see the problem you and Alistair dis-

cussed as merely transitory.
Boehm:I agree that the increasedfocus on individual skill development
in both agile methods and personal
software processes is long overdue. But
I maintain that bravely following some
of the agile principles, such as Òsatisfy
the customer, focus on working soft-

ware, and trust motivated individu-
als,Ó runs a high risk when the 
motivated individuals donÕt have the

requisite domain skills. For example,
weÕve had teams that tried to satisfy a
customerÕs desire for a natural-lan-

guage-processing capability by focus-
ing on toy versions of working NLP
software, without realizing they were
nowhere close to a robust system.
Without some explicit documentation

and an external review framework, itÕs

harder to tell when such projects run
off course.PLAN OR SUPERPLAN?DeMarco:
At Þrst, your characteri-zation of the Software Engineering
InstituteÕs Capability Maturity Model

and its ilk as Òplan-driven develop-
mentÓ charmed me. But then I started
to feel it was all wrong. Extreme pro-
gramming involves tons more planning
than most CMM organizations ever
do. There are signiÞcant, weighty, and

complicated planning steps each day
about which versions to tackle next,
what should be in each one, what tests

will justify the next version and even-
tually prove it, and how the design
should be partitioned. Because devel-
opers revisit many of these decisions
again and againÑthatÕs what refactor-

ing is all aboutÑthe mental planning
muscles tend to get a lot more exercise

in XP than in any Þxed process-driven
approach.Looked at in this fashion, the CMM-like processes might better be described
as Òboilerplate-plan-driven.ÓBoehm:I agree completely that thesoftware CMM is way too easy to
implement with bureaucracy and boil-
erplate. IÕve been encouraged to see it
being replaced by the Capability
Maturity Model Integrated, with its
emphasis on risk management and
integrated teaming. You can use a risk-

driven documentation approach to
avoid documenting items that pose low
risks if left undocumented, and to
avoid documenting items that invite
high risks when you do try document-
ing themÑsuch as GUIs. The same
holds true for risk-driven activity lev-
els for peer reviews and independent
quality assurance. The rapprochement
of CMM and CMMI leaders toward
agile methods, exemplified by Mark
PaulkÕs article ÒExtreme Programming

from a CMM PerspectiveÓ (IEEESoftware, Nov.-Dec. 2001, pp. 19-26),
is an encouraging trend. I can still Þnd many applications inwhich the requirements are relatively
stable and a preplanned architecture
can successfully accommodate later
increments. In such cases, believing
Òyou arenÕt going to need it,Ó and
June 200291Agile means investing heavily in individual skill-buildingrather than organizational rule sets.
 change has added to the documentaryburden. Nothing ever gets subtracted.
Agile methods are a kind of backlash
against this widely understood ßaw in
the resultant Þxed process. By neglect-
ing to consider documentary bloat,
you left out one of the principal ways
that agile approaches can help.Boehm:I agree that this is a bigproblem and that agile worldviews
help combat it. So does CMM/CMMI
Level 5, which advocates that we look
at where weÕre overdoing things like
documentation, then trim them back.
Unfortunately, too many CMM orga-

nizations stop at Level 3, which
directly results in documentation
bloatÑa problem the governmentrevisiting decisions again and againbecomes unnecessary rework and an
insult to your customer. However, I see

definite trends toward more applica-
tions with highly dynamic or emergent
requirements, which require using agile
methods.DeMarco:
After almost 20 years ofindustry-wide process obsession, the
typical process I encounter in client
companies has become much too doc-
ument-centric, resulting in the docu-
mentary bloat now endemic in our
Þeld. Each new change in process has
tended to be additive: Gee, we saw this
kind of problem on project x, so weÕlladd a new component to our process
and impose it on all projects. Eachbrings on itself by asking for just Level3 in many source selections. Tom DeMarco 
is a principal of theAtlantic Systems Guild and a fellow of
the Cutter Consortium. Contact him
at tdemarco@systemsguild.com.
Barry Boehm
is director of the Uni-versity of Southern California Center
for Software Engineering. Contact him
at boehm@sunset.usc.edu.Software Technologies
Editor: Michael J. Lutz, Rochester Institute of Technology, Department of 

Computer Science, 102 Lomb Memorial
Drive, Rochester NY 14623; mjl@cs.rit.edu