 0018-9162/02/$17.00 © 2002 IEEE36ComputerPERSPECTIVESSoftwareDevelopment: An
OutsiderÕs View
Athriving debate surrounds competing software developmentmethods.1,2Advocates of both traditional software engineeringand craft-basedÑalso known as agileÑdevelopment approaches
appear no closer to a consensus now than they were when the
controversy began 30 years ago.Yet, from the outside looking in, the debateÑand software development
itselfÑtake on a different perspective. How developers make software is
often a central if not necessarily explicit concern of technical circles and gen-
eral social debates on privacy, trade, patents, innovation, and security.

Building a bridge between the speciÞc technical issues and the broader social
concerns can thus help us move toward a clearer understanding of software
and software development.Bringing software into nontechnical frameworks involves translating spe-ciÞc software issues into equivalent social and economic domains. Much in
software is unique, but much also has been debated, discussed, and learned

before. The act of translating and viewing software technologies and prac-
tices through social science domains raises interesting questions: What is
software? Why is it hard to make? Why do we care?Insiders normally assume that the answers to these questions are obviousand well understood. However, social science teaches that unstated or unde-

Þned assumptions often are the essential issues in any debate. Drawing on
these different traditions offers a worthwhile exercise, not because doing so
will solve the software development debate, but rather because insiders may
acquire new tools and insights for moving the discussion forward.A LITTLE HISTORY
The ongoing debate has shown clear cycles of alternating strength betweencraft-based and engineering approaches to software development. For a
debate to exist so strongly for so long, even as the software industry has

grown to maturity, shows that it touches on fundamental aspects of soft-

ware. In contrast, other modern industries have resolved these fundamen-
tal issues rather quickly. For example, by the time the automotive industry

had reached its 30th anniversary, around 1930, the fundamental issues of

production, as exempliÞed by FordÕs assembly line; product, as exempliÞed

by standardized design; and industry, as exempliÞed by the few dominant

national players like Ford and GM, had all been clearly established.Much has been made of the 1968 North Atlantic Treaty Organization
conference that deÞned software engineering.
3Yet, from a sociological per-
spective, the 1969 NATO conference and the report
4it generated prove farmore revealing. Comparing softwarewith other disciplines
and industries can help
resolve the perennial
debate between those
who advocate an
engineering approach 
to development and
those who advocate a 
craft-based approach.Kyle EischenUniversity of California, Santa Cruz May 200237The Þrst meeting, which focused on general con-cerns and management issues, produced widespread
agreement about the clear need to prevent a soft-
ware crisis caused by increasing software complex-
ity and a lack of skilled software professionals. The second meeting, designed to focus on thetechnical questions of preventing the crisis, saw a
Òcommunication gapÓ split participants between
the theory versus practice and computer science
versus software engineering approaches. From its
conception as an independent Þeld of activity, soft-

ware thus established a basic pattern that continues
to this day, with serious unresolved tensions

between management, theory, and practice issues.
Discussions then and now tend to focus on thequality, cost, and practice aspects of software devel-

opment methods. As demonstrated at the 1968
NATO conference, the software community gen-

erally agrees that they should produce the highest
quality software for the lowest cost. However,

defining, estimating, and measuring quality and
costÑas well as the methods to produce such
resultsÑhave remained open to question since the
second NATO conference.
The central issue is why software developersagree on the general problem but disagree on the
speciÞc approaches to solve it. The main answer is
that when they get down to speciÞcs, developers
disagree on the general deÞnition of software qual-
ity and efÞciencyÑmuch as people will agree that
a code of law is good, but they disagree about the
speciÞc laws it should contain. This fundamental
difference becomes obvious only when developers
discuss methods in detail; as a result, they never ask
basic or first-principle questions about software
quality, cost, and efficiency or place such issues

within a broader context.RATIONALIZING SOFTWARE?
The broader context is software rationalization.Since 1776, when Adam Smith advocated the divi-
sion of labor in Wealth of Nations
, rationalizingproduction has offered a proven method for
increasing quality, lowering cost, and improving

efÞciency. 
The expansion of industrial capitalism, the rise ofmodern bureaucracy, and scientiÞc management all

accelerated the momentum for creating defined,
quantiÞable, repeatable production and organiza-
tional processes. General competition in markets
proved the power of such rational systems and
pushed their general adaptation. Although the
modern automobile industry provides perhaps the
most well-known example, the general logic ofrational organization and production existsquite broadly in society, from government to

public schools to farming.Predictably, then, the 1968 NATO meet-
ingÑwhich took place at the beginning of a
true computer revolution and the height of
US industrial manufacturing dominanceÑ
produced general agreement on the increas-
ing importance of software in society and the
need for an engineered approach to its pro-
duction. Just as predictably, the participants in the
1969 conference could not agree on the
details of a deÞned, quantiÞable, repeatable
process while highly skilled professionals still
crafted most of the worldÕs software. These pro-

fessionalsÑoften engineers by training and thus
not averse to the titleof software engineerÑworked as direct practitioners who were neither in-
volved in nor inclined to build software factories.Additional assumptionsAssuming that software can be rationalized leadsto a host of additional assumptions that frame the
debate around development methods. Rationali-
zation assumes a quantiÞable process, maximized
for efÞciency by a distinct division of labor, with

deÞned inputs and outputs, managed by an effec-
tive rule-bound bureaucratic structureÑall of which
results in a process capable of being engineered. Arguably, the industrial revolution signaled the
rise and dominance of rational approaches to pro-
duction over small-scale, craft-based methods. In
a world of scarce resources, producing more with

less is a positive outcome. Within economics, a

perennial tradeoff exists between the benefits to
society overall and the costs individual producers
must bear from the introduction of new produc-
tion processes or organizations. This tradeoff holds
true for free trade, technological change, and man-
ufacturing methods. Economists make the argu-
ment, with strong evidence behind it, that in the
long term, both individuals and society beneÞt from

increasing productivity, higher quality, greater vari-

ety, and lower costs.
Engineering softwareGiven the rationalization of multiple craft indus-tries over the past two centuriesÑall of which were
once considered impossible to manufacture or mass-
produceÑand the resulting benefits in efficiency
and quality, we can reasonably expect that soft-

ware can and should become engineered as well.
We also can expect that software producers, like
Software developers agree on the general problem butdisagree on the speciÞc approaches to solve it. 38Computerall skilled professionals in the past, will resistthis process vehemently, deeming it impossi-

ble to rationalize software given its unique
nature, which requires skilled training and
unquantiÞable knowledge to master. 
Rationalization and bureaucracyAt the turn of the 20th century, Max Weber
foresaw a world of Òspecialists without spirit,
sensualists without heart; this nullity imag-
ines that it has attained a level of civilization
never before achieved.Ó His comment reßects
the attitude that skilled artisans have always
felt toward rationalization. However, Weber
also recognized that rationalization and bureau-
cracy play essential roles, making them inevitable,
if ßawed, features of modern life5 that limit creativ-ity, innovation, and spiritualityÑby deÞnition. 
Rationalization leads to rule-bound, Þxed para-meters and hierarchies that place control, knowl-
edge, and power in institutions and not individ-
uals. Bureaucracy is essentially an institutional-
ized algorithm that takes general inputs and pro-
duces Þxed and anticipated outcomes.Thus, rationalization and bureaucracyÑtheunderpinnings of modern manufacturingÑhave
consistently emphasized management objectives
and goals as the drivers of industrial development.
The more rationalized and explicit a process, the
more it can be managed, moving control of the
process from producers to managers. The very act of quantifying the process and mov-ing it toward a manufactured method places skill in
new tools and techniques, opening up the possibil-
ity of replacing skilled professionals with less-
skilled workers. Individual resistance to the process
isnÕt sufÞcient to prevent an overall transformation

of the industry toward engineered methods. So, we must question why software developmenthasnÕt been rationalized. Why, even with a tremen-

dous effort to engineer the process from within the
profession and from the industry overall, does soft-
ware development continue to confront the same
issues it did 30 years ago? Why havenÕt basic indus-

trial patternsÑsoftware industrialization, software
manufacturing, software engineering, and software
assembly linesÑbecome dominant within the
industry? Answering these questions requires
understanding softwareÕs precise nature.
SOFTWARE DEFINED
Rationalizing software development requires ÞrstdeÞning software quality, skill, and professional-
ism. That this is still an open issue after 30 yearsexplains why software development remains unra-
tionalized and unique from other industries or
processes. However, understanding 
whyarrivingat a deÞnition is difÞcult does provide a key step
toward understanding exactly what software is.Patent or copyright?Consider for example whether software shouldbe patented or copyrighted. The answer to this
question frames the debate on software methods. Is software development an invention derivedthrough a scientiÞc method, or is it an act of speech
and creativity? Is software an act of engineering or communica-
tion? If software is a rational endeavor, improving

quality involves better and more resources: better
management, better tools, more disciplined pro-
duction, and more programmers. If software is a
craft, improving quality involves the exact oppo-
site: focusing on less hierarchy, better knowledge,

more-skilled programmers, and greater develop-
ment ßexibility. 
That software has characteristics of both patentsand copyrights helps explain why software devel-
opment debates become so intractable and condi-
tional. It is difficult, especially from the outside

looking in, to separate software into understand-
able and well-deÞned categories. Our legal system,
assumptions, and experience force software to be

one or the other, losing an accurate description in

the process.Opening open sourceProcesses, products, and industries normallyinvolve relatively separate areas of study. Such

assumptions donÕt work for software. The debate

surrounding open source development provides an

example. In many ways, the basic conßict between
open source and proprietary methods stems from

two distinct visions of how software should be
made, distributed, and rewarded. Even questions
of qualityÑthe belief that open, transparent, peer-

reviewed products have higher qualityÑdeal not

with the end product but also eventually with the
structure of software businesses and processes.When debating software development methods,a central problem arises from not bringing assump-
tions of quality, organization, and reward clearly

into the open or linking them together. For example,

being adamantly committed to open source for its
quality or organizational aspects still doesnÕt address

questions of business or economic rewards. Softwaredevelopmentdebates becomeintractable and conditional becausesoftware hascharacteristics ofboth patents andcopyrights. May 200239Communicating designAs early as 1974, Fred Brooks6stated that merelyadding people to a software project didnÕt increase

its productivityÑa classic diseconomies-of-scale
phenomenon. At some point, when more people try
to use the same tool, the entire process slows down. From a sociological viewpoint, this situation pre-sents a fascinating case study into the speciÞc lim-
its of software development. The essential limit is

not the number of tools or lack of organization but,
rather communication. The increase in lines and
quality of communication, not the number of peo-
ple, complicate software development. Yet, bureau-

cracy and rationally managed processes are built
to create rules for communicating and managing
information ßows to achieve economies of scale.Thus, the solution to software developmentshould be better planning, particularly in deÞning
a project at its inception to accurately identify
needed resources. As IÕve outlined, however, such

defined, managed processes have yet to become
prevalentÑexactly because communication is just
as difÞcult between developers and users at a pro-

jectÕs inception as it is between developers 
duringthe process.7Communication and sociologyAs sociologists know, communication is inher-
ently difficult, mediated by always-contextual
codes, norms, culture, and perceptions. What is
new and surprising is that software has the char-
acteristics of other communication mediums.8Building basic requirements, for example, involves
a process of tacit knowledge communication,
which explains much of what is difficult in soft-
ware development. Translating knowledge from

one context to another, like translating any lan-

guage, involves not just basic grammar and syntax
rules, but also issues of meaning and intent that are
contextual and subjective. Sociologists clearly understand the difÞculty in uni-versally deÞning and quantifying over time anything
that involves human interaction, practice, or beliefÑ

exactly what software development attempts to do.9Broadly, software offers an exercise in translat-
ing existing algorithmsÑin nature, organizations,
or practicesÑinto digital form. Much of this
domain knowledge is tacit, undeÞned, uncodiÞed,
and developed over time, often without being
explicit even to the individuals participating in the

process. More importantly, such knowledge and

practices are dynamic, constantly evolving, and
transforming. It should not surprise us that model-ing these processes proves exceedingly difÞ-cult and that such efforts are often incomplete,
impractical, or unsatisfactory. 
DOMAIN KNOWLEDGEÕS KEY ROLEThe ease with which a concept translates isa function of how well accepted and deÞned
its speciÞc domain knowledge is. Most chil-
dren can, for example, design a car using
widely known and socially agreed-upon con-
cepts. Although most people have a basic idea
of how a factory operates, asking someone to
design a process for making cars is more difÞcult.

Asking someone to design the process of designing
a car poses an even greater challenge. Is there one
right way to design? Are there rules? Is it a burst of

inspiration or is it 99 percent hard work performed
by a solitary individual or by a team?Translation implications
The further away from broadly accepted andunderstood domain knowledge we move, the more
difÞcult translating that knowledge becomes. The
issues are clearly context speciÞc, changing with cul-
ture, location, gender, and experience. Assessing the

importance of domain knowledge to software devel-
opment can bring new understanding to topics such
as the following that developers discuss and prac-
tice within the discipline: ¥Organizational development will be structured
around and struggle with the demands of com-

munication, both in the initial project design
and during its development.¥If deÞning software requirements is difÞcult,
deÞning a universal, Þxed process will be dif-
Þcult as well. This observation suggests that
development modeled on a rational process or
physical principles will always have limited
applicability to software development.¥Because software products often involve unde-
Þned domain knowledge, the more social the
development process the better. Arguably,

tools like peer-review networks and extensive

beta testing focus tacit knowledge.¥Because software developmentÕs end result will
be both a deÞned product and an aspect of a
translation process, it will have characteristics
of patents andcopyrights.¥Questions of quality will often be individually
subjective, changing over time and place. The
social nature of software ensures that even
measuring quality will be difÞcult, involving Communication is inherentlydifÞcult, mediatedby always-contextual codes,norms, culture, and perceptions. 40Computermixed and relative costs, reliability, and 
look-and-feel aspects.¥How well we deÞne domain knowledgeÑ
beyond issues of organization, cost, and 
development timeÑplays a large role in 
structuring development. When develop-
ers thoroughly understand the processes 
they are modeling, and when algorithms 
are most transparent, they can create soft-
ware with greater ease. Arguably, then, 

existing well-engineered processes lend 
themselves to engineered software de-
velopment.¥The software development methods they 
choose, and the sides they take in software
debates, generally reflect developersÕ 
assumptions and experiences regarding 
how well deÞned, and thus translatable, 
knowledge domains are.Overall, the software debate would beneÞt fromaddressing a basic design process that is inherently
difÞcult, social, and based on domain knowledge.
Design presents a challenging intellectual activity
in any industry, but this maxim is especially true

for software, exactly because it involves an almost
pure design process.Design assumptionsSoftware engineering and software methods likethe Software Engineering InstituteÕs Capability

Maturity Model arise from a government and mil-
itary tradition of dealing with clearly deÞned prob-
lems and needs. Issues of management, cost, and
robustnessÑnot how to define the problem
domainÑare central.Agile or craft-based methods, on the other hand,originate in university and programmer communi-
ties, where solutions to problems evolve collectively
over time, based on a transparent, open-ended
process. Both engineering and craft-based methods
address the speciÞc demands of translating domain
knowledge, but they differ in their design assump-tions and problem deÞnitions. This shifts the soft-
ware development debate to consider what
software is expected to do, how to structure a

design process to deÞne and meet these needs, and
what methods and tools support that process. 
BRINGING SOFTWARE INTO SHARP FOCUS
When debating software development, the analo-gies used to describe a specific methodÕs benefits

can cause confusion. Both engineering and craft-
based analogies have limitations. Engineering meth-ods stem from a tradition that describes domainsaccording to physical laws and deÞned parameters,
not dynamic evolving systems. Craft-based ap-
proaches highlight the centrality of individual pro-
ducers, but they do not necessarily address the
demands of a global industry.
While the scenarios in the ÒSoftware Develop-ment AnalogiesÓ sidebar are in some ways limited,
they donÕt need to provide an ideal Þt. Rather, they

highlight the assumptions underlying software
methods and help to locate possible scenarios that
better reßect software reality.
In each analogy, issues of design, quantifying qual-
ity, efÞciency, skill, and complexity dominate the

development process. In each, the Þnal productÕs suc-

cess and the development process itself are suscepti-
ble to complex interactions that are difÞcult to
control, anticipate, and quantify. Thinking through

various examples of intellectual, domain-knowledge-
based work opens the ongoing software debate to
the consideration of new development models.LINKING THE INSIDE AND OUTSIDEFrom the outside, a few things seem clear.
Developing high-quality software consistently, at a

reasonable cost, presents a real challenge. Software
combines creativity, translation, skill, and a disci-

plined method. The various aspects of software as
industry, product, and process push for and simul-

taneously resist rational, standardized methods.Industrial constraintsSoftware as an industry must confront the samemarket forces, accounting practices, and govern-
ment oversight as all other industries. Software
products combine both functional and subjective
aspects that make standard assessment difficult.
Even basic issues of security, privacy, and look and

feel are relative and situational. Rationalizing software processes involves stan-
dardizing intellectual work, which is historically
difficult and most likely counterproductive.
However, these obstacles raise tremendous chal-

lenges for the industry, whose market expects ratio-

nal management and calculation. Improving
software involves considering each of these aspects. As our society and economy become more infor-mation- and knowledge-based, demands on software
and its producers will increase. As an increasingly
central means of producing, storing, transforming,
and distributing knowledge,8software demands everincreasing numbers of solutions and professionals.
The original articulation of this trend at the 1968
NATO conference has proven correct.
Overall, this debatewould beneÞt from
addressing a basicsoftware designprocess that isinherently difÞcult,social, and based on
domain knowledge. 42ComputerGlobal implicationsSoftware also forms part of a broader trendin which multiple industries face similar chal-
lenges to produce intellectual work on a global
scale. Software development can learn from

work on the characteristics of information
economies and intellectual or information
industries.Networked together by ßows of people,
ideas, and Þnance,10the global economy Þtswell with the basic patterns that structure soft-ware as an industry. This environment bases com-

petition on the management, development, and
control of innovation and knowledge in both prod-
ucts and people.11To achieve these aims, Þrms and
organizations must be structured to promote learn-

ing, innovation, and general goal-setting, thus break-
ing with past bureaucratic, Þxed models.12Certain industries and organizations, like phar-
maceuticals, Þlm, or universities, can adapt more
easily to such an environment exactly because they
are structured around basic issues of intellectual
production and management. Design, innovation,
and intellectual work are basic issues in an infor-

mation economy. The work detailing these trends

is extensive and well documented, including quan-
titative and qualitative factors of R&D, productiv-
ity, commercialization, entrepreneurship, learning,

and network organizations.Manufacturing legacyAll of these examples provide resources that soft-ware development can draw upon and apply.

Historically, software developers have indeed done

so, but usually in the context of methods like 
manufacturingÕs Total Quality Management or

engineeringÕs Statistical Quality ControlÑmethod-

ologies based on deÞned processes linked to quan-
titative tools. TQM and SQC have a place in
software development, but applying these method-
ologies should follow from an understanding of
design as the central software activity.
The design issue changes the tools and the ques-tions. TQM, an important tool for manufacturingcars, is far less effective for designingthem. Evenmanufactured products suffer from poor industrial
design, resulting in product recalls or failure in the
market. Generally, questions of design, domain knowl-
edge, and speciÞcation donÕt lend themselves easily

to pure statistical analysis. We shouldnÕt expect soft-

ware to differ from other industries in this regard.
Neither should we ignore the possibility that soft-

wareÑas a leading design and intellectual activityÑcould be an innovator that generates new combi-nations and insight into tools and resources arising
from intellectual work in an information age.FUTURE ISSUESShort-term concerns in software developmentclearly focus on cost, efÞciency, and quality. How-

ever, putting design and domain knowledge at the

discussionÕs center will highlight the following

issues: ¥Software benefits from peer review. Is peerreview beneÞcal early in the process, as in an
open source model, or late in the process

through beta testing or public review? Private
software will continue to be a factor, so a key

question is funding third-party or public mon-
itoring. Universities have an obvious role to
play here, especially in terms of protecting
security and privacy. But the process should

also be democratized, so that general user com-
ments and perspectives can be included, and
tradeoffs between cost, quality, and appropri-

ateness are openly understood and chosen.¥Much is already right with software develop-ment.Developers generally agree on manymethods that work, usually rules of thumb
such as test early, test often; perform daily

builds; and focus resources early on require-
ments. We also need to articulate why these

methods work, speciÞcally as they relate to the
core activity of translating domain knowledge
and managing intellectual work. This will facil-

itate comparing software to existing case stud-

ies of other informational industries. It will

also help in developing basic concepts that can
make software understandable to other eco-
nomic and social sectors.¥Competition in the market is essential, regard-less of speciÞc development methods.Empha-sizing that monopoly as an impediment to
innovation misses an equally essential point:
Markets can also evaluate cost and quality
tradeoffs efÞciently. Well-functioning markets

will eventually support well-functioning devel-
opment processes. However, we can learn

much from studies of the media industryÕs con-

trol over content and distribution. Keeping dis-
tribution channels open, particularly as
software becomes more service oriented, will

be key to ensuring innovation in products as
well as processes.¥Build and borrow tools for evaluating andtransferring domain knowledge.Simple met-Design, innovation,and intellectualwork are basicissues in an informationeconomy.
 May 200243rics or models that quantify how well a processis deÞned will in turn help generate estimates
of time and cost. Such efforts will also help

determine the resources needed to deÞne the
domain originally. We can build on tools from

the social sciences to evaluate simple questions
of how well codiÞed a process is, how well such
codes transfer to digital form, and how well
individuals can communicate such knowledge.¥Design, an inherently buggy process, is difÞ-cult across the board.Software as a puredesign activity will never be perfect, especially
as it models and interacts with human activi-
ties in a dynamic environment. It will also
never be manufacturing, except to the extent
that manufacturing is a design activity. We

must decide what we expect from software.
Tools that deÞne and rank requirements are

essential. The nature of design, as a human-
centered process, also means that mistakes,
bugs, and unforeseen and unintended conse-
quences will occur, just as they do in other

industries. Developing mechanisms to correct
these problems, and creating incentives to
avoid them, must be part of the ongoing dis-
cussion. The increasing pervasiveness of soft-
ware in society will make such issues central,
whether software quality and reliability
increase or not.Longer-term issues involve creating development
support that reßects both the increasing importance
of software in society and the unique demands
made in transferring domain knowledge into effec-

tive software: ¥Software education should include generalskills.These skills include communication,social analysis, design processes, and team-
work between both software developers and
nontechnical users. In addition to developing
strong software skills, this training should
instill the means to analyze, communicate, and
work within a design environment.¥Cross-disciplinary education will create exper-tise in new domain knowledge areas.Thistraining will let developers combine their soft-
ware skills with speciÞc understanding of prob-
lem domains. Biology, Þnance, Þlm, and

management all provide examples of areas in
which software skills will be needed in the

future. Applied projects, especially in nontech-
nical environmentsÑsuch as creating infor-
mation systems for nonproÞt organizations orin developing countriesÑwould buildexpertise and beneÞt from becoming a
standardized part of curricula. These
measures would most likely increase par-
ticipation and interest in software devel-
opment as a dynamic, socially engaged
profession. ¥Cross-disciplinary training should extendto nontechnical Þelds.An understandingof technology generally, and software

practices in particular, will help facilitate

communication about needs and prod-
ucts. Until understanding and apprecia-
tion of software extends beyond the
computing industry and computer sci-
ence departments, the ability of future admin-
istrators, managers, Þnanciers, consultants,
educators, and policymakers to see softwareÕs

potential beneÞts and effectively implement
new software-related projects will remain lim-
ited. ¥Cross-disciplinary research merits increasedsupport.This work should focus on softwareprocesses, products, and industries. Cross-
disciplinary teams and closer ties between all
scientiÞc disciplines would help developers
understand speciÞc issues in process and prod-
uct innovation, the effects and optimal direc-
tion of R&D funding, and aspects of public
regulation and support. This knowledge would,
in turn, help provide an overall map of software
that extends from the present forward. In-

creased interdisciplinary awareness would also
expand the general understanding of software
and help incorporate key lessons from software
development into broader disciplines.Our ultimate goal should be to simply and
directly raise the proÞle of software gener-
ally, respecting and making explicit its
unique structures and important role in society, and

creating training opportunities, research projects,
and tools to support it. Such efforts move software

not only beyond current methodology debates but
also closer and more understandably to the world
outside looking in. References1.A. Cockburn and J. Highsmith, ÒAgile Software
Development: The Business of Innovation,Ó Com-puter, Sept. 2001, pp. 120-122.2.S.R. Rakitin, ÒLetters,Ó 
Computer, Dec. 2001, p. 4.
As softwarebecomes more 
service oriented,
keeping distributionchannels open willbe key to assuringinnovations in products andservices.
 3.P. Naur and B. Randell, eds., ÒSoftware Engineer-
ing: Report on a Conference Sponsored by the
NATO Science Committee,Óhttp://www.cs.ncl.ac.uk/

peoplebrian.randell/home.formal/NATO/nato1968.

PDF.
4.J.N. Buxton and B. Randell, eds., ÒSoftware Engi-
neering Techniques: Report on a Conference Spon-

sored by the NATO Science Committee,Ó http://

www.cs.ncl.ac.uk/people/brian.randell/home.formal/

NATO/nato1969.PDF.
5.M. Weber, 
The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of Cap-italism, 1920, reprint, Routledge, London, 1992.6.F.P. Brooks, 
The Mythical Man-Month: Essays onSoftware Engineering, Addison-Wesley, Reading,
Mass., 1995.7.P. McBreen, 
Software Craftsmanship: The NewImperative, Addison-Wesley, New York, 2002.
8.P.G. Armour, ÒThe Case for a New Business Model,Ó
Comm. ACM, Aug. 2000, p. 19. 9.K. Eischen, ÒInformation Technology: History, Prac-
tice and Implications for Development,Ó Center for
Global, International and Regional Studies, Univer-
sity of California, Santa Cruz, Working Paper 2000-

4, 2000, http://www2.ucsc.edu/globalinterns/wp/
wp2000-4.pdf.10.M. Castells, 
The Information Age: The Rise of theNetwork Society,
Blackwell Publishers, Cambridge,Mass., 1996.11.P.F. Drucker, 
Management Challenges for the 21st
Century,
HarperBusiness, New York, 1999.
12.C.A. Bartlett and S. Ghoshal, ÒBeyond the M-Form:
Toward a Managerial Theory of the Firm
,Ó CarnegieBosch Institute for Applied Studies in International
Management, Working Paper 94-6, Pittsburgh, 1994,

http://www.gsia.cmu.edu/bosch/bart.html.
Kyle Eischen is associate director of Regional andInformational Research at the Center for Global,
International and Regional Studies, University of
California, Santa Cruz. His research interests include
innovation and design processes and the social and
economic impact of information technology. Cur-

rently he is codeveloping the Technology and Human

Development Initiative, a UC systemwide Òskunk
worksÓ for applied technology projects in the devel-

oping world. Eischen received an MA in sociology

from UC Santa Cruz and an MPIA in international
affairs (applied economics) from the Graduate School
of International Relations and PaciÞc Studies at UC
San Diego. Contact him at kbe@ieee.org.computer.org/join/
Complete the online application andTake Web-based training courses in technical areas for free
Receive substantial discounts for our software development professional certiÞcation programGet immediate online access to ComputerSubscribe to our two new publications, IEEE Pervasive Computing
and IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing
, or any of our 22 periodicals at discounted ratesAccess the entire Computer Society digital library for only $50*
Attend leading conferences at member pricesSign up for a free e-mail aliasÑyou@computer.org
*Regular price: $99. Offer expires 15 August 2002.Join the IEEE Computer Society online atTHEWORLD'SCOMPUTERSOCIETY