 84ComputerIT SYSTEMS PERSPECTIVESDespite 50 years of researchand practice, the develop-
ment of softwareÑparticu-
larly complex and innovative
softwareÑis far from a pre-dictable, exact process. Many soft-

ware projects exceed their budget, fail
to conform to their development

schedule, and do not meet expecta-

tions when eventually delivered.In recent years, open source soft-wareÑmore properly, free and open

source softwareÑhas emerged as one
popular solution to the so-called Òsoft-

ware crisis.Ó Advocates regard F/OSS

as an agile, practice-led initiative that
addresses three key issues:¥Cost: F/OSS products are usuallyfreely available for public down-

load.¥Time scale
: The collaborative, par-allel efforts of globally distributed
developers allow many F/OSS
products to be developed much
more quickly than conventional
software.¥Quality: Many F/OSS offeringsare recognized for their high stan-
dards of reliability, efÞciency, and

robustness; products such as
GNU/Linux, Apache, and Bind
have become Òcategory killersÓ
stifling the incentive to develop

any competing products. Supporters also point out that F/OSSharnesses the scarcest resource of all:
talented software developers, many of
whom exhibit a long-standing com-mitment to their chosen projects. In
addition, the resulting peer review

process helps ensure the quality of the

software produced.Moreover, researchers in other
ÞeldsÑincluding sociology, economics,

management, psychology, public policy,

and the lawÑhave embraced F/OSS as
an innovative model for organizing
activity in a variety of social contexts.F/OSS CHALLENGESDespite its wide appeal, F/OSS facesa number of serious challenges that
have led some naysayers within the
software engineering community to
declare that the model is doomed to

ultimately fail.  
Development talentThe main F/OSS contributors areÒcode godsÓ acknowledged to be
among the worldÕs most talented and

highly motivated programmers. The

software industry has long recognized
the potential contribution of gifted

individuals, but they are critical to
F/OSS: The absence of face-to-face

interaction or other normal organiza-
tional sanctions makes it vital that therebe an ultimate arbiter with unques-tioned authority and ability who
charismatically inspires others and can
resolve disputes and prevent forking.However, the explosion of interest in
F/OSS may exceed the pool of develop-
ment talent available. To some extent,

this is already happening. For example,

SourceXchange, a brokering service for
companies soliciting F/OSS developers,
ceased operations in 2001. Studies of
Freshmeat.net and SourceForge.net,
two popular F/OSS development Web
sites, revealed that most projects haveonly one or two developers. They also
have little apparent vitality, as follow-

up studies reported no change in ver-

sion number or size of code base for
many listed projects several months

later. 
Code quality While F/OSS pioneers may havebeen Òbest-of-breedÓ programmers,

the ability of future contributors is

much more in doubt. The popularity
of F/OSS increases the risk that so-

called net-negative-producing pro-
grammers will become involved.
Despite the long probationary period

programmers serve on many F/OSS
projects, NNPs could introduce errors
into the code base. This could irreme-

diably harm F/OSS projects, which
lack the marketing muscle to help

undo damage to volunteersÕ reputa-
tions. Some empirical studies question
the quality of F/OSS code.Project initiationEven if more companies decide to
make their source code generally avail-
able, F/OSS developers are not privy toA Critical Look at Open Source Brian Fitzgerald, University of LimerickDespite many challenges, free and open-source

software remains a viable

model. the organizational design decisionsunderlying the code baseÕs evolution.

Simply releasing a large proprietary
productÕs source codeÑas Netscape

did with its Mozilla browserÑis not
alone enough to launch a vibrant, fully
functioning F/OSS project. Code modularity Code modularity is a key to F/OSS
success as it is the basis for distribut-
ing the development process. However,

it can also be a projectÕs AchillesÕ heel.

Excessive modularity increases the risk
of common coupling,an insidiousproblem in which modules unneces-

sarily refer to variables and structures
in other modules. Thus, changes to

data structures and variables in seem-
ingly unrelated modules can have
major knock-on implications. In this
way, as F/OSS systems evolve, main-

taining them can become difÞcult if not
impossible in the long run. 
Mundane tasks Many software tasksÑsuch as docu-mentation, testing, internationaliza-

tion/localization, and Þeld supportÑ
are tedious but vital, particularly as new
cohorts of developers join and maintain
projects. However, F/OSS developers

could cherry-pick more exciting tasks
such as code design, which is under-
standable in a culture that doe not wor-

ship the likes of Òdocumentation gods.Ó
Unfortunately, nontechnical F/OSS con-

tributors and users may not Þll the gap
to the extent originally predicted.Stability Companies have valid concernsabout the survival of and continued
support for F/OSS products. The tradi-
tional telephone hotline and mainte-

nance contract offer a comfort factor
that a voluntary bulletin boardÑwhich
is the only support that exists for many
F/OSS productsÑcannot provide.Standardization GNU/Linux version proliferationalready poses a substantial challenge to
software providers, who must write andtest applications for the many commer-
cial versions available. Also, the inde-
pendent development of F/OSS products

results in time-consuming interoper-

ability and compatibility problems
among different product versions. Standardization is arguably moreimportant for F/OSS developers, who
typically do not meet face to face, than
for traditional proprietary developers.
Any mechanism that can facilitate col-
lective action, such as common stan-
dards for integration, would beneÞt the
F/OSS community. Although numer-

ous initiatives are moving broadly in
this direction, their conßicting politi-
cal agendas do not make the prospects

of any near-term convergence on stan-

dards likely.
WHY F/OSS?Despite these potential chokepoints,the future for F/OSS remains bright.
Recent research effectively dispels the
stereotype of F/OSS developers as
anarchistic hackers operating on the
fringes of society. Studies by Karim

Lakhani and Bob Wolf in the United

States and by Rishab Aiyer Ghosh in
Europe indicate that most developers
are in stable cohabiting relationships,often with children, and are experi-enced IT professionals paid for their

work on F/OSS projects. Individuals participate in and sup-port F/OSS development for a number
of reasons. Developers can collaborate

with peers they truly respect, acquiring
more rapid feedback and direct recog-
nition through credit acknowledg-
ments on the project lists. In addition,

the informal development style of

F/OSS liberates many from the for-

malized organizational environments

in which they work every day. Also,

students can boost their career pros-

pects by gaining experience on real
development projects. 
Finally, research suggests that imple-
menting F/OSS can result in signiÞcant

savings. Organizations that deploy
F/OSS products freely offer advice to
one another, sharing insights and

lessons learned. At the same time,

hands-on users must proactively work
with IT staff to ascertain whether avail-

able F/OSS products meet their needs.
This cooperative spirit, which in part
may arise from a sense of shared adven-
ture, starkly contrasts with the tradi-
tional impersonal, bilateral relationship
between vendor and customer. 
July 200485Further ReadingThe following resources provide more information on the issues surround-
ing free and open source software:¥A. Capiluppi, P. Lago, and M. Morisio, ÒEvidences in the Evolution of
OS Projects through Changelog Analyses,Ó Taking Stock of the Bazaar:
3rd Workshop Open Source Software Eng.,
25th IntÕl Conf. SoftwareEng., 2003, pp. 19-24; http://opensource.ucc.ie/icse2003.¥J. Feller et al., 
Perspectives on Free and Open Source Software,MIT Press,2005.¥B. Fitzgerald and T. Kenny, ÒDeveloping an Information Systems
Infrastructure with Open Source Software,Ó IEEE Software,vol. 21, no.1, 2004, pp. 50-55.¥E.S. Raymond, 
The Cathedral & the Bazaar: Musings on Linux and OpenSource by an Accidental Revolutionary,
OÕReilly & Assoc., 1999.¥S.R. Schach and A.J. Offutt, ÒOn the Nonmaintainability of Open-Source
Software,Ó Meeting Challenges and Surviving Success: 2nd Workshop
Open Source Software Engineering,24th IntÕl Conf. Software Eng., 2002;http://opensource.ucc.ie/icse2002/SchachOffutt.pdf. 86ComputerSome argue that F/OSS represents
a paradigm shift in software engi-

neering. For example, Eric
Raymond describes the disciplined and
coordinated conventional approach as
a ÒcathedralÓ and F/OSS as a noisy,

confused Òbazaar.Ó 
At first glance, F/OSS appears tocontravene fundamental tenets of soft-
ware engineering: no formal require-

ments speciÞcation or design process,
no risk assessment or measurable
goals, informal coordination and con-

trol, and much duplication and paral-
lel effort. However, well-established

software engineering principles lie at

the heart of F/OSS. 
Code modularity allows partitioning
of work among a global pool of devel-
opers and facilitates the recruitment of
new contributors, as it reduces their

learning curve to a subset of modules
rather than the entire project. Indeed,
developers rewrote projects such as
Sendmail, Samba, and even Linux in
modular form to ensure successful

development. F/OSS developers also carefully vetand incorporate contributions in accor-

dance with sound conÞguration man-

agement, independent peer review, and

testingÑall familiar software engi-
neering concepts. Brian Fitzgeraldholds the FrederickA. Krehbiel II Chair in Innovation in

Global Business and Technology at the

University of Limerick, Ireland. Con-
tact him at bf@ul.ie.
ITSystems Perspectives
Editor: Richard G. Mathieu, Dept. ofDecision Sciences and MIS, St. Louis 
University, St. Louis, MO 63108;

mathieur@slu.eduF/OSS does not represent 
a paradigm shift in software engineering.
