 64 COMPUTER
  PUBLISHED BY THE IEEE COMPUTER SOCIETY
 0018-9162/16/$33.00 © 2016 IEEE
Agile software development approaches such 
as Scrum increase the e˜ciency and ˚exi
-bility of software development by reducing 

organizational overhead and emphasizing 
direct communication instead of comprehensive docu
-mentation. All documentation must satisfy a particu
-lar need and must be as lightweight as possible. These 

approaches work well for small collocated collaborative 
teams that meet daily because they 

can discuss any open issue face to 

face. Documentation translates to 
minutes of team meetings, which 
tends to reduce the architectural 

metaphor to a sketch.
Nevertheless, the merits of using 
agile development approaches to 

create software architecture are 

still being debated, and agile meth
-ods are increasingly being applied 

in long-term and distributed proj
-ects.
˛,˝
 Such projects often have 
larger teams, and not all develop
-ers know the complete system.
˙ In 
a controlled and extended evolu
-tion of complex software systems 

within larger distributed teams, 
the documentation of an explicit 
architecture is critical,
ˆ but the 
right balance between reducing process overhead by 

minimizing documentation and maintaining light
-weight development with minimal documentation is 
di˜cult to achieve. 
Unlike traditional development, in which archi
-tecture is a huge upfront design, architecture in agile 
development must adapt to changing requirements and 

remain lightweight.
ˇ In the agile development world, 
Sebastian Gayer,
 MID
Andrea Herrmann,
 Herrmann & Ehrlich
Thorsten Keuler,
 John Deere
Matthias Riebisch,
 University of Hamburg
Pablo Oliveira Antonino,
 Fraunhofer Institute for Experimental 
Software Engineering
Although traceability information is vital to 
many software engineering activities, agile 

development approaches rarely use it because 

of the extra effort required. In this industry case 

study, the authors report the results of applying 

their lightweight semiautomated method that 

integrates traceability into software architecture 

developed with an agile process like Scrum.
Lightweight 
Traceability for
 
the Agile Architect
   MAY 2016
 65architecture is far from monolithic: it is 
a dynamic communication vehicle that 

serves as input to subsequent system 

design and development activities, and 
agile architects document any assump
-tions made.
˜ An explicit representation 
of architecture and traceability serves 
as documentation to satisfy certi˚ca
-tion and standards compliance, or it can 
be the basis for negotiations between 
customer and provider.
IEEE de˚nes as architecture as ﬁthe 
fundamental organization of a system, 

embodied in its components, their rela
-tionships to each other and to the envi
-ronment, and the principles govern
-ing its design and evolution.ﬂ
˛ Under 
this de˚nition, software architecture 

includes the rationale of decisions and 

traceability links to other artifacts, 
such as requirements and test cases.
Traceability between artifacts is a 
way to support the maintainability, 
changeability, and sustainability of 

a software system and its artifacts. 

Traceability answers diverse questions 

during software engineering, usually 
across multiple artifacts; for exam
-ple, in product-line development, it 
captures which functionalities have 

been delivered with which code ver
-sion.
˝,˙
 The required information and 
relationships must be documented 

and available in a form that supports 

activities like impact analysis,
ˆˇ which 
identi˚es the potential changes due to 

changing requirements before these 
 changes occur.
ˆˆ
The de˚nition of traceability from 
the Center of Excellence for Software 

and Systems Traceability (CoEST) states 

these functions explicitly:
ˆ˘[Traceability is] the ability to inter
-relate any uniquely identi˜able 
software engineering artifact to 

any other, maintain required links 

over time, and use the resulting 

network to answer questions 

of both the software product 
and its development process.
To demonstrate the feasibility of 
using traceability in agile development, 
we developed a traceability procedure 

that integrates traceability informa
-tion into existing artifacts and identi
-˚es and updates it semiautomatically, 

requiring only trivial extensions to 

existing toolsets. To ascertain the right 

balance between development and doc
-umentation, we applied our approach 

in an industrial case studyŠa project 

at John Deere. The results of the study 
show that developers can create and 
maintain architectural documentation 

of an agile process, such as Scrum, with 

little additional eort.
WHAT DOES 
LIGHTWEIGHT MEAN?
To ensure that our approach would be 
lightweight, we adopted three main 

strategies: 
 łidentify the necessary traceabil
-ity information using a goal-
 
oriented approach, 
 łensure that the creation and 

maintenance of traceability links 

can be integrated with existing 

processes and tool chains, and
 łprovide automated support for 

traceability link creation and 

maintenance. 
We designed our approach to work 
with any agile software development 

process, although we use ScrumŠ
 generally accepted in the software 
industry as a de facto processŠin 

our case study. Figure ˆ presents the 

basic Scrum process and artifacts.
 The user stories in each sprint (which 

refers to the time block in which spec
-i˚ed work must be delivered) are 
detailed into task cards. Architecture 
is viewed as part of the product and 

integrated into the Scrum process in 

that context, for example, as architec
-ture sprints, user stories, and tasks. 

The code- and version-
 management 
system contains developer comments, 
which can cover traceability informa
-tion. The lines between artifacts show 
the three necessary traceability links: 

requirements to user stories, which 

drives design decisions; user stories to 

architecture, which drives implemen
-tation; and user stories to test cases, 
which drives testing. 
RETRIEVING TRACEABILITY 
INFORMATION
Some traceability is implicitly estab
-lished during the creation of devel
-opment artifacts and thus does not 
demand any additional eort. For 
example, most modeling tools auto
-matically create links such as the own
-ership relation between two classes, 
and coding tools indirectly create 

module interdependencies simply 

by accessing other code units™ inter
-faces. These naturally occurring links 
are used in conducting activities like 
impact and coverage analyses or in 

understanding how cross-layer ele
-ments relate. The challenge is how to 

retrieve that traceability information 

from the tools™ infrastructure. 
Other links require consider
-ably more eort to create and main
-tain. All vertical traceability links, 

such as those from requirements to 
 66 COMPUTER
   WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/COMPUTER
architecture and from requirements 
to implementation artifacts, require 

some degree of e˜ort, depending on 

the granularity of the interlinked arti
-facts. Linking high-level artifacts, for 

example, is much easier than creating 

links between those at a lower level. 

Our approach aims to address both 

types. To address links that require 

e˜ort to create, we incorporate two 

steps: analyze needs and adapt the 
tools™ infrastructure accordingly.
 Analyze needs
Analysis must be done in combina
-tion with the underlying process and 
tool infrastructure. Needs are usu
-ally driven by the risks attached to 
the project, which in turn are strongly 

in˚uenced by the degree of team dis
-tribution and system complexity, the 

quality requirements to be ful˛lled, 
and the need for sustainability. 
Adapt tool
 infrastructure
The minimal information needed to cre
-ate a link and integrate it into the tool™s 
infrastructure is the trace™s source and 

target. If available, the traceability link 
type is useful; an example is a struc
-tural relation such as part-of, re˛ned-to, 
or called-by. If possible, the develop
-ment activity could be added to the 

link, such as Trac item, bug report, user 

story, or even a sprint task. Links must 

be bi
 directional, as both directions are 
needed for traversal. Examples are cov
-erage checks and comprehension activ
-ities for reverse engineering.
ACQUIRING 
TRACEABILITY LINKS
Acquiring traceability links requires 
creating either implicit relationships as 

part of engineering activities or explicit 

relationships in addition to engineer
-ing activities.
Regardless of how they are used, 
traceability links must be captured 

and documented somewhere using 

either a single model or multiple arti
-facts. Keeping links in a single model 

makes it hard to connect the links to 
external artifacts; storing links in 
Design-decision traceabilityImplementation traceabilityTest-case traceabilityAutomated support     Unit testsProduct visionSprint backlogAcceptance testsIntegration +regression testsIncrementTeamSprint(1 to 4 weeks)Dailyscrum(24 hours)Sprint tasksDaily resultsProduct backlogProductProduct ownerScrum masterFIGURE ˜. Scrum development process extended with traceability links. Our method provides automated support for traceability tasks 
(purple dashed lines), which include the creation and maintenance of traceability links among user stories listed in the sprint backlog, design 
decisions, and component implementation for that sprint, and test cases related to those user stories and design decisions. 
   MAY 2016
 67
multiple artifacts requires integrating 
a large number of artifacts and links. 

Regardless of the capture and doc
-ument strategy, semiautomatically 
creating links can reduce the e˜ort 
involved. Combining semiautomatic 

link creation with tools to automate 

link maintenance removes many of 

the additional costs and e˜ort associ
-ated with traceability.
One of the main barriers to ensur
-ing traceability among development 

artifacts is that people with di˜erent 

project roles and professional back
-grounds create those artifacts, and 

they tend to prefer familiar develop
-ment tools. Consequently, there is less 

willingness to migrate to highly inte
-grated tools with built-in traceabil
-ity support, such as MID™s Innovator 

(www.mid.de/en/products/innovator
 -enterprise-modeling-suite.htm), 
 Version
    One, and ThoughtWorks™ Min
-gle. This reluctance puts a burden on 

any traceability approach, which must 
aim to be as noninvasive on develop
-ment processes and developer prefer
-ences as possible.
MAINTAINING 
TRACEABILITY LINKS
Agile development™s guiding philos
-ophy is to embrace change, which 
complicates traceability because any 

development alteration requires updat
-ing traceability links. To avoid excess 

maintenance e˜ort, traceability meth
-ods should update links only if neces
-sary, such as to correct an inconsistency 

with a changed model element. 
Developers can easily identify obso
-lete and erroneous links by comparing 
the modi˚cation dates of the trace™s 
source and target elements and ver
-ifying the link if the source element 
has a more recent date. A tool such as 

TraceMaintainer can simplify this ver
-i˚cation by automating the rule-based 

maintenance of trace links.
˛˝JOHN DEERE CASE STUDY
To evaluate our approach, we integrated 

it into the agile development process 

and tool infrastructure at John Deere.
John Deere decided to introduce 
agile software development to more 

quickly respond to customer needs and 

provide robust solutions as rapidly as 

possible. The compelling advantages of 

going agile are short release cycles and 

early customer feedback; the down
-side is the inevitable communication 
overhead associated with a distributed 
development team.
Project characteristics
We chose to use our approach in a proj
-ect to design the display for agricultural 

tractors, which is the machine opera
-tor™s interface and thus critical to the 
tractor™s success as a product. 
The project had the following 
characteristics:
 łmore than ˛˙ˆ developers;
 łglobal development using Qt, 
Linux, and C++;
 ła system of ˛ˆ million LOC, 

translating to roughly ˛ˆˆ 

components; 
 ła sprint of ˇ weeks; and 
 ła potentially shippable increment 

(PSI) in ˘ weeks.
The project™s risk factors were dis
-tributed teams, team and project size, 

and the high number of requirements 

to ensure product quality.
Traceability challenges
At John Deere, user stories are created 

in Rally (www.rallydev.com), require
-ments speci˚cations documents and 

architecture design models are created 
in Microsoft Word using text editors 
and a dedicated modeling tool, and test 

cases are speci˚ed with Google™s C++ 

Test Framework, SpecFlow, and NUnit. 

However, direct links between user sto
-ries and requirements speci˚cations 

were missing, which led to several chal
-lenges throughout the process. 
RequireddocumentsUser storiesTest casesTraceManEnterprise ArchitectFIGURE ˜. Inputs to TraceMan as applied in the John Deere project. TraceMan uni˜ed 
traceability links between requirements, user-story, and test-case formats by providing a 
centralized repository for the links that served as input to Enterprise Architect. By partially 
automating link creation with fully automating link maintenance, TraceMan reduced much 
of the additional cost and effort typically associated with traceability.
 68 COMPUTER
   WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/COMPUTER
To improve this situation, John 
Deere included Sparx Systems™ Enter
-prise Architect and Fraunhofer™s 
TraceMan as part of an e˜ort to cen
-tralize agile development activities. 

Enterprise Architect is a well-known 

and widely adopted modeling tool. 

TraceMan, developed at the Fraun
-hofer Institute for Experimental Soft
-ware Engineering (IESE), is at the 

core of our traceability procedure. 
As Figure ˚ depicts, it provides auto
-mated support in creating traceability 
links among documents created with 
Microsoft Word; user stories created 

in Rally, and test cases speci˛ed in C++ 

Test Framework, SpecFlow, and NUnit. 

It also houses the links in a central 
repository that serves as input to the 
Enterprise Architect environment.
Establishing links
User stories and requirements spec
-i˛cations were imported to Enter
-prise Architect with TraceMan, and 

the traceability links were estab
-lished and maintained in a centralized 

model. Within Enterprise Architect, 
architectural elements such as inter
-faces, components, and design pat
-terns were targets of these links. The 

automatic import function in our tool 

extensions allowed us to quickly link 

requirements speci˛cations in Word to 

user stories in Rally.
In many cases, a project team opts 
to refactor the source code and archi
-tecture incrementally, which enables 

them to reduce the number of links, 

retaining only the most relevant ones. 

Refactoring inherently involves mod
-ifying tests and sometimes require
-ments speci˛cations, so work to update 
links does not incur any noticeable 
overhead e˜ort. Our method explicitly 

addresses refactoring e˜ects on trace
-ability by linking product vision, prod
-uct backlog, and sprint backlog (see 

Figure ˝).
Figure ˙ shows a speci˛c exam
-ple of link creation. In Figure ˙a, the 

requirement elements ﬁtractorﬂ and 

ﬁimplementﬂ are connected with an 

ISOBUS (a communication unit within 

the tractor), which has associated tex
-tual documentation specifying the 

details of that connection and the 
requirement™s decomposition into 
four user stories. We supported this 

link-
 creation step by automatically 
importing the four user stories cre
-ated in Rally into the same environ
-ment where requirements are speci
-˛ed using model-
 based approaches.
The link in Figure ˙b highlights the 
importance of connecting user stories 
to design elements. We have observed 

that many projects fail to delineate an 

explicit relationship between architec
-tural design and the elements, such as 

user stories, that motivated particular 
design decisions. In this case, the link 
shows that two speci˛c user stories 
<<Requirement>>Tractor and implement are connected with an ISOBUS<<User Story>>Implement can be attached to a tractor<<User Story>>Implement can be detached from a tractor<<User Story>>Operator can control the implement<<User Story>>Operator sets up implement depending on ˜eld and hay(a)decomposedecompose(b)<<User Story>>Implement can be attached to a tractor<<User Story>>Implement can be detached from a tractorBus-client managerECU 1deploy<<User Story>>Operator sets up implement depending on ˜eld and hay<<Test Case>>Tractor operator caninsert ˜eld and hay information in the system<<Test Case>>Type of hay inserted is in a wrong format(c)ArchitecturedecomposedecomposeaddressaddresstesttestFIGURE ˜. Creating traceability links among architectural artifacts in the John Deere project. 
Links shown are between (a) requirements and user stories, (b) architectural design and 
user stories, and (c) a user story and two test cases. To support link creation, our approach 
automatically imports elements, such as user stories and test cases, into a common 
environment. Developers can then easily and quickly create links manually. ECU: electronic 
communication unit.
   MAY 2016
 69drove an architectural decisionŠthe 
inclusion of a bus client manager and 

electronic communication unit (ECU). 

We have found that explicit links also 
reduce the number of unaddressed 
architecture drivers, as well as the 

number of architecture elements with 

no responsibilities. 
As with requirements and user sto
-ries, our approach automatically im
  ports test cases into the same working 
environment as the requirements and 
user stories. In the sample link in Fig
-ure ˜c, the user story ﬁOperator sets up 

implement depending on ˚eld and hayﬂ 

is tested by the test cases ﬁTractor opera
-tor should be able to insert ˚eld and hay 

information in the systemﬂ and ﬁType of 
hay inserted is in a valid format.ﬂ
Traceability management
As the various sidebars describing 
established traces describe, traceabil
-ity management during the John Deere 

project was both e˛cient and e˝ective 
in large part because product owners 
and system engineers could work on a 

centralized model that united user sto
-ries speci˚ed in Rally and requirements 

speci˚ed in Microsoft O˛ce tools. 

Traceability links were quickly nar
-rowed to only the most important ones.
Bene˜ts to architecture 
and architects
Our approach not only simpli˚ed archi
-tectural decisions because of the cen
-tral location and structure of the arti
-facts and their traceability links, but it 
also supported impact analysis during 
software evolution. Traceability links 

can help in predicting how the require
-ments changes will a˝ect the architec
-ture. Without documented links, it was 

di˛cult to trace which architectural 
decisions had to be reconsidered, as the 
only support came in the form of spec
-i˚cation documents and architectural 
models.
Impact analysis also improved be-
cause traceability from the user sto
- ries to the architecture enabled 
architects and systems engineers to 
identify exactly which architecture 
elements had to be considered if the 

user stories changed.
Sprint planning also became more 
e˛cient because, once all the candi
-date artifacts were identi˚ed, it was 
TRACE TO LINK REQUIREMENTS 
AND USER STORIES
 »Before:
 Trace is not done.
 »After:
 Trace takes approximately ˜ minutes for each user story.
 »Assumptions:
 Product owners previously created user stories in 
Rally. Requirements are in Word or Excel ˚les.
Requirements engineers import the user stories from Rally that 
are associated with the speci˚ed requirement. TraceMan creates a 
modeling element that represents the Rally user story and a model 
element that represents the requirement. Requirements engineers 

manually create the trace links between them. 
The estimated ˜ minutes includes time to type the user story 
number, for the tools to communicate, to check that the user story 

was correctly imported, and to create the link.
TRACE TO LINK USER STORIES 
AND ARCHITECTURE
 »Before:
 Trace is not done.
 »After:
 Trace takes less than ˛˝ minutes per user story.
 »Assumptions:
 User stories are in Rally. An architecture model 
exists.
The product owner and architects discuss which architectural ele
-ments are necessary (ones that either exist or need to be created) to 
address the user story. Once they identify dependencies among the 

necessary elements, they manually create trace links. Most of the 
required time is devoted to the discussion to determine the neces
-sary elements.
 70 COMPUTER
   WWW.COMPUTER.ORG/COMPUTER
easier to estimate the e˜ort to imple
-ment each feature and select the most 
suitable artifact for the sprint. 
Improvements in test speci˜cations
Each user story has a set of acceptance 

criteria that should be re˚ected in test 

speci˛cations. In John Deere™s typical 

process, user stories are documented in 
Rally, and test speci˛cations are stored 
in the databases of the tools that devel
-oped them. When a user story changed, 

it took considerable e˜ort to manually 

verify if the associated test was still 

valid. With our approach, test speci˛
-cations are imported into the modeling 
tool. As user stories are imported from 
Rally into the modeling tool, the traces 

are created with automated support, 

making the subsequent discussion 

more fruitful.
It is also important to highlight 
which user story is related to which code 
and whether that code has been tested, 
reviewed, and working. Also import
-ant are the connections between sprint 

tasks and daily results and the unit tests 
to verify the validity of those results and 

between product backlog and product 
and the acceptance tests that verify the 
validity of the produced results. 
As with the traces between require
-ments and user stories, the traces 

between test cases and user stories are 

created manually. Again, extra e˜ort is 

minimal because the agile development 
team can easily trace the elements while 
they discuss which test cases are needed 

to completely cover each user story. 
E˚ects on
 the development environment 
Our approach gave John Deere devel
-opers a structured way to communi
-cate requirements among stakeholder 

groupsŠperhaps the most valuable 
bene˛t of the case study project. With 
the resulting centralized information 

source, engineers could combine ele
-ments from agile development and 

traditional document-centric develop
-ment, presenting an opportunity for the 

company to enhance its overall develop
-ment process with reasonable e˜ort.
We have presented a procedure 

with automated support for 

creating and maintaining a 
lightweight traceability-
 management 
solution for agile software devel
-opment. To minimize communica
-tion overhead, our approach relies on 

extensions to agile artifacts and pop
-ular tools. Link identi˛cation is semi
-automatic, and links can be visualized 

graphically within existing tools. 
Our case study in an industrial proj
-ect demonstrated the feasibility of 

implementing our approach in a main
-stream model-based development envi
-ronment with only minor extensions. 

Any agile software development pro
-cess is can be extended similar to the 
way we extended Scrum.
In future work, we plan to increase the 
degree of automated support for creating 
traceability links using connections in 

impact analysis, and applying rule-based 

consistency checks between related arti
-facts during software evolution. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We thank members of the German Com
-puter Society™s Special Interest Group on 
TraceabilityŠElke Bouillon, Baris Güldali, 

Ste˜en Lehnert, and Daniel MoldtŠfor 

their fruitful discussions about early drafts 

of this article.
REFERENCES
˝.
 J. Eckstein, 
Agile Software Deve
lopment 
in the LargeŠDiving Into the Deep
, Dor
-set House, ˙ˆˆˇ
.˙.
 C. Larman and B. Vodde, 
Practices 

for Scaling Lean & Agile Development: 

Large, Multisite, & O˜shore Product 

Development with Large-Scale Scrum
, Addison-Wesley, ˙ˆˆ˘.
.
 L. Cao and B. Ramesh, ﬁAgile 

Requirements Engineering P
ractices: 
TRACE TO LINK USER STORIES 
AND TEST CASES
 »Before: 
Trace is done ad hoc, taking an average of ˜˚ minutes 
 per user story.
 »After:
 Trace takes less than ˛˚ minutes per user story.
 »Assumptions:
 User stories are in Rally and were imported to the 
modeling tool with TraceMan. Test cases are in NUnit or SpecFlow 
test tools.
Testers and product owners discuss which test cases will be used 
to verify the acceptance criteria associated with a user story. As 

soon as the testers and product owner identify the necessary tests, 
the testers use TraceMan to import the test cases created in NUnit 
or SpecFlow into the modeling tool. The product owner and tes
-ters manually create links between the user stories and test-case 
elements.
Most of the ˛˚ minutes allotted is devoted to deciding if the test 
suite will verify the criteria. Once the test suite is identi˝ed, Trace
-Man is used to create traceability links.
   MAY 2016
 71An Empirical Study,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, vol. ˜˚, no. ˛, ˜˝˝˙, pp. ˆ˝ˇˆ˘.
 P. Kruchten, ﬁArchitecture,ﬂ blog, 
Kruchten Engineering Services, ˜˝˛; 

http://philippe.kruchten.com
 /architecture.
˚. P. Kruchten, ﬁSoftware Architecture 

and Agile Software Development: 

A Clash of Two Cultures,ﬂ 
Proc. ACM 

Int™l Conf. Software Eng.
 (ICSE ˛˝), ˜˝˛˝, 
pp.˘Œ˙.
ˆ. D. Falessi et al., ﬁPeaceful Coexis
-tence: Agile Developer Perspectives 

on Software Architecture,ﬂ
   IEEE Software
, vol. ˜˘, no. ˜, 
 ˜˝˛˝, pp. ˜Œ˜˚.
˜.
 IEEE Std. ˚˛˜˚-˝˙˙˙, IEEE Recom
-mended Practice for Architectural 

Description for Software-Intensive Sys
-tems
, IEEE, ˜˝˝˝; https://standards
 .ieee.org/ndstds/standard/˛˘˛
 -˜˝˝˝.html.
˙. S. Rochimah, W. Wan Kadir, and A.H. 

Abdullah, ﬁAn Evaluation of Trace
-ability Approaches to Support Soft
-ware Evolution, 
Proc. ˝nd IEEE Int™l 

Conf. Software Eng. Advances 
(ICSEA 

˝˘), ˜˝˝˘, pp. ˛Œ˜˘.
 N. Aizenbud-Reshef et al., ﬁModel 

Traceability,ﬂ 
IBM Systems J.
, vol˚, 
no, ˜˝˝ˆ, pp. ˚˛˚Œ˚˜ˆ.
˛˝.
 A. De Lucia, F. Fasano, and R. Oliveto, 

ﬁTraceability Management for Impact 

Analysis,ﬂ 
Proc. ACM Frontiers Soft
-ware Maintenance 
(FoSM ˝˙), ˜˝˝˙, 

pp. ˜˛Œ˝.
˛˛.
 S. Winkler and J. von Pilgrim, ﬁA Sur
-vey of Traceability in Requirements 

Engineering and Model-Driven Devel
-opment,ﬂ 
Software and Systems Model
-ing
, vol, no, ˜˝˛˝, pp. ˚˜Œ˚ˆ˚.
˛˜.
 J. Cleland-Huang et al., ﬁSoftware 

Traceability: Trends and Future Direc
-tions, 
Proc. ACM Future of Software 

Eng. Conf.
 (FoSE ˛), ˜˝˛, pp. ˚˚Œˆ. 
˛.
 K. Schwaber, 
Agile Project Management 

with SCRUM
, Microsoft Press, ˜˝˝
˛
 P. Mäder, O. Gotel, and I. Philippow, 

ﬁRule-Based Maintenance of Post-
 
Requirements Traceability Relations,ﬂ 

Proc. ˚ˆth IEEE Int™l Conf. Requirements 

Eng. 
(RE ˝˙), ˜˝˝˙, pp. ˜Œ˜.
ABOUT THE AUTHORS
SEBASTIAN GAYER 
is a managing consultant at MID GmbH. His research inter
-ests include the Innovator modeling platform, model-driven software devel
-opment, requirements engineering, enterprise-architecture management, and 

service-
 oriented architecture. Gayer received a Diploma in information engineer
-ing and management from the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology. Contact him at 
s.gayer@mid.de.
ANDREA HERRMANN 
is a freelance software-engineering trainer and researcher 
with Herrmann-Ehrlich. Her research interests include requirements engineer
-ing, decision making in software engineering, and empirical research. Herrmann 

received a PhD in physics from the University of Stuttgart. She is a member of the 

German Informatics Society and a member and leader of several working groups 

of the German chapter of ACM. Contact her at herrmann@herrmann-ehrlich.de.
THORSTEN KEULER 
is a product engineering supervisor of the John Deere 
Intelligent Solutions Group in Kaiserslautern. His research interests include qual
-ity improvement processes and optimized sustainable measures to support the 
delivery of high-quality software. Keuler received a PhD in computer science 

from the Technical University of Kaiserslautern. Contact him at KeulerThorsten@
 
JohnDeere.com.
MATTHIAS RIEBISCH 
is a professor of software engineering at the University 
of Hamburg. His research interests include software evolution and sustainability, 
model-based development, and software architectural design methods. Riebisch 

received a PhD in computer science from the Ilmenau University of Technology. 

He is a member of the German Informatics Society and cochair of its Software 

Architectures group. Contact him at riebisch@informatik.uni-hamburg.de.
PABLO OLIVEIRA ANTONINO
 is a senior engineer and project manager at the 
Fraunhofer Institute for Experimental Software Engineering, Kaiserslautern. 
His research interests include the construction and analysis of architectures of 

dependable embedded systems to support automotive, agricultural, medical-
 device, and avionics applications. Antonino received a PhD in computer sci
-ence from the University of Kaiserslautern. Contact him at pablo.antonino@iese
 .fraunhofer.de.
Selected CS articles and 
columns are also available for 

free at 
http://ComputingNow
 .computer.org
.@securityprivacy
FOLLOW US
