 The 24-Hour Knowledge Factory: Can It Replace theGraveyard Shift?CitationGupta, A. ﬁThe 24-Hour Knowledge Factory: Can It Replace theGraveyard Shift?.ﬂ Computer 42.1 (2009): 66-73. ©2009 IEEEComputer Society.As Publishedhttp://dx.doi.org/10.1109/MC.2009.25PublisherIEEE Computer SocietyVersionFinal published versionAccessedTue May 29 14:22:52 EDT 2018Citable Linkhttp://hdl.handle.net/1721.1/59378Terms of UseArticle is made available in accordance with the publisher's policyand may be subject to US copyright law. Please refer to thepublisher's site for terms of use.Detailed TermsThe MIT Faculty has made this article openly available. Please sharehow this access benefits you.  Your story matters. With improved telecommunications and higher band
-width, geographical distance is no longer the handicap 
that it once was, so it makes no sense to risk employee 
health with a graveyard shift. Indeed, many companies 
now view the time differences as a strategic edge to pro
-ductivity, not an obstacle. 
This new mind-set, as well as the need for a healthier 
alternative to night work, led to the formation of a re
-search group at the University of Arizona with the aim 
of defining the 24-hour knowledge factory concept and 
creating a prototype system that would support it.
1 In this 
paradigm, multiple collaborating centers in time zones 
six to eight hours apart hand off work around the clock, 
ensuring that each center completes its respective part 
during the daytime. Of course, not all work lends itself 
to this arrangement, but our group found that the para
-digm is adaptable for a variety of knowledge-based tasks. 
The key issues are how to hand over work in progress, 
decompose tasks into relatively autonomous units, and 
manage operations effectively in such a decentralized 
environment.
Examples from industry and academia offer insight into 
what is and is not currently possible or on the horizon. 
Decades ago, many companies developing 
software applications viewed the geographic 
dispersion of computer professionals as a per
-formance and productivity bottleneck. The 
time difference, they argued, would hamper 
the ability to execute work, adding delays and overhead, 
such as travel expense. Rather than outsource develop
-ment to distant countries, most organizations addressed 
productivity by adding a night, or graveyard, shift. The 
shift was aptly named, as it turns out, since both the World 
Health Organization and American Cancer Society have 
recently linked working at night to breast and prostate 
cancer (
www.msnbc.msn.com/id/2202666
0).
Amar Gupta, 
University of Arizona
Collaborating centers in time zones six to 
eight hours apart can transfer work so that 
every center is working during the daytime. 
Although this concept avoids the hazards 
of night work, it requires careful planning 
and a way to automatically capture evolving 
knowledge.
COMPUTER
 66
COVER FEATURE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
0018-9162/09/$25.00 © 2009 IEEE
 THE 24-
HOUR KNOWLE
DGE FAC
TORY: 
CAN I
T REPLACE 
 THE 
GRAVEYAR
D SH
IFT
? Clearly, the ideas will spawn a new generation of computer 
professionals who will need to develop pieces of the fac
-tory infrastructure within various disciplines.
HOW IT WORKS
To illustrate how a 24-hour knowledge factory might op
-erate, consider the workflow in three centers. An employee 
in a North or South American center ends work at 5 p.m. 
and transfers work to a worker in an Asian or Australian 
center, which is just beginning its workday. Approximately 
eight hours later, that worker transfers work to a third 
worker in a European or an African center, who at the end 
of the day, transfers the work back to the American center, 
and the cycle begins again. The paradigm requires at least 
three collaborating centers, but more are feasible if shifts 
need to be shorter.
Although this description makes the paradigm seem 
rather simple, it is, in fact, not that straightforward. Work 
transfer
 is really more like work 
transformation
, since 
each worker adds and reshapes knowledge before pass
-ing it on. Transformed tasks, in turn, lead to redefined 
job descriptions, which require expertise to break down 
and define. 
This workflow means that organizations must con
-sider the characteristics of the work before attempting 
to apply the factory paradigm. Any situation in which 
an organization can capture and digitize underlying 
knowledge might be suitable, but the work must meet 
three criteria:
The work can be broken down into disaggregated 
components. 
Several individuals can work on such components 
with little peer support.
The cost of transferring work in progress is low. Cost 
includes the overhead involved in packaging both the 
work and the evolving decision rationales. As such, 
what constitutes ﬁlowﬂ is an economic or business 
decision that is unique to each organization.
It is tempting to immediately dismiss manufacturing as 
a feasible application area, but in reality, it is not difficult 
to transmit information about individual manufactur
-ing applications, such as design rationale, engineering, 
quality assurance, and sales data for individual parts, sub
-assemblies, and finished products. With such information, 
geographically distant suppliers and others on the rev
-enue stream can contribute to a manufacturing facility™s 
operations. The same applies to information in a range 
of disciplines involving accountants, architects, business 
managers, computer programmers, financial analysts, 
medical practitioners, and product designers.
ŁŁŁEARLY EFFORTS
The factory concept and follow-the-sun models are not 
new. The notion of a collaborative 24-hour workday started 
with geographically dispersed call centers. Three or four 
centers collaborated, exploiting voice-over-IP technology 
to provide round-the-clock coverageŠbut with all employ
-ees working only during the daytime in their respective 
countries. Global communications networks also use mul
-tiple support centers.
However, call centers are not concerned with generat
-ing a product or with knowledge transformation. Software 
development centers were the first to experiment with a 
rudimentary factory concept as a way to boost efficiency 
over traditional offshore outsourcing. In the traditional 
approach, which some companies still endorse, one center 
works on developing code for several weeks and then 
sends it to the company™s complementary center for in
-dependent testing. The modules under test remain frozen 
until the testers are finished. If the testers discover major 
flaws, the code returns to the development center, and 
the submit-freeze-test process would begin again with the 
revised code.
Obviously, the develop-test cycle had to be shorter, so 
developers came up with the idea of leveraging the time-
zone difference. The goal was to discover errors earlier 
in the development process, yet maintain advantageous 
skill and wage differences. In this model, development 
involves two geographically distant teamsŠone to write 
the code during the day and the other to test it during the 
first team™s night. The second team then returns the results 
at the beginning of the first team™s day. As this description 
implies, the teams have somewhat of a master-slave rela
-tionship, which requires careful planning. 
For knowledge to flow efficiently, the distributed teams 
must accurately delineate tasks and understand task inter
-dependencies. Knowledge reuse and agility are particularly 
relevant to follow-the-sun models, and functionality en
-capsulation and interface standardization are critical to 
leveraging and reusing knowledge.
2Several software development projects have used this 
model. A 1999 IBM project
3 involved several collaborating 
The goal of leveraging the time-zone 
difference was to discover errors earlier 
in the development process, 
 yet maintain advantageous skill and 
wage differences.
67
JAN
UARY 2009
 COVER
 FEATURE
COMPUTER
 68
centers in a hub-and-spoke model, with the Seattle office 
acting as the hub. Similarly, a 2001 project at Motorola used 
developers across six countries to enable project work to 
continue at least 21.5 hours daily.
4 In a 2005 project,
5 a pro
-gramming team distributed among three sites (US, UK, and 
Asia) used modified Extreme Programming techniques in 
developing mobile telephone data services.
Industries outside software development are gradually 
embracing this idea as well. Beridium International, an ac
-counting company, has experts working in different time 
zones in the European Union and in Mauritius, making it 
possible to provide round-the-clock accounting support, 
and North America General Motors uses the 24-hour para
-digm in collaborating with Australian vehicle designers 
(www.pbs.org/nbr/site/onair/transcripts/070209b).
HOW EFFECTIVE IS IT?
In 2007, I and another researcher from the Massachu
-setts Institute of Technology (MIT) evaluated a yearlong 
study of two IBM teams assigned to similar development 
projects and working in parallel, one based entirely in the 
US, and the other distributed between the US and India.
6 Although it reported on only two collaborating centers, 
the study provided insights into how a distributed team 
compares with the traditional team structure. Because the 
primary deliverable had a one-year time frame, the study 
covered the two teams at every major point in the project 
life cycle. Overall, the final deliverable quality was very 
similar, but the distributed team produced better docu
-mentation and a higher-quality knowledge repository.
Advantages
One obvious advantage was 
less time for task resolu
-tion
. The gradual one-to-one pairing between onshore 
and offshore members made it easier to transfer tasks 
and knowledge. In one case, the US and Indian developers 
working in an interlaced mode (US sending the code for 
testing in the evening and getting programmer feedback 
from India in the morning) resolved a bug in half the time 
they would have taken in a conventional structure.
Related to shorter task resolution is 
earlier issue re
-porting
, which often translates to cost savings in software 
development, since a bug detected late in development can 
delay product release. With the 24-hour model, a US-based 
engineer could incrementally improve code during the 
day and pass it to a test engineer in Asia with appropriate 
instructions, thus making it easier to detect any bug early 
in the life cycle.
A by-product of constant communication is 
superior 
documentation and knowledge dissemination
. Team mem
-bers who work in the same operational environment at the 
same time often distribute knowledge relatively informally. 
In a decentralized structure, they must use more formal 
mechanisms to capture decision rationale and design his
-tory, thus establishing a dynamic knowledge repository. 
Figure 1 depicts a tool for building a chain of knowledge 
events that communicate the reason behind the change in 
a piece of source code. This trail, or event history, is invalu
-able in transferring knowledge about design rationales, 
thus avoiding the common pitfalls of reinventing the wheel 
and repeating unproductive design decisions.
Finally, close teamwork results in a 
better incorporation 
of cultural issues
. Because professionals from diverse cul
-tures are continuously involved with one another, they are 
consciously or subconsciously exchanging specific, cul
-ture-based insights. The resulting product or service can, 
therefore, be of greater value to more global markets.
Disadvantages
Although informal communication can work against 
superior documentation, it is useful in narrowing cultural 
and technical gaps among professionals. Thus, 
loss of 
informal communication
 is also a disadvantage in that geo
-graphic distance makes face-to-face discussion difficult. 
However, communication technologies, such as webcams 
and instant messaging, are rapidly mitigating this problem 
by capturing the essence of informal discussion.
Geographic distance also means considerable 
handoff 
overhead
. Work is transitioned every eight hours, and time 
and effort are involved in each handoff activity. The fac
-tory paradigm also involves considerable upfront effort in
 task decomposition
. Someone must decide how to break 
down tasks in the various disciplines. 
Management and quality control 
become more burden
-some. With possibly three programmers across three 
continents, someone must provide overall guidance and 
management. One option is to employ three managers, but 
at some point the teams need a central coordinator, for ex
-ample, to respond to urgent calls at any hour. Determining 
code quality is another control issue. If each programmer 
has a different idea of quality, who prevails? Should the 
team put the issues to a majority vote, with two against 
one, which might lead to relationship problems? Should 
an independent party decide? Decisions by consensus fre
-quently involve significant time and correspondence, and 
the quality issue will come up during every code review. 
The notion of consensus is also tied to team size. When 
the size varies, the largest team tends to dominate, so it is 
best to establish teams of similar size.
Another overhead source is 
infrastructure duplication
, since each country™s center requires its own set of hard
-ware and software. Obviously, one set would cost less, 
but overhead is not the only concern. If all programmers 
used a single set of hardware and software in a 24-hour 
shift, someone would have to work at night. The ultimate 
goal is to have no one work at night, and the findings of 
the World Health Organization and American Cancer So
-ciety could motivate companies (and countries) to adopt 
 69
JAN
UARY 2009
measures that enforce day work wherever possible, even 
with the overhead.
SUPPORTING KNOWLE
DGE 
ASSIMILATION
As this list of pros and cons implies, implementing the 
24-hour knowledge factory will require new management 
tools. Office Tiger (now part of R.R. Donnelly Inc., with 
operations in the US, India, Sri Lanka, Singapore, and the 
Philippines) has developed a T-Tracks system to enable the 
fine-grained tracking of work in progress at distributed 
sites. Wipro, a major offshoring company, uses the Veloci-
Q tracking system.
7Although these tools are useful, the factory paradigm 
requires more comprehensive support than merely track
-ing work. Between 2000 and 2004, an MIT research team 
explored the feasibility of such support. This work re
-sulted in KnowFact, a concept demonstration prototype 
that analyzes the capabilities for automated capture of 
evolving knowledge.
8 The prototype successfully assimi
-lated the evolving understanding of design requirements, 
as well as the history of experience and behavior. With 
rapid access to such knowledge, test subjects (system 
users) increased their productivityŠin some cases, by 
almost a factor of 10. 
With minimal user intervention, KnowFact captured 
information on evolving code, as well as associated de
-cisions, and it could handle frequent handoffs. The next 
challenge was to broaden the collaborative environment 
so that multiple programmers could work in a sequential 
mode with automated capture and use information about 
prior key decisions that various programmers made during 
code evolution. 
Between 2004 and 2008, the research group at the Uni
-versity of Arizona worked on developing MultiMind,
9 a 
collaboration environment for agile software development 
in a 24-hour knowledge factory. MultiMind incorporates 
a chronologically ordered persistent database to collect 
objectsŠencapsulated knowledge about the development 
Figure 1. Communication about events and decisions. In this screen, Tom views the sequence of knowledge events that led to 
a change in the source code (highlighted in top text box). The icon sequence below the text box is a timeline that corresponds 
to the log entries inside the bottom text box. Thus, the leftmost icon matches the ˜rst log entry and so on. From left to right 
the icons are Read Error Report, Read Source Code, Query (in this case, to the wiki), Read a PDF Document, Modi˜ed and 
Committed Source code, Signo˚, Hando˚, Read Source Code, and Query (in this case, a query about decision justi˜cation).
 environmentŠand events relevant to a project. These ob
-jects are the basis for team member communication. In 
MultiMind, users couple the semantics of project artifacts 
(documentation, design notes, application programming 
interface references, and so on) and knowledge events, 
essentially correlating knowledge events with artifact evo
-lution. This correlation means that the development team 
can reuse knowledgeŠa highly desirable capability in 
software development. 
MultiMind automatically logs common tasks, such as 
reading or posting a message, executing a search, or ac
-cessing a webpage, and automates higher-level tasks, such 
as visualizing the latest project status or enabling design 
decisions. It also includes mechanisms for collecting sched
-ule estimates from each developer, logging time spent on 
development, and updating estimates as the project moves 
forward. Users can activate schedule casting automatically 
when they log actual time or update an estimate.
Handing o˜ work
Figure 2 shows the handoff process in MultiMind. The 
embedded project management module creates work sum
-maries, which frees developers to focus on other subtasks. 
A template-based Scrum-style process initiates questions 
to ascertain summary details about the anticipated future 
state of open tasks. These questions focus on the progress 
made in the prior shift, problems encountered during that 
shift, and likely progress during the next shift. 
 Traditional software development techniques 
strongly emphasize recursive decomposition until 
every unit breaks down to a module or class. Ide
-ally, each module then has one assigned owner, who 
strives to improve the module until its actual state 
matches its expected state. In most cases, one person 
per module is the norm, although some practitioners 
have advocated otherwise.
10
 Consequently, module 
owners must constantly interact, and collaboration 
time can be formidable. Two decades ago, Tom De
-Marco and Tim Lister estimated that time to be as 
much as 70 percent of the total work time for software 
engineers,
11
 and although the medium has changed, 
communication overhead can still come close to this 
figure in an array of programming situations.
Communication support
To address this asynchronous communication 
lag, MultiMind uses a 
composite personae 
(CP) struc
-ture, which defines a highly cohesive micro-team 
that possesses both individual and collective attri
-butes simultaneouslyŠa kind of minicorporation. 
The CP notion is based on the realization that it is 
not practical to decompose a problem horizontally 
(assume single ownership of a module) past a certain 
threshold. 
Thus, in the CP structure, the developer role is virtual: 
The outward appearance is of a single entity with a unique 
identity that owns and develops work artifacts, accumu
-lates project performance metrics, and so on. But in reality, 
a CP has multiple membersŠat least one at each develop
-ment siteŠand an individual can be a member of multiple 
CPs. The 
CP driver
 is the member at the currently active de
-velopment site and the one with complete control over the 
CP™s identity and allocated resources during that time.
The CP Mercury in Figure 3a, for example, spans three 
development sites: Tucson, Arizona; Sydney, Australia; and 
Wroclaw, Poland. While the sun is shining on Tucson, Tom 
is driving Mercury. As the day goes on and Tucson ends its 
day, Tom transfers control of Mercury to Molly in Sydney. 
Likewise, Molly drives Mercury until her shift ends, and 
she passes control to Grzegorz in Wroclaw. 
Figure 3 shows the three possible communication 
patterns within a CP and between CPs. In the handoff, in
-formation flows within the CP and around the clock from 
one site to the nextŠfrom Tom to Molly to Grzegorz. Lat
-eral communication occurs between the drivers of two or 
more CPs that are collocated and is common in resolving 
a conflict in the module interface. Lateral communication 
is rapid and informal, since both developers use the same 
language and are of the same culture. The third commu
-nication pattern, lateral + handoff, recognizes that not 
all problems are solvable in a single shift. In this pattern, 
new CP drivers come online to continue working on the 
Figure 2. Hando˚ process for programming tasks using MultiMind. 
When a programmer signs in at the beginning of a shift, the 
module generates a Scrum report by integrating information 
from the previous Scrum entry and the state of various archived 
project artifacts. As the project proceeds, MultiMind continuously 
generates and updates design and code review documents, 
incorporating these intermediate artifacts into the work˛ow, 
along with user-interface elements. The work essentially follows 
the sun, so each center is always working during the daytime.
COVER
 FEATURE
COMPUTER
 70
 71
JAN
UARY 2009
problem. At present, MultiMind supports a combination 
of handoff and lateral communication and encourages 
conducting lateral + handoff transactions as a sequence 
of the two simpler patterns. 
The CP structure fosters a smooth transition within a CP 
and across CPs, maintains trust among development peers, 
enables faster convergence on the overall goal, and pro
-vides greater resilience against sudden changes in module 
ownership. The problem of communication overhead will 
become less severe as technology improves. Our research 
group has already developed EchoEdit, a supplementary 
tool that integrates code documentation and voice recog
-nition. Developers can record a comment, play it back, 
and convert audio to text for indexing and rapid access. 
Programmers can provide annotations in text, audio, or a 
combined format. After a handoff, the new CP driver can 
play back the recording by selecting an icon displayed in 
the margin.
Quality and productivity support
Most software processes aim to improve quality and 
productivity, measured in terms of cost, effort, delivery 
schedule, and defect incidents. Core to both quality and 
productivity are task-time estimation, work allocation, 
knowledge transfer, and defect control. However, existing 
estimating tools assume single ownership of code (hori
-zontal decomposition). To support developers working in 
the factory paradigm, our research group created CPro.
To support task-time estimation, CPro encourages de
-velopers to provide their respective time estimates for all 
subtasks. A schedule caster then executes a Monte Carlo 
simulation to determine how the project should evolve. 
As the subtasks proceed, the simulation compares actual 
times with their respective estimates so that developers 
can realign and reassign subtasks as needed. 
CPro can assign work according to either random- or se
-lected-work assignment. In the selected-work assignment 
algorithmŠthe more sophisticated of the twoŠCPro first 
arranges all open tasks in increasing order of complexity. 
When a developer selects a task, CPro generates a simula
-tion of the effort required to complete it. If the developer 
cannot complete the task by the end of that shift and is 
unwilling to work overtime, CPro makes the task available 
to another developer. If the originally selected developer 
intends to complete that task, CPro locks the task to pre
-vent its assignment to another developer.
To support defect reduction, CPro incorporates a three-
pronged strategy: 
Periodic artifact review.
 Within a CP, peer reviews aim 
to improve software quality and promote communi
-cation and the understanding of the module being 
reviewed.
Test-driven development.
 CPro validates module de
-velopment in various phases using test cases that the 
team creates to evaluate and debug modules. Because 
peer reviews take place inside the CP, the test cases 
are a form of communication that helps keep the CP 
coherent. 
Heuristic assignment.
 CPro incorporates heuristics 
that optimize knowledge sharing within the CP as a 
by-product of task assignments. 
ŁŁŁCP VulcanCP MercuryCP MinervaCP MercuryCP MinervaTomCP MercuryMollyCP Mercury(a)(b)(c)We
stern USAustrali
aPolandFigure 3. Three communication types that the composite personae (CP) structure supports. The emphasis is on tacit knowledge 
sharing, which favors agile methods, such as XP and Scrum. (a) In a hando˚, a CP in one country hands o˚ the task in progress 
to a member of the same CP in another country. (b) In lateral communication, multiple CPs in the same country (collocated) 
communicate with each other on peer tasks. (c) In lateral + hando˚ communication, a CP driver in one country interacts with a 
driver of another CP located in a di˚erent country.
 COVER
 FEATURE
COMPUTER
 72
TOWAR
D A GENERAL INFRASTRUCTURE
So far, applications of the knowledge factory paradigm 
have focused on software development, but the paradigm 
can benefit other professions, such as transportation. 
Much work remains, however, to develop a generic com
-puter-based infrastructure that will be applicable across 
diverse industries.
Knowledge-based approaches
Collaboration across time and space requires novel 
knowledge-based approaches that will accommodate 
continuous communication and knowledge sharing. One 
approach encompasses knowledge acquisition through 
traditional information sources, in conjunction with 
knowledge discovery, management, and dissemination.
12
 Knowledge acquisition provides participants with accu
-rate and comprehensive material; knowledge discovery 
requires continuous and automated mining of multime
-dia in the capture of underlying knowledge. Knowledge 
management tools can address the heterogeneities that 
invariably exist when input must cross geographic and 
temporal borders. Finally, knowledge dissemination tech
-niques can aid in extracting, customizing, and directing 
knowledge to appropriate destinations and users. 
Task breakdown
A generic infrastructure will also need ways to split 
tasks into well-defined components that a professional 
can execute without having to know all the idiosyncra
-sies of other tasks and how to assemble tasks into a work 
product. Individual components will not necessarily be 
following a standard, unlike physical parts and assembly-
line subsystems. The combination of software components 
can take many forms, and development teams often do 
not need to fully delineate how a component will fit with 
other components. 
Business rule recording
Given the diversity of professions, business rules natu
-rally have dissimilar formats and intersect in dissimilar 
ways within an information system or business process. 
Designers must capture any rule change in multiple sys
-tems, and this is particularly difficult with a globally 
distributed team. 
Untangling business rules means unlocking the ability 
to represent specific elements of business knowledge only 
once in a knowledge repository. The repository then be
-comes the basis for designing specific knowledge elements 
that will naturally manifest themselves in appropriate 
forms. Structured programming, reusable code libraries, 
relational databases, expert systems, object technology, 
computer-aided software engineering tools, code genera
-tors, and computer-aided process engineering tools are 
frameworks that have attempted to create such a reposi
-tory. A more recent approach
2 focuses on knowledge reuse 
by recording comprehensive information of the particular 
business, untangling the underlying business rules, and 
then enabling the re-creation of many key business pro
-cesses without the need to define them from scratch. 
Reuse frameworks
Generalizing the knowledge factory paradigm will 
require better frameworks for leveraging and reusing 
knowledge. Members of geographically distributed teams 
must reconcile differences in concepts and terminologies; 
problem domain understanding; and training, knowledge, 
and skills.
The solution must be an architectural approach that 
normalizes knowledge and provides reusable artifacts in 
an accessible knowledge repository. Identifying knowledge 
components requires distinguishing two kinds of asser
-tions: ones that when divided lose no information and 
ones that when divided will sacrifice meaning. A division 
sacrifices meaning when it causes the loss of informa
-tion that is not recoverable after pieces are reassembled. 
Rules that are impossible to break down further without 
irreparable information loss are indivisible or atomic rules 
or irreducible facts.
The Object Management Group is developing the Ontol
-ogy Definition Metamodel, which aims to link Common 
Logic and the Resource Description Framework (RDF)/
Web Ontology Language (OWL) with a model-driven ar
-chitecture. Common Logic is an International Standards 
Organization standard designed to facilitate knowledge 
and information exchange in computer-based systems. 
The evolution of these metamodels for specifying knowl
-edge will encourage knowledge reuse, which will make it 
easier to deploy the knowledge-factory paradigm.
2MultiMind has served as a conceptual 
architecture for identifying next steps. 
Our research group plans to incorpo
-rate more new tools to create a common 
development environment for commercial 
implementation. Augmentations to the current-genera
-tion development environments, such as IBM™s Jazz, are 
likely to provide additional capabilities. Jazz, developed 
as an extension to the Eclipse development environment, 
offers several capabilities that can support the knowledge 
factory environment. Our team has already developed a 
plug-in that integrates discussion forums into Jazz, and 
EchoEdit is suitable for the Eclipse environment. With 
these continual improvements, most companies will soon 
be able to implement the knowledge factory paradigm 
with minimal effort. 
Organizations that adopt the 24-hour knowledge fac
-tory model stand to gain a considerable productivity and 
 MOBILE AND UBIQUITOUS
 SYST
EMS
IEEE Pervasive Computing 
seeks accessible, useful papers on the latest peer-
reviewed developments in pervasive, mobile, and 
ubiquitous computing. Topics include hardware 
technology, software infrastructure, real-world 
sensing and interaction, human-computer 
interaction, and systems considerations, including 
deployment, scalability, security, and privacy. 
 Call for    Articles
Author guidelines: 
www.computer.org/mc/
pervasive/author.htm
Further details: 
pervasive@computer.org
www.computer.org/pervasive
 6.
 S. Seshasai and A. Gupta, ﬁThe Role of Information Re
-sources in Enabling the 24-Hour Knowledge Factory,ﬂ 
Information Resources Management J.
, vol. 20, no. 4, 2007, 
pp. 105-127.
 7.
 V. Subramanyam et al., ﬁAn Integrated Approach to 
Software Process Improvement at Wipro Technologies: 
Veloci-Q,ﬂ tech. report CMU/SEI-2004-TR-006, Software 
Eng. Inst. Carnegie Mellon Univ., Mar. 2004; www.sei.cmu.
edu/pub/documents/04.reports/pdf/04tr006.pdf.
 8.
 S. Seshasai, A. Kumar, and A. Gupta, ﬁAn Integrated and 
Collaborative Framework for Business Design: A Knowl
-edge Engineering Approach,ﬂ 
Data and Knowledge Eng.
, vol. 42, no. 1, 2005, pp. 157-179. 
 9.
 N. Denny et al., ﬁHybrid Offshoring: Composite Personae 
and Evolving Collaboration Technologies,ﬂ 
Information 
Resources Management J.
, vol. 21, no. 1, 2008, pp. 89-104.
 10.
 M.E. Nordberg III, ﬁManaging Code Ownership,ﬂ 
IEEE Soft
-ware
, vol. 20, no. 2, 2003, pp. 26-33.
 11.
 T. DeMarco and T. Lister, 
Peopleware
, Dorset House, 
1987.
 12.
 A. Gupta, ﬁExpanding the 24-Hour Workplace,ﬂ 
The Wall 
Street J.,
 15 Sept. 2007, p. R9.
Amar Gupta
 is the Thomas R. Brown Endowed Chair of 
Management and Technology and professor of entrepre
-neurship, management information systems, management 
of organizations, and computer scienceŠall at the Univer
-sity of Arizona. He is also a visiting professor in the College 
of Engineering at the Massachusetts Institute of Technol
-ogy for part of the year. Gupta received a PhD in computer 
science from the Indian Institute of Technology, Delhi. He 
is a senior member of the IEEE and a member of the ACM. 
Contact him at 
gupta@arizona.ed
u.market edge. The model integrates contributions of key 
players from around the world, enables all personnel to 
work during the daytime in their respective countries, 
avoids the health hazards that characterize working the 
graveyard shift, and reduces overall development time. The 
use of personnel from different continents makes it more 
likely that the final products or services will have greater 
global appeal. Having each collaborating group act as a 
peer auditor can lead to overall quality gains. Finally, the 
factory paradigm is robust: If one center becomes suddenly 
inoperational, the other centers can continue work. 
Acknowledgments
Thanks to Nathan Denny, Shivram Mani, Satwik Seshasai, 
Igor Crk, R. Sheshu, M. Swaminathan, Jamie Samdal, Kate 
O™Toole, Tapasya Patki, Ben Chen, and Sarah Trainor for their 
valuable assistance. Thanks also for the valuable input and 
assistance provided by 
Computer
™s reviewers.
References
 1.
 A. Gupta, 
Outsourcing and Offshoring of Professional Ser
-vices: Business Optimization in a Global Economy, 
IGI Global 
Press, 2008.
 2.
 A. Mitra and A. Gupta, 
Creating Agile Business Systems with 
Reusable Knowledge
, Cambridge Univ. Press, 2006.
 3.
 E. Carmel, 
Global Software Teams: Collaborating across 
Borders and Time Zones
, Prentice Hall, 1999.
 4.
 R.D. Battin et al., ﬁLeveraging Resources in Global Soft
-ware Development,ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, Mar. 2001, pp. 70-77.
 5.
 M. Yap, ﬁFollow the Sun: Distributed Extreme Program
-ming Environment,ﬂ 
Proc. IEEE Agile Conf
., IEEE Press, 
2005, pp. 218-224.
73
JAN
UARY 2009
