 0018-9162/05/$20.00 © 2005 IEEESeptember 200543COVER FEATURE
PPu
ub
bl
li
is
sh
he
ed
d bby
y tth
he
e IIE
EE
EE
E CCo
om
mp
pu
ut
te
er
r SSo
oc
ci
ie
et
ty
yTest-Driven Development:
Concepts, Taxonomy, 

and Future DirectionThe test-driven development 
strategyrequires writing automated tests prior to
developing functional code in small, rapid
iterations. Although developers have been
applying TDD in various forms for several
decades,1this software development strategy hascontinued to gain increased attention as one of the
core extreme programming practices.XP is an agile methodthat develops object-ori-ented software in very short iterations with little

upfront design. Although not originally given this
name, TDDwas described as an integral XP prac-

tice necessary for analysis, design, and testing that
also enables design through refactoring, collective
ownership, continuous integration, and programmer
courage.Along with pair programming and refactoring,TDD has received considerable individual attention
since XPÕs introduction. Developers have created

tools speciÞcally to support TDD across a range of
languages, and they have written numerous books
explaining how to apply TDD concepts. Re-
searchers have begun to examine TDDÕs effects on

defect reduction and quality improvements in aca-
demic and professional practitioner environments,
and educators have started to examine how to inte-

grate TDD into computer science and software
engineering pedagogy. Some of these efforts have

been implemented in the context of XP projects,
while others are independent of them.
TEST-DRIVEN DEVELOPMENT DEFINED
Although its name implies that TDD is a testingmethod, a close examination of the term reveals amore complex picture.
The test aspectIn addition to testing, TDD involves writing auto-mated tests of a programÕs individual units. A unit

is the smallest possible testable software component.
There is some debate about what exactly constitutes
a unit in software. Even within the realm of object-

oriented programming, both the class and method
have been suggested as the appropriate unit.
Generally, however, the method or procedure is the

smallest possible testable software component. Developers frequently implement test drivers andfunction stubs to support the execution of unit tests.
Test execution can be either a manual or automated

process and can be performed by developers or des-
ignated testers. Automated testing involves writing
unit tests as code and placing this code in a test har-
ness or framework such as JUnit. Automated unit
testing frameworks minimize the effort of testing,

reducing a large number of tests to a click of a but-

ton. In contrast, during manual test execution devel-
opers and testers must expend effort proportional
to the number of tests executed.
Traditionally, unit testing occurred after devel-
opers coded the unit. This can take anywhere from
a few minutes to a few months. The unit tests might

be written by the same programmer or by a desig-
nated tester. With TDD, the programmer writes the

unit tests prior to the code under test. As a result,

the programmer can immediately execute the tests
after they are written.Test-driven development creates software in very short iterations with 
minimal upfront design. Poised for widespread adoption, TDD has become

the focus of an increasing number of researchers and developers.
David JanzenSimex LLCHosseinSaiedianUniversity of Kansas 44ComputerThe driven aspectSome definitions of TDD imply that it isprimarily a testing strategy. For example, in

JUnit inAction 
(Manning Publications,2003), Vincent Massol and Ted Husted stated

that Test-driven development (TDD) is a program-
ming practice that instructs developers to write
new code only if an automated test has failed,
and to eliminate duplication. The goal of TDD
is Ôclean code that works.ÕHowever, according to XP and TDD pioneer
Ward Cunningham, ÒTest-Þrst coding is not a test-

ing technique.Ó TDD is known by various names
including test-first programming, test-driven
design, and test-Þrst design. The drivenin test-dri-ven development focuses on how TDD leads analy-

sis, design, and programming decisions. TDD
assumes that the software design is either incom-
plete or pliable and open to changes. In the context
of XP, TDD subsumes many analysis decisions. The

customer should be Òon-siteÓ in XP. Test writing is

one of the Þrst steps in deciding what the program
should do, which is essentially an analysis step. The
Agile Alliance offers another deÞnition that cap-

tures this idea (www.agilealliance.org/programs/

roadmaps/Roadmap/tdd/tdd_index.htm):Test-driven development (TDD) is the craft of pro-
ducing automated tests for production code, and
using that process to drive design and program-
ming. For every tiny bit of functionality in the pro-

duction code, you Þrst develop a test that speciÞes
and validates what the code will do. You then pro-

duce exactly as much code as will enable that test
to pass. Then you refactor (simplify and clarify)
both the production code and the test code.
To promote testing to an analysis and design step
the practice of refactoring must be introduced.

Refactoring changes the structure of an existing
body of code without changing its external behav-
ior. A test may pass, but the code may be inßexible

or overly complex. By refactoring the code, the test
should still pass but the code will be improved.Understanding that TDD is more about analysisand design than it is about testing is one of the most
challenging conceptual shifts for new adopters of
the practice. Program testing has traditionally

assumed the existence of a program. The TDD idea
that a test can be written before the program or that
test can aid in deciding what program code to write
and what that programÕs interface should look like
is a radical concept for most software developers.The development aspect
Intended to aid in constructing software, TDD
is not in itself a software development methodol-
ogy or process model. It is a practice, a way of
developing software to be used with other prac-
tices, in a particular order and frequency and in the
context of a process model. TDD has emerged

within a particular set of process models. It can be

applied as a microprocess within the context of

many different process models.TDD produces a set of automated unit tests thatprovide some side effects in the development

process. The practiceassumes the automated tests

will not be thrown away once a design decision is
made. Instead, the tests become a vital component
of the development process, providing quick feed-
back to any changes to the system. If a change
causes a test to fail, the developer knows immedi-
ately after making the change, while the test is still
fresh in the developerÕs mind. Among the draw-

backs, that developer must now maintain both the
production code and the automated tests.TDDÕS HISTORICAL AND MODERN CONTEXTSDespite the lack of attention in undergraduate
curriculum and inconclusive reports of usage in
industry, a wide range of software tools exist to sup-

port testing, making TDDÕs emergence possible. 
Software development methodologiesA software development process or methodol-ogy deÞnes the order, control, and evaluation of the

basic tasks involved in creating software. Software

process methodologies range in complexity and
control from largely informal to highly structured.

Developers classify these methodologies as pre-
scriptive or agile and label the specific types as
waterfall, spiral, incremental, or evolutionary.
When an organization states that it uses a par-ticular methodology, it often applies a combination

of smaller, Þner-grained methodologies on a pro-

ject scale instead. For example, an organization
might apply an incremental development model,
building small, cumulative slices of a projectÕs fea-

tures. In each increment, the developers could apply
a waterfall or linear method of determining require-
ments, designing a solution, coding, testing, and
then integrating. Depending on the size of the incre-
ments and the waterfallÕs time frame, the process

could be labeled differently, with potentially very

different results in terms of quality and developer
TDD assumes that the softwaredesign is eitherincomplete or pliable and open to changes. September 200545satisfaction. If we break a software project into 
Nincrements where Iirepresents each increment, thenthe equation i = 1NIican represent the entire project.If Nis reasonably large, we can label this as anincremental project. However, if 
N2, we would
label this as a waterfall project. If the increments require modifying a signiÞcantamount of overlapping software, we can say that
our methodology is more iterative in nature.
SpeciÞcally, for project 
Pconsisting of code Canditerations I=i = 1NIi, if Ciis the code affected by iter-ation 
Ii, and if project 
Pis iterative, then 
CiCi+ 1for most isuch that 1 < 
i< N.Similarly, with incremental and waterfall ap-
proaches, we expect a formal artifact, such as a spec-
iÞcation document, for documenting the incrementÕs

requirements. If the artifact is informalÑsay, some

whiteboard drawings or an incomplete set of UML
diagrams and was generated quicklyÑwe would be
working in the context of an agile process. The
approach and perspective of the architecture or the
design would cause us to label the process aspect-

oriented, component-based, or feature-driven.Some individual software developers and smallerteams apply even Þner-grained models such as the

personal software process or the collaborative soft-
ware process.The time, formality, and intersection

of the steps in software construction can determine

the way developers categorize a process method-
ology. 
The order in which construction tasks occur inßu-
ences a projectÕs label and its quality. Natural and

logical, the traditional ordering is requirements elic-
itation, analysis, design, code, test, integration,
deployment, and maintenance.  We could, however,

consider some possible reorderings even though
most do not make sense. For example, we would

never maintain a system that hasnÕt been coded.

Similarly, we would never code something for which

we have no requirements. Requirements do not necessarily imply formalrequirements. A requirement can be as simple as an
idea in a programmerÕs head. Programmers have

applied the prototyping approach when require-ments are fuzzy or incomplete. With this approach,

we may do very little analysis and design before cod-
ing, but ultimately might have to discard the proto-

type even though it was a useful tool in determining
requirements and evaluating design options.When we closely examine the design, code, andtest phases, we see many finer-grained activities.

For example, various types of testing take place,
including unit, integration, and regression testing.
The timing, frequency, and granularity of these tests
can vary widely. Some testing can be con-
ducted earlyÑconcurrent with other coding
activities. Test-driven development reorders

these steps to an advantage. By placing Þne-
grained unit tests before just enough code to
satisfy that test, TDD can affect many aspects
of a software development methodology.
TDDÕs historical context
Test-driven development has emerged in
conjunction with the rise of agile process
models. Both have roots in the iterative, incre-
mental, and evolutionary process models used as
early as the 1950s. In addition, tools have evolved
to play a signiÞcant role in supporting TDD. Early test, early examples. Research on testing hasgenerally assumed the existence of a program to be

tested, implying a test-last approach. Moving tests
from the end of coding to the beginning, however,

is nothing new. Software and test teams commonly

develop tests early in the software development
process, often with the program logic. The evalu-
ation and prevention life-cycle models integrated
testing early in the software development process
nearly two decades ago. Introduced in the 1980s,
the Cleanroom approach to software engineering
included formal verification of design elements
early in the development process. Some claim that

NASAÕs Project Mercury applied a form of TDD as

early as the 1950s.1Prior to the introduction of XP in 1998, little hadbeen written about the concept of letting small

incremental automated unit tests drivesoftwaredevelopment and design processes. Despite the lack

of published documentation, many developers have
probably used a test-Þrst approach informally. Kent

Beck claims he Òlearned test-Þrst programming as
a kid while reading a book on programming. It said
that you program by taking the input tape ... and
typing in the output tape you expect. Then you pro-
gram until you get the output tape you expect.Ó2Some argue that TDD merely gives a name and
deÞnition to a practice that has been sporadically
and informally applied for some time. TDD is more
than this. As Beck states, XP takes the known best

practices and Òturns the knobs all the way up to
ten.Ó2Many developers might have been thinkingand coding in a test-first manner, but TDD does

this in an extreme way: always writing tests before

code, making tests as small as possible, and never
letting code degrade. TDD fits within a process

model, and the development of incremental, itera-
tive, and evolutionary process models has been vital
to its emergence.The order in whichconstruction tasks occurinßuences aprojectÕs label 
and its quality.
 46ComputerIterative, evolutionary, and incremental develop-
ment. Iterative development involves repeat-ing a set of development tasks, generally 
on an expanding set of requirements.1Evolutionaryapproaches involve adaptiveand lightweight iterative development. Being adaptiverefers to using feedback fromprevious iterations to improve the software.
Being lightweightrefers to the lack of completespeciÞcations at the beginning of development,
thus allowing feedback from previous itera-
tions and from customers to guide future iter-

ations. Lightweight can also refer to otheraspects such as a processÕs level of formality and

degree of documentation. The spiral modelis an evo-lutionary approach that incorporates prototyping
and the cyclic nature of iterative development with

risk-driven-iterationsand anchor point milestones.The incremental model produces a series of releases,
called increments, that provide more functionalitywith each increment.
TDD developed within the context of such itera-
tive, incremental, and evolutionary models. TDD

works because these approaches provide the pre-
requisite process models. Beck claims that to imple-
ment XP, developers must apply all of the

incumbent practicesÑleaving some out weakens the
model and can cause it to fail.3TDD requires thatdesign decisions be delayed and ßexible to inßuence
software design. Each new test might require refac-

toring and a design change. Automated tests give
programmers the courage to change any code and
the information they need to know quickly if some-
thing has broken, enabling collective ownership. Automated testingSoftware tools have become important factors in
the development of modern software systems. Tools

ranging from compilers, debuggers, and integrated
development environments to modeling and com-
puter-aided software engineering tools have

improved and increased developer productivity. 
Tools have played an important role in the emer-
gence of TDD, which assumes the existence of an
automated unit testing framework. Such a frame-
work simpliÞes both the creation and execution of

software unit tests. Test harnesses
, basically auto-mated testing frameworks, provide a combination
of test drivers, stubs, and interfaces to other sub-
systems. Often such harnesses are custom-built,
although commercial tools do exist to assist with
test harness preparation.Erich Gamma and Kent Beck developed JUnit,an automated unit testing framework for Java.Essential for implementing TDD with Java, JUnitis arguably responsible for much of TDD and XPÕs

wide popularity. JUnit-like frameworks have been

implemented for several different languages, cre-

ating a family of frameworks referred to as xUnit.
Generally, xUnit lets a programmer write sets of
automated unit tests that initialize, execute, and
make assertions about the code under test.
Individual tests are independent of one another so
test order does not matter. The programmer reports

the total number of successes and failures. xUnit
tests are written in the same language as the code
under test and thus serve as Þrst-class clients of the

code, while tests can actually serve as documenta-
tion for it. On the other hand, because developers imple-
ment xUnit in the target language, that language
determines the toolÕs relative simplicity and ßexi-

bility. For example, JUnit is simple and portable

partly because it takes advantage of JavaÕs porta-

bility through the bytecode/virtual machine archi-
tecture. It uses JavaÕs ability to load classes

dynamically and exploits JavaÕs reßection mecha-

nism to automatically discover tests. In addition,
JUnit provides a portable graphical user interface
that has been integrated into popular integrated
development environments such as Eclipse.A wide range of additional tools have emerged to
support automated testing, particularly in Java.
Some tools simplify the creation of mock objects,
or stubs. The stubs replace the needed collaborat-
ing objects so that developers can test a particular
object. They can use other tools such as Cactus and
Derby with JUnit to automate tests that involve
J2EE components or databases.The proliferation of software tools that supportTDD shows that it has widespread support and will
likely become an established approach. JUnitÕs sim-

plicity and elegance have been a signiÞcant factor
in TDDÕs use, particularly in the Java community.

Programmers can develop unit tests easily and exe-

cute large test suites with a single button click,

yielding quick results about the systemÕs state.
Early testing in academiaThe undergraduate computer science and soft-ware engineering curriculum provides one indica-

tor of a software practiceÕs widespread acceptance.

Sometimes academia has led practice in the Þeld,
sometimes it has followed. Software engineering,
iterative development, and TDD all seem to follow

this latter model. Much software engineering research originatedin academia and then found its way into commonTDD developedwithin the context of iterative, incremental, and evolutionary
models. September 200547practice. The undergraduate computer science andsoftware engineering curriculum, however, tends

to reßect or even lag behind common practice in
industry. The choice of programming language has

commonly followed business needs. Process mod-
els developed in practice later become reßected in
curricula. The 1991 ACM Curriculum Guidelines recom-
mended giving fewer than eight hours each of lec-
ture and lab time to iterative development processes

and veriÞcation and validation. The 2001 guide-
lines recommended giving an even smaller amount

of time to development processes and software val-
idationÑtwo and three hours each, respectively. 
Undergraduate texts give little attention to com-parative process models. Texts provide limited cov-

erage of software design and testing techniques.
The topics of software design and testing are often

relegated to a software engineering course that may
not be mandatory for all students. Extreme programmingÕs place in undergraduate
education has been the topic of much debate. Some
argue strongly for using XP to introduce software

engineering to undergraduates. Others argue that XP
and agile methods offer only limited beneÞts. Given

the different opinions on using XP in the undergrad-
uate curriculum, TDD has received limited exposure
at this level. Some educators have called for increased
design and testing coverage. Others see TDD as an
opportunity to incorporate testing in the curriculum,
rather than relegating it to an individual course. TDD tools have, however, found their way into
early programming education. BlueJ, a popular
environment for learning Java, incorporates JUnit
and adds help for building test cases at an early
stage in a programmerÕs learning cycle. Proponents

have advocated using JUnit for early learning of

Java because it abstracts the bootstrapping mech-
anism of 
, allowing the student to concen-trate on the use of objects early. 
TDD has yet to achieve widespread acceptance inacademia, at least partly because faculty who do
not specialize in software engineering are not likely

to be familiar with it. TDD instructional materials
that target undergraduate courses remain basically
nonexistent.Recent contextXP and agile methodshave received much atten-
tion in the past few years. Even though conclusive
documentation is lacking, anecdotal evidence indi-
cates that TDD usage is rising.Agile methods. These methods clearly have rootsin the incremental, iterative, and evolutionary
methods. PekkaAbrahamsson and col-
leagues4provide an evolutionary map ofnine agile methods and describe how they

focus on simplicity and speed while empha-
sizing people over processes.Probably the most well-known agilemethod, XP is often used in combination
with other agile methods such as Scrum. XP
proposes using TDD as an integral compo-
nent for developing high-quality software.
The highly disciplined practice of TDD and
the simple, lightweight nature of agile
processes give rise to an interesting conßict.
Potential TDD adopters often express concern
regarding the time and cost of writing and main-
taining unit tests. Although he concedes that auto-
mated unit tests are not necessary for absolutely
everything, Beck insists that XP cannot work with-
out TDD because it provides the glue that holds
the process together.
3Adoption measures. Measuring the use of a partic-ular software development methodology is hard.
Many organizations might be using the method-
ology without talking about it. Others might claim
to be using a methodology when in fact they are
misapplying it. Worse yet, they might be advertis-

ing its use falsely. Surveys might be conducted to

gauge a methodÕs usage, but often only those who

are much in favor or much opposed to the method-

ology will respond.A 2002 survey reported that out of 32 survey
respondents across 10 industry segments, 14 Þrms
used an agile process.5Of these, Þve were in the 
e-business industry. Most of the projects using agile

processes were small, involving 10 or fewer partic-

ipants and lasting one year or less. A 2003 survey
reported that 131 respondents claimed they used an
agile method.6Of these, 59 percent claimed to beusing XP and implied they were using TDD. Both

surveys revealed positive results from applying agile
methods, with increases in productivity and qual-
ity and reduced or minimal changes in costs.XP has accumulated a substantial body of litera-ture. Most of this involves the promotion of XP or

explains how to implement it. Many experience

reports present only anecdotal evidence of XPÕs ben-

eÞts and drawbacks. Although the existence of these
reports indicates that XP is being adopted in many
organizations, it remains unclear if these same orga-
nizations will continue to use XP over time or, if

they have, if they will move on to other methods.Although XPÕs popularity implies a growing
adoption of TDD, we have no idea how widely it is

being used. Organizations may be using XP with-XP proposes using TDD as an integral component for developing high-qualitysoftware. 48Computerout adopting all of its practices or they may beapplying the practices inconsistently. On a project at

ThoughtWorks, JonathanRasmusson, an early XP

adopter, estimates one-third of the code was devel-

oped using TDD.7In the same report, Rasmusson
stated, ÒIf I could only recommend one coding prac-
tice to software developers, those who use XP or
otherwise, it would be to write unit tests.ÓIn this ThoughtWorks project, developers used
16,000 lines of automated unit tests on 21,000 lines
of production code. Many tests were written in
both test-Þrst and test-last iterations.Despite the possibility of adopting XP withoutit, TDD seems to be a core XP practice. Anecdotal

evidence indicates that TDD is commonly included
when only a subset of XP is adopted.The use of xUnit testing frameworks providesanother possible indicator of TDDÕs use. JUnit, the

Þrst such framework, has enjoyed widespread pop-
ularity (www.junit.org). No JUnit adoption statis-

tics are directly available. The Eclipse core
distribution, a popular integrated development
environment primarily used for Java development
includes JUnit. A press release issued in February
2004 on the Eclipse Web site states that the Eclipse

platform has recorded more than 18 million down-
load requests since its inception. Although dupli-
cate requests from the same developer can occur,

the figure is still substantial. Certainly not all
Eclipse developers use JUnit, nor do all JUnit
adopters use TDD, but it is likely that the popu-
larity of XP, JUnit, and Eclipse combined implies a

certain degree of TDD adoption.
EVALUATIVE TDD RESEARCH
Since the introduction of XP, many practitioner
articles and books on applying TDD have been
written. There has been relatively little evaluative
research on the beneÞts and effects of TDD, how-
ever.
Research on TDD can be categorized broadly bycontext. In particular, TDD research is classiÞed as

industry if the study or research was conducted pri-
marily with professional software practitioners. It
is classiÞed as academia if the practitioners are pri-

marily students and the work takes place in the con-
text of an academic setting. Academic research also

includes studies in which students work on a pro-
ject for a company but in the context of an acade-
mic course.TDD in industry
A few evaluative research studies have been con-ducted on TDD with professional practitioners.

North Carolina State University seems to be the only
source of such a study to date. Researchers at NCSU

have performed at least three empirical studies on

TDD in industry settings involving fairly small

groups in at least four different companies.8-10Thesestudies examined defect density as a measure of soft-
ware quality, although some survey data indicated

that programmers thought TDD promoted simpler
designs. In one study, programmersÕ experience with

TDD varied from novice to expert, while program-

mers new to TDD participated in the other studies.
These studies showed that programmers usingTDD produced code that passed 18 percent to 50
percent more external test cases than code pro-
duced by corresponding control groups. The stud-
ies also reported less time spent debugging code
developed with TDD. Further, they reported that

applying TDD had an impact that ranged from
minimal to a 16 percent decrease in programmer
productivityÑwhich shows that applying TDD
sometimes took longer. In the case that took 16 per-

cent more time, researchers noted that the control
group wrote far fewer tests than the TDD group.
Table 1 summarizes these studies and labels each
experiment as either a case study or a controlled
experiment.TDD in academia
Several academic studies have examined XP as awhole, but a few focused on TDD. Although many
of the TDD studies published in academic settings
are anecdotal, the five studies shown in Table 2

speciÞcally report on empirical results. When refer-
ring to software quality, all but one
11study focusedon the ability of TDD to detect defects early. Two

of the Þve studies reported signiÞcant improvement
in software quality and programmer productiv-

ity.
11,12One reported a correlation between thenumber of tests written and productivity.
13In thisparticular study, students using test-Þrst methods

wrote more tests and were signiÞcantly more pro-

ductive. The remaining two studies
14,15reported no signiÞcant improvement in either defect density
or productivity. 
All Þve of these relatively small studies lasted asemester or less and involved programmers who had
little or no previous experience with TDD.Table 1. Summary of TDD research in industry.  
Number ofNumber of 
Study Type companies programmers Quality effects Productivity effects  
George8Controlled experiment 3 24 TDD passed 18% more testsTDD took 16% longer 
Maximilien9Case study 1 9 50% reduction in defect density Minimal impact 
Williams10Case study 1 9 40% reduction in defect density No change 
 FACTORS IN SOFTWARE PRACTICE ADOPTION
A variety of factors play into the widespreadadoption of a software practice. These include
motivation for change, economics, availability of
tools, training and instructional materials, a sound
theoretical basis, empirical and anecdotal evidence
of success, time, and even endorsements of the prac-
tice by highly regarded individuals or groups. These factors complicate TDDÕs current state.
Current software development practice provides a

clear motivation for change and thus TDD seems
poised for growth. Software development involves
a complex mix of people, processes, technology,

and tools that struggle to Þnd consistency and pre-
dictability. Projects continue to go over schedule

and budget, which makes practitioners eager to Þnd
improved methods.Tool support for TDD is strong and improving
for most modern languages. Tools such as JUnit,

MockObjects, and Cactus are mature and widely
available. Much of this tool development has tar-
geted Java, an increasingly popular language in
both commercial applications and academia. Economic models have noted the potential forpositive improvements for XP and TDD, but rec-

ognized that additional research is needed. This is

especially true regarding speed and defects and
when TDD is combined with pair programming.
The interplay between academic and industry prac-
titioners for acceptance is an interesting one.
Research indicates that it takes Þve to 15 years for

academic development to succeed in commercial
practiceÑand the reverse holds true. Research
shows how TDD can improve programming ped-
agogy, yet few instructional resources exist. The

JUnit incorporation into BlueJ and the corre-
sponding programming textbook indicates
improvement may be on its way, however.
The adoption of TDD faces many challenges.First, TDD requires a good deal of discipline on the
programmerÕs part. Hence, programmers may

require compelling reasons before they try it.
Second, TDD is still widely misunderstood, per-
haps because of its name, but many still think erro-

neously that TDD addresses testing only, and not

design. Third, TDD doesnÕt fit every situation.

Developers and managers must determine when to
apply TDD and when to do something else.Additional research and the availability of train-ing and instructional materials will likely play an
important role in determining how widespread

TDD will become. UNDERSTANDING TDDÕS EFFECTS
Further research must be done to determine and
understand TDDÕs effects. To date, research has

focused on TDD as a testing technique to lower

defect density. Empirical studies should be con-

ducted to evaluate TDDÕs effect on software design

quality and to examine characteristics such as
extensibility, reusability, and maintainability.
Even with the focus on defect density, there have
been only a small number of studies conducted,
and those on only small samples. One industry
study with more than 10 participants involved a
small application that took only one day to com-
plete. The results were suspect because the control

group wrote a minimal number of tests. 
The few academic studies that have examineddefect density produced inconsistent results. The
largest study reported a 54 percent reduction in
defect density with beginning programmers. Two

other reasonably large studies with advanced pro-
grammers did not provide any signiÞcant reduc-
tion in defect density. One study hinted at better

designs. Future studies should consider the effectivenessof TDD at varying levels in the curriculum and the

programmerÕs maturity. The studies can also exam-

ine how TDD compares to test-last methods that

Þx the design ahead of time, as well as iterative test-
last methods that build an emergent design.XP-EF,
16a framework for consistently conductingand assessing case studies on XP projects, currently

under development, seems appropriate for adapta-
tion into a TDD case studies framework. Given such
a framework, researchers can conduct multiple case
studies and controlled studies. Programmer produc-
tivity and software quality should be examined.
Adoption issues such as learning curves, suitability
and Þt, and motivation must be addressed.
Additionally, research is needed to examine the

effects of combining TDD with other practices such

as pair programming and code inspection.Both industry and academic settings can beneÞtfrom more research. In particular, academic stud-
September 200549Table 2. Summary of TDD research in academia. 
Number of Controlled experiment programmers Quality effects Productivity effects
Kaufmann118 Improved information flow 50% improvement 
Edwards1259 54% fewer defects n/a 
Erdogmus1335 No change Improved productivity 
1419 No change, but better reuse No change 
Pancÿur1538 No change No change 
 50Computeries need to examine whether TDD improves or atleast does not hinder learning. Can TDD be incor-
porated into the undergraduate curriculum in a

way that improves studentsÕ ability to design and
test? If so, then TDD must be written into appro-
priate student texts and lab materials.Even if XP fades in popularity, TDD may persist.

Additional research is needed on TDDÕs ability

to improve software quality and on its place inundergraduate computer science and software engi-
neering curricula. If TDD Þnds its way into acade-
mia, students could enter software organizations
with increased discipline and improved software
design and testing skills, increasing the software
engineering communityÕs ability to reliably produce,

reuse, and maintain quality software. References1.C. Larman and V.R. Basili, ÒIterative and Incremen-
tal Development: A Brief History,Ó 
Computer, June2003, pp. 47-56.2.K. Beck, ÒAim, Fire,Ó 
IEEE Software, Sept./Oct.2001, pp. 87-89.3.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange, Addison-Wesley, 1999.
4.P. Abrahamsson et al., ÒNew Directions on Agile
Methods: A Comparative Analysis,Ó Proc. 25th IntÕlConf. Software Eng.(ICSE 03), IEEE CS Press, 2003,pp. 244-254.5.D.J. Reifer, ÒHow Good are Agile Methods?Ó 
IEEESoftware, July/Aug. 2002, pp. 16-18.6.Shine Technologies, ÒAgile Methodologies Survey
Results,Ó 17 Jan. 2003; www.shinetech.com/

download/attachments/98/ShineTechAgileSurvey2003-

01-17.pdf?version=1.7.J. Rasmusson, ÒIntroducing XP into GreenÞeld Pro-
jects: Lessons Learned,Ó IEEE Software, May/June,2003, pp. 21-28.8.B. George and L. Williams, ÒA Structured Experiment
of Test-Driven Development,Ó 
Information and Soft-ware Technology
, vol. 46, no. 5, 2004, pp. 337-342.9.E.M. Maximilien and L. Williams, ÒAssessing Test-
Driven Development at IBM,Ó 
Proc. 25th IntÕl Conf.Software Eng. (ICSE 03), IEEE CS Press, 2003, pp.
564-569.10.L. Williams, E.M. Maximilien, and M. Vouk, ÒTest-
Driven Development as a Defect-Reduction Prac-
tice,ÓProc. 14th IntÕl Symp. Software Reliability Eng.(ISSRE 03), IEEE Press, 2003, pp. 34-45.
11.R. Kaufmann and D. Janzen, ÒImplications of Test-
Driven Development: A Pilot Study,Ó 
Companion ofthe 18th Ann. ACM Sigplan Conf. Object-OrientedProgramming, Systems, Languages, and Applica-
tions,ACM Press, 2003, pp. 298-299.12.S.H. Edwards, ÒUsing Test-Driven Development in
the Classroom: Providing Students with Automatic,
Concrete Feedback on Performance.Ó Proc. IntÕlConf. Education and Information Systems: Tech-

nologies and Applications (EISTA 03), Aug. 2003;
http://web-cat.cs.vt.edu/grader/Edwards-EISTA03.

pdf.13.H. Erdogmus, M. Morisio, and M. Torchiano, ÒOn
the Effectiveness of Test-First Approach to Program-

ming,Ó IEEE Trans. Software Eng.
, Mar. 2005, pp.
226-237.14., ÒExperiment about
Test-First Programming,Ó 
IEE Proc. Software, IEEPublications, 2002, pp. 131-136.15.M. Panc
ÿur et al., ÒTowards Empirical Evaluation of
Test-Driven Development in a University Environ-

ment,Ó Proc. Eurocon 2003: The Computer as aTool
, The IEEE Region 8, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 83-86.16.L. Williams, L. Layman, and W. Krebs, 
Extreme Pro-gramming Evaluation Framework for Object-Ori-
ented Languages, v. 1.4, tech. report TR-2004-18,
North Carolina State Univ., 2004.
David Janzenis the president of Simex LLC, a con-
sulting and training Þrm, and an associate profes-
sor of computer science at Bethel College. He is
currently a PhD candidate at the University of

Kansas, where he received an MS in computer sci-

ence. Janzen is a member of the IEEE Computer
Society and the ACM. Contact him at david@
simexusa.com.Hossein Saiedianis a professor and associate chairin the Department of Electrical Engineering and
Computer Science, and a member of the Informa-
tion and Telecommunication Technology Center at

the University of Kansas. His research interests
include software process improvement, object tech-
nology, and software architecture. Saiedian received

a PhD in computer science from Kansas State Uni-

versity. He is a senior member of the IEEE, and a

member of the IEEE Computer Society and the
ACM. Contact him at saiedian@eecs.ku.edu.