 Jointly developed by the ISOand IEC in 1995, the ISO/IEC
12207 standard, Software Life
Cycle Processes, provides spe-
cific guidance in defining theroles and responsibilities of various
stakeholders in the life cycle of a soft-
ware project, product, or service. And
the software community is beginning to
take heed. James W. Moore, a leading

expert on software engineering stan-
dards, has indicated the importance of
this standard (Software EngineeringStandards: A UserÕs Road Map
, IEEE CSPress, Los Alamitos, Calif., 1997):ISO/IEC 12207 may be the mostimportant software engineering stan-
dard ever written. Within the Infor-

mation Technology industry, the

standard may have impact similar to
that of the ÒISO 9000Ó series of stan-
dards. Already, the standard is being

adopted by influential organizations
within the industry.  
The standard itself is relatively brief,detailing 17 processes in less than 40
pages. The 17 processes are divided into
three main process groups:¥ Primary processes include acquisi-tion, supply, development, opera-

tion, and maintenance.¥ Supporting processes include docu-mentation, conÞguration manage-
ment, quality assurance, verifi-
cation, validation, joint review,

audit, and problem resolution.¥ Organizational processes includemanagement, infrastructure, im-
provement, and training.Each process breaks down into rele-vant activities and tasks that reflect a
clear plan-do-check-act cycle. One fur-
ther process, tailoring, speciÞes the activ-
ities and tasks to follow in adapting the
standard to a particular situation or
application.But just how useful is this standard?Based upon personal mentoring expe-riences, I brießy describe two case stud-
ies that demonstrate the standardÕs

importance and versatility:¥  Haldex Traction AB of Landskrona,
Sweden, the supplier of a safety-crit-
ical automotive component to
Volkswagen GmbH, among others,

and¥  Cambio+ Healthcare Systems AB of
Linkoping, Sweden, the supplier of
a medical information system for
hospitals and clinics.In these two cases, ISO/IEC 12207 hasprovided important value-added guid-
ance to the stakeholders involved in each
project. Drawn from very different indus-
tries, these case studies also show that
ISO/IEC 12207 can be applied to both
systems and software engineering.AUTOMOTIVE SYSTEMS ENGINEERINGHaldex Traction AB has developed a
new coupling device for four-wheel vehi-

cles: the Limited Slip Coupling (LSC).
The LSC dynamically adapts the degree
of stiffness in the rear-axle coupling

based on several parameters including
speed, temperature, braking, turning,
and tire and road conditions. This small
electromechanical device resides in a
harsh environment and is safety-critical.
LSC represented an important new 
market to Haldex. The Þrst series instal-
lations of LSC products will be in
Volkswagen automobiles.
The LSC project involved a multi-disciplinary effort among mechanical,
electronic, systems, application, and soft-
ware specialties. Haldex AB involved sev-
eral subcontracting stakeholdersin the

process. The product evolved over time
as a series of prototypes that engineers
used in simulated and live testing in var-
ious parts of the world.The project leader realized the impor-tance of structuring the project around a
sound set of processes that would guide
Haldex and the other stakeholders in-
volved. Given that no satisfactory system
life cycle process standard existed at that
time, the project leader, based upon my

recommendation, decided to use ISO/IECDeÞningStakeholderRelationships Harold W. Lawson, Lawson Konsult AB
110ComputerStandardsEditor: Charles Severance, Michigan StateUniversity, Department of Computer

Science, 1338 Engineering Bldg., East
Lansing, MI 48824; voice (517) 353-2268;
fax (517) 355-7516; crs@egr.msu.edu;

http://www.egr.msu.edu/~crs
DeÞning stakeholderroles and responsibilities
in the life cycle of aproject, product, or
service is crucial. 
. 12207 for the system software and appli-cation software. We then decided todeÞne and tailor additional processes tocover the mechanical and electronicaspects. Thus, in this application, Haldex
AB deployed ISO/IEC 12207 as a system
standard.The project group used the standardin the initial stages to establish the projectstructure, in particular for identifyingstakeholdersand their capabilities, roles,and responsibilities. Since the product issafety-critical, it was vital to establish a
documentation structure that would cap-ture the essential aspects of the productas well as the project. This documentstructure is shown in Figure 1.As noted in the figure, the top-leveldocument is a safety case. This document
summarizes the information needed toprovide certain evidence about qualiÞedstakeholders. It shows that stakeholders
developed the product with suitableproduct technologies and according todeÞned processes and a safety plan.The process document deÞnes tailoredversions of the ISO/IEC 12207 primaryprocesses. Since most of the supportingprocesses are vital from a safety point ofview, tailored versions of these processeswere incorporated into the safety plan.Haldex AB further tailored the stan-dard to meet the needs of the productdevelopment model, a model that I can
best describe as Òincremental builds withconcurrenciesÓÑincremental within eachprototype and concurrent in that multi-ple prototype and series versions weredeveloped and tested simultaneously.The importance and usefulness ofISO/IEC 12207 was several-fold. While
project pressures caused deviations fromthe established processes, the set of basedocuments provided vital assistance inestablishing and communicating the pro-ject framework. Those base documents
also helped in orienting new personnel,
as well as provided an important salesargument for Haldex AB, which now hassold the LSC product to another majorautomotive manufacturer. HEALTH CARE SOFTWARECambio+ Healthcare Systems AB, asmall but rapidly developing company,develops medical information processingproducts for hospitals and clinics. Thefunctions supported include both inpa-tient and outpatient service, administra-tion and patient billing, scheduling of
medical services (including operations),laboratory results, pharmacology, andmedical specialty journals.In Sweden and elsewhere, signiÞcantproblems have arisen in deploying med-ical information processing systems incomplex hospital environments. Manysuppliers attempt to provide major sys-tems in a Òbig bang.Ó That is, they pro-vide large, complex, often inflexiblesystems at the initial installation.  Unfortunately, this has resulted incostly problems for the customers, oftento the point of triggering legal actions.
Problems involve missed requirements,user dissatisfaction, inadequate perfor-mance and reliability, inadequate train-ing, and the inability of customers to
inßuence the systemÕs development. Recognizing these problems, Cambio+concentrated on developing the right tech-nology as well as the right customer-related processes to ensure successfulinstallation and support of their productsin clinics as well as complex hospital envi
-ronments. To this end, Cambio+ devel-oped a business strategy based on the
application of ISO/IEC 12207 as well as
ISO/IEC 9126 (product quality character-istics). The basic premise of the strategy isto provide ÒQuality in UseÓ by achievingthe following product objectives:¥meet the customerÕs needs,¥be reliable, and¥be developed in a manner that per-mits active customer participationin product evaluation and improve-ment. To achieve these quality goals,Cambio+ views each customer relation-ship as a cooperative project betweenCambio+ and its customer. Further, toavoid Òbig bangÓ problems, a progressiveacquisition approach to purchasingMarch 1999111Safety caseStakeholdersProducttechnologyProcessSafety planPresentsargumentsProductPeopleProcessSafety issuesContinuous evaluationCambio+ andcustomerresourcesQualityinuseCooperativeprocessesProductFigure 1. Document structure for the LSC product. Figure 2. A continuous supply and feedback loop for Cambio+ software development.. 112Computering serves as a Þrm basis for negotiationbetween Cambio+ and their customers.
Further tailoring of the activities and taskdeÞnition then provides a Þrm basis forproject scheduling. Cambio+ can thenemploy the six major product qualityattributes of ISO/IEC 9126 in verifying
and validating the product: functional-ity, reliability, usability, efÞciency, main-tainability, and portability.  Cambio+ has, by using the ISO/IEC12207 and 9126 standards, developedthe backbone of a viable business con-cept that is gaining wide acceptance
among its customers and potential cus-tomers.These examples demonstrate that
learning to use ISO/IEC 12207 con-structively provides importantvalue-added returns on investment.Already translated into French, Japanese,and Portuguese, the standard will soonbe available in Swedish. A US adapta-tion, the standard has now been ofÞciallyapproved as IEEE/EIA 12207.  In addi
-tion to containing the ISO/IEC standard,further guidance is provided in respect to documentation and utilization. The
12207 standard will continue to evolve,and the standard working group is sched-uled to amend it in 2000 and then revisea few years after. In addition, the sameworking group is developing ISO/IEC15288 (System Life Cycle Processes),which provides similar guidance for thelife cycles of complex systems involving
hardware, software, and humans. Giventhe fact that quality management systems
based on processes occupy the currentline of thinking for ISO 9001:2000, both
ISO/IEC 12207 and eventually 15288
will play an increasingly important rolein deÞning processes to be evaluated andcertiÞed.vHarold W. (Bud) Lawson, an IEEE andACM Fellow, is an independent consultantin Stockholm and head of the Swedish del-egation to ISO/IEC JTC1 SC7WG7. He
thanks Raghu Singh, editor of ISO/IEC
12207, and the Swedish National Techni-cal Development Board and the SwedishDefense Material Administration.Contact
him at bud@lawson.se.Cambio+ products and services is deÞned.This results in a continuous supply andfeedback loop, as shown in Figure 2. As indicated in the Þgure, Cambio+and the customer supply resources(including personnel) and deploy them
according to a set of ISO/IEC 12207-deÞned cooperative processes. This cre-ates a product version, which is thenveriÞed and validated according to a setof product quality attributes followingISO/IEC 9126. After product deploy-ment, and based on experience with the
product, the customer and Cambio+jointly evaluate the product and establish
new goals for improving the existing ver-sion as well as adding new functionality.This carries them along in the develop-ment cycle, revisiting the resource aspect,the processes, and the product quality. The cooperative processes are basedon a first-level tailoring of relevantISO/IEC 12207 processes down to theactivity level, which concretely identiÞesthe project roles and responsibilities ofCambio+ and the customer. This tailor-StandardsResourcesCopies of the ISO/IEC 12207 stan-dard are available from national stan-dards bodies, such as ANSI (Cus-tomer Services, 11 West 42nd St.,New York, NY 10036), from ISO (1,rue de Varembe, CH-1211 Geneva20, Switzerland), or IEC (3, rue deVarembe, CH-1211 Geneva 20,Switzerland).The IEEE/EIA Std 12207 SoftwareLife Cycle Processes adoption of theinternational standards is availablefrom IEEE Standards Online http://standards.ieee.org/catalog/olis/index.html.The following book thoroughlypresents software engineering stan-dards, including 12207:S. Magee and L.L. Tripp, Guide toSoftware Engineering Standards andSpeciÞcations, Artech House, Boston,Mass., 1997.come to trust it. And only then does itmake sense to use it in real products. Thisprocess can take Þve to ten years for analgorithm, less for protocols or sourcecode libraries. Look at the length of time
it is taking elliptic curve systems to beaccepted, and even now they are onlyaccepted when more-trusted alternativescanÕt meet performance requirements.In cryptography, there is security infollowing the crowd. A homegrownalgorithm canÕt possibly be subjected tothe hundreds of thousands of hours ofcryptanalysis that DES and RSA haveseen. A company, or even an industryassociation, canÕt begin to mobilize theresources that have been brought to bearagainst the Kerberos authentication pro-tocol, for example. No one can duplicate
the confidence that PGP offers, afteryears of people going over the code, line
by line, looking for implementation
flaws. By following the crowd you canleverage the cryptanalytic expertise of theworldwide community, not just a fewweeks of some analystÕs time.And beware the doctor who says, ÒIinvented and patented this totally
new treatment that consists of tor-tilla-chip powder. It has never been triedbefore, but I just know it is much betterand IÕm going to give it to you.Ó ThereÕsa good reason we call new cryptographyÒsnake oil.Ó vBruce Schneieris president of Counter-pane Systems, a cryptography and com-puter security consulting company.  He
is the author of Applied Cryptography(John Wiley & Sons, 1995) and theinventor of the Blowfish and Twofishencryption algorithms. He thanks MattBlaze for the analogy that opened this
column. You can subscribe to his freecryptography e-mail newsletter athttp://www.counterpane.com.Internet WatchContinued form page 109.