 0018-9162/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEJune 200367COVER FEATURE
Published by the IEEE Computer SocietyDeveloping ComplexProjects Using XP 
with ExtensionsExtreme Programming is a disciplinedapproach to software development that
emphasizes customer satisfaction and team-
work,1but IT managers often view it as a
slightly chaotic methodology. Many even
regard XP as dangerous and unpredictable because

to them it appears to neglect planning and con-
trolling in large-scale or long-term projects.2When asked about his previous impressions ofXP, a participant in one of our IT workgroups

described it as Òstructured anarchy.Ó This comment

reßects the broadly held view that XP is a loosely
regulated process that gives developers in particu-
lar a great deal of freedom. Many developers Þnd

this feature attractive, but to project leaders and
managers, Òloosely regulatedÓ is often synonymous
with Òunplanned and uncontrollable.ÓHowever, our experience contradicts this view.
When suitably adapted for use in projects with com-

plex domains or limited resources, we have found
that XP offers a high degree of security and relia-

bility without limiting the advantages of agile soft-
ware development.3,4At IT Workplace Solutions (www.it-wps.com),
we have followed the recommended practice of

adapting XP to each specific project5and havedeveloped methodological extensions to XP for use
in a number of areas in which questions and prob-
lems frequently occur. We apply these extensions in

a cyclic and iterative approach that emphasizes con-

stant feedback, project preparation, and the cre-

ation of new roles for the participants in a software
development project.In our view, this approach provides a way to deal
with both the technical complexity of an application
domain and the complexity inherent in a develop-
ment process involving many groups. In addition to
extending the application of XP to manage projects
in which fuzzy requirements may hamper establish-

ing realistic release schedules, it also helps to prepare
customers for the effort involved in testing by
addressing the critical issue of resource management. Table 1 summarizes some projects in which we
have used our approach. Each project represents a
unique combination of characteristics including the
front-end system (Web, desktop, batch processing,

or mobile clients), location (in-house or external),
number of developers and coaches, participant
qualiÞcations, duration, and special features. PLANNING FOR MULTIPLE CUSTOMERS
A major problem with conventional development
processes is that they leave a wide gap between cus-
tomers and developers. To prevent misunderstand-

ings about a projectÕs objectives and outcome as

early as possible, XP and other agile processes rely
on the customerÕs close involvement throughout the

development process.1In large projects, however, constructing the soft-
ware requires meeting the needs of numerous poten-

tial user groups. Having only one XP team involved

in meeting these diverse needs can strain the pro-
jectÕs limited resources; on the other hand, if the

project involves several teams, the challenge is to
reconcile the various stakeholdersÕ interests to
develop a uniform vision for building the software. Using methodological extensions to adapt XP for large-scale or long-term
projects offers a high degree of security and reliability without limiting the

advantages of agile software development.
MartinLippertPetra Becker-

PechauHolgerBreitlingJırn KochAndreasKornst−dt Stefan RoockAxelSchmolitzkyHenningWolf
HeinzIT Workplace 
Solutions  68ComputerProduct managersIn Projects A and C, several business divisionsapproached the XP teams with unÞltered, some-
times conßicting requirements for a speciÞc con-

struction object. One solution to this problem is to appoint a 
prod-uct manager, who determines the requirements of thevarious interest groups. The product manager then
plays the role of the XP customer in a planning game,which is conducted to decide the scope and timing of
releases based on estimates the programmers pro-
vide. Following the planning game, the various inter-

est groups receive a summarized feature list.Product managers can improve many projects,but making compromises when conflicts occur

requires special skills. Evaluating a product man-
agerÕs performance is difÞcult, but the usersÕ reac-

tions at system presentation usually are a good

indicator. Although occasional complaints about

missing features are acceptable, continual dissatis-
faction with feature implementations might indi-
cate the need to replace the product manager.
To avoid communication problems, if develop-
ers have purely domain-related questions rather

than questions about task prioritization, they
should circumvent the product manager and query
the users directly.
Phased parallel constructionAn additional problem in Project C was the lim-
ited size of the XP team, which could not build soft-

ware simultaneously for all three of the business
divisions involved in the project. In the planning

game, it was not clear which division should receive

priority, what effort this required, or how to divide

the resources among the three groups. Initially, as Figure 1a shows, the team suggested
that it should allocate three weeks to each of thethree business divisions in turn. However, the cus-
tomers immediately rejected this suggestion because
no work would be done on their system for a period
of six weeks. 
In this case, the solution was phased parallel con-struction, with the development team working on
two business divisions in parallel. As Figure 1b
shows, for each division, the work was conducted
over a total six-week period in a staggered three-

week rhythm. Rather than increasing the con-
struction work for each division, this approach
merely stretched it out, reducing the break for each
division to an acceptable three-week period. The
increased processing period facilitated closer feed-
back with the customers from each division and

avoided the misunderstandings that can occur with
a lengthy break.To use phased parallel construction effectively,
developers must gain insight into each interest
groupÕs work situation. Misunderstandings can

occur because similar terms have different mean-
ings for different interest groups. Distribution over multiple teamsProjects A and C posed a similar problem:Several business divisions presented their require-
ments, and none wanted to wait long for their
implementation. Some groups repeatedly com-
plained that their requirements received too little
attention, or that it came too late.
For Project A, a separate XP team was estab-lished for each business division to determine the
amount of resources available. A product manager

was assigned to each team to consolidate the con-
ßicting requirements of the various interest groups.
The product managers then represented their group
by participating in separate planning games con-
ducted for each team. Table 1. Project characteristics.
ProjectFront end(s)ProjectNumber of  ParticipantDuration
location developers/coachesqualiÞcations(consumed/rest)Special features
A Web, desktop, In-house 15/2 Highly heterogeneous; 24/12 monthsDifferent interest groups;  
batchparticipants occasionally (200/200 multichanneling application

processingconversant with person-months)
technologies B Desktop, External 6/0 Homogeneous, but 6 months; completed High demands with regard
batch  initially little domain to documentation for
processingknowledgecertification by auditor(s)  
C Desktop, External 10/0 Homogeneous 9/27 months Project divided into two
mobile (40/100 phases: demonstrate

clientsperson-months) feasibility/utility and 
prototype development  D Desktop External 6/0 Homogeneous 6 months; completed Product development  

E Batch In-house 3/1 Heterogeneous 15 months; completed DevelopersÕ first experience
processingwith OO; embedded in host environment   Distribution over several XP teamsÑeach with,as we propose, at least four developersÑoffers a
viable option when phased parallel construction
reaches its limit. Nevertheless, having several small
teams working together in a project invariably
causes communication overhead. CUSTOMER TESTINGUsing customer feedback to swiftly check deci-sions and developments is a key principle of agile
development processes such as XP. 
Frequent releases are particularly important
because customers can directly evaluate the projectÕs

results. Unlike system presentations, using early sys-
tem versions helps to address questions relating to
features such as stability, load behavior, and per-

formance. Customer reluctance to agree to develop
releases in small increments reduces the effective-

ness of this important risk management instrument.
Problems can occur if the customer does not fol-low through on promises to extensively test the
prototypes and subsequent versions. When faults
in the developed software do not become evident

until shortly before the planned introduction of
the system, Þxes must be made under signiÞcant
time pressure. Preparing the customer for the testing effortAlthough most customers do not dispute the ben-eÞts of early releases, they often fail to carry out

testing because it appears to offer little direct ben-
eÞt in return for the time and resources it requires.
However, early and frequent feedback is an essen-

tial XP concept. Our approach emphasizes the importance ofholding a frank conversation at the beginning ofthe project that explains what is expected of thecustomer, particularly with respect to regular

involvement in testing. This conversation should
make clear how the customer can integrate this

effort into a normal work routine and that the test-
ing will yield tangible benefits. Responding to
objections about testing provides an opportunity
to initiate an early search for solutions that foster
the XP goal of encouraging the customerÕs close

involvement in the development process. More up-front risk managementMore intensive risk management is required if
the customer does notÑor cannotÑuse the devel-
oped releases. It is difÞcult or impossible to use sys-
tem demonstrations to detect risks related to load

behavior, robustness, and the support of coopera-

tive work. Detecting these risks as early as possi-
ble is essential, but developers can only Þnd them
if they look for them. The development team

should follow the XP principle of building spike

solutions as simply as possible, separate from sys-
tem development, while producing as little Yagni

(Òyou arenÕt going to need itÓ) code as possible. 
However, spike solutions cannot answer ques-
tions about the systemÕs practical worth. Answering

such questions requires putting the release to use. 
Providing documentation and feedback on test resultsEven if the customer does carry out testing, theresults from manual acceptance tests can be inter-

preted in different ways. At this point in the project,
developers must assume a subordinate role because
the customer determines what is good and correct.
Developers must be able to assess the quality of theJune 200369CW2930313233343536373839404142434445464748495051
CW2930313233343536373839404142434445464748495051
ABC 1DEF 1GHI 1ABC 2DEF 2GHI 2ABC 3ÉABC 1DEF 1GHI 1ABC 2DEF 2GHI 2ABC 3É(a)(b)Figure 1. Buildingsoftware for three
business divisions
(ABC, DEF, and GHI).

(a) Allocating three
weeks to each 
division in turn
would result in no
work being done on
a given system for
six weeks at a time.
(b) Phased parallel
construction
stretches out each
divisionÕs workload

and enables
customers to provide
closer feedback. 
CW = calendar week. 70Computercustomer testing, but doing so is a difÞcultundertaking, especially when the feedback is
positive. One solution is to both document the test
setup and results and to evaluate them in a
feedback cycle. Feedback can point to
remaining weaknesses in the tests, providing
a basis for more meaningful tests. While
endorsed test results offer more protection
against unwarranted additional require-
ments, the feedback cycle is beneficial

because high-quality acceptance tests avoid
the need for such requirements. COMPLEX OR IMPRECISE APPLICATION DOMAIN
We generally assemble development teams as
needed. Because team members work for a limited

period on a project within a speciÞc domain, they

tend not to be specialists in any particular domain.

This can cause problems when developing software
for a complex domain because developers initially
may not understand how the domain works or
what the system is supposed to accomplish. 
To design and implement the new system, the
development team must work with the customer in
a joint learning process to understand the system
requirements and to translate them into the soft-

ware. The customerÕs availability is a critical issue

when the project requires specialist knowledge
about the domain. Author-critic cycles
XPÕs iterative and incremental approach focuses
on the source code. However, in complex long-term

projects, developing other types of documentation
in short cycles and having the customer assess them
is beneÞcial. Project B, for example, required the speciÞcationand documentation of an assets accounting system
to provide a basis for certiÞcation by an auditor.

Instead of selecting a typical phase-oriented
approach, the developers gradually improved
results in short cycles and regularly requested cus-
tomer feedback. In informal interviews with the customer, the
developers Þrst clariÞed essential domain-related
issues and documented the results in their own

words but taking care to use the terms and con-

cepts of the application domain. The customer
reviewed these results to provide feedback and

point out any errors. The developers incorporated
this feedback into a revised version of the docu-
ments and again presented them to the customer toreview. This
author-critic cycle
continued througha number of iterations.6This document-based process was particularlyimportant in the early stages of Projects B and E.
By closely communicating with the customer and
recapitulating the results, the developers gained
more detailed specialist knowledge with every
cycle. Both projects produced technical glossaries;
in addition, Project E generated a detailed descrip-
tion of the implemented calculation procedures,
and Project B generated certifiable system docu-
mentation.The author-critic cycle requires additional effort
and skills. Developers must be familiar with writ-
ing and reviewing documentation in the language
of the application domain. In addition, both cus-
tomers and developers must expend considerable
time and effort on nonprogramming tasks, with-
out overdoing it. When executed correctly, the

author-critic cycle creates a systematic information

base of high-quality documents that are readily
available to project members.Customer-on-demand
For projects in which the customer is not avail-able full-time onsite, we rely on thecustomer-on-
demand concept to facilitate communications.
Using this approach, developers usually can con-
tact customers by telephone within a few minutes
and, if necessary, schedule a physical meeting on

the same or the following day. Combining cus-

tomer-on-demand with the author-critic cycle

allows sufÞciently close and swift communication
to avoid delays in the project. LONG-TERM PLANNINGXP planning instruments focus on individual iter-ations and releases. During XPÕs planning game,

team members identify and assess features as 
sto-ries, a summary of information about individualuse cases that will Þt on an index card. Cost and
speed of implementation for each story is estimated
based on experience from either previous stories of
the same project or previous projects in which the

problems and team structures were similar. 
Exploratory phase with subsequent 
rough release scheduleThe more a project differs from comparable pre-vious projects in terms of its goals, technologies used,
and team composition, the more difÞcult it is to pro-
vide reliable estimates over a long period. Project A,
for example, involved replacing a large legacy sys-

tem with a new system that could do Òall that theCombiningcustomer-on-
demand with theauthor-critic 
cycle allowssufÞciently close and swift communication to avoid delays in the project. old system could, but better,Ó but nobody on the
team could provide reliable information about the

old systemÕs functionality. Team members had

patchy application-related knowledge, and most
were unfamiliar with the technologies. In this case,
the collective lack of experience and projectÕs size

made the exclusive use of story cards impractical.Large projects requiring some guarantee of fea-sibility within budgetary constraints call for an ini-
tial one- to three-month exploratory phase, duringwhich developers conduct interviews and construct
prototypes6to survey the Þeld as much as possible.
On the application side, this phase provides an

opportunity to assess expected functionality; on the
technical side, the developers obtain an overview
of the existing and proposed technology. 
The development team can use the informationgathered in the exploratory phase to better assess
the projectÕs scope and draw up a rough feature list

that they partition into task packages.The teamalso gets a better sense of what it can achieve, at
least in the near term. The next step is to draw up a rough release sched-ulefor the entire project, including estimates of the
effort involved for each individual release. The accu-
racy in determining the Þrst release serves as an indi-
cation of how realistic the initial planning was. A
high degree of accuracy reinforces the conviction,
both within the team and on the part of manage-
ment, that the stated goal is attainable. On the other

hand, substantial deviations may require adjusting
the entire schedule if eliminating the interference
factors through training or other measures is impos-
sible. Gradually establishing better assessment plan-
ning increases reliability with each release.Some XP practices are not applicable during theexploratory phase, but othersÑsuch as stand-up
meetings, refactoring, collective ownership, and pair

programmingÑare deÞnitely valuable. The entire

phase is essentially one high-level planning game for
the upcoming project. However, we do not consider

an exploratory phase to be a breach of XPÕs 
noupfront designprinciple because no details are Þxedin advance.Management generally prefers to add some extradays of exploration rather than to start a project
when the development team does not even know
whether its task is feasible. An often-heard piece of
advice7regarding functionality assessment alsoapplies: Speak to the right people. Management
may think it knows best, but the usersÕ acceptance
ultimately decides the projectÕs fate. It is important

to select experienced people who are familiar with
the system. In projects with multiple customers, theexploratory phase is also a good time to lookfor a product manager.
DEPENDENCIES AMONG PROJECT TASKS
Two key principles of XP are to focus on
the program code and to neglect dependen-
cies among programming tasks.1 This is whystory and task cards are not used except for

programming. However, software projects

involve many other nonprogramming tasks
that are often interdependent and can
strongly inßuence the development process.
Such tasksÑincluding presentations on the
projectÕs progress, training team members in

the use of new technologies, hardware and

software procurement, and planning pro-
duction takeoverÑmust be integrated into
development process planning. Project A, for example, focused so intently onthe planning game that the customerÕs failure to do

his part to introduce the new system did not

become apparent until relatively late. The program
code was on schedule, but the customer had not
yet purchased the computer on which the projectÕs

Web server was to be installed. It took several

monthsÑan unexpectedly long timeÑto procure
a suitable computer, unnecessarily holding up over-

all project progress by delaying acceptance testing
by the application department.Baselines with responsibilitiesTo address this problem,the team can use
base-linesto model all nondevelopment project tasks. Abaseline consists of a task description, a list of pos-
sible dependencies on other baselines, the name of
a person responsible for meeting each baseline, and,
in some cases, an assessment of effort.6The personresponsible for a baseline does not necessarily per-
form the task; that personÕs job is simply to keep an

eye on task performance and keep it moving along. A baseline managermonitors overall progresstoward all baselines, using a prominently displayed
table to identify new tasks and dependencies in coop-
eration with the development team and customer.

After each planning game, the baseline manager
determines whether to include tasks not captured on
story cards in the table, ticks off baselines reached,

and reminds those responsible of their duties. 
Adding baselines complicates the process becauseusing both stories and baselines inßuences the plan-
ning game and task assignment. Participants in the

planning game prioritize task assignments and bal-
ance the resources available for stories with those
needed to monitor and complete the baselines.June 200371The developmentteam can use theinformationgathered in theexploratory phase
to better assessthe projectÕs scope
and draw up a roughfeature list that itpartitions intotask packages. 72ComputerDevelopers must choose between selecting thenext story card or working on a baseline.
One possible solution is to assign one or twopersons to work exclusively on baselines.
Because baseline tasks address infrastructure
or nondevelopment tasks that may not be obvi-
ous to the customer, the project cannot rely on

the customer to deÞne necessary baselines in
the planning game. The team should also sug-
gest baseline tasks. Whether the customer or
the project manager determines tasks and pri-
oritizes baselines depends on the project.REQUIREMENTS DEFINITIONIn the XP approach, customers write story
cards that capture the system requirements
during the development process. However, unlike tra-

ditional requirements speciÞcations, these story cards
do not represent exact deÞnitions.5Capturingrequirements of proper granularity at the outset is

sometimes necessary, especially in conventional Þxed-

price projects, to use as a basis for the contract or for
long-term planning. These requirements must be
detailed enough to allow a rough effort assessment
but not so precise as to stiße developersÕ creativity.
Business storiesDuring the projectÕs exploratory phase, the devel-
opers collaborate with user representatives from
each business division or subproject to draw up the

aims as well as special Òrequirements documents.Ó
The aims roughly define what is expected of the

project as a wholeÑwhich business processes it 
will support and what aspects need improvement.
In contrast, the requirements documents are

lengthy stories indicating the future systemÕs antic-

ipated functionality. These 
business storiestend tobe less detailed than normal stories, and they are

more closely geared to business processes than to
user tasks. For example, in Project C, the three business divi-sions formulated their different system require-

ments as typical business processesÑlists of
previously used work materials and generic activi-
ties to perform on them such as create, read,

update, or delete. However, it was not clear how

the team would use these general descriptions to

arrive at concrete system requirements. Each of the three subprojects produced 35 busi-
ness stories in a project runtime of nine months,

requiring approximately 600 person-days of devel-

oper capacity. The story list was divided into two

sections: necessary and optional stories. While only
the necessary stories are relevant to acceptance incontractual terms, capturing the optional storieshelps team members look beyond the current pro-

jectÕs conÞnes. 
Instead of using a very general requirements spec-
iÞcation, the customer and provider agreed to use

these business stories on a contractual basis. By
mutual arrangement, they also agreed that the cus-
tomer could alter the business stories, even during
the course of the project, as long as such changes
did not increase overall development effort. Thus,
for every new requirement, an old one had to be

abandoned or simpliÞed. This arrangement makes
it possible for the customer to adjust aims while a
project is in progress, but it does not put the devel-

opers at a disadvantage because the requirements
do not increase, they merely change. Basically, such business story lists constitute an
optional scope contract,8the terms of which can be
altered during a project. However, to prevent con-

fusion, we do not recommend using this term in the
initial negotiations with the customer. This does not

imply reducing communication; on the contrary,

business stories require quite intensive negotiations,
but it is more effective to introduce this concept after
the customer has learned to trust the provider. 
Business story lists constitute a good basis formanaging and monitoring software projects
because for each business story, management and

the customer can agree on exactly what has been
accomplished. They also provide a sound basis for
iteration and release scheduling.Because business stories are at a higher level ofabstraction than story cards, team members must
maintain contact with lower-level project planning

to ensure ßexibility. 
We donÕt invariably use XP on every project.

Instead, we adapt the development method

to each situation and incorporate new ele-ments in our process as needed. The XP extensions

we have created focus on the planning and con-

trolling aspects of development, demonstrating
that, contrary to the opinion of many IT managers,
a suitably adapted agile development process is
ideal for long-term projects and the development
of large systems.
AcknowledgmentWe thank all it-wps coworkers and project part-
ners for the numerous discussions on the topics
addressed here and for their help in gathering expe-
rience.Business story lists
constitute a goodbasis for managingand monitoring software projects becausemanagement and thecustomer can agreeon exactly what hasbeen accomplished. References1.K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: EmbraceChange,Addison-Wesley, 2000.
2.A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development,Addi-son-Wesley, 2002.
3.M. Lippert et al., ÒXP in Complex Project Settings:
Some Extensions,Ó Extreme Programming Perspec-tives,M. Marchesi et al., eds., Addison-Wesley, 2001,
pp. 579-589.4.M. Lippert, S. Roock, and H. Wolf, 
Extreme Pro-
gramming in Action: Practical Experiences from
Real-World Projects,
John Wiley & Sons, 2002.
5.K. Beck and M. Fowler, 
Planning Extreme Pro-gramming, Addison-Wesley, 2001.
6.
The Object-Oriented ConstructionHandbook,Morgan Kaufmann, to be published 2003.
7.B. Meyer, 
Object-Oriented Software Construction,2nd ed., Prentice Hall, 1997.8.K. Beck and D. Cleal, ÒOptional Scope ContractsÓ;
www.xprogramming.com/ftp/Optional+scope+

contracts.pdf.Martin Lippertis a software architect and coach atIT Workplace Solutions (it-wps), an IT consulting

and development company in Hamburg, Germany,

and a research assistant and PhD candidate in the
Software Engineering Group (SWT) of the Univer-
sity of HamburgÕs Department of Computer Science.

His research interests include object-oriented analy-
sis and design, frameworks, refactoring, and com-

ponents; the architecture of interactive OO software
systems; aspect-oriented programming; and the
employment of plug-in architectures. Lippert
received an MS in computer science from the Uni-

versity of Hamburg. He is a member of the ACM.

Contact him at lippert@acm.org.
Petra Becker-Pechau
is a consultant for it-wps anda research assistant and PhD candidate in the SWT.

Her research interests include OO analysis and
design, ontologies, architectures and component
models, plug-in architectures, framework develop-
ment, and XP. Becker-Pechau received a polytech-

nic degree in computer science from the University

of Applied Sciences in Hamburg. Contact her at
becker@jwam.org.Holger Breitlingis a software architect and coach at
it-wps and a research assistant and PhD candidate
in the SWT. His research interests include OO analy-

sis and design, frameworks, and components; the
architecture of interactive OO software systems; the
modeling of computer-supported cooperative work

(CSCW) processes; and the employment of plug-inarchitectures. Breitling received an MS in computer
science from the University of Hamburg. Contact

him at breitling@jwam.org.
Jırn Kochis a software developer and coachat it-
wps. His research interests include OO analysis and
design, refactoring, frameworks, and components;
and architectures of CSCW systems. Koch received

an MS in computer science from the University of
Hamburg. Contact him at koch@jwam.org.
Andreas Kornst−dtis a software architect and
coach at it-wps. His research interests include OO

analysis and design, frameworks and user-oriented 

component systems; management of software
development projects; and computer applications
in musicology. Kornst−dt received a PhD in com-

puter science from the University of Hamburg.

Contact him at kornstaedt@jwam.org.
Stefan Roockis a software architect and coach atit-wps. His research interests include OO analysis
and design, frameworks, and components; the
architecture of interactive OO software systems;
and management of software development pro-
jects. Roock received an MS in computer science
from the University of Hamburg. Contact him at

roock@jwam.org.Axel Schmolitzky
is a consultant for it-wps and asenior researcher in the SWT. His research interests

include OO framework development and language
design, XP, and visualization of OO design.

Schmolitzky received a PhD in computer science

from the University of Ulm, Germany. He is a mem-

ber of the ACM and the German Computer Society
(GI). Contact him at schmolitzky@jwam.org.Henning Wolf
isasoftware architect and consultant
at it-wps. His research interests include service archi-

tectures and software project management. Wolf

received an MSin computer science from the Uni-

versity of Hamburg. Contact him at wolf@ jwam.org.is CEO at it-wps, a professorin the University of HamburgÕs Department of

Computer Science, and head of the attached Soft-
ware Technology Center. His research interests

include OO analysis and design, frameworks, and
components; and the architecture of interactive



in computer science from the Technical University

of Berlin. He is a member of the ACM and the GI.

Contact him at zuellighoven@jwam.org.
June 200373