 0018-9162/03/$17.00 © 2003 IEEEJune 200379COVER FEATURE
Published by the IEEE Computer SocietyMigrating AgileMethods to
Standardized
Development PracticeModern business organizations areemergentÑthey reside in a state of
continual process change.1Globaliza-tion, deregulation, increased compe-
tition, mergers and acquisitions, andthe like all reveal organizations in transition, adapt-
ing to a continuously changing business environ-
ment. In this dynamic context, however, organiza-

tions must still project quality of product, service,
and process to gain market presence and competi-
tive edge. SigniÞcant organizational tension arises
as the stability thatunderpinsnotions of quality

controlis overlaid on environments in ßux.
In software development, this tension is most obvi-ous in the difference between standardized engi-

neering approaches and more recent agile methods.
Engineering approaches tend toward explicitly
deÞned processes that can be standardized both

within and across organizations. The signiÞcant
industry investment in engineering approaches is evi-
dent in standards such as the International Organiza-
tion for StandardizationÕs ISO 9000 series, the

Software Engineering InstituteÕs Capability Maturity

Model (CMM), and a number of industry-led ini-
tiatives such as the Object Management GroupÕs

UniÞed Modeling Language and the Rational UniÞed
Process (RUP) from Rational Software. 
However, the agile development movement has
begun to question the philosophy behind engineer-ing initiatives. Agile development emphasizes thehuman or crafted aspects of software development
over the engineering aspectsÑindividuals and inter-
actions over processes and tools, working software
over comprehensive documentation, customer col-
laboration over contract negotiation, and respond-
ing to change over following a plan.The ÒIndustrial Context: AgCo Legacy Migra-
tionÓ sidebar introduces our work with a large
international systems integrator, which we pseudo-

nymously call ÒAgCo.Ó In this work, we found
engineering and agile perspectives to be equally
important to modern software development. We

developed a framework approach to implementing

agile values and principles in the context of AgCoÕs

organizational mandate for the consistent use of
RUP and CMM.BACKGROUNDThe rise of capitalism, modern bureaucracy, and
scientiÞc management has propelled the creation of
managed, repeatable, and quantifiable organiza-
tional processes.2In general, the power of rationalsystems has been proved in the context of market

competition and is well evidenced in the success of
the ÒmanufacturingÓ approach to production.Software crisisIn 1968 and 1969, the North Atlantic Treaty
Situated process and quality frameworks offer a way to resolve the
tensions that arise when introducing agile methods into standardized 

software development engineering.
Mark Lycett
Robert D.MacredieChaitali PatelRay J. PaulBrunel University 80ComputerOrganization held two conferences to discuss theÒsoftware crisis.Ó The conference proceedings doc-
ument the perceived need for rational systems in
software development.3,4Perceived problemsincluded the increasing size and complexity of soft-
ware systems, difÞculties in estimating costs and

managing large numbers of people, shortages of
skilled software professionals, emphasis on coding
at the expense of design and testing, and poor doc-
umentation.Key conference recommendations sought to stan-dardize the software development process with

emphasis on quality, costs, and development prac-

tices. In keeping with a rational system approach,
proponents expected the process to improve qual-
ity at the same time it reduced costs and increased
productivity. 
Software development has since come to rely ona methodical approach. Comprehensive develop-
ment reviews testify to this reliance, which is also
evident in an identiÞable orthodoxy in information
systems research.5This orthodoxy structures thesystem development process through a purposeful

framework that organizes and regulates activities
and ensures their comprehensiveness. From crisis through depression to agilityBecause software is so woven into the fabric ofmodern business, it is in many ways pointless to
argue that the engineering approach has failed.
However, the manufacturing ideal of software pro-

duction remains unfulfilled, and significant evi-
dence indicates that many of the software crisis
problems remain with us today. 
Results of a recent study, for example, showed
that 80 to 90 percent of software does not meet
performance goals, 80 percent of systems are deliv-
ered late and over budget, about 40 percent of
developments fail or are abandoned, less than 25
percent of systems properly integrate business and
technology objectives, and only 10 to 20 percent
meet their success criteria.
6A compelling perspective on these enduringproblems argues that software development
process is not a product so much as a communica-
tion medium.7The process must translate tacit,evolutionary, and often undeÞned knowledge into

digital form. The translation involves not just basic

grammar, syntax, and rules but also issues of mean-

ing and intent that are both contextual and sub-

jective.2In this view, software development is a
knowledge-acquiring as well as a product-produc-
ing activity, and its structure must address a com-

munication mediumÕs demands in good part. 
The agile approach implicitly embodies this view.
It strongly favors human communication and col-
laboration over deÞned and repeatable activities as
mechanisms for developing quality software. In
practice, the difÞculties that many organizations
face with the agile approach reside, Þrst, in the cul-

tural change necessary to convince management of

its beneÞts and, second, in its feasibilitywithin the

increasingly global market forces, regulatory prac-
tices, and government oversight that fuel stan-
dardization. To reduce the disjunction between software
development management, theory, and practice

that has remained unresolved since the NATOcon-
Industrial Context: AgCo Legacy MigrationAgCo (a pseudonym) was originally a mainframe manufacturer. Since
the mid-1990s, however, the company has moved its strategic focus

toward information management. This focus includes industrial and orga-
nizational expertise as well as the application and support of informa-

tion technology. Thus, the company offers its services in the areas of sys-

tems endurance, business transformation, business enhancement, and

systems replacement. Although these services are available across a range
of industrial sectors, Þnancial services provide a major revenue area and
one in which the company has a considerable history. 
AgCo has several legacy products catering to the financial servicesindustry. The products were developed in a fourth-generation language.

Perceived customer demand and technology advances motivated a deci-
sion to migrate three legacy products toward a service-based environ-
ment. AgCo wanted to increase product ßexibility and scalability as well
as component reusability, thereby supporting system tailoring and growth

to suit changing contexts. It expected to do so with less overhead than
traditionally developed systems impose. Legacy migration was part of a larger organizational strategy aimed atstandardizing organizational development approaches. AgCo has adopted
the Rational UniÞed Process (www.rational.com/products/rup/) for soft-

ware development and is working toward quality certiÞcation via the Capa-
bility Maturity Model Integration (www.sei.cmu.edu/cmmi). 
RUP uses an iterative, incremental approach to software development,offering a set of common processes to improve communication and cre-
ate a common understanding of all necessary development tasks, respon-
sibilities, and artifacts. CMMI provides models for organizational process

improvement in the areas of software, system engineering, and integrated

product and process development. In addition to providing a ÒstagedÓ
model for process improvement and audit, CMMI offers a continuous
representation that allows different organizational processes to improve
capabilities at their own pace.AgCo adopted both RUP and CMMI with an engineering philosophyin mind. To develop a means of legacy migration, it needed to institu-

tionalize RUP and align the migration with it. To achieve and demon-

strate process maturity, it needed to institutionalize CMMI as well.
Clearly, institutionalization involves signiÞcant, ongoing organizational
change, but it also implies that Òone size Þts all.Ó To some extent, this

accurately reßected management thinking, but it does not Þlter through
to the reality of development practice, which commonly adapts processes
and so on. This disconnect signals an opportunity for introducing agile

software development.  June 200381ferences,2we must examine the needs that emerge
from each perspective.
Process theories and realitiesIn engineering development, the demands onsoftware development are relatively well articu-
lated. The perspective assumes that requirements

can be fairly well deÞned and that the development
process concentrates on moving software process
control from producers to managers. Three princi-
ples underlie this view:¥FormalismÑseeking a universal approach toa wide range of problem situations. An

abstract set of processes, activities, and so on
transform inputs into outputs to deduce a

repeatable solution.¥External knowledge captureÑcapturing andstandardizing the development process to sup-
port a learning paradigm of inert knowledge
transfer as a basis for coordination, commu-
nication, and training.¥EconomicsÑusing the division of process and
labor to rationalize cost and effort. By estab-

lishing a purposeful framework of component
activities, management can eliminate the activ-
ities that appear to be redundant, irrational,
and counterproductive. It can also partition

the process, allowing task specialization and

pay rates differentiated for particular skills.Several theories inßuence this approach.8A trans-formationview of process, which decomposes a
problem into sequential activities that change

inputs to outputs, has dominated production think-
ing for many decades.The management tasks ofplanning, execution,
and control all have underlying theories. Planningassumes that the organization consists of separate
management and production elementsÑthat
ÒthinkingÓ can be separated from ÒdoingÓ and that

producing plans is synonymous with action.
Executionprovides the interface between plan andwork, dispatching authorization to proceed.
Controluses a thermostatic model that monitorsvariances between standard and actual values and
corrects the process accordingly.
The realities of emergent organizations, however,
are disjoint from these theories, which have failed

to solve the software crisis problems.In agile development, solutions evolve collec-tively over time. The process concentrates on con-

solidating control with the producers, thus
implying a coordination role for management. Theprinciples underlying this view contrast withthe engineering approach:9,10¥Context awarenessÑvarying theapproach based on a collective under-
standing of contextual needs and deliv-
ering working software frequently as the
principal check on quality and progress.¥Individual excellenceÑemphasizing thehuman aspects of skill development and
motivation, mandating management
trust, and exploiting pride in the job. ¥Peer-based knowledge capture
Ñusing pairingand periodic group reßection as mechanisms
for explicit collective learning and emphasizing
face-to-face communication as the principal
means of knowledge transferÑexplicit and
implicitÑbetween developers and customers.¥Minimalist methodologyÑconcentrating onlyon effort that is judged to be necessary and suf-

Þcient in a particular situation.From a production perspective, agile develop-
ment is more akin to value generationthan to trans-formation. Value generation aims to provide the

best possible value from the customerÕs perspec-

tive.11It accepts that customer requirements areneither necessarily available nor well understood

and that allocating requirements to different devel-
opment activities is a difÞcult problem. From a management perspective, management-as-organizing12supersedes planning, executing, andcontrolling. In this view, management involves the

design, coordination, and enabling of activities and
is primarily concerned with shaping the physical,
political, and cultural environment for action.

Importantly, agile developmentviews action as

inherently situatedÑit is never adequately capturedin a plan.RESOLVING TENSIONS
Agile development is based on theory moreappropriate to emergent organizations, but it faces

a signiÞcant barrier to implementation: the resis-
tance oflarge, mature organizations to wholesale

change in working practice. However, while theo-

ries may differ, the broad goals of engineering and

agile development are implicitly the same: produce
the intended software artifact, observe internal

needs such as minimizing cost, and fulÞllexternal

customer-related needs such as quality and ßexi-

bility. The congruence in these broad goals provides

a lever for migrating organizations across the 
theoretical divide. The agiledevelopmentprocess implies a coordination role formanagement. 82ComputerHowever, two practicalities arise from
attempting to introduce agility while project-
ing product, service, and process quality and
managing both a market presence and a com-
petitive edge.Situated processesThe primary tension that agile principlesand values impose on development practice
is in balancing between implementing repeat-
able processes and allowing for the nuances
in a particular development context. From an engineering development perspective,management expects predictable processes to
achieve its primary goal of quality product devel-
opment at minimal cost. But uncertainty and con-

textual differences are a fact of life in software

development. While it may appear easier to plan,
execute, and control development via globally
applied standard processes, management is not use-
ful if it does not reßect project realities. Further, a

process generic enough to deal with any situation
is too high-level to be practical. It must be tailored,
which requires substantial up-front effort. Many
reuse efforts attest to this observation, yielding nei-

ther use nor reuse.Agile software development accepts these difÞ-culties, adopting collaborative principles and values

that engender informal trust and interaction; a
chaordic perspective that sees complete order as a
fallacy; and a Òbarely sufÞcientÓ methodology9thatreßects a Òless is moreÓ philosophy.
To management, these elements shout risk and,
furthermore, risk that increases signiÞcantly in rela-

tion to project size. The contractual nature of much
large-scale software development makes it easy to
understand why production and management the-
ories are what they are. Developers at AgCo, for

example, rarely have contact with clientsÑother

parts of the organization act as gatekeepers in this
regard. Rational Unified Process. Given AgCoÕs adoption of
RUP and pursuit of CMM quality certiÞcation, we

proposedusing RUP for a learning framework that

would educate the organization in agile principles
while mitigating risk. At a senior management level, we Þrst intendedto standardize on a set of activities, artifacts, work-
flows, and roles for each RUP discipline across
three legacy migration projects. This approach
seemingly offered easier rollout and monitoring.
However, a significant number of RUP activities

and actifacts soon proved to be unsuitable to the
development context of legacy migration. At a tactical management level, we tried map-ping RUP activities and artifacts to the existing
AgCo methodology to provide some consistency
of understanding. However, this approach also

became problematic. Even though we completed a

nominal mapping at the activity level, RUPÕs iter-

ative and incremental aspect was new to AgCo,
which had a waterfall mentality. A simplistic map-

ping of RUP standards to existing company meth-
ods only repeated difficulties that inhere in the
engineering approach. Explicit tailoring. 
Accounting for a more situationalview, the most culturally acceptable solution was

to translate implicit tailoring to explicit tailoring.
This meant finding a level at which we could

broadly reuse processes, activities, artifacts, and
the like. We thus sought to migrate to a more agile

approach by¥Factoring a core set of artifacts judged to be
necessaryÑbut not necessarily sufÞcientÑfor
a wide range of development. These artifacts
provided a means for working back to the core
generic processes and activities. We took arti-

facts as a starting point because AgCo man-
agement saw them as the elements providing

the most value.¥Identifyinga set of candidate patterns judged
to cover (a) the core types of developmentÑ
legacy migrationbeing one typeÑand (b) thecontextual application of activities, artifacts,

and guidelines. Patterns were used as they pro-

vide repeatable solutions to a given contextual
problem. Core patterns provide a means of

conÞguring a set of context patterns to meet a
development level need.¥Examining each patternÕs additional artifacts
for those considered both necessary and barely

sufÞcient.¥Producing a skeletal decision framework for
selecting patterns from four characteristic sets:
project elements, such as scope, scale, and nov-elty; product elements, such as technology base
and complexity; team elements, such as exper-tise, size, and work location; and organiza-tional elements, such as structure and culturalmentality. These characteristic sets can expand

or evolve with the repository of good working
practice/pattern catalogs.The framework implements a Òlearn by doingÓphilosophy and an evolving repository of good
working practice. The practice is embodiedin pat-

terns documented by lightweight developmentA process generic enough to deal with any situation is too high-level to be practical. June 200383cases. The cases, in turn, are based on RUP arti-facts that capture conÞguration and rationale on
necessary and sufÞcient aspects of a development
pattern. The overall framework is not prescriptive
per se. Rather, it is an aid in tailoring the process to

context and in educating the people involved.
Consequently, developers actively revisit the case

in each development iteration. Visibility. 
Figure 1 shows how the situated process
framework functions. In practice, making the deci-
sion process visible is extremely valuable because it
forces management to actively determine whether
an activity or artifact is both necessary and sufÞcient. 
Table 1 describes how the framework applies in
the context of agile principles and practice. In broad
terms, the situated process framework aims to ori-
ent users toward adopting agile development in
everyday practice by suggesting suitable techniques
for collaboration, interaction, and communication.
For example, observing a patternÕs evolution can

suggest new or more effective ways to apply the
pattern in specific situations. It can also help in
determining how often the process must deliver

software to form effective feedback and trust loops
as well as what forms and frequency of communi-

cation are necessary for effective delivery.
Situated qualityA second tension that agility imposes on engineer-ing practice relates to the perception of quality. From

an engineering perspective, quality is strongly linked

to the use of standards and the subsequent certiÞca-
tion against those standards. Most quality standards,
such as ISO 9000 and CMM, function under the Òsay

what you do, then do what you say you doÓ philos-
ophy. In practice, certiÞcation requires an audit of

both the ÒsayingÓ and ÒdoingÓ and assumes that
process quality will equate to product quality. 
The audit mentality mandates tangible outputand tends toward common development difÞcul-ties such as excessive documentation, reduced com-
munication-oriented activity, and a growing

disjunction between the working code and docu-
mentation. An agile perspective puts more emphasis onproduct quality. Process quality can lead to prod-

uct quality, but a good process is not necessarily

standardized or repeatable. The agile perspective
sees a key distinction between consistency and
repeatability. Emergent situations never give rise to

repeatability because the development contextÑ
information, constraints, politics, and so onÑis
always different.10Outcome consistency, however, is more likely
achievable when project aspects equate with simi-

lar experience and when the experience is oriented
toward reßective practice as opposed to Òfollow-
ing a process.Ó However, in keeping with the engi-
Table 1. Embedding agility into the situated process framework.
Agile principles Situated process framework
Different projects need different Tailoring a process to meet a projectÕs contextual
processes.needs  
In methodology, Òless is more.Ó Selecting patterns, activities, and artifacts based 
on the Òbarely sufficientÓ criterion   
Deliver working software Adopting an incremental and iterative approach

frequently and establish to enforce iteration of all software development
feedback loops. phases, including build  

Enhance interaction and  Suggesting interaction and communication 

communication.techniques suitable to a projectÕs contextual 
characteristics   
Empower individuals to Enabling individuals to further tailor selected 
make decisions. patterns  

Learn by doing. Capturing good working practice to enrich the 
framework  Pattern(RUPdevelopmentcase)DecisionmakingDrivesCreatesContextpatternConsists of:Workflows

Activities
Artifacts
GuidelinesCorepatternFrameworkfor
configuring
context
patternsPatterncatalogReflectionContributesDraws fromRefinementContextualcharacteristicsProject
Product
Team

OrganizationalFigure 1. Situated process framework. Patterns are developed via a situated examination of contextual characteristics, which results in a pattern catalog of RUP workßows, activities, artifacts, and the like. Patterns are expressed as an RUP development case. The developmentcase is reviewed and reÞned as the project goes through iterations and is housed in the context pattern repository of good work
ing practice.  84Computerneering perspective, customer trust currently rests
in the software process infrastructure.
The institutionalization of quality was impor-tant to AgCo from both the practical development
and marketing perspectives. However, the organi-

zational aim of mapping CMM Integration prac-
tices to RUP artifacts as directly as possible created
the impression of a Òone size fits allÓ process 
that did not work. We solved the immediate difÞ-

culty by¥adopting the pattern-based framework to sup-
plant repeatability with consistency, while still

providing the audit trail necessary for assess-
ment; and¥mapping CMMI practices to candidate devel-
opment patterns and accepting that combina-

tions of RUP workßows, activities, artifacts,

and so on can participate in more than one

CMMI practice. 
Figure 2 illustrates this mapping. This approach does not violate the Òsay whatyou do, do what you say you doÓ principle, but it
does seek to replace the weak notion of repeata-
bility with a strong notion of consistency in

approach, decision making, and expected product
quality. It has important implications for certiÞca-

tionÑspeciÞcally,an audit of continuously devel-

oping capability, which in turn suggests continuous

CMMI implementation. 
In addition, the approachÕs tailored nature sug-
gests that process capabilities will be certiÞed at the
level of ÒDeÞned,Ó which explicitly acknowledges

the value of tailoring and conÞguration. Organizations must derive development pat-
terns and the necessary and barely sufÞcient

processes, activities, and artifacts from theirexperience over time. Our learning framework
allows mature organizations to migrate from an

engineering view of development to a more agile
view. 
The argument that software development has astrong communication element means that an
entirely rational process model will always have
limited applicability. Accepting this problem is a

prerequisite for addressing it. At the same time,
large and mature organizations are unlikely to
adopt a big-bang approach to agility. Management

sees the associated risks as too great. Despite a clear rationale for a migratoryapproach, it is not without difÞculties. First, build-
ing the pattern repository takes time and effort.
Further, the repositoryÕs evolution requires some

form of conÞguration management system. Finally,

the framework and conÞgurations pose complex
maintenance issues. We propose the application of agile thinking to
manage these issues. Agile process does not ßy in

the face of engineering practice. If used thought-
fully, it provides a clear mandate for making engi-

neering practice lean and well focused. For the
approach to be truly successful, however, organi-

zations must grasp the opportunity to reintegrate

software development management, theory, and

practice. The effects of disjunction have been evi-
dent long enough.References1.D.P. Truex, R. Baskerville, and H. Klein, ÒGrowing
Systems in Emergent Organizations,Ó Comm. ACM,vol. 42, no. 8, 1999, pp. 117-123.2.K. Eischen, ÒSoftware Development: An OutsiderÕs
View,Ó 
Computer, May 2002, pp. 36-44.3.P. Naur and B. Randell, eds., ÒSoftware Engineering:
Report of a Conference Sponsored by the NATO Sci-

ence Committee,Ó 1968; http://homepages.cs.ncl.
ac.uk/brian.randell/NATO/.
4.B. Randell and J.N. Buxton, eds., ÒSoftware Engi-
neering Techniques: Report of a Conference Spon-

sored by the NATO Science Committee,Ó 1969;

http://homepages.cs.ncl.ac.uk/brian.randell/NATO/.
5.R. Hirschheim, H.K. Klein, and K. Lyytinen, 
Infor-mation Systems Development and Data Modeling:
Conceptual and Philosophical Foundations, Cam-bridge Univ. Press, 1995.
6.C. Clegg et al., 
The Performance of InformationTechnology and the Role of Human and Organiza-
Workflow
ArtifactArtifactArtifactActivityActivityWorkflow
ArtifactArtifactArtifactArtifactActivityCMMIContext pattern
ActivitySpecificpracticeSpecificpracticeProcess areaProcess areaSpecificpracticeFigure 2. Mapping Capability Maturity Model Integration practices to processpattern elements. We map the CMMI speciÞc practices within each process area

to context patterns on many different levels: RUP workßows, workßow details,
activities, artifacts, and guidelines. June 200385tional Factors, tech. report, Economic and SocialResearch Council, UK, 1996.7.P.G. Armour, ÒThe Case for a New Business Model,Ó
Comm. ACM
, vol. 43, no. 8, 2000, pp. 19-22.8.L. Koskela and G. Howell, ÒThe Underlying Theory
of Project Management Is Obsolete,Ó Proc. PMIResearch Conf., Project Management Institute, 2002.9.A. Cockburn, 
Agile Software Development: SoftwareThrough People, Addison-Wesley, 2002.
10.J. Highsmith, 
Agile Software Development Ecosys-tems, Addison-Wesley, 2002.
11.H.E. Cook, 
Product Management: Value, Quality,
Cost, Price, ProÞt and Organization
, Chapman andHall, 1997.12.R.B. Johnston and M. Brennan, ÒPlanning or Orga-
nizing: The Implications of Theories of Activity for
Management of Operations,Ó Omega, vol. 24, no. 4,1996, pp. 367-384.Mark Lycett
is a research project manager and lec-turer for the Department of Information Systems
and Computing at Brunel University. His research

interests include all aspects of software development,
with emphasis on agile, adaptive, and evolutionary
systems. Lycett received a PhD in information sys-

tems from Brunel University and is a member of the

IEEE, the ACM, and the Project Management Insti-
tute. Contact him at Mark.Lycett@brunel.ac.uk.
Robert D. Macredie is a professor of interactive sys-tems in the Department of Information Systems
and Computing at Brunel University. His research

is broadly grounded in information systems devel-
opment, particularly the integration of people,
process, and technology. Macredie received a PhD

in computer science from the University of Hull
and is a member of the IEEE, the ACM, and the
British Computer Society. Contact him at Robert.

Macredie@brunel.ac.uk.Chaitali Patel is a research assistant in the Depart-ment of Information Systems and Computing at

Brunel University. Her research interests are in agile

systems development, particularly method and
process. Patel received an MSc in distributed infor-
mation systems from Brunel University. Contact

her at Chaitali.Patel@brunel.ac.uk.Ray J. Paul is a professor of simulation modeling in
the Department of Information Systems and Com-
puting at Brunel University. His research is broadly

grounded in information systems development,
with an emphasis on adaptive and evolutionary sys-
tems. Paul received a PhD in operational research

from the University of Hull. He is a member of 

the Operational Research Society and a fellow of

the British Computer Society. Contact him at

Ray.Paul@brunel.ac.uk.
Computeris always looking for interesting editorialcontent. In addition to our theme articles, we have
other feature sections such as Perspectives, 
Computing Practices, and Research Features as 
well as numerous columns to which you can
contribute. Check out our author guidelines at http://computer.org/computer/author.htm 

for more information about how to contribute to your magazine. Computer Wants You
Computer Wants You
DONÕTGET CUT OFF

Take your e-mail address with you
Get a free e-mail alias 
from the IEEE
Computer Society 
and Take your e-mail address with you
Get a free e-mail alias 
from the IEEE
Computer Society 
and Sign up today at computer.org/WebAccounts/alias.htm
Sign up today at computer.org/WebAccounts/alias.htm
