  56 COMPUTER
 Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0018-9162/13/$31.00 © 2013 IEEECOVER FEATURE
Johannes Neubauer and Bernhard Steffen, 
Technische Universität Dortmund, Germany
Unexpected hurdles in dealing with inte-
gration, variability, and interoperability in 
 software development can be overcome 

using higher-order process integration. 

Even in its simplicity-oriented, tamed 

version, this approach fosters a powerful 

plug-and-play discipline, where processes 

and services are moved around like data.
Computer applications are deeply integrated into 
our daily activities in a wide range of areasŠfrom 
personal activities such as shopping, travel, bank
-ing, and paying bills, to business functions such 
as payroll, taxes, and inventory tracking. These activities 

are handled by different applications of widely varying 
quality and flexibility. Indeed, there are often different 

solutions for a single problem or task, even from the same 
provider, depending on the user profile or context. Vari
-ance occurs in the look and feel and the required user 
process, not to mention the API interactions between 
systems. As an unintended consequence, users struggle 
with wide technical diversity in the applications, tech
-nical developers struggle with increasingly challenging 
implementations, and businesses grapple with exploding 
maintenance costs.
In 2011, with the launch of the Business Process Model 
and Notation 2.0 (BPMN 2.0)
1Ša standard for business pro
-cess modeling that uses graphical representation to specify 
business processesŠthe area of BPM heated up with the 
promise that application-level business processes would 

now be directly executable. This advance was due to BPMN 
2.0™s potential to close the semantic gapŠa key source of 
misunderstanding between business (dealing with the pur
-pose of the application) and IT (focused on the technical 
implementation)Šand so BPM was seen as an almost-uni
-versal cure to diversity and variability problems. However, 
BPM™s promise only bears out in specific scenarios and 
does not support variability because it lacks the means to 

manage process variation and variant-rich systems.
2Current BPM standards, such as the Business Process 
Execution Language (BPEL),
3 BPMN,
4 and even BPMN 2.0, 
are constrained to fixed bindings between business activi
-ties in a model and the services or substructures they refer 

to. Thus, each variant must be modeled explicitly via deci
-sion points that are modeling pendantsŠthat is, activities 
that branch to different execution paths (successor activi
-ties)Što if- and switch-clauses in comprehensive but very 
large models; otherwise they are maintained individually 
as a collection of separate entities. Both alternatives are 
problematic: comprehensive modeling leads to unman
-ageably large models, and the maintenance and support 
of many structurally similar individual variant models is 
a nightmare. 
This is a long way from the simplicity BPM promised. 
Enhancing BPM with a tamed version of higher-order pro
-cess passing breaks the spell by supporting a flexible form 

of type-based process integration, which also enables vari
-ability modeling and captures variants with functionality 

that was unknown at the process™s start.
5 In practice, de
-ployed and even running processes can be seamlessly 
enhanced with new functionality without touching their 
code base. In fact, based on the higher-order concepts, 

new services and component processes can be selected, 
modified, constructed, and then safely passed as if they 
were data.
Tamed
 refers to both strict enforcement of type correct
-ness and the explicit exclusion of recursion. Controlling 
Plug-and-Play 
 Higher-Order 
Process 

Integration
  NOVEMBER 2013 57variability means controlling the huge 
wealth of combinations, as described 
by Anna-Lena Lamprecht, Stefan 
Naujokat, and Ina Schaefer, else
-where in this issue.
6 Thus, at the 
(business) process modeling level in 
particular, variability concerns and 
computational aspects should be 

separated in favor of simplicity and 
understandability.
We illustrate the impact of our dy
-namic, type-safe, application-level 

service and process integration via 
the FlexToll system, a small case 

study in which services and pro
-cesses are exchanged at runtime in 

a plug-and-play fashion. 
THE FLEXTOLL SCENARIO
Toll road systems, particularly as 
they are set up in Europe, can be an
-noying because they not only require drivers to pay toll 

fees, but also (force drivers) to wait in line behind others 

to physically do so. Some automated toll-paying solu
-tions eliminate this delay, but many are too specific and 

require dedicated setups that typically only work for a 

single toll service provider and very few payment and on
-board systems.
As the variety of payment services and local toll pro
-viders is difficult to change, an ideal generic onboard 
system should automatically adapt to these services™ spe
-cific setups and infrastructures without requiring manual 
payment interaction, let alone queuing. In fact, the com
-plete toll process should work in three simple steps: 
 Toll stations and approaching cars automatically con
-nect and search for a matching configuration between 

toll service and payment system. The automatic con
-nector synthesis technology from the Connect Project
7 or a new standard developed for this purpose and en
-forced could be used to support this communication.
 The toll station stores the matching configuration 

together with the car™s entry point, time, and other 
relevant data as the car proceeds. Automatic payment 
processing is guaranteed. Only in the case of outage 

or system failure would the car need to queue for an 
entry ticket. 
 When the car leaves the toll area, the toll is billed to 
the chosen payment system according to the rules of 
the applied toll service. 
Why is this solution beyond the scope of current (busi
-ness) process modeling? Because no existing solution  
deals with the 
combinatorial explosion
: for 
t toll services, 
p payment services, and 
c onboard systems, the fixed 
binding between business activities and services or the 

substructures they refer to implies that every combina
-tion must be specified, leading to an explosion in either 
quantity or size in the order of 
O(t × p × c). Furthermore, 
current BPM solutions can only deal with entities known 
at design time. Adding a new entity requires a new release.
Relying on state-of-the-art product lines
2 and variation 
management
8 might help simplify the required mainte
-nance effort, but they do not reduce the combinatorial 
explosion or the need for new releases. Overcoming 
these limitations requires a mechanism and discipline 

that allow late discovery and binding of 
entire processes
, and can construct ad hoc solutions in a simple way while 

still ensuring correctness. Taken together, higher-order 

thinking and the type safety concept from programming 
languages do the job.
HIGHER˜
ORDER EX
TREME 
 MODEL˜DRIVEN DEVELOPMEN
TWe combine higher-order capabilities with the eXtreme 
Model-Driven Development paradigm.
9 XMDD brings to
-gether ideas from service-oriented, model-driven design 

and the user-centeredness advocated in extreme program
-ming. XMDD puts application experts in control of process 
design and evolution according to their level of technical 
competence and business responsibility. As an example, 
the Java Application Building Center (jABC)
10 is an XMDD 
graphical framework for service-oriented design and de
-velopment explicitly designed for nontechnical people. 
Figure 1 shows the user interface for a subprocess in 
the FlexToll system. The 
browser area
 (Figure 1, top left) 
shows in tree form the projects, a collection of process 
Figure 1. 
The eXtreme Model-Driven Development (XMDD) paradigm in action. The 
screenshot shows a collection of toll-related processes including 
LookupTollService
 and GermanToll
.  58 COMPUTER
COVER FEATURE
models (called service logic graphs, or SLGs) for the 
active project, and the library of available services or 
components. In the screenshot, no service browser tab 
is available at all, sinceŠin the spirit of separation of 

concernsŠthey are only visible to specific (more tech
-nical) users. The collections of SLGs and services form 

the available domain of reusable, configurable processes 

and components. 
In the 
inspector area
 (Figure 1, bottom left), several in
-spectors (SIBGraph, Draw, Reference, and LocalChecker) 

show internal information for the selected activity or SLG. 

In the snapshot, the SIBGraph inspector shows that 
Ger
-manToll
 is a service and that it complies with the interface 
TollService
. Also included in this window are its icon, vari
-ables, and variable types. The small blue 
G icon indicates 
that 
paymentService
 is a higher-order variable. This in
-formation can be edited. In the SIBGraph inspector, for 

example, the user can change the name of the graph; add, 
delete, or rename context variables (as well as set their 
type); and drag and drop variables to activities to wire data 

dependencies. 
The 
graph canvas
 (Figure 1, right) is the modeling area, 
currently displaying the process model for the 
GermanToll
 service. Users build their process models by browsing the 

SLG and service libraries and dragging the icons of selected 

elements to the canvas, where they are instantiated as ac
-tivities (SIBs, or service-independent building blocks). The 

user then connects them as appropriate, and, finally, they 

are configured via the inspectors. 
The SLGs and their constituent activities (service-
 independent building blocks, or SIBs) are the only models 

used in application development. In fact, the one-thing 
approach (OTA)
11 provides the conceptual modeling in
-frastructure that enables all stakeholders (application 

experts, designers, component experts, implementers, 
quality assurers, and so on) to cooperate in an XMDD 

fashion.
11 In particular, OTA allows immediate user ex
-perience and seamless acceptance: all stakeholders 
know, refine, and modify the same ﬁthingﬂ without 
duplications or the need to juggle different modeling 
languages or paradigms. Stakeholders can observe the 

progress of the development and the implications of 
 decisions at their own level of expertise, which is a cen
-tral trait of OTA.
Technically, SLGs are formal models with well-defined 
semantics in terms of Kripke transition systems (KTSs) 

that come with a wealth of corresponding analysis and 

synthesis tools. KTSs are generalizations of Kripke struc
-tures and labeled transition systems that allow labels on 

both nodes (the SIBs) and edges (the outgoing branches).
12 Operationally, the process models are similar to control-
flow graphs: the SIBs represent activities and the branches 
describe how to continue the execution depending on the 

result of the previous activity.
SIBs can represent a single functionality or an entire 
subgraph (that is, another SLG),
13 thus serving as a macro 
that hides more detailed process models. SIBs are parame
-terizable and communicate resources via shared 
execution 

contexts
, a hierarchical concept comprising executable 
process instances. Because this approach is higher order, 
it allows high reusability of components (see, for example, 
the article by Cristina Seceleanu and Ivica Crnkovic
14 in 
this issue) as well as of entire (sub-)models and processes 
within larger applications: (sub-)models and processes can 
be passed around just like data.
15TYPE 
CON
SIST
ENCY 
IN THE 
 HIGHER˜
ORDER 
CON
TEX
TOur approach combines strict type matching at the 
process level with the higher-order process integration 
described previously, so the application level and corre
-sponding interface descriptions of business activities use 
compatible data types. Type transformations at the process 
level remove type mismatches. The benefits of this ap
-proach include agility, because integrating new processes 
or changing existing processes does not imply changes to 
any other services as long as interface compatibility is war
-ranted, and interoperability, because strict type matching 
at the process level can hide differences between systems 
behind interface descriptions. 
This way, services can be introduced or exchanged with 
different internal interfaces at any time in a plug-and-play 

fashion. However, the simplicity and ease of change man
-agement require a well-thought-out handoff between the 
technical level, which deals with implementation issues 
and the various programming language types and con
-cepts, and the business (user) level, which deals with the 
process logic and virtual concepts that must be appro
-priately coupled or decoupled to guarantee a smooth 

plug-and-play experience. 
Figure 2 shows our solution, which extends business- 
and application-oriented modeling beyond the scope of 
Java APIProcessmodels
(SLG)Services:Java, CMD, RMI, WSDL, REST, CORBA, JNI, ......Dynamic SIBTechnicalApplicationCode (Java)*Figure 2. 
Dynamic pattern for business process modeling 
using Java as the base language. SIB, service-independent 

building block; SLG, service logic graph.
  NOVEMBER 2013 59current practice in BPM. We base our implementation on 
an established programming platform (in this case Java) 
that defines the coding environment for the code-level in
-tegration of external services, and thus the implementation 
language of the SIBs and SLGs, but we explicitly support 
permeability of concepts and techniques of the two worlds 
that cooperate in the middle layers to deliver the code-level 

interoperability for agile process models.
An SLG that supports higher-order process integration 
and guarantees type compatibility consists of possibly 

hierarchical business activities within jABC™s graphical 
 development environment. Coarse-grained SLGs, classi
-fied as application-level graphs, are successively refined 

by more specialized and technical SLGs, which in turn are 
based on dynamic SIBs. Dynamic SIBs are based on Java 
method calls and domain-specific data structures also 

defined in Java.
Our system
 uses the available type information to 
check whether the use of services and subgraphs passed 

this way is correct with regard to the underlying API ex
-pected by the higher-order SIB (caller) and provided by 

the SLG passed as parameter (callee). This type-checking 

mechanism, which overlaps the technical and business 
worlds, cultures, and practices, narrows the semantic gap 
and moves the hard technological break behind a Java API, 

where only technical experts are involved. In this sense 
it supports the principle, ﬁsimple for the many, difficult 
for the few.ﬂ
 16The fact that prominent business process management 
frameworks, such as Java BPM (jBPM) versions 4 and 5, 
 Activiti, AristaFlow, and jABC, are all based on Java in
-dicates that it is a good choice for implementing such a 

framework. However, Java is only used at the tool/system 
levelŠfor example, to support consistent typing and ob
-ject-oriented features such as subtyping and parametric 
polymorphism. Individual processes might use a different 
implementation language. Moreover, these concepts are 
quite general and can be implemented in and for other 

typed languages, such as C++ or C#.
The services level in Figure 2 includes the wealth of service 
and component paradigms that can serve as execution-
 time implementations for SIBs. JavaŠas a largely plat
-form-independent languageŠis a good choice here as well, 

providing adapters to a wealth of other languages. For ex
-ample, Web Services Description Language (WSDL) and 
Representational State Transfer (REST) stubs can be gen
-erated from the corresponding service descriptions. Java 
also allows the integration of arbitrary code, assuming it 
is accessible through a standard Java API. Almost every 
technology or method can be wrapped into a Java method: 

the Java Runtime Environment (JRE) provides interpret
-ers for scripting languages such as Groovy, Jython, and 

JRuby, and the Java Native Interface (JNI) eases access to 

platform-dependent functionsŠfor example, via C or C++ 
code. In fact, even command-line tools are accessible via 

standard Java libraries.
MODELING FLEXTOLL A
S A  PLUG˜AND˜
PLAY 
APPLICA
TION
The sketch at the top of Figure 3 shows how FlexToll 
should function from the user™s perspective: the bar should 
automatically go up as the vehicle approaches the en
-trance and exit toll gates at speed. The handwritten notes 
below this sketch reflect the toll stations™ viewpoint: at 
the entry barrier, check the compatibility of all the soft
-ware processes for the approaching vehicle and store the 
checkpoint data; later, at the exit barrier, recognize the car, 
calculate the price due for this journey, and issue the ap
-propriate bill to the appropriate billing agency.
The process model shows how the onboard system 
handles this scenario. At the top level, the main process 

is launched when the toll station at the start checkpoint 
sends an event to the approaching car (activity 
start
). Upon 
launch, FlexToll looks for the ﬁrightﬂ 
payment service
 and 
toll services
. If these lookup activities execute success
-fully, the onboard FlexToll system is prepared for payment 

at the exit point and the car passes the gate. Otherwise 
(for example, the car™s onboard system attempts to use an 
unsupported payment method), the system switches to 

manual operation, and the driver must pay at the toll sta
-tion. When the car reaches the exit station, the station™s 

toll system recognizes the car, retrieves the corresponding 

data, and bills FlexToll in the local currency. Upon receiv
-ing the bill, FlexToll invokes the business activity 
pay toll
, which references the previously stored toll process with 

the previously stored payment process instance (from the 
context variable 
payService
) as a parameter. If the payment 
operation fails, it exits to 
assistance needed
.This process looks simple, but it requires not only de
-termining the driver™s preferred payment service but also 
a toll process that is compatible with the payment and 

toll systems. To exploit the full flexibility, such a system 
requires higher-order processes. Most current toll collec
-tion systems in Europe use fixed payment services as well 
as toll systems, and require user registration and an on
-board unit (OBU). Consequently, a truck driver who drives 

from Hamburg to Greece might have quite a collection 

of identities with different national and local toll collec
-tion organizations, and an impressive collection of OBU 
devices.
Services can be introduced or exchanged 
with different internal interfaces at any 

time in a plug-and-play fashion.
  60 COMPUTER
COVER FEATURE
Both activities, 
get payment service
 and 
get toll 
services
, look in the respective process lists for 
type-compatible processes that deliver the re
-quired functionality. Both are higher-order SIBs, 
symbolized by the magnifying glass icon. The SLG 
library includes a selection of toll processes, as 
shown in Figure 1. Matching process instances are 

stored to the corresponding variable  (that is, the 
instantiated SLGs) in the execution context of the car™s Flex-
 Toll system, represented by the 
tollService
 or 
payService
 objects. The activities 
pass gate
 and 
approach exit
 are 
typically toll-system specific, too. However, for ease of 
bill(SwedishBill)value(SEK) converted(EUR)...ContexttollService(TollService)payService(PaymentService)...ContextpayService(PaymentService)...inputsSuccessSuccessSuccessSuccessSuccessSuccessApproach exitPay tollEndAssistance neededFailedpayService(PaymentService)Manual operationStartPass gateGet payment serviceGet toll servicesNot foundNot foundunsupported paymentStartSuccessSuccessSuccessSuccessErrorexceptionSuccessSuccessSuccessSuccessSuccessSuccessSuccessSuccessCancelConvert currencyConvert currencyConvert sender infoRetrieve receiver infoConvert receiver infoConvert receiver infoDo paymentDo paymentExtract valueRetrieve billSuccessSuccessCancelFailedStartConcrete servicefor payment withcredit cardFigure 3. 
The higher-order business process model of the in-car FlexToll system.
  NOVEMBER 2013 61exposition, we focus on 
pay toll
, as the other activities 
would be treated similarly.
Whereas 
payService
 is a first-order service, 
tollService
 is second order because it needs the selected 
payService
 as an input parameter. Thus, 
payService
 is a procedural 
parameter, and its flow is depicted by the thick gray arcs 
in Figure 3. At exit, the 
pay toll
 activity must also be aware 

of these bindings. To illustrate the flexibility of this tamed 
form of higher-order process modeling, assume that a US 
individual drives to Uppsala, Sweden, with OBU software 

made by a German company. The middle level of Figure 3 
shows a concrete process model for a Swedish toll service, 
executed by activity 
pay toll
 in the main process. Its SLG re
-trieves a bill from the toll station with receiver information 
(for payment) and the calculated fee, converts this amount 
from the local currency (Swedish krona, or SEK) to euro 

(EUR) as FlexToll system-wide valuta. The execution con
-text at this hierarchy level contains the context variables 

bill
, value
, and 
converted
 and their respective data objects, 
as well as a payment process instance in the context vari
-able 
payService
. Finally, the business activity
 do payment
 triggers the execution of the payment service previously 

identified and passed.
All the service processes must match an interface 
definition that determines the input/output parametriza
-tion. This definition includes strict data types for sender, 
 receiver, value, and so on that correspond to the public, 

application-level concepts used by the processes at their 

service interface to communicate with the outside world. 
Internally, however, a concrete payment process converts 
these data types to the concrete types used by the target 

payment service, calls the service, and translates the result 
back to the model-level data types. In our case, the sup
-ported value in euro is translated into US dollars (USD), 
since the driver pays with a US credit card.
This therefore demonstrates the ability to plug in entire 
process models for a given business activity, as illustrated 

with 
pay toll
 for the first hierarchy level and 
do payment
 for 
the second, to seamlessly deliver ease of modeling, adapt
-ability, and ultimately flexibility to the entire process. The 

system does this without needing explicit modeling of all 
alternatives at design time or explicit management of a 
large base of variants, and without requiring redeployment 

of code and restart of ongoing processes for integrating 
new or varying existing component functionality.
Note the green arrow between the activities 
convert 
currency
 and 
convert sender info
 at the bottom of Figure 3. 
 This snapshot was taken during process execution with 
the jABC tracer, the built-in SLG interpreter. The green col
-oring of edges, business activities, and context variables 
of process instances graphically highlights the concrete 
execution trace in the process model. The tracer can also 

serve as a systematic and step-by-step debugging facility in 
the modeling framework, showing the hierarchy, contexts, 
and concrete data values. In this snapshot, the execution is 
paused in the business activity 
convert sender info
 within 
the second hierarchy level (the actual payment process).
BENE
FITS
 AND 
IMPAC
THigher-order modeling™s winning attribute is best dem
-onstrated by noting that the FlexToll process model is 
totally unaware of which toll service it will execute, and 
the selected toll service is unaware of which payment 

services it might execute. All that is necessary is that the 
chosen services adhere to the required interface, which 
in our approach is achieved by a strict higher-order type 

discipline that guarantees executability. This means, for 
example, that 
 any toll or payment service can be added to the Flex
-Toll scenario simply by providing a corresponding 
type-correct interface, with no changes to the Flex
-Toll OBU; and 
 executability is maintained independent of the se
-lected combination of type-correct toll process or 

payment process instances. 
Thus, there is no explosion in model size or number of 
variants, and the full FlexToll scenario can be maintained 
elegantly in a ﬁwrite once, run everywhereﬂ fashion.
The price to pay is the complexity of a higher-order 
modeling and execution environment. The looked-up pay
-ment process is passed as a parameter to the looked-up 

toll service, so this example is already third order. More 
concretely, FlexToll has a process parameter (
tollService
) that has another process parameter (
payService
) as a para-
 meter. We organize these dependencies in a strictly hier
-archical fashion: the two relations 
is parameter of
 and 
can 

be called by
 form strict partial orders. Whereas the first 
preorder restriction is pretty standard, the latter excludes 
recursion, a fact essential for our notion of 
tamed
 higher 
 orderedness, which is tailored for achieving transparent 
and intuitive variability modeling at the process-model 
level. In our experience, prohibiting recursion enforces 

a clear separation between algorithmic aspects, which 
are typically technical in nature and local to specific 
processes, and variability modeling, which concerns the 

global interplay between processes, services, and data 
at the business level. This modeling level benefits most 
from the ability to treat all these entities alikeŠas objects, 
Prohibiting recursion enforces a clear 
separation between algorithmic aspects 

and variability modeling.
  62 COMPUTER
COVER FEATURE
as parameters, and across multiple hierarchy levels. In 
fact, most process models do not seem to require recur
-sion, and where the need arose (in algorithmic parts), we 

safely resolved it at an intraprocess level. Using jABC, such 

higher-order process models are directly executable, and 
in fact, their execution can be intuitively visualized, as 
described earlier.
To maintain the intended transparency and simple 

plug-and-play intuition, we did not allow recursion 
at the interprocess level. Our experience with this 
decision is rather positive. Most process models do not 
seem to require recursion, and where the need arose (in 
algorithmic parts) we safely resolved it at an intraprocess 
level. The future will show whether and then how to loosen 

this restriction if necessary. Currently, we are considering 
how to best extend jABC™s verification technology to also 
capture these tamed higher-order process models, in order 

to produce a comprehensive framework for dealing with 
product-line management, variability modeling, and self-
adaptation technology in a constraint-based fashion.
5  References
 1.
 T.˜Allweyer, 
BPMN 2.0:˜Introduction to the Standard for Busi
-ness Process Modeling
, Books on Demand (BoD), 2009.
 2.
 F.J.v.d. Linden, K.˜Schmid, and E.˜Rommes, 
Software Prod
-uct Lines in Action: The Best Industrial Practice in Product 
Line Engineering
, Springer, 2007.
 3.
 J.˜Pasley, ﬁHow BPEL and SOA Are Changing Web Services 
Development,ﬂ 
IEEE Internet Computing
, vol.˜9, no.˜3, 2005, 
pp. 60-67.
 4.
 J.˜Recker and J.˜Mendling, ﬁOn the Translation between 
BPMN and BPEL: Conceptual Mismatch between Pro
-cess Modeling Languages,ﬂ 
18th Int™l Conf. Advanced 
 Information Systems Eng. 
(CAiSE), Proc. Workshops 
and Doctoral Consortium, Namur Univ. Press, 2006, 
 pp. 521-532.
 5.
 S.˜Jörges et al., ﬁA Constraint-Based Variability Modeling 

Framework,ﬂ 
Int™l J. Software Tools for Technology Transfer
, vol. 14, no. 5, 2012, pp. 511-530.
 6.
 A.-L. Lamprecht, S.˜Naujokat, and I.˜Schaefer, ﬁVariability 
Management beyond Feature Models,ﬂ 
Computer
, vol.˜46, 
no.˜11, 2013, pp. 48-54.
 7.
 A.˜Bennaceur et al., ﬁTowards an Architecture for Runtime 
Interoperability,ﬂ 
Proc. Int™l Conf. Leveraging Applications 
of Formal Methods, Verification, and Validation 
(ISoLA), vol. 
2, LNCS 6416, Springer, 2010, pp. 206-220.
 8.
 I.˜Schaefer et al., ﬁSoftware Diversity: State of the Art and 

Perspectives,ﬂ 
Int™l J. Software Tools for Technology Transfer
, vol.˜14, no.˜5, 2012, pp. 477-495.
 9.
 T.˜Margaria and B.˜Steffen, ﬁService-Orientation: Con
-quering Complexity with XMDD,ﬂ 
Conquering Complexity
, M.˜Hinchey and L.˜Koyle, eds., Springer, 2012.
 10.
 B.˜Steffen et al., ﬁModel-Driven Development with the 
jABC,ﬂ 
Proc. Int™l Haifa Verification Conf. Hardware and 
Software, Verification, and Testing 
(HVC 06), LNCS 4383, 
Springer, 2006, pp. 92-108.
 11.
 B.S.T.˜Margaria, ﬁBusiness Process Modeling in the jABC: 

The One-Thing Approach,ﬂ 
Handbook of Research on Busi
-ness Process Modeling
, Jo Cardoso and W. van der Aalst, 
eds., IGI Global, 2009, pp. 1-26.
 12.
 M.˜Müller-Olm, D.˜Schmidt, and B.˜Steffen, ﬁModel-

Checking: A Tutorial Introduction,ﬂ 
Proc. Int™l Symp. Static 

Analysis
 (SAS 99), Springer, 1999, pp. 330-354.
 13.
 B.˜Steffen and T.˜Margaria, ﬁMetaframe in Practice: Design 
of Intelligent Network Services,ﬂ 
Correct System Design: 
Recent Insight and Advances
, LNCS 1710, Springer, 1999, 
pp. 390-415.
 14.
 C.˜Seceleanu and I.˜Crnkovic, ﬁComponent Models Made 

for Reasoning,ﬂ 
Computer
, vol.˜46, no.˜11, 2013, pp. 40-47.
 15.
 J.˜Neubauer, B.˜Steffen, and T.˜Margaria, ﬁHigher-Order 

Process Modeling: Product-Lining, Variability Modeling 

and Beyond,ﬂ 
Electronic Proc. in Theoretical Computer 
 Science
, vol.˜129, 2013, pp. 259-283.
 16.
 T.˜Margaria and B.˜Steffen, ﬁSecond-Order Semantic Web,ﬂ 
Proc. Ann. IEEE/NASA Software Eng. Workshop
 (SEW 05), 
IEEE CS Press, 2005, pp. 219-227.
Johannes Neubauer 
is a PhD student in the Department 
of Computer Science at Technische Universität Dortmund, 

Germany. His research interests include model-driven 
 development, variability modeling, programming in the 

large, service-oriented computing, and automata learning. 

Contact him at johannes.neubauer@cs.tu-dortmund.de.
Bernhard Steffen 
is the chair of programming systems 
in the Department of Computer Science at Technische 

Universität Dortmund, Germany. His research interests 

include program analysis and optimization, model-based 

analysis of distributed systems, automata learning, and 

service-oriented computing. Steffen received a PhD in 

computer science from Christian-Albrechts-Universität 

zu Kiel, Germany. He is a member of IEEE, ACM, Interna
-tional Federation for information Processing, the German 

Informatics Society, and European Association of Soft
-ware Science and Technology. Contact him at steffen@cs.
 tu-dortmund.de.
 Selected 
CS articles and columns are available 
  for free at http://
Computing
Now.computer.org.
IEEE Internet Computing 
reports emerging tools, 
technologies, and applications implemented through the 

Internet to support a worldwide computing environment.
For submission information and author guidelines, 
please visit www.computer.org/internet/author.htm
Engineering and Applying the Internetwww.computer.org/internet
