  46 COMPUTER
 Published by the IEEE Computer Society
 0018-9162/14/$31.00 © 2014 IEEESoftware-defined networking opens up new 
possibilities for architectures based on open 

source components, promising improved or
-
chestration and agility, lower operational costs, 

andŠmost  importantŠa wave of innovation.
A primary goal for software-defined networking 
(SDN) is to introduce new abstractions that help 
network operators rethink and separate the dis
-tribution of control plane and data forwarding 
functions, which have traditionally been placed in close 

proximity on the same device. Successful production and 
experimental implementations use protocols and APIs that 

are swiftly becoming standards, if they are not already.
1,2
 Indeed, SDN™s scope has progressively broadened since 
OpenFlow triggered its inception in 2009.
3 Today, SDN 
encompasses multiple networking proposals, from Open
-Flow™s original control plane and data plane split
2 to 
software-based edge tunnels that define virtual network 

overlays to hybrids that augment and expose existing dis
-tributed protocols through programmable interfaces, such 
as the Internet Engineering Task Force™s I2RS.
4Whatever its manifestation, SDN gives network archi
-tects new flexibility for using open source components. 
The advent of the Open Daylight Project (ODP), along with 
related large-scale, open source infrastructure projects 

such as OpenStack and OpenCompute, puts SDN in a posi
-tion to replicate the success of the archetypal Web services 
solution stack LAMP (Linux, Apache, MySQL, PHP). With 

LAMP, IT architects can build scalable server farms from 
low-cost commodity gear with minimal licensing costs. 
SDN™s promise is similar: assemble a set of open source 

software components to define the network control logic 
and use open APIs to interact with multivendor network
-ing hardware. Adaptability will be higher and ownership 
cost will be lower because solutions are built from high-
 performance commercial networking hardware and open 

source software running in commodity server technology.
A rich ecosystem is developing around SDN, and API 
availability and maturity will play a critical role in defin
-ing the networking landscape. Our experience creating 

and deploying production SDN architectures and opera
-tions, specifically RouteFlow
5 and Cardigan,
6 has given us 
a basis for exploring the new wave of SDN-based solutions 
and understanding how open source networking is evolv
-ing to unlock opportunities once available only through 
vendor-proprietary solutions. 
Despite those who argue that SDN has seen limited deploy
-ment, projects such as Google™s B4, described in the sidebar 

ﬁThe Case for SDN,ﬂ lead us to believe that network architects 
will soon be using fully open sourceŒenabled SDN stacks.
OVERVIEW OF OPEN SOURCE SDN PROJECTS
Free/libre/open source software (FLOSS) provides the 
networking industry with low-cost and customizable 
network management and configuration tools, security 
suites, protocol testing and interoperability packages, 

and software appliances. As with any software-centric 
When Open Source 
Meets Network 

Control Planes
Christian Esteve Rothenberg,
 University of Campinas
Roy Chua,
 SDNCentral and Wiretap Ventures
Josh Bailey,
 Google
Martin Winter,
 Network Device Education Foundation
Carlos N.A. Corrêa,
 Federal Fluminense University and Unimed 
Sidney C. de Lucena,
 Federal University of the State of Rio de 
Janeiro
Marcos Rogério Salvador,
 Lenovo Innovation Center
Thomas D. Nadeau,
 Brocade
r11rot.indd   4610/23/14   5:56 PM  NOVEMBER 2014
 47industry, the reasons behind open source™s success are the 
customization opportunities and development and com
-mercialization economies it affords.
7 Until recently, open source™s success in networking has 
been limited to the management plane and to software ap
-pliances that run in commodity x86 servers. In the latter 

category are software-based IP routers such as Quagga and 
the Bird Internet routing daemon (BIRD), and security so
-lutions such as Bro and SnortŠall of which are free, open 
source code. Also available are commercialized counter
-part versions enhanced with value-added services. 
Now, however, open source in SDN is expanding imple
-mentation possibilities.
Evolution to the open source SDN stack
Figure 1 shows the evolution from traditional networking 

to the open source SDN stack. The traditional network
-ing scenario in Figure 1a is augmented in Figure 1b by 

SDN (OpenFlow in particular), which allows the network™s 

brainŠthe control plane and related applicationsŠto be 
implemented in the high-level programming languages on 
commodity server technology untangled from the physical 

boxes that implement forwarding plane functions. Theo
-retical SDN abstractions for forwarding and control planes 

have led to software-based embodiments that are contrib
-uting to the open source SDN stack in Figure 1c.
Figures 1b and 1c portray two API types, southbound and 
northbound. Southbound APIs facilitate communication be
-tween the SDN controller and the network devices such as 
switches and routers (virtualized or physical), aiming to 
meet real-time traffic demands. Northbound APIs, on the 

other hand, facilitate communication between the SDN con
-troller and network applications that may in turn provide 

network services and functions to users or other appli
-cations. This affords designers of these applications the 
flexibility to easily and rapidly customize and innovate.
Characteristics and trends
Table 1 provides an overview of open source projects in parts 
of the ecosystem around the SDN stack. These projects, taken 
from SDNcentral.com (www.sdncentral.com/comprehensive-
list-of-open-source-sdn-projects) vary in code quality and the 

extent of active development and community support. Many 
are primarily academic exercises, but a fewŠOpen Daylight, 
OpenContrail, and ONOS, for exampleŠbenefit from ample 

financial and professional development support.
Aside from offering libraries to interact with network
-ing devices, open source projects are actively competing to 

develop the SDN controller and northbound APIsŠa critical 
step to maturing the SDN ecosystem. Control and manage
-ment applications are already addressing objectives such 
as topology discovery and routing, but, like support tools, 
these existing applications are controller-specific and lack 
a common API to enable portability.
Similar to the early days of webservers or Java appli
-cation servers, competition is fostering ideas and driving 

innovation. In the next few years, we expect to see an in
-crease in SDN projects (controllers, applications, testing, 

and integrated development environments), which is a 

prerequisite to arriving at a platform consensus.
OpenDaylight Project. 
At the controller level, noteworthy 
activities are underway within the ODP, a vendor-led initia
-tive of the Linux Foundation to create an open source SDN 

controller and application ecosystem to counterbalance 
The Case for SDN
If SDN is such a useful advance, why is its deployment in produc
-tion networks so limited? There are several reasons, including 
the need to directly address operational comfort with SDN, pro
-vide concrete benefits, and demonstrate a practical migration 
path, starting with the ability to interoperate with non-SDNs.
Skeptics may argue that notions such as redistributing control 
plane functions or computing offline routes already exist and just 

need further exploitation, so why move to SDN? However, the 

maturity of projects such as OpenDaylight and OpenStack and the 

introduction of commercial products based on those projects are 

proof that these new approaches are succeeding. 
Recent production projects demonstrate that SDN allows sim
-pler, more reliable, and easier network operation. Proof of that is in 

projects such as Google™s B4 inter-datacenter WAN
1 and Micro
-soft™s Swan.
2 Efforts within RouteFlow and Cardigan also show the 
concrete benefits of SDN while interworking with legacy routers.
B4, operational since 2012, is based on SDN principles, Open
-Flow technology, and open source components, such as the 

Quagga routing stack. Relative to traditional distributed control 

planes and traffic engineering tools based on multiprotocol label 

switching, network operation with B4 is simpler, easier, and more 

reliable. Further, by augmenting the SDN routing system with 

custom traffic engineering algorithms, B4 attains link utilization 

levels of close to 100 percent, which is unprecedented. In summary, 

B4 is an appealing, low-cost proposition that traditional network
-ing approaches could simply not have achieved until the introduc
-tion of these new SDN concepts.
While some might argue that B4 is an exceptional SDN deploy
-ment, coming from a major industry player with the resources and 

talent to release a cutting-edge internal networking project, per
-haps it is less an exception than the result of simple timing: technol
-ogy being adopted within a particular ecosystem maturity window. 
Unlike many other open source ecosystems, SDN grew quickly 
in academic environments, and only recently have users had a 

chance to test SDN stacks in production environments. Route
-Flow and Cardigan are examples of many open source projects 

that will start appearing in production now that SDN technolo
-gies are maturing.
References
1. S. Jain et al., ﬁB4: Experience with a Globally-Deployed 
Software Defined WAN,ﬂ 
Proc. 2013 Ann. Conf. ACM Special 

Interest Group Data Comm. 
(SIGCOMM 13). 2013, pp. 3Œ14.
2.
 C. Hong et al., ﬁAchieviving High Utilization with Software-

driven WAN,ﬂ 
Proc. 2013 Ann. Conf. ACM Special Interest 

Group Data Comm.
 (SIGCOMM 13), 2013, pp. 15Œ26.
r11rot.indd   4710/23/14   5:56 PM  48 COMPUTER
the many vendor-proprietary or partially open source SDN 
controllers. One of the project™s goals is to produce a com
-mercially viable, open sourceŒbased SDN controller. The 

ODP incorporates other open source projects into its code 

base and integrates with other southbound drivers or north
-bound interfaces, such as OpenStack Neutron, creating 

further momentum toward an open source SDN controller. 
Many successful open source projects start with vendor- 
and community-driven project management. As the projects 

become larger and more complex, a foundation forms that 

provides more structured evolution. Apache and Eclipse are 
examples. Historically, most successful open source projects 
have been community-driven, but the occasional vendor-

driven project could mature if it is able to attract involvement 
from other communities or create a community of it own. 
Community involvement generally increases the diversity 
of code committers and base code, both of which are integral 

to successful open source projects. The ODP, for example, 
includes coders with more than a hundred affiliations. 
Although the ODP™s success is still unproven, indus
-try adoption of its controller is increasing with its second 

release. Many large vendors, including Brocade, Redhat, 

Ciena, Ericsson, and Cisco, have announced plans for com
-mercial products based on ODP™s controller, by providing 

their own distributions or enterprise versions with paid 

support plans. 
Open source and standardization. 
As in LAMP, industry-
driven open source controller projects like the ODP push 
functionality beyond OpenFlow, generating an ecosystem 
that allows architects to snap together various components. 
Vendors can use a shared platform, which reduces fragmenta
-tion and user risk. In addition, vendors can benefit from one 

another™s development efforts in areas that do not threaten 

strategic product differentiation.
In this context, open source becomes less a fixed solu
-tion and more a development ethos or mindset to rapidly 

construct and evolve tools, techniques, and running code 
based on community input, knowledge, and interest. Col
-lectively, these forces will introduce a market process in 
which de facto standards are forged through open source 
platforms parallel with or complementing traditional 
standardization. 
The characteristics in Table 2 show the contrast between 
traditional standardization and SDN and are evidence that 

SDN is accelerating standardization. Although vendors have 

long driven standards development, in open source SDN, 
users are the main force, as network operators and equip
-ment buyers see the benefits of innovating their network 
infrastructure and of reducing costs and vendor lock-in.
State of APIs
APIs from open source community development should 

help decrease the time to market for proofs of concept and 
products, which in turn should shorten the path to working 
standards. Thus, API standardization (at least de facto stan
-dardization) and maturation are key for open source SDN. 
Southbound APIs are more mature overall, but their het
-erogeneity introduces obstacles. Northbound APIs are less 
mature and thus less defined, which implies possible flux 
˜˚˛˜˝˛˜˙˛ˆNorthbound APIsControl amd management appsProgramming abstractions/compilersNetwork operating systemsVirtualizationOpenFlow libraries/driverInfrastructure(data plane implementations)Southbound APIsLoad balancerVirtualizationController platformFirewallRoutingVRFBenchmarking, debugging,simulation, testing, veri˜cationFigure 1. 
Path from traditional networks to an open source software-defined networking (SDN) stack. (a) Traditional net
-works with distributed control and device-specific management contrast with (b) SDN™s flexible and logically centralized 
control and management, in which southbound protocols interact with data plane devices. (c) The emerging open source 

SDN stack enables this interaction, relying on open APIs between functional layers and on open source supporting tools, 

which are often highly customizable. VRF: virtual routing and forwarding.
r11rot.indd   4810/23/14   5:56 PM  NOVEMBER 2014
 49Table 1. Active open source SDN projects.
SDN realm
Project name
Benchmarking
Cbench (GPLv2, C, Perl, UNIX shell), OFLOPS (GPL, C)
Debugging, testing, and 
simulation
ndb, OFRewind, STS (Apache, Python), OFDissector (BSD, C), liboftrace (BSD, C), OFTest (BSD, Python), Mininet 

(BSD, Python), fs-sdn (GPL, Python), ns-3 (GPL, C++), TestON (GPL, Python)
Verification
Hassel (GPL, Python), NetPlumber (GPL, Python), NICE (BSD, Python), FlowChecker, OFTEN
Control and management 

applications 
Topology discovery, (GPL, many), HostTracker (GPL, many), Plug-n-Serve (BSD, C++), Aster*x (BSD, C++), FlowS
-cale (Apache, Java), SNAC (Python, C++), Odin (Apache, Python), PANE (BSD, Haskell), FRESCO (GPL, Python, 

C++), OSCARS (BSD, Java), RouteFlow (Apache, Python, C, C++, Java), Open DayLight (Eclipse, Java)
Programming abstractions, 

compilers, and isolation
FatTire, Flog, FML, Frenetic (GPL, OCaml), HFT, NetCore, Nettle, Procera, Pyretic (BSD, Python), Maple (Python), 

FlowN, LibNetVirt (GPL, C, Python), OpenStack Neutron (Apache, Python)
Controller platforms
NOX (GPL, C++), POX (GPL, Python), Maestro (LGPL, Java), Beacon (GPL, Java), Floodlight (Apache, Java), Ryu 

(Apache, Python), Trema (GPL, C, Ruby), FlowER (MIT, Erlang), NodeFlow (GPL, javascript), Mul (GPL, C), Open 

Daylight (Eclipse, Java), ONOS (Java); OpenContrail (Apache, C++, Python)
Data plane virtualization
FlowVisor (BSD, Java), PortVirt (BSD, C), Expedient (Apache, Python), OpenVirteX (Apache, Java)
OpenFlow protocol libraries 

and southbound drivers
OFLib-Node (BSD, JavaScript), OpenFlowJ (BSD, Java), OpenFaucet (Apache, Python), Pylib-OpenFlow (BSD, 

Python/C++), freeflow (Apache, C, C++), xDPd, ROFL (MPL, C, C++), libfluid (Apache, C/C++)
Data plane 

implementations
NetFPGA (BSD, C, Verilog), Open vSwitch (Apache, C), Reference design (BSD, C), softswitch 13 (BSD, C), Open
-Wrt/Pantou (GPL, C), Switch Light (Eclipse, C), Indigo Virtual Switch (Eclipse, C), LINC-Switch (Apache, Erlang)
.*BSD, Berkeley software distribution; FML, Flow-Based Management Language; FRESCO, FRamework for Enabling Security Controls in OpenFlow (networks); GPL, GNU general public 
license; HFT, high-frequency trading (algorithm); LGPL, Lesser GPL; LINC, LINC Is Not Closed; MPL, Mozilla Public License; NICE, Network Interface Controller with encoder; NOX, network 

operating system; OF, OpenFlow; OFTEN, OpenFlow Testing Environment; ONOS, Open Network Operating System; OpenWrt, Open WRT (from Linksys WRT54G); OSCARS, OpenFlow 

and On-Demand Secure Circuits and Advance Reservation System; PANE, participatory networking; POX, Python network operating system; ROFL Revised OpenFlow Library set; SNAC, 
Simple Network Access Control; xDPd, extensible datapath daemon
and churn; applications programmed to them will have to 
follow their changes. Because most southbound APIs rep
-resent fully standardized networking protocols that will 

rarely change, these will on average be more stable.
Southbound APIs. 
OpenFlow became prominent when 
startups such as Nicira (and then Big Switch Networks) first 

commercialized SDN products that utilized the protocol. 
During 2014, other southbound mechanisms appeared, 

some of which, like OpenFlow, are now full-fledged pro
-tocols for defining both transport and messaging. Other 

mechanisms are still nascent.
Many southbound mechanisms have at least some 
market acceptance. The Network Configuration Proto
-col (Netconf) and Simple Network Management Protocol 

(SNMP) are perhaps the most widely accepted. OpenFlow 
Table 2. Characteristics of traditional networking versus SDN in standards development.
Characteristic
Traditional
With SDN
Drivers
Vendors
Customer
Goals
Enable multiple solutions (interoperability)
Address user or operator needs (customization)
Deliverables
Documents
Implementations and proofs of concept (PoCs)
Quantity of Standards
More
Less
Timetable
Many years
Few years
Validation
Products and deployments after release
PoCs integral to the process
Control point
Seat at standards committee table
Contribution to FLOSS codebase; ability to understand 
codebase
Involved parties
Vendors who can afford membership fees; highly 

regarded experts and academics 
Anyone with domain expertise and coding ability
r11rot.indd   4910/23/14   5:56 PM  50 COMPUTER
is next in line, followed by the Open vSwitch Database 
Management Protocol (OVSDB). Subsequent to these are 
the Extensible Messaging and Presence Protocol (XMPP),  
JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) over HTTPS, and other 

RESTful APIs, which are more transport envelopes than 
fully-defined protocols. Relatively new to the scene is 
policy-centric, declarative OpFlex, a favorite of Cisco pro
-ponents (http://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-smith-opflex-00).
OpenFlow™s lower position in the market acceptance 
spectrum is not surprising, given its relatively short life
-time relative to other southbound mechanisms. Beyond 
version 1.0, uptake has been limited, in part because of 
the challenge to map OpenFlow 1.3 (beyond the minimal 

mandatory features) to existing ASIC-based pipelines. An
-other contributing factor is the lack of a standard protocol 

library that would suit both open source and vendor de
-velopment communitiesŠmuch as OpenSSL served both 
its communities and thus contributed to the production 
use of SSL protocols.
Recognizing the need for a standard and readily avail
-able library that abstracts OpenFlow intricacies, the Open 

Networking Foundation (ONF), which spearheads Open
-Flow and SDN standardization, conducted a competition to 
create an open source OpenFlow driver that would make it 
easier to develop OpenFlow switch agents and controllers. 

In March 2014, ONF selected libfluid (http://opennetwork
-ingfoundation.github.io/libfluid) as the winner.
Northbound APIs. 
At present, northbound APIs are mostly 
proprietary or non-standardized, depending on the SDN 
controller and the controller™s target use cases. In the past, 

every open source controller defined its own basic north
-bound interfaces, most of which were simple, appearing 

as a thin layer over OpenFlow, and occasionally support
-ing some topology query elements. 
As of September 2014, about 20 commercial SDN con
-trollers exist, each with its own set of northbound APIs. 

The Plexxi controller, for example, features a workload 
affinity API, for communication between external sys
-tems and the controller, and a network orchestration API, 
which aids in translating workload requirements into 
network instructions. 
In general, most commercial controllers provide only 
rudimentary northbound APIs, primarily for device-level 

configuration and flow programming, as opposed to 
offering APIs on a networkwide service level. Because 

network application requirements differ considerably, 
blends of northbound APIs should not be surprising. 
In parallel to the standardization work in ONF™s North
-bound Interface Working Group, code from projects 

like ODP and OpenStack are appearing as candidate de 
facto northbound API standards. This trend is consis
-tent albeit with a slight twist: the Internet Engineering 
Task Force™s motto ﬁrunning code and rough consensusﬂ 
implies that significant code has been implemented as 
part of a reference implementation before standardiza
-tion. Moreover, some in the industry have argued that 

the optimal northbound APIs should at least integrate 

into the orchestration stack, which will foster integra
-tion into existing OSS (operations systems support) and 

management systems.
API pairing. 
With the significant differences in north- and 
southbound approaches and their abstraction layers, a 

standard layered SDN architecture is doubtful. Never
-theless, efforts like the ODP are attempting to create a 

unified software architecture that accommodates the 

different approaches.
The ODP™s unification strategy centers on a model-
driven service abstraction layer (MD-SAL) architecture 

that supports multiple abstraction models without man
-dating fixed abstraction layers. MD-SAL enables different 

northbound APIs through REST configuration (RESTConf) 

interfaces that use the Yang data modeling language to 
configure the model and manipulate state data. The result
-ing north- and southbound pairing will create end-to-end 
siloed stacks, which will persist until users see commonali
-ties and motivate northbound API coalescence.
ROUTEFLOW: 
 SOFTWARE˜DEFINED IP ROUTING 
RouteFlow is an ongoing project to glue together open 
source IP routing stacks and OpenFlow networks. With 
RouteFlow, designers use virtual network routers to 
create a virtualized network control plane and install 

the resulting packet-handling rules into the datapaths™ 
flow tables. These rules fully represent each router™s 
forwarding tables. As in a legacy network, the virtual 

routers exchange traditional network protocol messages, 
such as open shortest path first (OSPF), using protocols 
like the Border Gateway Protocol (BGP) to interconnect 

with external physical and legacy routers. RouteFlow is 
also suitable for hybridsŠnetworks formed by SDN and 
legacy components.
Because IP routing is a core networking application, 
RouteFlow™s progress in the SDN community is an excel
-lent window on SDN advances. 
Open source architectural components
As Figure 2 shows, RouteFlow leverages several open source 

solutions and introduces three components: RF
 -Client, 
RF-Server, and RF-Proxy. With these components and the 
resulting SDN stack, network architects can run Linux-

based routing stacks and arbitrarily install the generated 
forwarding information base (FIB) into OpenFlow devices.
RF-Client 
is a user-space daemon that collects routing 
and forwarding information, such as the IP routing table, 

from any Linux-based routing engine. It typically runs in a 
r11rot.indd   5010/23/14   5:56 PM  NOVEMBER 2014
 51virtualized environment, such as a 
Linux container (LXC) or kernel vir
-tual machine (KVM).
RF-Server 
is a stand-alone ap
-plication that handles the system™s 
core logic, such as event processing 
and component mapping. Routing-

specific services are implemented 
as operator-tailored modules, which 
can use network-wide information 

to deliver arbitrary, high-level rout
-ing logic. Such information might 

include load balancing and pre
-ferred exit points, for example.
RF-Proxy 
is a shim proxy ap
-plication atop an OpenFlow 

controller that handles switch 
interactions and uses topology 
discovery and monitoring to col
-lect network state.
In a straightforward operational 
mode, a single data plane switch 

naturally associates with a single 
virtual router. Different modes are 
also possible, including
 Ła multiplexed mode, in which 

multiple virtual routers slice and control datapaths, and
 Łan aggregate mode,
5 in which a single virtual router 
represents a datapath group, enabling a single router 
abstraction to use eBGP to configure domain-wide 
routing control platforms.
To act as a router, RouteFlow creates OpenFlow rules 
that match destination IP and MAC addresses, rewrite MAC 

addresses according to next-hop information, or employ 
multiple flow tables and group tables to take specific ac
-tions on incoming traffic patterns. It then installs the 
resulting flow-based FIB entries in OpenFlow devices. Be
-sides serving as the data plane API, the OpenFlow protocol 

is the vehicle for delivering control plane messages from 

and to the virtualized OS™s interfaces.
In line with the best cloud application design practices, 
RouteFlow relies on scalable, fault-tolerant data storage 

that centralizes the core state; the logical, physical, and 
protocol-specific network views; and any information base 
used to develop route-control applications, such as traffic 

forecasts, flow monitoring, and administrative policies. 
Either ZeroMQ or a distributed NoSQL database, such as 
MongoDB, can serve as the pubsub-like message-queuing 

interprocess communication (IPC) mechanism. The only 
requirement is that the IPC mechanism adhere to an ex
-tensible JSON-based RouteFlow protocol implementation 
to loosely couple the modules.
In essence, RouteFlow tries to follow principles that 
allow architectural evolution: layers of indirection, system 

modularity, and interface extensibility. Network archi
-tects can distribute the number of RF-Proxy and RF-Client 

instances and hypervisor switches arbitrarily, and RF-
 Protocol northbound APIs abstract the routing engine and 
SDN API specifics away from the core logic.
Controller independence
Any abstraction must overcome the heterogeneity of 
southbound OpenFlow APIs and the lack of standardized 
northbound APIs. The latter obstacle motivated our work 
on route-centric simplified OpenFlow messaging, a uni
-fying abstraction that makes it easier to develop a shim 
RF-Proxy application for multiple controllers while keep
-ing the remaining modules intact and independent of the 
southbound protocol version.
8RF-Protocol acts as an IPC that glues different modules 
together with a simple command/response JSON syntax 
northbound to RF-Clients and a subset of OpenFlow mes
-sages southbound to RF-Proxy.
The result is a hierarchical design that is independent of 
a specific controller and agnostic to the OpenFlow version 
that the forwarding devices support. Additional work will 

aim to enable interaction with heterogeneous OpenFlow de
-vices, which is critical since these devices™ capabilities and 

optional feature sets can differ significantlyŠan obstacle 
Quagga, XORP, BIRDRoutingengineARPtableRoutetableNIC 1NIC 2Virtual switchVirtualizationDBRouteFlowRPC ProtocolRouteFlow ServerRouteFlow ProxyOpenFlow driverNetwork controllerOpenFlowOpenFlow agentHALNIC nkernel spaceUser spaceRouteFlowClientLinuxOpen vSwitch, softswitch 13,LXC, QEMC, Xen, libvirtMongoDB, Redis,ZeroMQ, jQuery, JITNOX, POX, Floodlight, Ryu,Open DaylightONF driverFlowVisorMininet, OVS,softswitch 13, Pica8 OSSoftwareHardwareHardware tablePorts21nVirtual routersControlcoordinationControllersDatapathsApp. n...FlowstatsTopo.disc.GUIFigure 2. 
RouteFlow architecture. RouteFlow introduces three software components, 
RF-Proxy, RF-Server, and RF-Client, into a modular design. The components combine 

with a routing-oriented SDN stack, which is based on many widely used open source 

solutions (left).  RPC: remote procedure call; ARP: Address Resolution Protocol; NIC: 

network interface card. 
r11rot.indd   5110/24/14   11:11 AM  52 COMPUTER
already receiving attention from the ONF™s Forwarding Ab
-stractions Working Group. We also expect potentially useful 
IP 
 routing˜oriented APIs from related work on IETF I2RS, 
despite its focus on in-box routing stacks and distributed 
control planes.
CARDIGAN: ROUTEFLOW LIVE
Cardigan, in operation since 2014, is the code name for 

efforts that leverage RouteFlow to realize SDN production 
goals, including 
 Łseamless replacement of deployed technology, 
 Łzero performance penalties, and 
 Łgame-changing innovation relative to traditional 
operations. 
Cardigan deployment
6 began as a simple network: two 
OpenFlow switches in different buildings controlled by a 
single controller, peering the Wellington Internet Exchange 
(WIX) on one side and the Research and Education Ad
-
vanced Network New Zealand (REANNZ) office network on 
the other. However, the two OpenFlow switches appear as 
a single router when commanded through the single, logi
-cally centralized abstraction provided by the RouteFlow 
control platform. 
As Figure 3 shows, the system connects directly to the 
Internet through the WIX, and its configuration man
-agement is from a single, logically centralized point, via 
which a network operator can add, translate, and distrib
-ute routes to the switches. More importantly, this same 
paradigm extends even as additional switches are added 
to the network. 
This network provides a platform for practical SDN re
-search in a realistic hybrid and live deployment, peering 

with non-SDN devices and directly connected to the Inter
-net. Approximately 90 organizations peer through WIX; 
most are IPv6 ready, handling up to 500 IPv6 and 1,000 IPv4 
network announcements (http://
wix.nzix.net/peers.html).
Although Cardigan™s initial 
deployment size was modest, we 

believe that practical production 
deployment is the best way to 
boost SDN production projects. 

Even basic systems need to get in 
production as early as possible to 
perform actual work outside the 

lab and feed experiential results 
into the development-deploy
-ment cycle. 
Cardigan uses Van
 dervecken 
(http://github.com/routeflow/
RouteFlow/tree/vandervecken), 

a RouteFlow fork aimed at 
continual consolidation of pro
-duction-based research. Flow programming is proactive 
and is based on the RouteFlow IP route and Address 
Resolution Protocol (ARP) table computations; all other 
forwarding is denied by default, which limits the control
-ler™s exposure to denial
 -of-service attacks. 
As of September 2014, each switch has 1,138 flows: eight 
flows tunnel control plane traffic to the controller; 98 flows 
describe directly connected hosts at WIX and REANNZ; and 
1,032 flows represent layer 3 routes. The aggregate traf
-fic fluctuates around hundreds of megabits per second. 
Changes at the Internet exchange point (IXP) provide three 
to four updates every 10 seconds to account for ARP time
-outs and link changes. Given the deployment™s live nature, 
the Cardigan project team has not yet conducted a deeper 
performance analysis.
Cardigan has recently added OpenFlow 1.3 support as 
a critical step to work with multiprotocol label switching 

(MPLS) and IPv6 and is using group tables to efficiently 
implement IP next-hop forwarding. Beyond L2/L3 inter
-working, Cardigan has achieved basic label switch router 
(LSR) interoperability. The Cardigan network now spans the 
US (ESnet), Australia (CSIRO), and New Zealand (REANNZ 

and VUW). Interoperability with Brazil (RNP) is planned.
NEXT STEPS
Obviously, increased SDN deployment faces technical 

challenges, such as scalability, performance, depend
-ability, and product maturity,
9 which both the academic 
research community and ONF industrial partners are ac
-tively addressing. 
For RouteFlow, we will be adding full support of Open
-Flow 1.3.4, IPv6, and RSVP-TE to the SDN routing stack. 

Planned experiments with various OpenFlow data plane 
implementations (including ASIC, NPU, SW, and hybrids) 

will investigate scalability of flow number, state-change rate, 
device number, and distance between distributed devices.
WIXREANNZOtherControllerTopologyRouteFlowOther fabricPronto 3780Pronto 3290CardiganL3L2Tra˜cControlCustomersIXP fabricPolicyFigure 3. 
How Cardigan works. Running a tailored RouteFlow version, the Cardigan con
-troller implements the logical router interconnection between the Research and Educa
-
tion Advanced Network New Zealand (REANNZ) and the Wellington Internet Exchange 

(WIX), which controls two OpenFlow switches (Pronto 3780 and Pronto 3290) that are 

physically interconnected through dark fiber. IXP: Internet exchange point.
r11rot.indd   5210/23/14   5:56 PM  NOVEMBER 2014
 53At the controller level, we are increasing RouteFlow™s 
availability, including OpenFlow master/slave/equal 
role support and establishing interoperation with sev-
eral additional controllers, among them On.Lab™s ONOS 

and Open Daylight. We also recognize that RouteFlow 
must withstand denial-of-service attacks; it must be 
easier to manage than a network of separate routers, 

but it must also be more reliable and easier to fix. In 
addition to exploiting common software engineering 
practices, we will be leveraging 

SDN research on formal meth-
ods to build provably correct 
networks and systematically 

troubleshooting them.
Finally, we are researching 
practical questions that arise 

in operating multiple SDNs, in-
cluding suitable SDN-to-SDN 
protocols. For example, how 

should SDNs in different admin-
istrative domains communicate 
beyond BGP? 
We are devoting these efforts 
to realizing the vision of soft-

ware-defined IXPs,
10 in which 
participants can peer on the 
basis of topology, metrics, and 
policies that are far more ex-

pressive than BGP, as illustrated 
in Figure 3.
We expect the SDN 
horizon to radically 
change current net-
work design, building, and 
operation, and invigorate 
innovation through open, ven-
dor-agnostic architectures that 

provide clear decoupling of data 
and control planes. 
Open source and SDN are 
critical partners in moving the 

networking industry forward in 
this change. Significant progress 

is already evident in the number 
and diversity of open source 
SDN projects, including practical 

deployments like the RouteFlow 
architecture and operational ex-
periences like Cardigan. Even 

so, the SDN community must 
solve foundational standard-
ization and API maturity issues 
before widely deployable open source SDN stacks will 
appear in production. 
Acknowledgments
We thank David Meyer and Inder Monga for insightful comments 
and the anonymous reviewers of earlier versions of this article. 

We also thank Diego Kreutz for his contribution to Figure 1. This 

work was partially supported by the Innovation Center, Ericsson 

Telecomunicações S.A., Brazil.
J-BHI is one of the leading journals in computer science and information systems with a strong interdisciplinary focus and biomedical and health application emphasis. J-BHI publishes papers on the following topics:   
˜  IEEE JOURNAL OF BIOMEDICAL 
AND HEALTH INFORMA
TICS Sensor Informatics and Quantified Self (deadline 18 December 2014)
 Biomedical and Health Informatics for Diabetes
(deadline 28 February 2015) 
˜
Editor-in-Chief: Guang-Zhong Yang, PhD, FREng, FIEEE Email: jbhi-eic@embs.orgDirector, The Hamlyn Centre, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, United KingdomUpcoming Special Issues: These are complemented by managed special issues/sections covering topics that are of strategic importance to the journal, coordinated by guest editors who are leading experts in these fields.  Recent special issues include Big Data for Health, Bioinformatics in Clinical Environments and Service Science for e-Health. The Journal was retitled from the IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine (T-ITB) in 2013. We particularly encourage large cohort studies with clearly demonstrated clinical translational values supplemented by online data sets or algorithms that can be shared by the research community.Visit http://jbhi.embs.org to subscribe to our mailing list, receive monthly J-BHI highlights, and read about our latest featured articles.http://jbhi.embs.orgBioinformaticsImaging InformaticsSensor Informatics  Medical InformaticsPublic Health Informatics   J-BHIr11rot.indd   5310/23/14   5:56 PM  54 COMPUTER
References
1. D. Meyer, ﬁThe Software-Defined-Networking Research 
Group,ﬂ 
IEEE Internet Computing
, vol. 17, no. 6, 2013, 
pp. 84Œ87.
2.
 N. McKeown et al. ﬁOpenFlow: Enabling Innovation in 
Campus Networks,ﬂ 
SIGCOMM Computing Comm. Rev
. vol. 38, no. 2, 2008, pp. 69Œ74.
3. T. Nadeau and K. Gray, 
SDN: Software Defined Networks
, O™Reilly Media, 2013.
4. D. Kreutz et al., ﬁSoftware-Defined Networking: A 
Comprehensive Survey,ﬂ to be published in 
Proc. IEEE
, 2015; http://arxiv.org/abs/1406.0440.
5. C. Rothenberg et al., ﬁRevisiting Routing Control 
Platforms with the Eyes and Muscles of Software-
Defined Networking,ﬂ 
Proc. ACM Hot Topics in Software-
Defined Networking 
(HotSDN 12), 2012, pp.
  
 13Œ18.
6.
 J. Stringer et al., ﬁCardigan: Deploying a Distributed 

Routing Fabric,ﬂ 
Proc. ACM Hot Topics in Software-
Defined Networking 
(HotSDN 13), 2013, pp. 169Œ170.
7. J. Lindman et al., ﬁMatching Open Source Software 
Licenses with Corresponding Business Models,ﬂ 
IEEE 
Software
, vol. 28, no. 4, 2011, pp. 31Œ35.
8.
 J. Stringer and C. Owen, ﬁRouteMod: A Flexible Approach 

to Route Propagation,ﬂ Victoria Univ. of Wellington, 
2013; http://wand.net.nz/~jps22/routemod.pdf.
9. S. Yeganeh et al., ﬁOn Scalability of Software-Defined 

Networking,ﬂ 
IEEE Comm.
, vol. 51, no. 2, 2013, pp. 136Œ141.
10.
 A. Gupta et al.,ﬁSDX: A Software Defined Internet 

Exchange,ﬂ 
Proc. 2014 Ann. Conf. ACM Special Interest 
Group Data Comm.
 (SIGCOMM 14), 2014, pp. 551Œ562. 
Christian Esteve Rothenberg
 is an assistant professor 
at the University of Campinas, Brazil. His research inter
-ests include IP systems, networking, and open source SDN 

projects, such as RouteFlow, softswitch 13, and libfluid. 

Rothenberg received a PhD in electrical and computer en
-gineering from the University of Campinas. He has two 

international patents. Rothenberg is a member of IEEE, 

ACM, and the Brazilian Computing Society, and an ONF 
research associate. Contact him at chesteve@dca.fee.
 unicamp.br. 
Roy Chua 
is cofounder and a partner of SDNCentral.com 
and a partner in Wiretap Ventures. His research interests 
include SDN, network virtualization, network security and 
cloud platforms. Chua received an MBA from MIT™s Sloan 
School of Management and an MS in electrical engineering 

and computer science from the University of California at 
Berkeley. Contact him at rchua@sdncentral.com.
Josh Bailey 
is a software engineer at Google in Wellington, 
New Zealand. His research interests include large-scale, 
high-performance networks and computers. Contact him 
at joshb@google.com.
Martin Winter 
is a technical lead and cofounder of the 
Network Device Education Foundation. His research inter
-ests include routing platforms, networked systems, and 

software engineering as well as OpenSourceRouting, a non
-profit project to improve Quagga. Winter received a BS in 
computer science from Brugg-Windisch HTL. He is chair of 
the Open Source Working Group in RIPE (European Inter
-net Provider Forum). Contact him at mwinter@netdef.org.
Carlos N.A. Corrêa 
is a PhD candidate in computer science 
at the Federal Fluminense University and an IT operations 
consultant at Unimed. Corrêa received an MS in informa
-tion systems from the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro. 
Contact him at carlos.nilton@gmail.com.
Sidney C. de Lucena
 is an assistant professor of informa
-tion systems at the Federal University of the State of Rio 
de Janeiro. His research interests include network manage
-ment and SDN. De Lucena received a DSc in computer and 
systems engineering from the Federal University of Rio de 
Janeiro. He is a member of the Brazilian Computing Society. 
Contact him at sidney@uniriotec.br.
Marcos Rogério Salvador
 is a research collaborator at the 
University of Campinas and senior manager of innovation 

at the Lenovo Innovation Center, Brazil. His research in
-terests include network virtualization, software-defined 

infrastructures, and cloud datacenter architectures. Salva
-dor received a PhD in computer science from the University 
of Twente, the Netherlands. He is an ONF research associate 
Contact him at msalvador@lenovo.com.
Thomas D. Nadeau
 is a Distinguished Engineer at Bro
-cade and Chief Architect of Open Source in the company™s 
Software Business Unit. His research interests include 
building commercial open source˜based products, SDN, 
NFV and open-source projects such as Open Daylight and 

OpenStack. Nadeau received an MSc from the University 
of Massachusetts in Lowell, where he is an adjunct profes
-sor of computer science. He is cochair of the IETF NETMOD 
Working Group and coauthor of 
SDN: Software Defined 
Networks, An Authoritative Review of Network Pro
-grammability Technologies
 (O™Reilly, 2014). Contact him 
at tnadeau@brocade.com. 
 Selected CS articles and columns are available 
  for free at http://ComputingNow.computer.org.
r11rot.indd   5410/23/14   5:56 PM