 COMPUTER
 22COVER FEATURE
Published by the IEEE Computer Society
0018-9162/11/$26.00 © 2011 IEEE tematic methodology that reflects future design concerns 
and constraints.
The US Department of Energy™s (DoE™s) exascale 
computing initiative has identified hardware-software 
codesign as a central strategy to meet this need. The idea 
is to have a novel development partnership in which appli
-cation scientists participate in a highly collaborative and 
iterative design process well before the vendor brings the 
system to market. Accelerating this cycle could improve 
energy efficiency and usable performance by orders of 
magnitude.
Through a joint project involving our three laboratories, 
we are assembling Codesign for Exascale (CoDEx), a com
-prehensive hardware-software codesign environment that 
will enable an unprecedented opportunity for application 
and algorithm developers to influence the direction of 
future architectures so that they meet DoE mission needs 
(https://sites.google.com/a/lbl.gov/codex). CoDEx combines 
three elements:
 highly configurable, cycle-accurate simulation of node 
architectures from Lawrence Berkeley National Lab
-oratory™s Green Flash project (www.lbl.gov/cs/html/
greenflash.html);
 novel automatic extraction and exascale extrapolation 
of memory and interconnect traces using the Law
-rence Livermore National Laboratory™s ROSE compiler 
framework (www.rosecompiler.org); and
 scalable simulation of massive interconnection 
networks using Sandia Laboratories™ Structural Simu
-lation Toolkit (SST)/macro, a coarse-grained simulator 
(http://sst.sandia.gov). 
Over the years, users of high-performance com
-puting (HPC) systems have seen dramatic 
increases in peak performance claims but with 
no commensurate improvement in application 
performance. Moreover, as these systems approach the 
exaflops scale, their designers are confronting enormous 
electrical power requirements. The cost of power is 
expected to exceed the procurement costs of HPC systems, 
and will thus ultimately limit their future practicality. 
Unless system designers work aggressively with vendors 
and the scientific community to develop more energy-
 efficient solutions, these trends will lead to an HPC indus
-try crisis.
1,2
 Traditional HPC system design methodologies 
have not had to account for power constraints or parallel
-ism on the level designers must contemplate for exascale 
systems. Furthermore, these tectonic shifts in computer 
architecture are anticipated to radically change the pro
-gramming model and software environment at all scales in 
future computing systems. The designers of HPC hardware 
and software components have an urgent need for a sys
-The US Department of Energy™s exascale com-
 puting initiative has identified hardware-
 software codesign as a central strategy
 in achieving more agile hardware devel
-opment. Hardware simulation and code 
analysis tools that facilitate deeper col
-laboration between hardware architects 
and application teams will be an essential 
 component of the codesign process.
John Shalf, 
Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory
Dan Quinlan, 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory
Curtis Janssen, 
Sandia National Laboratories
Rethinking 
 Hardware-Software 
Codesign for 
 Exascale Systems
 23NOVEMBER 2011These tools will enable a tightly coupled software-hard
-ware codesign process that is highly suitable for complex 
HPC designs.
WHY CODESIGN AND SIMULATION 
 TOOLS ARE KEY
HPC system development requires a more tightly inte
-grated approach to designing future computing systems 
to meet the extreme power and performance challenges 
for the next decade. Codesign is an iterative process, in 
which the goal is to optimize both applications (algorithms 
and algorithmic implementations) and hardware for some 
combination of performance, power, and cost. An essential 
first step is to identify the application targets, which makes 
it possible to use target applications™ performance on the 
target machine as a key success criterionŠone in which 
hardware architects and applications teams are equally 
invested.
An effective codesign process also requires accurately 
predicting the performance, cost, and power consequence 
of any design tradeoff in algorithms or hardware configu
-ration. The architectural simulation of computing systems 
plays an essential role in providing this predictive capa
-bility because it enables the quantitative exploration of 
HPC system design tradeoffs. HPC system development 
requires a more tightly integrated approach to designing 
future computing systems to meet the extreme power and 
performance challenges for the next decade.
The embedded processor market has refined codesign 
processes over the past 20 years to meet the demanding 
cost and power efficiency requirements of battery-pow
-ered consumer electronics (smartphones, MP3 players, 
and so on) as well as of power-sensitive high-perfor
-mance embedded applications like avionics systems. 
Codesign™s success is due largely to a continued focus on 
developing tools that make the methodology productive, 
cost-effective, and beneficial, such as automated proces
-sor synthesis tools, cycle-accurate simulators, and the 
automated generation of software tools (compilers and 
debuggers) from hardware specifications. These tools 
have broken through the slow pace of system design that 
held back the embedded industry for many years and that 
continues to impede critical advances in HPC design and 
implementation.
The partnership in DoE™s vision furthers codesign 
practice by anticipating application needs. The multidis
-ciplinary codesign team begins the process by identifying 
leading-edge, high-impact scientific applications and then 
using these as optimization targets instead of the tradi
-tional speed and feed targets (flops and bandwidth) and 
percentage of peak flops. The design process is applica
-tion driven. Thus, rather than looking at what scientific 
applications can run on an exascale system after it ar
-rives, the team seeks to uncover what a system needs to 
meet the requirements of critical science problems. There 
was no thunderclap or equivalent to a sonic boom when 
we crossed the threshold to petaflops, nor will there be for 
the first system to exceed the ﬁexaflops barrier.ﬂ The suc
-cess of the DoE exascale program hinges on the success 
of the science applications. As such, the process builds 
on DoE™s understanding of application requirements and 
expands its already broad-based computational science 
portfolio.
In contrast to a traditional pipelined process, which 
optimizes isolated team-specific metrics, the codesign 
process requires collaboration and compromise from 
all teams to achieve a common optimization target. 
Application experts work in concert with computer ar
-chitects and algorithm designersŠall using sophisticated 
tools to accelerate the design loop to meet the common 
goal of maximizing scientific application performance 
within the constraints of power and cost. The method
-ology depends on a bidirectional optimization of design 
parameters, in which software requirements drive hard
-ware design decisions, and hardware design constraints 
motivate changes in the software design to better fit 
within those constraints. 
Thus, a deep analysis of application requirements drives 
key design decisions for the overall system architecture. 
It provides quantitative measures of application require
-ments and relates them to architectural parameters such 
as on-chip memory, memory bandwidth demands, and 
interconnection requirements. 
Unfortunately, many hardware design choices are too 
costly to implement or do not improve energy efficiency 
enough to justify the costŠa condition that motivates 
software implementation changes. Architectural simu
-lation provides an avenue to experiment with hardware 
configurations, programming models, and algorithms on 
exascale class machines before making the full system 
implementation available. Designers can integrate models 
of the hardware, runtime system, and application into 
the simulation to evaluate the tradeoffs among the design 
choices imposed on each aspect of the integrated system. 
Cycle-accurate simulation tools let designers quantify the 
performance impact on applications in light of specific 
hardware constraints. 
Codesign is an iterative process, in 
which the goal is to optimize both 
applications and hardware for some 
combination of performance, power, 
 and cost.
 COVER FEATURE
COMPUTER
 24Analysis of the hardware con
-straints in terms of cost, area, 
and power consumption serves 
as feedback to motivate changes 
in the application and algorithm 
design to better fit within hard
-ware constraints.
CODESIGN TOOLS
The codesign process requires 
both hardware and software 
models. The hardware models 
capture the structure and func
-tion of the exascale system™s 
hardware components. The 
software models consist of a 
variety of surrogates for the 
application software. Different 
surrogate types allow designers 
to implement different aspects 
of the codesign process. Table 1 
lists several surrogates and their 
definitions. Figure 1 shows how 
the application reduction hierar
-chy relates to code analysisŠas 
applications reduce to the kernel 
surrogate, understanding in
-creases, and as the design moves 
up the hierarchy, its gets closer 
to reality, or the full application. 
Figure 2 shows the codesign 
workflow using these different 
application representations. 
Compact mini-applications and 
mini-drivers and kernels run on 
actual hardware; skeleton appli
-cations run only in a simulated 
hardware environment. Tools 
that allow automated conver
-sion among these surrogates 
are a key feature of the CoDEx 
environment.
Full workload Compact apps Composite testsKernels Skeletons Full application  Integration (reality) increasesUnderstanding increasesHydro, radiation transport, and so onCoupled multiphysics applicationAll application kernels, but stripped to essentialsCG, eliptic solve, stencil, PIC particlepush vs. particleJust communication (halo exchange) or per-core computational load  Manual process Automated or semiautomated process Codesign evaluation  Fullapps Compactapps Skeletonapps ROSEautotuningoptimizationsNodearchitecturesimulatorsCommunicationnetworksimulatorsReports (performance,power, and so on)Figure 1. 
Interplay among the layers in the application hierarchy. In the CoDEx co-
design process, kernels enable the rapid exploration of new languages and algorithms 
because of ease of rewriting, whereas full applications are harder to rewrite but ensure 
adherence to original application requirements.
Figure 2. 
Hierarchy of code representations. The CoDEx codesign process uses a hierar
-chy of simplified surrogate code representations to provide hardware designers with 
actionable detailed information while still ensuring that the context for any insight 
remains faithful to the full application™s requirements.
Table 1. Application surrogates and their definitions.
Surrogate
Description
Compact application
Small app with fewer features and simpli˜ed boundary conditions relative to a full app
Mini-application
Small, self-contained program that embodies essential performance characteristics of key apps
Skeleton application
Program that captures an app™s control ˚ow and communication pattern; can be run only in a simulator
Proxy application
General term for all other surrogates
Mini-driver
Small programs that act as drivers of performance-impacting library packages
Kernel
Program that captures an algorithm™s node-level aspects
 25NOVEMBER 2011Deep code analysis
In our codesign process, the 
ROSE infrastructure forms a 
central part of the tool chain 
for automating the extraction of 
skeleton applications to support 
input to the simulators. As Figure 
3 shows, the chain starts with the 
ROSE-based tool reading source 
code into an abstract syntax tree 
using an intermediate represen
-tation. The tool then analyzes 
the source code indirectly using 
the AST and subsequently trans
-forms the AST to cut away parts 
of the application™s representa
-tion to reduce complexity but 
preserve specific features, such as 
message-passing interface (MPI) 
communication. From the modi
-fied AST, the tool can generate a 
less complex source code version, 
which becomes the skeleton for 
input into hardware simulators. 
Research to provide a deep understanding of code 
performance depends on significant internal compiler 
analysis. Current work uses data dependence and control-
 flow information (def-use analysis) to support the genera
-tion of backward slices rooted in the application™s MPI calls. 
Future work will expand on def-use analysis and use a more 
general dataflow framework in ROSE to support the gen
-eration of skeletons that capture a range of behaviorsŠnot 
just MPI communication. Future work will also incorporate 
interprocedural analysis based on the system dependence 
graph to track the use of variables across function inter
-faces and provide more aggressive simplification levels for 
large-scale applications.
These techniques to automate generation of skeleton 
applications are central to how codesign can incorporate 
current scientific software into the process of evaluating 
modern numerical techniques for future exascale archi
-tectures. Research to support this work is an ongoing 
collaborative effort of the ROSE project and Galois Inc., 
with iterative results available on the ROSE project website 
(www.rosecompiler.org).
Coarse-grained interconnection simulation
Coarse-grained simulations let designers study 
large-scale systems in a way that captures the complex 
interactions among hardware components, including in
-teractions that arise only at the largest scales. The SST/
macro
3 and Warwick Performance Prediction simulator
4 are examples of simulators designed specifically for study
-ing exascale class machines. Our codesign process uses 
the SST/macro simulator. The simulator software is modu
-lar, permitting the study of various computational and 
communication models. SST/macro is distributed under 
an open source license and is downloadable from http://
sst.sandia.gov.
Designers can use the simulator in two ways. One is to 
replay a trace of a previously run MPI application through 
the simulator, allowing its execution time to be estimated 
on new hardware. The application mimics a real appli
-cation™s control-flow and messaging pattern except with 
values from performance models instead of the computa
-tional and message-passing costs. 
Alternatively, the simulator can use a skeleton ap
-plication
5,6 that domain experts provide or ROSE-based 
analysis tools generate. Traditionally, an application ana
-lyst must manually extract skeleton applications from full 
applications by removing all noncommunication code 
yet preserving all the code necessary to compute the 
communication topology and message sizes. This task 
is tedious and labor intensive. Because communication 
skeletons are central to modeling communication perfor
-mance, the CoDEx project team has developed technology 
that enables the ROSE compiler to automate a skeleton™s 
extraction. 
Both ways of using the simulator have unique benefits. 
The tracing approach provides an easy way to understand 
existing application performance on new architectures. 
The skeleton application approach allows studies at 
extreme scales and permits the evaluation of new pro
-gramming model ideas and notional algorithms without a 
complete implementation.
UserROSE C/C++/Fortran/OpenMP/UPCTransformedsource codeVendorcompilerProgramtransformationROSEunparserProgramanalysisEDG Fortran-to-ROSEconnectorEDG front end/Open Fortran parserInternalrepresentation(AST)Figure 3.
  How the ROSE infrastructure supports the extraction of skeleton applica
-tions. ROSE-based tools analyze source code using the abstract syntax tree and then 
reduce application complexity while preserving communication features. The tool can 
then generate the skeleton code, a  less complex source code version that becomes 
input to other tools, such as commercial compilers.
 COVER FEATURE
COMPUTER
 26Rapid design synthesis
The embedded processor market has refined codesign 
processes by developing tools that make hardware-
 software codesign productive, cost-effective, and benefi
-cial. Our codesign approach extends many of the tools 
designed for the rapid synthesis of embedded designs so 
that they are suitable for exploring HPC design alternatives.
One of our key extensions is to the Tensilica Xtensa 
Processor Generator (XPG) tool chain to work as our rapid 
prototyping platform for the HPC simulation. XPG provides 
an end-to-end solution for quickly creating simple, semi-
 custom processors from optimized, power-efficient 
building blocks. The XPG™s customizable instruction set, 
communication interfaces, and 
memory hierarchy make it ideal 
for exploring novel chip multi
-processor designs. Its ability to 
extend the instruction set to add 
application-specific functionality 
produces a streamlined processor 
with scratchpad memories, ad
-vanced communication features, 
and custom operational codes that 
facilitate advanced communication 
and synchronization. XPG™s ability 
to automatically generate C/C++ 
compilers, debuggers, and func
-tional models enables fast software 
porting and rapid testing with a 
 new architecture. It also speeds 
language development by enabling 
researchers to target source-to-
 source translation technology (tar-
 geting the compilers that XPG au
-tomatically generates), which is 
substantially easier than crafting 
 a new compiler from scratch.
Accelerated hardware 
emulation
Design synthesis tools such as 
XPG produce gate-level Register 
Transfer Language, a list of gates 
with the circuit connections between 
them. Designers can use gate-level 
RTL as a chip-design layout, which 
in turn can be mass-produced at a 
chip fabrication facility. An alterna
-tive is to load the gate-level RTL for a 
potential processor design onto field-
programmable gate arrays (FPGAs) 
for full cycle-accurate emulation. 
Architectural emulation platforms 
based on FPGAs, such as Palladium, 
are a common way to support the rapid prototyping and 
evaluation of application-specific IC designs. Once the 
design synthesis tool maps gateware components onto the 
FPGA™s programmable logic blocks, the resulting system 
looks for all practical purposes like the actual hardware, 
except that it runs at a much lower clock frequency (but 
orders of magnitude faster than software simulation). The 
emulated system can boot conventional operating systems 
such as Linux and use the actual compilers targeted for the 
final development platform. 
FPGA emulation is hundreds to thousands of times 
faster than typical software emulation environments, yet 
its dramatic speed increase does not sacrifice accuracy. On 
Cycle time:6+ yearsAMD Opteron 0.02.04.06.08.010.012.014.0
16.018.012481248# Cores (SP)# Cores (DP)Total G˜op/s $ BypassSIMDPrefetchT/$ Block ReorderPaddingNUMANaïveTunesoftware(2 years) Buildhardware(2 years) Port application(a)(b)Design new system(2 years)Cycle time:daysAMD Opteron 0.02.04.06.08.010.0
12.014.016.018.012481248# Cores (SP)# Cores (DP)Total G˜op/s $ BypassSIMDPrefetchT/$ Block ReorderPaddingNUMANaïveAutoTunesoftware
(hours) Emulate
hardware(RAMP)(hours) Build application(minutes)Synthesize SoC(hours)3.5×Figure 4. 
Comparison of the CoDEx codesign cycle and a conventional design cycle. 
(a) Conventional design cycles last four to six years. In contrast, (b) the CoDEx co-
design process features rapid synthesis tools to generate prototype designs, FPGA-
accelerated emulation, and software autotuning, which could reduce that time to 
one or two days. 
 27NOVEMBER 2011the contrary, FPGA emulation is arguably more accurate 
than a software simulation environment, since it truly 
represents the hardware design. The direct mapping to 
FPGAs on the hardware emulation platform and copious 
performance data provide a fast, accurate performance 
emulation environment. In this environment, designers 
can benchmark real codes, thus ensuring that application 
developers are intimately involved in the codesign process.
Gate-level RTL design also provides accurate feedback 
on the design™s power consumption because it reflects the 
actual gates that would produce the real chip design. In 
contrast, power estimation is much more difficult to verify 
in a software-only simulation environment.
Our codesign process adopts the Research Accelerator 
for Multiple Processors (RAMP) technology, the result of a 
cooperative effort among six universities to build a novel 
emulation system for parallel processors (http://ramp.
eecs.berkeley.edu). RAMP emulation technology uses the 
Berkeley Emulation Engine 3 (BEE3) boards, which in turn 
use Xilinx FPGAs. Each board has inter-FPGA links on the 
same board and between boards. Consequently, design
-ers can scale up to simulate a single many-core socket, or 
even larger-scale clusters. The Berkeley RAMP Blue project 
demonstrated emulation of more than 1,000 cores using a 
stack of 16 BEE2 boards.
7With FPGA-accelerated emulation capabilities, a de
-signer can generate a new system design (tape out) every 
day; system build time is in minutes instead of years. De
-signers can also evaluate alternative design scenarios in 
minutesŠwhich used to take months or even years with 
conventional development processes. 
Overall, the performance and increased confidence in 
the timing model of FPGA-accelerated hardware emula
-tion platforms enhance interaction at all levels of system 
development. As Figure 4 shows, these capabilities can 
facilitate and ultimately accelerate the iterative process of 
science-driven system design.
CODESIGN STRATEGY
Codesign depends on a strategy that involves integrated 
design teams as well as sophisticated tools. Application 
experts work in concert with computer architects and 
algorithm designers to accelerate the design loop. The opti
-mization target for the process is the delivered application 
performance for the combined hardware and software en
-vironment, rather than tangentially related metrics such as 
peak flops or byte-to-flops ratios. Therefore, it is essential 
to clearly identify the application up front that will serve 
as the common measure of success for all aspects of the 
system design.
The iterative design methodology in Figure 4 depends 
on a bidirectional optimization of design parameters: deep 
analysis of application requirements drives key design 
decisions for the overall system architecture, while ar
-chitectural simulation provides quantitative feedback on 
potential design tradeoffs for both hardware and software 
implementations. This tightly integrated design optimiza
-tion cycle will enable orders-of-magnitude improvement 
in energy efficiency and usable performance.
RESULTS
We have applied our codesign process in several proj
-ects to develop climate modeling and seismic imaging 
applications, as well as to automatically cotune hardware 
and software in the same process.
8Our first project was Green Flash, the codesign of a ma
-chine for kilometer-scale climate modeling.
9 The three 
central features of the Green Flash design process were fast 
MULTIRESOLUTION MODELING
Modeling, simulation, and compiler analysis all play synergistic 
roles in the codesign process to cover a broad space of design 
parameters. As Figure A shows, a multiresolution approach using 
multiple modeling methodologies is essential to cover the extreme 
scale and provide enough fidelity to inspire confidence in the design 
choice. 
Tools such as cycle-accurate hardware simulation offer extreme 
detail in their modeling capability, but limit system scale to node size 
or small clusters. Software simulators, such as SST/macro, can expand 
the system scale that a model can handle, but they must neglect 
some detail to achieve that scalability. Likewise, constitutive models 
and other empirical modeling methods can cover much larger sys
-tems, but by definition can model the effects only as parameters. 
Most modeling is through empirical models because they are faster 
to construct and evaluate, but software-based and cycle-accurate 
models are also necessary because they can verify that the simpler 
model has included all the important effects and has not neglected 
anything essential but unanticipated.
ˇCoarse-grainedsimulation:SST/macroConstitutivemodelsEmulation:Green FlashFigure A. Multiple modeling approaches cover both the scale 
and accuracy required to understand system design tradeoffs. 
The two key axes for simulation and modeling techniques are 
model fidelity (horizontal axis) and the scale of the system that 
simulation can handle.
 COVER FEATURE
COMPUTER
 28Table 2. Comparison of energy efficiency in the Intel Nehalem, 
Nvidia Fermi, and Green Wave, a codesigned many-core 
processor implementation.
Architecture
Intel 
Nehalem
Nvidia 
Fermi
Green 
Wave
Total nodes
127,740
66,823
75,968
Megapoints per watt
4.27
6.28
32.63
Communication overhead (%)
9.50
43.00
16.00
Total megawatts
38.20
26.10
5.00
FPGA-based hardware emulation, rapid design synthesis 
tools, and software autotuning technology. 
Green Flash benefited greatly from FPGA-based emu
-lation to facilitate tightly coupled codesign processes. 
These processes in turn enabled the rapid development 
of an application-driven many-core chip design targeted 
at scientific applications. Finally, as the ﬁMultiresolution 
Modelingﬂ sidebar describes, the project demonstrated 
the effectiveness of using a multidisciplinary hardware-
 software codesign process that facilitates close interactions 
among application and computer scientists and hardware 
engineers in developing a system tailored to scientific com
-puting requirements.
Another project, Green Wave, conducted in collabo
-ration with the Fraunhofer Institute for Industrial and 
Applied Mathematics (www.itwm.fraunhofer.de), extended 
the codesign process to study reverse-time-migration prob
-lems in seismic imagingŠamong the most demanding 
commercial applications for large-scale HPC clusters.
10 The team modeled the full node design, including the 
memory subsystem, as well as the interconnection de
-sign™s performance. Green Wave demonstrated how 
a hardware-software codesign process can achieve an 
order-of-magnitude increase in energy efficiency over com
-parable GPU- and CPU-based systems. 
Table 2 shows how the codesigned Green Wave imple
-mentation compares with the Intel Nehalem and Nvidia 
Fermi designs for the seismic imaging survey. To ensure 
a fair comparison, the Green Wave design used a 45-nm 
process technology, the same memory technology as the 
Nehalem, and limited chip area to 240 mm
2, about the 
same as the die size for the Nehalem and about half the 
die size for the Fermi.
The project team optimized Green Wave using a co-
design process for a typical seismic imaging survey. The 
survey, which must complete in a week, requires approx
-imately 12,000 separate data analysis runs performed 
on a 30 × 20 × 10 megapoint computational grid. The 
first row of Table 2 shows the system size required to 
meet this computational rate; the last row indicates 
how many megawatts a system of that size would con
-sume. The metric of value for these simulations is the 
number of megapoints per secondŠthe number of grid 
points that the HPC cluster can process per second for 
this seismic survey. The second row of the table trans
-lates this into an energy efficiency metric of megapoints 
per watt of power consumed. The third row indicates 
how much of the computational time is spent on inter
-processor communication using the same InfiniBand 
interconnection technology. (We collected detailed com
-munication timing information from an instrumented 
MPI implementation.)
As the table indicates, relative to a conventional HPC 
design, the codesigned system offers 5 to 7.6 times higher 
performance given similar constraints on chip area, 
lithographic scale, and memory and interconnection 
technology. We believe expanding the codesign process 
to these components could yield another order-of-mag
-nitude improvement, since the Green Wave processor 
performance optimizations shift the primary sources of 
energy consumption to the memory and interconnection 
components.
Our experience using architectural simulators 
reflects six years of prototyping application-
 tailored chip designs for the Green Flash (kilo
-meter scale climate modeling) and Green Wave 
(high-resolution seismic imaging) projects. We 
have generalized the tools and methodologies 
developed to accelerate the codesign process for 
those projects, and these generalizations provide 
many of the hardware simulation capabilities for 
the CoDEx project. 
Both the Green Flash and Green Wave codesign 
projects relied on rapid synthesis to prototype 
new interprocessor communication and synchro
-nization services to support advanced execution 
models. For example, we synthesized direct word-
granularity interprocessor communication services 
to support fine-grained synchronization primitives 
˜˚˛˚˝˚˙˚ˆ˚ˇ˚˘˚˜˚ˇ˜˚˛˜˜˚˛ˇ˜˚˝˜˜˚˝ˇ˜˚˛˚˝˚ˆ˚˘˚˛˜˚˛˝˚˛ˆ˚˛˘˚˚Figure 5. 
OpenMP transformations using ROSE. The evaluation used 
a simulator on a numerical kernel (Jacobi iteration), evaluating both 
power and Mflops per watt for various numbers of threads.
 29NOVEMBER 2011for noncache-coherent global-address-space languages. 
The more flexible and generalized CoDEx environment 
can automatically expose this new capability in the com
-piler to make it immediately accessible to our software 
stack developers for experimentation. These automated 
rapid prototyping tools will enable us to make substantial 
progress in developing novel hardware support for locality 
management, resilience, security, and interprocessor com
-munication on a limited budget.
Advanced compiler environments also play a significant 
role in our architectural analysis. For example, we use 
ROSE to analyze sample applications and extract the MPI 
use as an input code to support the evaluation of message 
passing, which in turn supports the SST/macro simulator. 
This work supports the CoDEx project™s charter to auto
-mate the application of codesign to support the evaluation 
of DoE applications. 
The simulator represents a range of proposed future 
node architectures, with ROSE automating the complex 
code transformations needed to evaluate the potential of 
each design point. Figure 5 shows both power and Mflops 
per watt for different numbers of threads using a node 
simulator. Automating the exploration of both hardware 
and software design alternatives is essential in the goal to 
accelerate the iterative codesign cycle. 
Codesign for exascale systems provides research 
challenges along all axes of the hardware, system 
software, and application design space. Our 
codesign process features hardware simulation and 
compiler-driven code analysis for model development, 
which allows designers to consider complete application 
codes rather than proxy kernels. Deep code analysis using 
compiler-assisted model development, interconnection 
simulation, and both software and FPGA-based hardware 
emulation systems with rapid design synthesis tools plays 
a central role. The cotuning environment enables the rapid 
search of many design alternatives to find the optimal 
hardware-software solution. Such an extensive search 
would not be practical or even possible with traditional 
decoupled design processes.
We are rapidly evolving the architectural simula
-tion framework we have brought together in the CoDEx 
 project to improve usability, increase integration with 
other simulators, model faults and power consumption, 
support alternative programming models, and quantify 
the uncertainty in our simulation results. These efforts 
will provide a platform for ROSE-based tools to analyze 
ever more complex application programs. Above all, we are 
placing a heavy emphasis on validation to ensure that our 
simulation results provide an accurate basis for exascale 
system design.
To simulate failure modes, we are expanding our ability 
to automatically inject faults into any system design com
-ponent. Designers can use this feature to harden software 
infrastructure in the face of transient errors or to test new 
models for fault detection, resilience, and recovery. Simi
-larly, they can use SST/macro to insert simulated hardware 
failures into the interconnection model to test detection 
and correction methods for the interconnection protocol. 
Our hardware simulation environment enables us to 
better understand how to build a programming environ
-ment together with the hardware that can exploit new 
features. For example, we are planning to study language 
and hardware design for invasive uncertainty quantifi
-cation, in which probability density functions represent 
floating-point values. Another direction is to deepen the 
understanding of the programming involved in integrating 
NVRAM directly into the memory hierarchyŠa likely trend 
for future exascale system designs. Hardware simulation 
enables us to explore the consequences and benefits of 
adding more intelligence to the memory chips to perform 
operations on data in situ within the memory subsystem. 
In short, it is an exciting time to be involved in com
-puter architecture, and the future of codesign for exascale 
computing is bright. We envision processes that unite 
multidisciplinary teams of application scientists, math
-ematicians, and computer architects in creating machines 
that can tackle problems critical to societies worldwide. 
Acknowledgments
The work described in this article was supported by the 
US Department of Energy™s Office of Advanced Scientific 
Computing Research. Lawrence Berkeley National Labora
-tory is supported by the DoE Office of Advanced Scientific 
Computing Research under contract DE-AC02-05CH11231. 
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory is supported by the 
DoE Office of Advanced Scientific Computing Research under 
contract DE-AC52-07NA27344. Sandia National Laborato
-ries is a multiprogram laboratory managed and operated by 
Sandia Corporation, a wholly owned subsidiary of Lockheed 
Martin Corporation, for the DoE™s National Nuclear Security 
Administration under contract DE-AC04-94AL85000. We also 
acknowledge Chris Rowen of Tensilica and Martin Deneroff 
for insightful guidance and support.
References
 1.
 P. Kogge et al., ﬁExascale Computing Study: Technology 
Challenges in Achieving Exascale Systems,ﬂ IPTO tech. 
report TR-2008-13, 2008, DARPA; rwww.cse.nd.edu/
 Reports/2008/TR-2008-13.pdf.
 2.
 K. Asanovic et al., ﬁThe Landscape of Parallel Comput
-ing Research: A View from Berkeley,ﬂ tech. report UCB/
EECS-2006-183, 2006, EECS Dept., UC Berkeley; www.eecs.
berkeley.edu/Pubs/TechRpts/2006/EECS-2006-183.pdf.
 3.
 C.L. Janssen et al., ﬁA Simulator for Large-Scale Parallel 
Architectures,ﬂ 
Int™l J. Parallel and Distributed Systems
, vol. 
1, no. 2, 2010, pp. 57-73.
 4.
 S.D. Hammond et al., ﬁWARPP: A Toolkit for Simulating 
High-Performance Parallel Scientific Codes,ﬂ 
Proc. 2nd Int™l 
Conf. Simulation Tools and Techniques 
(Simutools 09), Inst. 
 CYBERSECURITY
cyberwarrior
ON THIS BATTLEFIELD, 
 
Cyber attacks are being waged all over the world, 
 creating an unprecedented demand for trained 
 professionals to protect our country™s data assets and 
 develop cybersecurity policies. Help meet the demand 
 with a bachelor™s or master™s degree in cybersecurity. 
 Whether you plan to work for Cyber Command taking 
 down cyber terrorists or for private industry battling 
 hackers, UMUC can help you make it possible.






 






UMUC13329 Cyber 7x4.75 IEEE Computer.indd   18/24/11   10:52 AMCOVER FEATURE
COMPUTER
 30for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics, and Telecom-
munications Eng., 2009, pp. 1-19.
 5. V.S. Adve et al., ﬁCompiler-Optimized Simulation of Large-
Scale Applications on High-Performance Architectures,ﬂ 
J. 

Parallel and Distributed Computing
, vol. 62, no. 3, 2002, pp. 
393-426.
 6. R. Susukita et al., ﬁPerformance Prediction of Large-Scale 
Parallel Systems and Applications Using Macro-Level Sim-

ulation,ﬂ 
Proc. Int™l Conf. High-Performance Computing, 
Networking, Storage, and Analysis
 (SC 08), ACM, 2008, pp. 

1-9.
 7. A. Krasnov et al., ﬁRAMP BLUE: A Message-Passing Many-
core System in FPGAs,ﬂ 
Proc. Int™l Conf. Field Programmable 
Logic and Applications
 (FPL 07), 2007; http://ramp.eecs.
berkeley.edu/Publications/RAMP%20Blue%20FPL%20
2007.pdf.
 8. M. Mohiyuddin et al., ﬁA Design Methodology for Domain-
Optimized Power-Efficient Supercomputing,ﬂ 
Proc. Int™l 

Conf. High-Performance Computing, Networking, Storage, 

and Analysis 
(SC 09), ACM, 2009, pp. 1-12.
 9. D. Donofrio et al., ﬁEnergy-Efficient Computing for Ex-
treme-Scale Science,ﬂ 
Computer
, Nov. 2009, pp. 62-71, 
2009.
 10. J. Krueger et al., ﬁHardware-Software Codesign for 
Energy-Efficient Seismic Modeling,ﬂ 
Proc. Int™l Conf. High-

Performance Computing, Networking, Storage, and Analysis 

(SC 11), ACM, to be published, 2011.
John Shalf
 is a staff computer scientist at Lawrence Berke-
ley National Laboratory and leads the Advanced Technology 
Group at the National Energy Research Supercomputing 
Center. His research interests include computer architec-

ture, programming models, and frameworks for large-scale 

scientific application development. Shalf received an MS in 
electrical and computer engineering from Virginia Tech. He 
is a member of the IEEE Computer Society and the Ameri-
can Association for the Advancement of Science. Contact 

him at jshalf@lbl.gov.
Dan Quinlan
 is the leader of the ROSE project at Lawrence 
Livermore National Laboratory™s Center for Advanced Sci-
entific Computing. His research interests include program 
analysis, source-to-source compiler construction for general-
purpose languages, programming models, parallel algorithms, 

and many-core and cache-based optimizations. Quinlan 
received a PhD in computational mathematics from the Uni-
versity of Colorado. Contact him at dquinlan@llnl.gov.
Curtis Janssen
 is a Distinguished Member of the Technical 
Staff at Sandia National Laboratories. His research inter-
ests include technologies required for high-performance 
scientific computation: programming models, performance 

analysis, and machine architecture. Janssen received a PhD 
in theoretical chemistry from the University of California, 
Berkeley. Contact him at cljanss@sandia.gov.
