  Reengineering Software
 Engineering Courses    Twenty-second Americas Conference on 
Information Systems, San Diego, 2016 
1 Reengineering Software Engineering Course Structure and Deliveryto Accommodate Iterative and Agile Development Practices   Narasimha Bolloju 
The LNM Institute of Information Technology, Jaipur, India 
narsi.bolloju@lnmiit.ac.in 
Abstract 
Semester-long group project work is a frequently us
ed component of software engineering courses both 
for problem-based learning and for continuous assess
ment. In traditional software engineering courses, 
completion of such project work fits very well with 
the structured methods as the order of teaching of the 
required knowledge and practicing the skills closely fo
llow the different phases of software development.  
With the recent trend in software engineering courses,
 which places significant emphasis on iterative or 
agile methodologies, this natural order of teaching does not sync very well with the method.  The students 
Œ for example Œ are required to learn necessary knowle
dge and skills of systems development prior to the 
first iteration or sprint.  Furthermore, as the proj
ects progress through multiple iterations instructors 
have to put in significantly more effort in monitoring and providing feedback to student groups.    
The proposed approach for reengineering software en
gineering course to address the above challenges 
has three ingredients:
 a) incremental coverage of required material during the semester, b) tool support 
for collaborative modeling and development, and pr
oject management; and c) 
distributed assessment.  
The first ingredient is about redistributing the teaching material such that basic topics necessary for the 

first iteration are covered prior very early in the cour
se.  For example, concepts of use case diagram such 
as system boundary, actors and base use cases can be 
introduced prior to the first iteration rather than 
getting into types of relationships and use case descri
ptions. Also, topics such as introductions different 
types of systems development methodologies and thei
r comparison can be moved towards the end of the 
course. Use of appropriate tools is important for ef
ficient modeling by project teams and for managing 
project related activities.  Such tools make it easier 
for the instructor to monitor the progress and provide 
feedback as and when required.  The last ingredient is
 aimed at imparting analytical and critiquing skills 
by involving the students in self
-assessment and peer-assessment work 
submitted by peers, and spreading 
the assessment of project work over different sprints.  
The proposed approach is being planned for implem
entation in a software engineering undergraduate 
course with a class size of about 180 students.  Th
is course covers agile systems development practices 
following the Scrum methodology giving importance to relevant UML techniques. Each group - of size 5 to 
7 - will work on a different applicat
ion development project in three sprints.  We are in the process of 
finalizing a cloud-based case tool and an agile projec
t management tool for the project work.  We are also 
developing several detailed asse
ssment rubrics to aid self and peer-assessment by student groups. 
The proposed approach is expected to benefit both st
udents and instructors in many ways.  Students are 
more likely to understand and appreciate the new material as it builds on their prior practice rather than 
prior knowledge.  For example, having gone through some estimation and testing in the first sprint they 
will be in a better position to understand more advanced forms of testing and estimation.  Use of 

appropriate tools that offer increased visibility into
 the progress of various groups will benefit the 
instructors both in continual monitoring progress an
d in feedback provision.  Furthermore, self- and 
peer-assessment using specially designed rubrics will help 
instructors, in addition to enabling students to 
develop critical skills, in offering quality feedback to
 the teams more efficiently.  Although there will be 
some challenges in the implementation of the proposed
 approach we believe that the benefits in terms of 
improved student engagement and learning outweigh
 the costs in addressing the challenges. We are 
looking forward for feedback and suggestions from the 
conference participants on this approach and for 
possible research collaboration. 
