 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Utah State UniversityUtah State UniversityUtah State UniversityAMCIS 2006 Proceedings. Cho et al.
Applicability and Effectiveness of Scrum
Proceedings of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Acapulco, Mexico August 04
th-06th 2006
A Case Study on the Applicability and Effectiveness of
Scrum Software Development in Mission-Critical and
Large-Scale Projects
Juyun ChoUtah State University
jcho@cc.usu.edu
YongSeog Kim
Utah State University
yong.kim@usu.edu
David OlsenUtah State University
David.Olsen@business.usu.edu
ABSTRACTAgile software development methods, including Scrum, Extreme Programming (XP), and Dynamic System Development
Method (DSDM) have been mainly applied to small-scale and dynamically evolving software development projects (e.g.,

Internet and Web software development) with some success, due to their lighter and faster development life cycle.  However,

there has been very limited evidence of the effectiveness of such methods (in particular Scrum) in mission-critical and large-

scale software development projects.  This paper will present the findings of a case study on the applicability and

effectiveness of Scrum in such projects.  We first briefly summarized the findings on what aspects of Scrum were both

successfully and poorly adopted (applicability perspective) and what aspects of Scrum were key factors to improve or

deteriorate the quality of the products in terms of bug rates, development time and costs (effectiveness perspective). Based on

literature reviews of small group research, we also analyzed the effectiveness of Scrum from the perspectives of social

facilitation, social loafing, and group motivational gains.  In addition, we identified five core characteristics of Scrum and
analyzed the relationships among them.  Finally, this paper provides some suggestions to help organizations overcome
obstacles expected in adopting the Scrum method as a future development tool.
Keywords
Agile development, Scrum, autonomous team
INTRODUCTION
Recently, agile software development methods (such as Scrum, XP, and DSDM) have garnered a lot of attention from
practitioners in the software engineering industry.  This is mainly because of their potential to improve customer satisfaction,

decrease defect rates, and shorten development time along with their capability to accommodate rapidly changing

requirements (Boehm and Turner, 2004).  However, most of these methods have been primarily applied to small-scale and

relatively simple projects.  It is not clear either whether the agile methods can provide the end-users with the desired quality

in a timely manner on large-scale projects (Marrington, Hogan, and Thomas, 2005), although some researchers have reported

that large-scale and complex projects have also benefited from suitably tailored agile development methods (Bowers, May,

Melander, Baarman, and Ayoob, 2002; Cao, Mohan, Xu and Ramesh, 2004).  Further, the majority of studies on large-scale

projects have been conducted using the XP method which was initially designed for small-scale projects, with less than 10

developers and a product that would not be excessively complex (Beck, 2000).  Although the Scrum method is claimed to be

suitable for all project sizes (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002), there have been very limited studies on the applicability and
effectiveness of Scrum in large-scale projects.  Therefore, it is worthwhile to conduct research to find out whether the Scrum
method is applicable to and effective for large-scale projects.
From the perspective of applicability, we first reviewed several key elements of Scrum and explained how each element was
adopted to minimize the implementation risks.  We also measured the effectiveness of Scrum in terms of bug rates,

development time and costs.  In addition, the concepts of social facilitation (Bond, 1982; Cottrell 1972), social loafing
 3705 Cho et al.
Applicability and Effectiveness of Scrum
Proceedings of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Acapulco, Mexico August 04
th-06th 2006
(Harkins and Jackson, 1985), and group motivational gains (Balijepally, 2005) were used to explain the effectiveness of
Scrum.  We also noted the relationships among five core characteristics (autonomous team, efficient product management,

enhanced communication, iterative and continuous monitoring, and human resource management).  Finally, we addressed the

net effects of these core characteristics on the quality of the products.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Agile software development with Scrum is first introduced along with
the most common elements of Scrum, and then the research methodology is explained.  Next, we summarize the findings on
what aspects of Scrum were successfully and poorly adopted (applicability perspective) and what aspects of Scrum were key
factors to improve or deteriorate the quality of the products in terms of bug rates, development time and costs (effectiveness

perspective).  After that, we present managerial implications and the relationships among five key characteristics.  We

conclude the paper with some suggestions for possible future research.
AGILE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT WITH SCRUM
In this section, we briefly introduce the most common elements of Scrum based on the explanation from Schwaber
(Schwaber et al, 2002), who formulated the initial version of Scrum development process.  In general, the Scrum method is a

team-based lightweight process to manage software development using iterative and incremental practices.  The origin of the

term,
Scrum,
 can be found in a popular sport, rugby, in which two teams consisting of eight individuals compete against each
other.  While the term Scrum refers to the strategy used for getting an out-of-play ball back into play in rugby, it was used to

describe the process of developing products in 1986 (Takeuchi and Nonaka, 1986).  As in a rugby match, development teams

in Scrum are organized to have holistic movement, have continuous interaction among team members, and have intacting

core team members.  Among the team members,
Scrum Master
 (SM) is the person who does administrative work, such as
arranging the daily Scrum meeting and location, and removing any production impediments.  The SM also serves as a liaison
between the team and other departments.  The SM also keeps track of what is going on in daily Scrum meeting to gauge the
velocity of the team.
We also noticed that there are several important meetings in Scrum including the
daily Scrum meeting, the daily Scrum of
Scrums meeting, the sprint planning meeting,
and
 the sprint review meeting
.  The
daily Scrum meeting is a short (usually 5-
15 minutes) standup meeting in which developers talk about what has been done since last meeting, what will be done before
the next meeting, and what the impediments are to progression.  Note that each development team may have different

schedules for the daily Scrum meeting.  The daily Scrum of Scrums is a daily meeting for SMs from multiple Scrum teams.

It is important to remember that both daily meetings are supposed to be a short standup meeting.  In addition to these

informal daily meetings, two monthly, more formal meetings are used.  The sprint planning meeting is a monthly meeting

where team members divide one of the items in the product backlog into a set of small and manageable tasks, which will be

entered into the sprint backlog.  The product backlog contains a prioritized list of all product requirements determined by the
product owner.  Based on the estimated completion time for each task, the set of all tasks in the sprint backlog is determined
in such a way that they can be completed within a month.  In this way, as small tasks are completed, developers can see the

progress easily and can have a sense of accomplishment at every Scrum meeting.  The main objective of another monthly

meeting, the sprint review meeting
,is to check what has been done, what things need to be improved, and what things the
team has done well.  Typically, it takes a day to conduct the sprint review meeting and the sprint planning meeting.  An open

working environment is recommended in Scrum, because it allows people to communicate more easily, makes it easier to get

together, and facilitates self-organization.
We subjectively identified four core characteristics of Scrum as follows: autonomous team, efficient product management,
enhanced communication, and iterative and continuous monitoring.  First of all, the success of software development with

Scrum is heavily dependent on how each team is constructed.  In particular, the Scrum method allows developers to run the

team and have more ownership on the projects that they are working on.  Developers like the idea that the team decides how

to do things based on consensus, and that the team has more control over how the development is managed and completed.
Overall, the autonomous team in Scrum enables the developers to facilitate better team work and better communication that
result in products of higher quality (Hanakawa and Okura, 2004).  Note, however, that a team consisting of team members

unwilling to help each other will significantly decrease product quality and require more time and costs for development.

From the perspective of efficient product management, a product backlog and a sprint backlog are used to help developers

prioritize tasks, and a burn down chart is used to keep track of task assignment.  In Scrum, the priority of projects and task

assignment to developers was dynamically changed based on the team members™ progress on the task and business

requirements.  Another characteristic of Scrum is its iterative and continuous monitoring on the progress of the projects.  The

daily Scrum meeting and the sprint review meetings help developers monitor the progress of the projects iteratively and

continuously.  In particular, when there are high priority tasks, the daily Scrum meetings help developers stay on task and

remind them what needs to be done on a daily basis.
 3706 Cho et al.
Applicability and Effectiveness of Scrum
Proceedings of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Acapulco, Mexico August 04
th-06th 2006
RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
A case study was conducted for eight months at a company founded in 1978.  This company has been developing and
maintaining software for more than 500 clients across 36 states in USA.  In particular, this company specializes in mission-

critical and sophisticated public safety software, such as jail management, fire/emergency medical service (EMS)

management, computer-aided E911 dispatch, mobile communications, and records management systems (RMS).  These

systems must meet the highest standard of robustness and reliability because of their great impact on public safety.  For

example, due to a computer glitch in the jail management system, seven inmates were released early last year in Michigan

(Rosencrance, 2005).
The company in the current case study has a total of 30 software developers and QA personnel, which are divided into five
development teams in the software division.  To test the success of Scrum, about 25 software developers and QA personnel,
including one of authors, were invited to two 8-hour intensive training sessions, which were conducted by one of the leading

training experts in this field.  After the training, the company decided to adopt Scrum and reorganized their development

teams to fit into the Scrum method.  Each team consisted of four to seven software developers, a Quality Assurance (QA)

person, a SM, and a Product Line Manager (PLM).
Email surveys and interviews were conducted among software developers and QA personnel.  In addition, one of authors
observed how the Scrum method was adopted and implemented in the company while he was participating in a jail

management project as a software developer.  Ten developers responded to the email survey while five technical leads in

each team, a QA manager, and a PLM were interviewed.  The interviews and surveys contained three main questions: 1)

What things did and did not work for you on a project? 2) What are the most interesting and unique aspects of Scrum? and 3)

What did you learn, what would you do next time and what advices do you have for others?  These questions served us well
in giving information on the applicability and effectiveness of the Scrum method.  The results of the interviews and the email
survey are summarized and categorized in the following subsections.
APPLICABILITY AND EFFECTIVENESS OF SCRUM
The Applicability of Scrum
When Scrum was first introduced to the company, most developers were reluctant to adopt a new method because of their
experiences in a traditional development method (e.g., waterfall method).  However, they soon began to enjoy several unique
features of Scrum as they exercised various elements of Scrum.  In general, most elements of Scrum were successfully

adopted and implemented with minor modification with regard to a meeting schedule and an open working environment.
The company first tried to keep the size of the Scrum team as small as possible because small teams can be more flexible and
adaptable in defining and applying an appropriate variant of Scrum (Rising and Janoff, 2000).  In terms of the daily Scrum

meeting, a couple of teams had a standup meeting and the rest of teams had a seated meeting.  However, the principal of short

daily Scrum meeting time was well observed (less than 15 minutes) by all teams.  Several developers claimed that it was not

necessary to have Scrum meeting everyday when there were no specific agenda to discuss, but the majority of developers and

QA personnel enjoyed this daily-based meeting.  The company could not invite clients to this meeting because there are so

many clients scattered in the United States.  Instead, the PLMs visited the clients to show the progress of the products and to

obtain feedback from the clients.  For those clients with whom the PLMs could not visit, a web conference which enables up
to 20 clients to watch online demonstration was used.  The PLMs spent about a half of their work time talking with the clients
using phone, email, or web demos as well as onsite visits.  In addition, the company hosted users™ conference once a year to

get feedback from the clients.  In this conference, clients voted for or against a new direction of application development.

The feedback from the clients was discussed and reflected on the product backlog.
The company also appointed a SM for each one of five development teams.  Due to the company™s belief that the main role
of SMs is to provide the administrative services for the team members, the company appointed all SMs from non-technical

persons.  A group of SMs held daily Scrum of Scrums meeting everyday for 5 to 15 minutes with company™s vice president

of software development division.  The company also held a
sprint review meeting called a ﬁproducts fairﬂ.  The products fair
was unique in the sense that developers in all teams, QA personnel, and people in other departments (sales, marketing,

customer support) were strongly encouraged to attend. The company expected that, given an opportunity to show their

accomplishments during the sprint, developers would diligently work to make sure that they are currently on the pre-

determined development schedule with appropriate levels of intermediate deliverables of the products.  Note that sprint
planning and review meetings are usually led by the SM or the PLM, while the PLM created the product backlog and
communicated with clients to reflect their opinions on the product backlog.  In order to improve the communication and
 3707 Cho et al.
Applicability and Effectiveness of Scrum
Proceedings of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Acapulco, Mexico August 04
th-06th 2006
interactions among team members, the company relocated all the scattered developers in the same team into the same place
where two developers shared cubicles.
From the perspective of applicability, a small and manageable team, an efficient daily and monthly meeting, a competent SM,
customer feedback, and a productive working environment are the key factors that should be adopted appropriately for the

success of Scrum.
The Effectiveness of Scrum
In the first stage (first three months) of the projects, the Scrum method was not very effective in terms of bug rates.  For
example, during the first three months, the QA department has found almost twice as many bugs since the company switched

to the Scrum method.  They attributed this finding to the complexity of the project.  As the size and complexity of the
application grew, the dependencies and interconnections among tasks in the application increased.  However, the developers
were not able to fully consider all the dependencies and interconnections among modules because of their myopic planning

and design in each sprint planning meeting (Elssamadisy and Schalliol, 2002).  Through personal interviews with developers,

we also found that when developers had to complete a set of tasks determined in each sprint planning meeting, they had a

tendency to complete tasks in a quick and dirty way rather than to think of how each task will be flexible enough for future

needs.  Further, the developers often found that their monthly work schedules to produce intermediate deliverables were

optimistically estimated.  As a result, they failed to finish all the tasks in the sprint backlog.  After the company supported

and encouraged the developers to spend more time considering the dependencies and interconnections among modules, and

the flexibility of the code, bug rates gradually decreased to the normal rates.  However, we did not see evidence that the

Scrum method lowered normal bug rates.
In terms of development times and costs, Scrum was not very effective during the first two months after the company
switched to the Scrum method.  We attributed this finding to the composition of development teams.  The teams were
reorganized without considering the knowledge and skills of the developers.  Therefore, some team members had to learn

business logic (how the application works in a specific field) that they were not familiar with, and others needed to learn new

development tools and programming languages.  As a result, it took a longer time and more costs.  However, once they

became familiar with business logic and mastered new development tools and programming languages, development time

and costs were reduced.
In order to further improve the effectiveness of the Scrum method, the company used two different management tools:
Microsoft Excel and VersionOne.  Microsoft Excel was first used, but was replaced by VersionOne because of its limited

capability.  The VersionOne is a web-based commercial management tool that provids various functionalities such as

simplifying project planning and management, enhancing business and project adaptability, improving project visibility, and

increasing project predictability and confidence.
Social Facilitation, Social Loafing, and Group Motivational Gain
Social facilitation indicates that in the presence of other people, performance is facilitated on a simple task, whereas
performance on a difficult task is hampered (Aiello and Douthitt, 2001).  Social loafing is the tendency to take advantage of
others™ efforts when working in groups, while group motivational gain can be obtained when people increase their effort to
help co-workers whose performance is poor.
Social facilitation effect and group motivational gains were observed as factors that reduced development times and lowered
bug rates.  In particular, evaluation apprehension (Bond, 1982; Cottrell, 1972) was observed when the company invited all of

developers, QA personnel, and people in other departments (sales, marketing, customer support) to the sprint review meeting.

Because in the sprint review meeting, all of developers had a chance to show what they had done in an interdepartmental

environment, they were concerned about how they were evaluated by these people.  Group motivational gains were also

obtained as a social compensation effect (Williams, Harkins and Karau, 1991) when a team member helped other team

members who were not familiar with new development tools or programming languages.  At the same time, the company did

not have ways to evaluate individual performance, leaving room for individuals seeking to free-ride.  This social loafing

should be eliminated by making individuals™ contributions verifiable (Balijepally, 2005) to offset negative impacts on
development time and costs.
THE MANAGERIAL IMPLICATIONS
In this section, we would like to address relationships among key characteristics of the Scrum method and managerial
insights to maximize the benefits of software development based on Scrum. In addition to four core characteristics
 3708 Cho et al.
Applicability and Effectiveness of Scrum
Proceedings of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Acapulco, Mexico August 04
th-06th 2006
(autonomous team, efficient product management, enhanced communication, and iterative and continuous monitoring) that
we identified in a previous section, we include human resource management to reflect the importance of team composition on

the success of software development.  In terms of human resource management, the company should consider what would be

an optimal allocation of limited number of developers.  It was obvious that it took more development time and cost when new

team members did not interact well with other members of the team (Williams and Kessler, 2000) or if team members needed

more training to complete their tasks.  The company should also carefully examine the role of a QA person in each Scrum
team.  Currently, each Scrum team has a QA person to test the codes, relieving the burden of all developers from testing their
own codes.  However, this causes a new problem: a QA person could test only parts of modules that the developers finished

by the end of the sprint and, as a result, another QA test must be scheduled in the following sprint.  Note that QA personnel

are always behind in the current sprint because they find bugs in the code that developers threw together in the previous

sprint.  Assigning an appropriate SM is also important for the success of the Scrum method.  Sometimes team impediments

were not taken care of, and the impediments slowed or even stopped the progress of the sprint.  If developers need to do other

projects asked by other departments they cannot focus on the sprint backlog items and Scrum will not work best.  In

conclusion, human resource management can directly affect the performance of Scrum teams.
The autonomous nature of the Scrum team allows the developers to have more control over how and when development is
completed, depending on the consensus of the team, and have more ownership of the projects that they are working on.

Therefore, it is tempting to state that an autonomous Scrum team is ideal for efficient product management.  Note, however,

that developers are not often able to fully consider all the dependencies and interconnections among modules, resulting in
inconsistent product outputs across team members within the same Scrum team.  Due to the limited communication among
different Scrum teams, it is difficult to keep the output of product consistent across teams.  For example, several teams may

simultaneously work on ﬁlook and feelﬂ design that should be implemented by a designated team (e.g., an architecture team).

This implies that there should be a person (possibly a SM in each team) who is responsible for checking consistency of

products across Scrum teams (Marrington et al, 2005).  Therefore, we found that the inconsistency and duplicates across

different teams could negatively affect the efficient product management.
It is clear that the autonomous nature of the Scrum team substantially increases the communication among developers within
a team through daily and monthly Scrum meetings.  In particular, the daily Scrum meeting is a good time for team members

to understand what other members are working on and identify obstacles to overcome.  For example, if a developer would

say, ﬁI am stuck with a certain problemﬂ, other developers would typically respond, ﬁI can help with that.  Let™s get together

after the meetingﬂ, or, ﬁI don™t know the solution for that but I can look at your problem after the meetingﬂ. Through good
communication, team members are able to refine the goal for each sprint and improve the quality of products (Hanakawa et
al, 2004).  However, it is noted that while sharing cubicles with a coworker can improve the opportunity to communicate

among team members, it would be possible for developers to be constantly distracted by cubicle partners who are often

having conversations with other coworkers.  An interesting field study shows that teams are more productive when their

members work independently (Parrish, Smith, Hale, and Hale, 2004).  Further, it may not be a good idea to have developers

run the team without having a team leader (Marrington at el, 2005) to make a right decision in a timely manner when team

members do not know which way to take among several alternatives.
The autonomous nature of the Scrum team also creates an incentive to monitor the progress of the projects iteratively and
continuously because it is the developers who create and update the priority of tasks through interactions and discussions in

the daily Scrum meeting and the sprint review meeting.  Further, the various features of the management tool for these

meetings are also beneficial in the sense that they help developers visually remember what needs to be done on a daily basis.

Note also that the iterative and continuous monitoring of the projects is tightly coupled with efficient product management.
For example, daily scrum meetings can be considered a good way to both continuously monitor the projects and efficiently
manage the quality of the product.
We finally summarized our findings in Figure 1 to show the interactions among the five factors and their directions using
arrow heads. The plus and minus signs indicate positive and negative influences respectively.  We found that these five

factors should interact positively when Scrum was applied to large-scale and mission-critical projects.
 3709 Cho et al.
Applicability and Effectiveness of Scrum
Proceedings of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Acapulco, Mexico August 04
th-06th 2006
Figure 1. Interactions among the five factors.
CONCLUSION
The need to develop a robust and reliable high quality software product within a short period of time has forced many
companies to adopt agile software development methods; most companies applied such methods mainly to small-scale and
relatively simple projects with some success.  However, it is questionable whether such methods could bring the same
success when they are applied to mission-critical and large-scale projects. This paper presents findings from a case study on

the applicability and effectiveness of Scrum on mission-critical and large-scale projects.  We summarized the findings as

follows:
·Compose teams after considering each team members™ knowledge and skills on the projects that they will work on.

Without the right mix of team members, Scrum process becomes much slower and more expensive.
·Designate a SM who can not only remove administrative and technical impediments of the team but can also

manage the overall product consistency across teams.
·Allocate enough time for planning and design to efficiently manage large and complex projects.
·Tailor the Scrum method depending on the nature of applications and the development environment because t
hereis no single software development process that is the best approach for every project (Little, Greene,
Phillips, Pilger, and Poldervaart, 2004;
Huo, Verner, Zhu, and Baber, 2004
).The lessons learned in this case study could be valuable to other organizations that are already using Scrum or planning to
implement it in the future.  This case study was conducted on on-going projects so it would be worthwhile to examine how

much development time and costs are needed to fix the bugs reported by the clients after the final products are delivered.

Due to numerous clients scattered across the nation, communication with customer was done through PLMs and this was

quite limited.  Better models should be studied for this situation to get feedback from clients more efficiently.  We also

briefly examined social facilitation, social loafing, and group motivational gain.  We think further studies on the effectiveness

of Scrum are needed with this viewpoint.  Finally, we hope further case studies will be published on the applicability and

effectiveness of Scrum on mission-critical and large-scale projects to find the common success factors in adopting the Scrum

method.
 3710 Cho et al.
Applicability and Effectiveness of Scrum
Proceedings of the Twelfth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Acapulco, Mexico August 04
th-06th 2006
REFERENCES1.Aiello, J. R., and Douthitt, E. A. (2001) Social facilitation from Triplett to electronic performance monitoring,
Group
Dynamics
, 5, 3, 163-180.
2.Beck, K. (2000) Extreme programming explained: Embrace change, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
3.Balijepally, V. (2005) Collaborative software development in agile methodologies Œ Perspectives from small group
research,
Proceedings of the Eleventh Americas Conference on Information
Systems, August 11-14, Omaha, NE, USA.
4.Boehm, B. and Turner, R. (2004) Balancing agility and discipline: Evaluating and integrating agile and plan-driven

methods,
Proceedings of the 26
th International Conference on Software Engineering,
718-719.
5.Bond, C.F. (1982) Social facilitation: A self-presentational view,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
 42,
1042-1050.
6.Bowers, J., May J., Melander, E., Baarman, M. and Ayoob A. (2002) Tailoring XP for large systems mission critical

software development,
Proceedings of the Second XP Universe and First Agile Universe Conference on Extreme
Programming and Agile Methods Œ XP/Agile Universe 2002,
August, 100-111.
7.Cao, L., Mohan, K., Xu, P. and Ramesh B. (2004) How extreme does extreme programming have to be? Adapting XP

practices to large-scale projects,
Proceedings of the 37
th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences
(HICSS™04),
 May 15-21, Hawaii.
8.Cottrell, N.B. (1972) Social facilitation, in C.G. McClintock (Ed.)
Experimental Social Psychology,
Holt, New York,
185-236.
9.Elssamadisy, A. and Schalliol, G. (2002) Recognizing and responding to ﬁbad smellsﬂ in extreme programming,

Proceedings of the 24
thInternational Conference on Software Engineering
, May 19-25, Orlando, FL, USA, ACM Press,
617-622.
10.Hanakawa, N. and Okura K. (2004) A project management support tool using communication for agile software

development,
Proceedings of the 11
th Asia-Pacific Software Engineering Conference (APSEC™04), 316-323
11.Harkins, S.G. and Jackson, J.M. (1985) The role of evaluation in elimination social loafing.
Personality and Social
Psychology
, 11, 575-584.
12.Huo, M., Verner, J., Zhu, L. and Babar, M. (2004) Software quality and agile methods,
Proceedings of the 28
th Annual
International Computer Software and Applications Conference (COMPSAC™04)
, v01, IEEE Computer Society, 520-525.
13.Little, T., Greene, F., Phillips, T., Pilger, R. and Poldervaart, R. (2004) Adaptive agility,
Proceedings of the Agile
Development Conference (ADC™04),
June 22-26, 63-70.
14.Marrington, A., Hogan, J. M. and Thomas, R (2005) Quality assurance in a student-based agile software engineering

process,
Proceedings of the 2005 Australian Software Engineering Conference (ASWEC™05)
, March 29-April 1,
Australia, 324-331.
15.Parrish, A., Smith, R., Hale, D. and Hale, J. (2004) A field study of developer pairs: Productivity impacts and

Implications,
IEEE Software,
 21, 5, 76-79
16.Rising, L. and Janoff, N. (2000) The scrum software development process for small teams,
IEEE Software
, 17, 4, 26-32.
17.Rosencrance, L. (2005) Computer glitch gives seven Mich. Prisoners early,

http://www.computerworld.com/governmenttopics/government/story/0,10801,105707,00.html.
18.Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M. (2002) Agile software development with Scrum, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
19.Takeuchi, H. and Nonaka, I. (1986) The new new product development game,
Harvard Business Review
, 64, 1, 137-146.
20.Williams, K.D., Harkins, S.G., and Karau, S.J. (1991) Social loafing and social compensation: The effects of

expectations of co-worker performance,
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology,
61, 4, 570-581.
21.Williams, L and Kessler R. (2000) All I really need to know about pair programming I learned in kindergarten,

Communication of the ACM,
43, 5, 108-114.
 3711