 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)National University of Ireland GalwayNational University of Ireland, GalwayNational University of Ireland GalwayNational University of IrelandNational University of Ireland GalwayAMCIS 2011 Proceedings - All Submissions.  Agile Software Development: A Case for Adequate Dec
ision Support Tools 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 1 
Agile Software Development: A Case for Adequate 
Decision Support Tools 
 Maciej Dabrowski 
Digital Enterprise Research Institute 
National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland 
maciej.dabrowski@deri.org 
Thomas Acton 
Business Information Systems Group 
J.E. Cairnes School of Business & Economics 
National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland 
thomas.acton@nuigalway.ie 
Meghann Drury 
Business Information Systems Group 
J.E. Cairnes School of Business & Economics 
National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland 
meghann.drury@nuigalway.ie
 Kieran Conboy 
Business Information Systems Group 
J.E. Cairnes School of Business & Economics 
National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland 
kieran.conboy@nuigalway.ie 
Anna Dabrowska 
Digital Enterprise Research Institute 
National University of Ireland Galway, Ireland 
anna.dabrowska@deri.org 
  ABSTRACT 

While there are many purported benefits of agile so
ftware development, use of these methods often has 
a significant impact 
on project coordination and information management,
 particularly where large, distributed teams are co
ncerned. Effective 
coordination requires easily accessible, preferably
 structured information that is typically unavailab
le. In this paper we 
present a comprehensive argument for the need to de
velop supporting tools for extracting information i
n agile projects. Such 
tools may improve the coordination, information man
agement and tracking processes in agile teams with 
automated 
highlighting of salient issues arising from project
 meetings using documentation generated automatical
ly from unstructured 
information, such as Instant Messaging (IM) history
 or transcribed audio records of team meetings. We 
discuss the relevance 
of our methodology for large-scale, distributed, mu
lti-project agile teams and present guidelines for 
designing information 
systems to support such tasks. We present a descrip
tion and evaluation of the proposed information ext
raction method using 
an actual dataset. 

Keywords  

Agile Development, Information Extraction, Decision
 Support Systems 
INTRODUCTION 

The last 10 years or so has seen the emergence of a
 number of information systems development (ISD) me
thods, collectively 
been labelled as agile. According to Tan and Teo (2
007), ﬁagile techniques are fast becoming the adopt
ed methodology 
commerciallyﬂ. A survey of 2,570 participants, show
s that more than 22% of the companies have adopted 
agile processes 
(Schwaber and Fichera, 2005).  

However, in relation to decision making in agile de
velopment, we argue that there are a number of weak
nesses in current 
agile method research (Conboy, 2009; Conboy et al.,
 2009). Firstly because agile development relies on
 tacit communication 
with little documentation (Fowler and Highsmith, 20
01), capturing task-specific meeting minutes and tr
acking issues is much 
more difficult, especially in large teams,  and is 
something that makes traditional data gathering app
roaches challenging or 
obsolete. This may be exacerbated in an agile setti
ng where political, cultural and other people issue
s are heightened (Conboy 
et al., 2010).  

Secondly, in an agile development environment, the 
project manager™s role as a decision-maker is great
ly reduced, and is 
more akin to that of a facilitator or coordinator (
Alleman, 2002; Nerur et al., 2005). The development
 team makes most of the 
decisions, creating a ﬁpluralist decision-making en
vironmentﬂ (Nerur et al., 2005) due to the diverse 
backgrounds, attitudes, 
goals, and cognitive dispositions of the team membe
rs (Chin, 2004; Cockburn and Highsmith, 2001; Highs
mith, 2004). This 
  Agile Software Development: A Case for Adequate Dec
ision Support Tools 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 2 
may give rise to additional complexities and decisi
on-making may not be as well structured and recorde
d. This is even more 
important to the individuals on the project given t
hat the team shares accountability. 
Thirdly, in agile projects the organisation or team
 structure is ﬁorganic and flexibleﬂ, as opposed to
 traditional structures 
which are ﬁmechanistic, bureaucratic and formalized
ﬂ (Nerur et al., 2005). Further, developers are not
 confined to a specific 
specialised role and are encouraged to self-organis
e, interchanging and blending roles (Nerur et al., 
2005) and involved in 
decisions that may fall outside their traditional s
kill areas. While this fluidity brings many benefit
s, the decision-making 
process may also have to be more flexible and less 
structured, increasing the need for appropriate sup
port. 
Fourthly, while small teams are typically suited to
 co-location, face-to-face team meetings and verbal
 project updates, this 
becomes increasingly difficult to coordinate with l
arge teams (Boehm, 2002; Bowers et al., 2002). Addi
tionally, using agile 
methods with distributed teams and/or multi-project
 agile teams increases the coordination issues of m
eetings and tracking 
and reporting tools (Sutherland et al., 2007). As t
he scalability of agile methods to large-scale, dis
tributed and multi-project 
teams is increasing due to the business value of di
stribution (Woodward et al., 2009), it is necessary
 to develop new decision 
aids to capture and track information to coordinate
 such teams. Distributed teams also often have cult
ural and language 
barriers to overcome (Sutherland et al., 2009; Suth
erland et al., 2007). However, for teams that have 
members speaking 
multiple languages, a decision aid that tracks meet
ing summaries and issues can clarify project update
s and issues after 
meetings when team members can read meeting summari
es. Finally, the use of agile methods has been ques
tioned in critical 
systems development where an auditable trail of doc
umentation for decisions is required (Drobka et al.
, 2004).  
To improve the coordination for decision-making in 
larger agile teams, we propose developing a decisio
n aid tool that can a) 
document meetings, b) track information over time f
or agile teams, and c) extract context-specific ite
ms of importance 
discussed at meetings and requiring action. Ultimat
ely, a tool that tracks meeting minutes and custome
r user stories would be 
beneficial to drill down to the tasks required for 
each user story, including the developer and time t
o complete the task. 
Samples of code that have been used for similar cus
tomer stories and customer prioritization votes cou
ld also be tracked. 
Ideally, a tool that scans all meeting minutes to i
nclude audio and/or video segments of team discussi
on for each customer 
story would have immense value for agile developmen
t teams. 
As a first step to building such a tool, we propose
 the development of a system capable of intelligent
ly extracting and 
highlighting topical items talked about at meetings
. The system would examine unstructured records of 
agile team meetings 
(e.g. meeting notes or IM history) to support agile
 processes. In time, we see this tool as a project 
management system that 
can track various project data and collate selected
 facts into management reports to improve the track
ing of agile teams while 
still maintaining limited project documentation. 

This work in progress paper presents a methodology 
for supporting meeting coordination and issue track
ing in agile project 
teams using information extracted from various type
s of recordings of team meetings. We discuss an app
roach for 
documenting project meetings using information extr
action techniques applied to unstructured content (
e.g. Instant 
Messaging (IM) history or transcripts of audio stre
ams recorded during team meeting) in planning, stan
d-up and retrospective 
meeting contexts. While this methodology can be app
lied to any type of software development team, we f
ocus on agile teams 
because these teams specifically value software ove
r documentation (Fowler and Highsmith, 2001) which 
was traditionally 
used as a vital decision aid. Our approach can mini
mise the effort necessary for documenting project p
rogress, and enable 
agile team members to summarise team meetings and t
rack tasks and recurring issues over time using str
uctured information.  
However, in this paper we also focus on how this ap
proach can facilitate decision-making in agile team
s, by extracting salient 
issues requiring addressing and decision using inte
lligent analysis of automated meeting transcripts. 
First we present the motivation of our study. We th
en describe the theoretical background for large-sc
ale team meeting 
coordination in agile IS projects, explain the rese
arch approach and discuss the empirical cases of ou
r study. 
DOCUMENTING MEETING ACTIVITIES 

Meetings are a common medium for teams to coordinat
e and to share understanding about their work (Minn
eman et al., 
1995). They involve various team activities oriente
d on exchanging information (e.g. discussions, pres
entations). As such, 
they undoubtedly are a rich source of information i
n a variety of forms (notes, audio/video records, s
ensor data) that, when 
properly organized, facilitates project management 
(Geyer et al., 2005). Best practices highlight the 
importance of meeting 
records that capture the agenda, the decision made 
during the meeting, the action items assigned and t
he issues that need to 
be solved later, with a variety of forms (see Figur
e 1). Such records may improve meeting efficiency b
y decreasing the effort 
necessary to revisit the conclusions and provide be
tter understanding of the decisions made.  
The importance of meeting documentation is acknowle
dged (Khan, 1992; Whittaker et al., 1994) showing t
hat at least 33% 
of team members review their notes regularly, but 7
0% reported that ﬁthere had been occasions when the
y wished they had 
  Agile Software Development: A Case for Adequate Dec
ision Support Tools 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 3 
written better notesﬂ (Geyer et al., 2005). Finally
, documenting meetings (e.g. note taking) not only 
requires additional effort 
from participants but also may become a distraction
 (Geyer et al., 2005).  
  Figure 1. Generic types of meeting documentation 
 
Although multi-modal (e.g. integrating notes and au
dio) meeting support systems are emerging (Belkhati
r, 2010; Chiu et al., 
2000), due to information richness, maturity of exi
sting speech-to-text solutions (Belkhatir, 2010), a
nd minimum technical 
requirements for recording (Yu and Nakamura, 2010) 
- in this work we concentrate on audio records. 
From Meeting Records to a Decision Aid 

Although there is significant value in a system cap
able of automatically generating documentation from
 project meetings, its 
value may centrally rest in facilitating the tracki
ng and history of decisions and developments throug
h the course of the 
project. Of more 
instant
 value to teams may be a system not only capable of
 capturing audio speech as text, but capable of 
analysing that text to identify the main issues (or
 topics) discussed by the team, assess whether disc
ussion on such items 
identified them as requiring action, and displayed 
this analysis to the team in a manner that visually
 ranked items discussed 
more frequently or with more emphasis as those poss
ibly needing immediate attention.  Such a system wo
uld provide a 
valuable decision aid for the agile development tea
m, and one that could be useful at each meeting. 
Decision aids are support systems designed to enhan
ce decision making (Thomassin Singh, 1998).  They e
ncompass the 
application of ﬁavailable and computer-based techno
logy to help improve the effectivenessﬂ of decision
 making (Keen and 
Scott Morton, 1978). The decision effort expended o
r required to be expended in decision-making is a c
entral and important 
factor influencing decision behaviour (Payne, 1982;
 Todd and Benbasat, 1991; Todd and Benbasat, 1993).
  Much of the 
literature on decision support systems (DSS) sugges
ts that decision aids, which minimise decision effo
rt, are of particular 
value (Todd and Benbasat, 1991; Todd and Benbasat, 
1993).  Todd and Benbasat (1993) argue that a DSS c
an be used as a 
replacement for decision maker effort rather, allow
ing a decision maker to ﬁcomplete the decision task
 with less effortﬂ.  
Indeed, decision makers ﬁtypically trade off the am
ount of effort to be spent in making a decision and
 the benefits they expect 
as a consequence of effort expenditureﬂ (Todd and B
enbasat, 1992).  
Automation of salient item extraction from meetings
 and the highlighting of those necessitating furthe
r action (such as 
assignment to persons for unit work completion) can
 help and reduce the otherwise manual effort associ
ated with task 
allocation stemming from such meetings.  As such, o
ur approach provides an effort-reducing team decisi
on aid.  How salient 
items are presented is important (Noyes and Garland
, 2003), and may include the visual identification 
of items most 
frequently mentioned, revisited, or stressed at mee
tings. It follows that intelligent information extr
action and display provides 
a decision aid that may facilitate teams with tasks
 directly related to prioritisation.  In the follow
ing section we expand further 
on how our approach first captures meeting audio as
 text, then intelligently extracts topics from this
 text, and how it identifies 
and displays these topics for consideration by the 
team. 
  Agile Software Development: A Case for Adequate Dec
ision Support Tools 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 4 
Smart Meeting Systems Using Audio Records  

Creation of meeting documentation requires signific
ant effort. Many techniques of automatic speech rec
ognition (ASR) have 
been developed to transcribe audio records (Gütl, 2
008; Yu and Nakamura, 2010). The key challenge for 
ASR Œ conversion 
of input audio (speech) to written text Œ is not a 
trivial task. In addition, free text Œ output of AS
R methods Œ is difficult to 
manage, search and process. As such, additional ste
ps, for example 
text summarization
, are required to improve the quality of 
information extraction
 methods that enable transformation of the unstruct
ured content to structured forms that can more 
naturally support agile team activities. Generic ta
sks for the extraction of relevant information from
 text include 
Sentiment 
Analysis
 and 
Topic Extraction
. Topic extraction methods mine and identify topics
 mentioned in the text and their relevant 
opinions (that is, the context in which they are di
scussed), which are then analysed in terms of artic
ulated sentiment about 
these topics (
Sentiment Analysis
). For example, ﬁCode unit 4 will take 3 days to do
, which we don™t haveﬂ ﬁYes, I agreeﬂ 
would identify Code Unit 4 as a topic, but with an 
overall negative sentiment. 
In the following sections we discuss the process of
 generation of structured content from audio meetin
g records in more 
detail. First we give an overview of methodologies 
and tasks for 
Speech Recognition
. We then discuss the processes of 
Topic 
mining 
and 
Sentiment Analysis
 of text generated from meeting records using infor
mation extraction methods.  
Speech Recognition and Text Summarisation 

Automatic speech recognition is a well-established 
research problem. Rabiner (1994) describes three cl
asses of speech 
recognition applications: isolated word recognition
 systems (pauses between the words), highly constra
ined systems using 
continuous speech but with small vocabulary and lim
ited to specific phrases, and finally, large vocabu
lary continuous speech 
recognition (LVCSR) systems Œ widely applicable but
 also the most challenging to implement. In the pas
t years many 
different methods have been developed to address th
ese tasks including: hidden Markov models (MMH) (Ra
biner and Juang, 
1993) and phoneme (sub-word) based approaches (Creu
tz et al., 2007). Summary of the literature (Yu and
 Nakamura, 2010) 
reveals the following generic tasks that an ASR sys
tem must support. First, the speech record is trans
formed using signal-
processing techniques so that the distinct sounds a
nd words are easier to distinguish (
audio
 pre-processing
) (see Figure 2). 
Further, the voice record is analyzed using statist
ical methods and training data to match phonemes in
 the audio stream 
(Acoustic modelling
). The L
anguage model
 provides possible combinations of phonemes (a gram
mar) and word sequences 
according to the language used. These two models ar
e used together to decode the audio stream into tex
t.  Quality speech 
recognition systems are capable of handling backgro
und noise (Pearce and Hirsch, 2000). Also, due to t
he characteristics of 
English language (morphological simplicity), its mo
delling has provided more than satisfactory results
 (Creutz et al., 2007). 
  Figure 2. A generic architecture for supporting dec
ision-making with information 
extracted from meetings audio records. 
 
Meeting summarisation results can be presented by e
ither text or speech (Furui et al., 2004). Text sum
marisations are 
considered superior as they can be easily looked th
rough, interesting fragments can be easily extracte
d (not a case for 
audio/video records that require annotation (Belkha
tir, 2010)), ﬁinformation extraction and retrieval 
techniques can be easily 
appliedﬂ to text documents (Furui et al., 2004), an
d they provide an ancillary benefit of producing tr
aceable meeting 
documentation. Further, state-of-the-art research (
Furui et al., 2004; Stolcke et al., 2006) has provi
ded a number of fairly 
accurate methods for text summarisation. On the oth
er hand, audio and video records require content in
dexing for easy access 
  Agile Software Development: A Case for Adequate Dec
ision Support Tools 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 5 
to original parts of the data (e.g. combining elect
ronic note taking with audio for better indexing (S
tifelman et al., 2001)). 
Capturing and combining audio and video records of 
meetings have recently gained interest (Belkhatir, 
2010), especially with 
the development of multimedia conference rooms (Chi
u et al., 2000). Furthermore, in the recent years, 
context-aware topic-
sentiment analysis received attention in the resear
ch (Mei et al., 2007). 
In the next section we describe the information sys
tem we developed to extract information from meetin
g transcripts that can 
be created using the above methods 

Information Extraction 

There are three generic tasks that topic mining sys
tems needs to fulfil: 
identification of the interesting concepts
, 
discovery of 
their descriptions (opinion phrases)
, and 
sentiment analysis 
(Popescu and Etzioni, 2005). In our method, the fir
st of these 
tasks is performed using domain knowledge for a giv
en topic of interest. The set of concepts interesti
ng to a particular 
decision maker are captured in a hierarchy (concept
 hierarchy). Every concept is associated with a col
lection of labels (i.e. 
synonyms). Therefore, our approach is flexible and 
can be used for extraction of any topic-related opi
nions. After 
identification of the relevant concepts in the text
, their descriptions (ﬁopinion phrasesﬂ) need to be
 recognised. To extract 
concept descriptions and to select sentences contai
ning potential opinions, we used a rule-based metho
d similar to Aciar et al. 
(2007). Using a set of domain-independent rules we 
extracted descriptions of relevant concepts as chun
ks of text. Overall, the 
method we used is similar to approaches based on wo
rd proximity windows (Hu and Liu, 2004), involving 
the computation 
of syntactic dependencies between words (Popescu an
d Etzioni, 2005). However, our approach accommodate
s language 
structure, in contrast to Hu and Liu™s approach (20
04), and is more efficient than that proposed by Po
pescu and Etzioni 
(2005). A more detailed description of the discusse
d framework for extraction of information from unst
ructured text can be 
found in (Dabrowski et al., 2010). 

    Agile Software Development: A Case for Adequate Dec
ision Support Tools 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 6 
Figure 3. A practical example of issue tracking and
 summarisation across meetings. 
Example 

We now describe a scenario demonstrating the suppor
t for agile project management provided by our deci
sion aid (see Figure 
3). Imagine you are a member of a distributed, mult
inational large agile team that is working on a del
ivery of an Information 
System. During every meeting the team consisting of
 many actors, including A1 and A2, discusses curren
t progress, tasks 
that will need to be addressed in the near future a
nd occurring issues. Dialogs (e.g. A1.1, A1.2, A2) 
are recorded live for 
further analysis without additional effort from mee
ting participants. During the first of a series of 
meetings, a participant (A1) 
mentions his concern on a task (
Issue1
) related to 
Module2.
 This issue is than again mentioned during the seco
nd meeting 
(Meeting 2
). Both actors (A1 and A2) provide their concerns a
bout the progress of the task reported (ﬁarchitectu
re of 
Module2
ﬂ). Moreover, A2 reports on another issue (
Issue2
) related to the same task.  Meeting audio records 
are converted to 
text transcripts by the 
Speech Recognition
 module and summarised by the 
Text Summarisation
 module (see Figure 3). 
Further, summarised dialogs are examined for releva
nt information (e.g. reported issues and their cont
ext). For every issue, 
the system provides a description and its sentiment
 (e.g. ﬁpositiveﬂ, ﬁnegativeﬂ). These results are l
ater summarised into a 
concise tabular representation (other presentation 
formats may be provided). When preparing for the ne
xt meeting (or when 
dealing with tasks) team members will be able to co
nsult a short, structured list of issues that were 
mentioned during the 
meeting together with participant™s sentiment repre
senting the progress (see Figure 3). Thus, tracking
 recurring issues or 
actors reporting them (e.g. particular customer) is
 possible with minimum additional effort required. 
Evaluation 

Spontaneous speech is often ill-formed, includes re
petitions and misspellings (Furui et al., 2004). On
 the other hand, product 
reviews are very informal, typically grammatically 
incorrect and misspelled paragraphs of text that cl
osely resemble 
characteristics of a meeting transcript. Evaluating
 our approach required a large amount of input data
: as an initial step we 
designed a simulation using a dataset consisting of
 product reviews we gathered from 
whatcar.com
. Every sentence in the set 
(203 reviews (1233 sentences) was annotated by a gr
oup of human annotators for comparison with system 
annotations, 
following similar studies in the domain (Hu and Liu
, 2004). Annotations consisted of a list of explici
t and implicit concepts, 
their descriptions and overall opinion sentiment us
ing a 5-step scale: -2 (very negative), to 2 (very 
positive). Annotators 
negotiated inconsistencies to avoid a potential neg
ative impact of subjective opinion on polarity and 
strength of the 
sentiment. We evaluated the performance of our meth
od with precision and recall metrics for our test d
ataset and accuracy of 
the sentiment analysis technique (see Table 1). 
Precision
 refers to the fraction of topics/issues that were 
correctly identified 
(i.e. is the team member actually mentioning Issue 
A1.1 in his IM?) and 
recall 
represents the percentage of successfully 
identified issues that were actually present in the
 text. 
Accuracy
 of Sentiment Analysis represents the fraction of c
orrectly 
identified sentiment of an agile team member toward
s the identified issue.  
 Topic mining Sentiment Analysis 
Precision Recall Accuracy 
76.3% 77.5% 82.6% 
Table 1. Opinion Mining evaluation results 
 
Overall, the results indicate that our prototype wa
s able to correctly identify four out of five issue
s and the expressed 
sentiment. We note that performance of the presente
d method can be further improved if additional step
s (e.g. text 
preprocessing for misspellings) are utilized.  

DISCUSSION 

Our approach supports decision-making in providing 
a decision aid that enables agile teams to examine 
salient issues 
discussed at meetings.  Such an aid can facilitate 
prioritisation of tasks, identify problem issues, a
nd highlight topics 
requiring address by team members.  The system prop
osed is passive, in that it does not require team e
ffort, and automates 
both the capturing and coding of meeting audio as t
ext, as well as the analysis and presentation of su
mmary issues.  The 
system also facilitates tracking of recurring issue
s, in that it can analyse meetings cognisant of pre
vious analyses, and 
therefore offer a tracking facility for unresolved 
issues. Further, the system provides automated docu
mentation for agile 
teams. 
  Agile Software Development: A Case for Adequate Dec
ision Support Tools 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 7 
In this paper we focused on the aspects of the syst
em concerned with extracting meaning from unstructu
red meeting 
documentation (e.g. transcripts of audio records), 
and so we presented summary results of a simulation
 focusing on these 
aspects. Table 1 shows that our approach can provid
e in excess of 82% accuracy in analysing contextual
 sentiments 
surrounding topical items, with in excess of 75% ac
curacy in information extraction. Although these re
sults are extremely 
promising at this early stage, perhaps the most val
uable asset is the lack of human effort required. T
his is in line with 
previous studies examining the importance of a redu
ced effort in terms of using decision aids (Johnson
 and Payne, 1985; 
Todd and Benbasat, 1993). 

This decision aid therefore has multiple benefits f
or agile teams. The minimal human effort required i
s a salient characteristic 
because it allows agile teams to maintain focus on 
delivering software over documentation while still 
maintaining a record of 
project team discussions, decisions and issues. Suc
h documentation is also important because the team 
shares the 
accountability for decisions. This accountability i
s increased as agile methods are more and more scal
ed to large, distributed, 
multi-project teams. The coordination issues facing
 such teams are challenging, as they must find some
 way to substitute for 
co-location, face-to-face meetings and verbal proje
ct updates. This decision aid can assist in coordin
ating these teams and 
supporting the large-scale accountability on larger
, distributed teams. It can also enhance project me
etings with analysis and 
presentation of meeting summaries and recurring iss
ues, which not only addresses the scalability, but 
also the cultural and 
language barriers of distributed teams. Finally, su
ch a tool can provide structured information to bet
ter support agile decision-
making. We are in the early stages of developing su
ch a decision aid tool to document meetings, track 
information over time, 
and extract particular information from such meetin
g summaries. Initially, this tool will aid agile te
am™s decision-making 
processes about recurring issues and project progre
ss.  
As a future work, we propose extending our decision
 aid into a larger project management system to ass
ist distributed and 
multi-project agile teams by integrating various me
dia types (e.g. video and audio) from web-conferenc
ing meetings, 
providing samples of previously used code, tracking
 task estimations and prioritization, and providing
 best practices for 
customer stories based on previous projects. Overal
l, we see immense improvements in coordination and 
tracking of data for 
agile development teams while still maintaining min
imal documentation, even for large-scale, distribut
ed and multi-project 
agile teams. 

REFERENCES 

1.
 Aciar, S., Zhang, D., Simoff, S. and Debenham, J. (
2007) "Informed recommender: Basing recommendations
 on 
consumer product reviews"
, Ieee Intelligent Systems,
 22, 3, pp. 39-47. 
2.
 Alleman, G. (2002) "Agile Project Management Method
s for IT Projects"
, 
in 
The Story of Managing Projects: A Global, 
CrossŒDisciplinary Collection of Perspectives,
Greenwood Press, Berkeley, CA. 
3.
 Belkhatir, M. (2010) "CLOVIS: towards precision-ori
ented text-based video retrieval through the unific
ation of 
automatically-extracted concepts and relations of t
he visual and audio/speech contents"
, J. Intell. Inf. Syst.,
 34, 2, pp. 
135-175. 
4.
 Boehm, B. (2002) "Get Ready for Agile Methods, with
 Care"
, IEEE Computer,
 35, 1, pp. 64-69. 
5.
 Bowers, J., May, J., Melander, E., Baarman, M. and 
Ayoob, A. (2002) 
Tailoring XP for Large Mission Critical Software 
Development
, XP/Agile Universe (Eds, Wells, D. and Williams, L
.), Chicago, IL, August 4-7,  pp. 100-111. 
6.
 Chin, G. (2004) Agile Project Management: How To Su
cceed in the Face of Changing Project Requirements
, 
AMACOM, NY. 
7.
 Chiu, P., Kapuskar, A., Reitmeier, S. and Wilcox, L
. (2000) "Room with a Rear View: Meeting Capture in
 a Multimedia 
Conference Room"
, IEEE MultiMedia,
 7, 4, pp. 48-54. 
8.
 Cockburn, A. and Highsmith, J. (2001) "Agile softwa
re development: The people factor."
, IEEE Computer,
 34, 1, pp. 
131-133. 
9.
 Conboy, K. (2009) "Agility From First Principles: R
econstructing The Concept of Agility in Information
 Systems 
Development"
, Information Systems Research,
 X, X, pp. XX-XX  
10.
 Conboy, K., Acton, T. and Halonen, R. (2009) "Prese
nting Data for Team-Based Decision-Making in Agile 
Information 
Systems Projects"
, 17th European Conference on Information Systems
. 
11.
 Conboy, K., Coyle, S., Wang, X. and Pikkarainen, M.
 (2010) "People Over Process: Key People Challenges
 in Agile 
Development"
, IEEE Software,
 (forthcoming). 
  Agile Software Development: A Case for Adequate Dec
ision Support Tools 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 8 
12.
 Creutz, M., Teemu, H., Kurimo, M., Puurula, A., Pyl
kkonen, J., Siivola, V., Varjokallio, M., Arisoy, E
., Saraclar, M. and 
Stolcke, A. (2007) "Morph-based speech recognition 
and modeling of out-of-vocabulary words across lang
uages"
, ACM 
Trans. Speech Lang. Process.,
 5, 1, pp. 1-29. 
13.
 Dabrowski, M., Jarzebowski, P., Acton, T. and O'Ria
in, S. (2010) 
Improving Customer Decisions Using Product 
Reviews: CROM - Car Review Opinion Miner
, 6th International Conference on Web Information S
ystems and 
TechnologiesSpringer, Valencia, Spain. 
14.
 Drobka, J., Noftz, D. and Raghu, R. (2004) "Pilotin
g XP on Four Mission Critical Projects"
, IEEE Software,
 21, 6, pp. 
70-75. 
15.
 Fowler, M. and Highsmith, J. (2001) "The Agile Mani
festo."
, Software Development,
 9, 8, pp. 28-32. 
16.
 Furui, S., Kikuchi, T., Shinnaka, Y. and Hori, C. (
2004) "Speech-to-text and speech-to-speech summariz
ation of 
spontaneous speech"
, Speech and Audio Processing, IEEE Transactions on,
 12, 4, pp. 401-408. 
17.
 Geyer, W., Richter, H. and Abowd, G. (2005) "Toward
s a Smarter Meeting RecordŠCapture and Access of Mee
tings 
Revisited"
, Multimedia Tools and Applications,
 27, 3, pp. 393-410. 
18.
 Gütl, C. (2008) "Enhancements of Meeting Informatio
n Management and Application for Knowledge Access a
nd 
Learning Activities"
, Journal of Universal Computer Science,
 14, 10, pp. 1625-1653. 
19.
 Highsmith, J. (2004) Agile Project Management
, 
Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA. 
20.
 Hu, M. and Liu, B. (2004) 
Mining and summarizing customer reviews
, Proceedings of the tenth ACM SIGKDD 
international conference on Knowledge discovery and
 data miningACM, Seattle, WA, USA. 
21.
 Johnson, E. J. and Payne, J. W. (1985) "Effort And 
Accuracy In Choice"
, Management Science,
 31, 4, pp. 395-414. 
22.
 Keen, P. and Scott Morton, M. (1978) Decision Suppo
rt Systems, An Organisational Perspective
, 
Addison-Wesley, 
Reading, MA. 
23.
 Khan, F. (1992) 
A Survey of Note-taking Practices
, HP Labs. 
24.
 Mei, Q., Ling, X., Wondra, M., Su, H. and Zhai, C. 
(2007) 
Topic sentiment mixture: modeling facets and opinio
ns in 
weblogs
, Proceedings of the 16th international conference 
on World Wide WebACM, Banff, Alberta, Canada. 
25.
 Minneman, S., Harrison, S., Janssen, B., Kurtenbach
, G., Moran, T., Smith, I. and Melle, B. v. (1995) 
A confederation of 
tools for capturing and accessing collaborative act
ivity
, Proceedings of the third ACM international confer
ence on 
MultimediaACM, San Francisco, California, United St
ates. 
26.
 Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R. and Mangalara, G. (2005) "
Challenges of Migrating to Agile Methodologies"
, Communication 
of the ACM,
 48, 5, pp. 72-78. 
27.
 Noyes, J. M. and Garland, K. J. (2003) "Solving the
 Tower of Hanoi: does mode of presentation matter?"
, Computers in 
Human Behavior,
 19, 5, pp. 579-592. 
28.
 Payne, J. W. (1982) "Contingent Decision Behavior"
, Psychological Bulletin,
 92, 2, pp. 382-402. 
29.
 Pearce, D. and Hirsch, H.-g. (2000) 
The Aurora Experimental Framework for the Performan
ce Evaluation of Speech 
Recognition Systems under Noisy Conditions
, 6th International Conference on Spoken Language P
rocessingBeijing, 
China, pp. 29-32. 
30.
 Popescu, A.-M. and Etzioni, O. (2005) 
Extracting product features and opinions from revie
ws
, Proceedings of the 
conference on Human Language Technology and Empiric
al Methods in Natural Language ProcessingAssociatio
n for 
Computational Linguistics, Vancouver, British Colum
bia, Canada. 
31.
 Rabiner and L, R. (1994) Applications of voice proc
essing to telecommunications
, 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics 
Engineers, New York, NY, ETATS-UNIS. 
32.
 Rabiner, L. and Juang, B.-H. (1993) Fundamentals of
 speech recognition
, 
Prentice-Hall, Inc. 
33.
 Schwaber, C. and Fichera, R. (2005) 
Corporate IT Leads the Second Wave of Agile Adoptio
n
. 
34.
 Stifelman, L., Arons, B. and Schmandt, C. (2001) 
The audio notebook: paper and pen interaction with 
structured 
speech
, Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human fac
tors in computing systemsACM, Seattle, Washington, 
United States. 
35.
 Stolcke, A., Chen, B., Franco, H., Rao, G. V. R., G
raciarena, M., Hwang, M., Yuh, Kirchhoff, K., Manda
l, A., Morgan, 
N., Xin, L., Ng, T., Ostendorf, M., Nmez, K., Venka
taraman, A., Vergyri, D., Wen, W., Jing, Z. and Qif
eng, Z. (2006) 
  Agile Software Development: A Case for Adequate Dec
ision Support Tools 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 9 
Recent innovations in speech-to-text transcription 
at SRI-ICSI-UW
, 
Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 
Piscataway, NJ, ETATS-UNIS. 
36.
 Sutherland, J., Schoonheim, G., Kumar, N., Pandey, 
V. and Vishal, S. (2009) 
Fully Distributed Scrum: Linear 
Scalability of Production between San Francisco and
 India
, Agile 2009, Chicago, IL, USA. 
37.
 Sutherland, J., Viktorov, A., Blount, J. and Puntik
ov, N. (2007) 
Distributed Scrum: Agile Project Management with 
Outsourced Development Teams
, Hawaii International Conference on Software Syste
msBig Island, Hawaii. 
38.
 Tan, C. H. and Teo, H. H. (2007) "Training Future S
oftware Developers to Acquire Agile Development Ski
lls"
, Communications of the ACM,
 50, 12, pp. 97-98. 
39.
 Thomassin Singh, D. (1998) "Incorporating cognitive
 aids into decision support systems: the case of th
e strategy 
execution process"
, Decision Support Systems,
 24, 2, pp. 145-163. 
40.
 Todd, P. and Benbasat, I. (1991) "An Experimental I
nvestigation of the Impact of Computer Based Decisi
on Aids on 
Decision Making Strategies"
, Information Systems Research,
 2, 2, pp. 87. 
41.
 Todd, P. and Benbasat, I. (1992) "The Use of Inform
ation in Decision Making: An Experimental Investiga
tion of the 
Impact of Computer-Based Decision Aids"
, MIS Quarterly,
 16, 3, pp. 373-393. 
42.
 Todd, P. and Benbasat, I. (1993) "An Experimental I
nvestigation Of The Relationship Between Decision M
akers, 
Decision Aids And Decision Making Effort"
, INFOR,
 31, 2, pp. 80-100. 
43.
 Whittaker, S., Hyland, P. and Wiley, M. (1994) 
FILOCHAT: handwritten notes provide access to recor
ded 
conversations
, Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human fac
tors in computing systems: celebrating 
interdependenceACM, Boston, Massachusetts, United S
tates. 
44.
 Woodward, E., Ganis, M. and Surdek, S. (2009) "Chap
ter One: The Evolution of Scrum"
, 
in 
A Practical Guide to 
Distributed Scrum
IBM Corporation. 
45.
 Yu, Z. and Nakamura, Y. (2010) "Smart meeting syste
ms: A survey of state-of-the-art and open issues"
, ACM Comput. 
Surv.,
 42, 2, pp. 1-20. 
 