 Dissanayake et al. 
 Knowledge Management in Software Development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 1 
Knowledge Management in Software Development: 
The Case of Agile Software 
 Indika Dissanayake 
University of Texas at Arlington 
indika.dissanayake@mavs.uta.edu 
Ramakrishna Dantu 
University of Texas at Arlington 
ramakrishna.dantu@mavs.uta.edu 
Sridhar Nerur 
University of Texas at Arlington 
snerur@uta.edu 
 ABSTRACT 

Today™s business environment is extremely dynamic a
nd competitive. In order to sustain the pressure an
d gain a competitive 
edge, it is imperative for organizations to be crea
tive in their software development efforts. Agile s
oftware development has 
huge potential for nurturing creativity. However, l
ittle research has examined creativity in the conte
xt of software 
development projects, particularly those using agil
e practices. The objective of this paper is to arti
culate a model that 
elucidates the relationship between agile practices
 and creativity. Further, the model tries to provid
e an understanding of how 
Knowledge Integration mediates the relationship bet
ween agile practices and team creativity. 
Keywords 

Software development, agile methodologies, knowledg
e integration, team creativity. 
INTRODUCTION 

It is perhaps tautological to assert that software 
is the lifeblood of contemporary organizations, per
fectly capable of helping 
them leapfrog their competitors. Therefore, it is n
ot surprising that organizations expend a lot of ti
me and money to improve 
their software development processes. The prolifera
tion of methods, tools, and techniques presents bot
h challenges and 
opportunities in this regard. While these advances 
can mitigate some development problems, their impac
t on processes such 
as knowledge integration and learning have hardly b
een subjected to empirical scrutiny. 
There is little doubt that software development is 
a complex process that frequently involves diverse 
stakeholders whose 
interests are not often aligned. In addition, the v
aried and, at times, conflicting perspectives of th
ese constituents have to be 
reconciled to develop a software product that endea
vors to provide uniform satisfaction. The crux of t
his effort lies in the 
ability of the software team to effectively create 
and assimilate, integrate, and deploy the relevant 
knowledge to satisfy not 
just the functional specifications of a customer, b
ut also the myriad business rules, architectural an
d design trade-offs, and 
non-functional requirements that are often not stat
ed explicitly. Clearly, the method employed to deve
lop software as well as 
the tools and techniques available play a pivotal r
ole in creating an environment that is conducive to
 the effective integration 
and management of knowledge. Despite the enormous s
trides we have made in the field of software develo
pment, there is a 
paucity of studies on how knowledge integration med
iates the relationship between development practice
s and project 
outcomes such as team adaptation, knowledge managem
ent effectiveness, and team creativity, to name but
 a few.  
The growing importance of agile software developmen
t (ASD) provides yet another compelling reason for 
investigating the 
issue of knowledge integration in software projects
. ASD emphasizes a collaborative, team-based approa
ch that aims to 
deliver high-quality software in short, iterative c
ycles (Highsmith and Cockburn, 2001; Highsmith, 200
2). The proponents of 
ASD advocate flexible processes that allow self-org
anizing teams to thrive. In addition, ASD encourage
s the active 
involvement of customers throughout the development
 process. Reviews and retrospectives at the end of 
each iteration 
provide opportunities for the team to interact with
 stakeholders and reflect on issues related to the 
product as well as the 
process. Further, daily stand-up meetings, as sugge
sted by most agile methods, promote the interchange
 of knowledge. Thus, 
ASD has very strong implications for how the stock 
of knowledge is created, exchanged, integrated, and
 managed within 
development teams. To the best of our knowledge, th
ere is little or no research on the effect of ASD p
ractices on knowledge 
integration. Given these gaps in the extant literat
ure, our study endeavors to evolve a conceptual res
earch model that 
elucidates how contemporary software development pr
actices such as iterative development, process flex
ibility, and self-
 Dissanayake et al. 
 Knowledge Management in Software Development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 2 
organization impact knowledge integration and the c
onsequences that follow from it. Specifically, we e
xplore how agile 
principles/techniques can foster a climate that is 
conducive to the creation of knowledge, which in tu
rn can facilitate software 
development team creativity.  

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.
 The next section reviews the literature that is re
levant to our study. This 
is followed by an articulation of our research mode
l and the propositions that ensue from it. Subseque
ntly, we discuss the 
limitations of the paper and provide some direction
s for future research. Finally, we conclude our pap
er with a summary of 
the implications for research and practice. 

LITERATURE REVIEW 

Knowledge integration in agile teams 

Agile methods such as Scrum, Extreme Programming (X
P), Feature Driven Development, and lean software d
evelopment 
have become increasingly popular among software dev
elopers since the articulation of the agile manifes
to in 2001 (Lee and 
Xia, 2010). Agile practices, such as sprint/iterati
on reviews, encourage interactions among diverse st
akeholders, including 
customers, system designers, developers, and manage
ment. One of the key characteristics of ASD is coll
aborative decision-
making (Nerur, Mahapatra and Mangalaraj, 2005). Col
laboration facilitates the interchange of different
 kinds of knowledge 
that members bring to the table, thereby enabling t
he team to make informed decisions (Robert, Dennis 
and Ahuja, 
2008).Some of the agile principles such as collabor
ation, self-organizing teams, retrospective meeting
s, and daily stand-up 
meetings facilitate the creation and exchange of kn
owledge (Chau and Maurer, 2004). Further, the activ
e involvement of 
customers and/or product owners enables team member
s to acquire external knowledge (Lee and Xia, 2010)
.  
As mentioned earlier, ASD uses iterative developmen
t that involves multiple short iterations in the pr
ocess of software 
development. These iterations help in incorporating
 evolving and changing customer requirements into t
he design and 
development process (Bonner, Teng and Nerur, 2010).
 Agile software development practices strongly emph
asize frequent 
feedback loops. At the end of each iteration, agile
 team members receive feedback directly from their 
customers or from the 
other members of the team. Agile teams use multiple
 mechanisms to incorporate these feedbacks into sub
sequent iterations of 
the project to ensure that the end product meets th
e business needs (Meso and Jain, 2006). This contin
uous interaction and 
feedback process leads to knowledge integration in 
agile development teams.  
According to Cavaleri and Obloj (1993), systems can
 reinvent themselves by venturing beyond their equi
librium thresholds 
to the ﬁedge of chaosﬂ. Likewise, ASD has often bee
n described as ﬁchaordicﬂ (e.g., Ambler, 2002), exh
ibiting characteristics 
of chaos and order in its efforts to engender chang
e while retaining its ability to respond to shifts 
in requirements.  Agile 
practices facilitate variety in teams through incre
asing team diversity (customer, developers, and oth
er stakeholders) and 
variety in skills through interchangeable roles. Fo
r example, in pair programming, the pairs continual
ly switch while 
programming (Beck, 2000). The emphasis on collabora
tion, iterative development, adaptive planning, fre
quent reviews, and 
retrospectives are ﬁvarietyﬂ enhancing mechanisms t
hat provide the requisite variety for agile teams t
o cope with high 
degrees of uncertainty (Ashby, 1968; Nerur and Bali
jepally, 2007).  Further, in the context of agile d
evelopment, variety and 
autonomy enhance the ability of teams to self-organ
ize in response to contingencies that might arise d
uring problem solving.  
Leadership and collaborative management style in ag
ile teams provide team members with more freedom, f
lexibility, and 
decision making power on their job-related activiti
es and enjoy greater level of autonomy (Mangalaraj,
 Mahapatra and Nerur, 
2009).  

Concept of ﬁbaﬂ 

Knowledge creation and integration happen through c
ontinuous interaction between tacit and explicit kn
owledge (Nonaka 
and Von Krogh, 2009). Nonaka™s knowledge creation m
odel identifies four stages in the knowledge creati
on process:  
Socialization, Externalization, Combination and Int
ernalization (SECI). According to Nonaka and Konno 
(1998), 
socialization is sharing of tacit knowledge among i
ndividuals engaged in collaborative work, particula
rly when they are 
collocated. Externalization is the process by which
 tacit knowledge is converted to explicit knowledge
. Combination refers to 
transfer of explicit knowledge into more comprehens
ive form of explicit knowledge through acquisition,
 integration, 
synthesis, and dissemination of knowledge. During t
he Internalization phase explicit knowledge is conv
erted into tacit 
knowledge through ﬁlearning by doingﬂ, and training
 (Nonaka and Konno, 1998; Nonaka, Toyama and Byosi`
ere, 2003) 
Nonaka™s notion of ﬁbaﬂ is particularly relevant to
 this study. According to Nonaka and Konno (1998; p
. 40), ﬁbaﬂ is ﬁa 
shared space that serves as a foundation for knowle
dge creationﬂ. Further, Nonaka et al. (2003; p. 499
) note that, ﬁ...the 
power to create knowledge is embedded not just with
in an individual but also within the interactions w
ith other individuals or 
 Dissanayake et al. 
 Knowledge Management in Software Development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 3 
with the environment. ﬁbaﬂ is a space where such in
teractions take placeﬂ. ﬁbaﬂ facilitates the nurtur
ing of knowledge within 
teams. In a sense, ﬁbaﬂ refers to an environment th
at engenders new knowledge - associated with the in
dividual or the group 
Œ and is largely determined by the nature of intera
ctions and sharedness among individuals. Nonaka™s n
otion of ﬁbaﬂ provides 
a valuable theoretical foundation for this study. N
onaka et al. (1998) identified five factors which f
acilitate ﬁbaﬂ: autonomy, 
fluctuations, redundancy, requisite variety, and tr
ust and commitment. 
Providing more autonomy to the team members encoura
ges them to share knowledge. Self- organizing teams
 can be used as a 
way to create autonomy (Nonaka et al., 2003). Fluct
uations refer to changes in the routines such as ne
w technology, and 
competition, market demand. Fluctuations in the wor
k environment facilitate knowledge creation in seve
ral ways. When 
fluctuations occur, employees alter their routine b
ehaviors and start questioning, and rethinking the 
process. This could lead 
to generation of new knowledge. Prigogine and Steng
ers (1984) refer to this phenomenon as ‚Order out o
f noise™ or ‚Order 
out of chaos™. In addition, fluctuations stimulate 
interactions of the team members with the environme
nt, which in turn 
enhances knowledge integration and creation opportu
nities (Nonaka et al., 2003). 
Redundancy refers to overlapping of information and
 responsibilities. Overlapping duties broaden the u
nderstanding of the 
domain among the co-workers, which in turn helps ef
fective exchange of knowledge among them. Furthermo
re, redundancy 
facilitates job rotation, which, in turn, helps acq
uire additional knowledge and skills. Redundancy, p
articularly in technical 
fields, creates highly specialized generalists and 
breeds innovation through knowledge sharing (Nonaka
 et al., 2003). 
Redundancy helps enhance creativity and common unde
rstanding among team members through ﬁParallel proc
essingﬂ and 
information sharing (Morgan, 2006). 

Striking a balance between order and chaos provides
 a strong foundation for knowledge creation. Requis
ite variety is seen as 
the means for achieving this balance. When the inte
rnal diversity is matched with diversity of the env
ironment, the system 
will be more adept at dealing with environmental ch
anges (Nonaka et al., 2003). In addition, variety f
acilitates emergence of 
multiple alternative solutions for the same problem
. Hence, variety enhances formation and accessibili
ty of new knowledge.   
Finally, in order to share knowledge and facilitate
 knowledge integration and creation, team members m
ust trust each other 
and be committed to the task at hand. 

Knowledge integration 

Drawing from Robert et al. (2008), we define knowle
dge integration in the context of software developm
ent teams as 
utilization of knowledge and skills from individual
 team members. Software development is characterize
d by complexity and 
extensive interchange of knowledge. Comprehensive k
nowledge about developing the entire product/proces
s does not reside 
in a single individual (Robert et al., 2008); rathe
r, team members bring a variety of knowledge and sk
ills to bear on the 
problem. Hence, effective integration of this distr
ibuted knowledge is important for product developme
nt and quality 
decision making. Previous literature identified thr
ee mechanisms for knowledge integration: directives
, organizational 
routines, and teams.  In a highly complex and dynam
ic software development environment, teams play a k
ey role in 
successful knowledge integration (Robert et al., 20
08). 
Previous researchers addressed different dimensions
 of knowledge integration and its impact on team pe
rformance. Tiwana 
and Mclean (2005) studied the effect of team compos
ition on knowledge integration. According to them, 
characteristics such 
as team member heterogeneity, relational capital, a
nd absorptive capacity influence knowledge integrat
ion. Robert et al. 
(2008) analyzed the effect of the dimensions of soc
ial capital on knowledge integration. In a study on
 the impact of 
knowledge integration on team performance, Basaglia
 et al. (2010) found that team climate consisting o
f autonomy and 
experimental climate leads to knowledge integration
. In an information systems development context, au
thors found that 
formal (job rotation, participative decision making
, autonomous teams) and informal organizational int
egrative practices 
(e.g., informal communications) are positively rela
ted to knowledge integration (Patnayakuni, Rai and 
Tiwana, 2007). 
Team creativity 

Team creativity has been studied various contexts (
for a review, see Conboy et al. 2009; Couger, 1990)
. Amabile et al. (1996; 
p. 1155 ) define team creativity as ﬁthe production
 of novel and useful ideas in any domainﬂ. Informat
ion systems projects are 
usually very complex and often require innovative s
olutions. Creative approaches are needed for variou
s aspects of IS 
development, including but not limited to, planning
, managing people, and implementing applications (C
ouger, 1990).  
Highsmith and Cockburn (2001) notes that agile team
s follow generative rules and depend on the ingenui
ty of team members 
to solve problems. Previous scholars studied how di
fferent work environments impact team creativity. A
mabile et al. (1996) 
have shown that work group characteristics such as 
diversity, mutual openness, shared commitments, and
 autonomy facilitate 
team creativity. 
 Dissanayake et al. 
 Knowledge Management in Software Development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 4 
 
RESEARCH MODEL AND PROPOSITIONS 

Agile software development practices stress the sig
nificance of interchangeable roles, iterative devel
opment, self-organizing 
teams, customer participation, and team collaborati
on. These aspects map on to the five ﬁbaﬂ character
istics of redundancy, 
fluctuation, autonomy, requisite variety, and trust
 and commitment. As mentioned earlier, Nonaka™s not
ion of ﬁbaﬂ provides a 
conducive environment for knowledge integration; th
erefore, we argue that agile practices provide the 
platform for 
knowledge integration.  

Nerur et al. (2007) have developed a conceptual fra
mework that maps agile practices to Morgan™s (2006)
 holographic 
principles. Specifically, among other things, they 
mapped self-organizing teams, iterative development
, interchangeable 
roles, and minimalistic design, to the correspondin
g holographic principles articulated by Morgan. In 
this paper, we adapt this 
framework to map agile practices to characteristics
 of ﬁbaﬂ. Figure 1 depicts the mapping.  
  Figure 1: Alignment of agile practices with Nonaka™
s notion of ﬁbaﬂ. 
Agile practices encourage interchangeable roles. Te
am members are not confined to specific roles. Thes
e practices have the 
potential to enable team members to develop multipl
e skills, thus enabling them to perform other membe
rs™ roles should the 
circumstances demand it.  In pair programming, pair
s continually interchange their roles. Hence, we ca
n see characteristics of 
redundancy in agile teams (Nerur and Balijepally, 2
007). Over time, it is expected that agile team mem
bers will become 
ﬁgeneralizing specialistsﬂ (for example, see Ambler
 2005) with a variety of skill sets. 
Agile practices encourage participative decision ma
king. Customers are also expected to be collocated 
and part of the team, 
and actively engage in the software development pro
cess. Open spaces advocated by some of agile method
s encourage face-
to-face communications. These practices help in bui
lding trust and commitment among team members. 
Agile teams are often described as self-organizing 
(Highsmith and Cockburn, 2001). Team members are em
powered to make 
decisions. Project managers play a facilitating rol
e, mentoring and guiding the team members without c
onstraining their 
creativity while addressing the tasks. Thus, such t
eams have greater autonomy than do traditional team
s that operate in a 
command-and-control mode (Nerur and Balijepally, 20
07). 
Agile is predicated on the assumption that requirem
ents are volatile and subject to frequent changes. 
Agile practices such as 
iterative development and self-organizing teams enh
ance the team™s ability to sense and respond to suc
h fluctuations. Further, 
agile teams behave as open systems and continuously
 interact with its environment. Continuous testing 
and feedback loops 
help incorporating evolving customer requirements i
n the design and development process (Bonner et al.
, 2010). 
Previous studies have shown that knowledge integrat
ion leads to creativity (Tiwana and Mclean, 2005), 
better decision 
quality (Robert et al., 2008), and better team perf
ormance (Basaglia, Caporarello, Magni and Pennarola
, 2010; Patnayakuni et 
al., 2007) in software development teams.  Relying 
on Nonaka™s articulation of ﬁbaﬂ, we argue that agi
le practices such as 
 Dissanayake et al. 
 Knowledge Management in Software Development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 5 
iterative development, self-organizing teams, and p
rocess flexibility foster a climate suitable for th
e generation of new 
knowledge. 

Based on these discussions, we developed the resear
ch model shown in figure 2. 
 Figure 1: Research Model 
Propositions 

Iterations in agile development occur in 2 to 6 wee
k cycles (Highsmith and Cockburn, 2001). These iter
ations facilitate 
continual rethinking and reevaluation of designs. F
eedback is received at the end of every iteration. 
This provides an 
opportunity to reframe issues in light of new knowl
edge and/or insight offered by various stakeholders
. Iterative development 
is best suited for accommodating fluctuations in th
e requirements or changing business needs. Thus, it
 is aligned with the 
ﬁbaﬂ characteristic of ﬁfluctuationﬂ. We have seen 
that fluctuation aids in knowledge integration. Hen
ce, we propose: 
P1: Iterative development is positively related to 
Knowledge integration 
Members of self-organizing teams possess overlappin
g skills and are not confined to any specific roles
. This enhances the 
diversity and skill variety of the teams. Further, 
team members enjoy autonomy, so they have high deci
sion making power 
(Nerur et al., 2005).  

Previous research has shown that practices such as 
job rotation, participative decision making, autono
mous teams, and 
informal communications have a positive impact on k
nowledge integration (Patnayakuni et al., 2007). Al
l these 
characteristics are apparent in self-organizing tea
ms that use agile software development. Since self-
organizing teams reflect 
ﬁbaﬂ characteristics of variety and autonomy, we ar
gue that self-organizing teams lead to Knowledge in
tegration. Thus, we 
propose: 

P2: Self-organization is positively related to Know
ledge integration 
Process flexibility has been viewed in several ways
 in the software development literature. According 
to Bonner et al. (2010), 
ﬁprocess flexibility encompasses the reaction capab
ilities inherent in agile processesﬂ. Nidumolu and 
Knotts (1998) define 
software process flexibility as ﬁthe speed with whi
ch the organization's software development approach
 can respond 
effectively to changes in the organization's enviro
nmentﬂ. 
Frequent interactions and heavy information flow ar
e common in flexible environments. Process flexibil
ity allows team 
members to quickly interchange their roles and adap
t to changes in the environment. As argued earlier,
 redundancy and 
autonomy are likely to be higher in agile teams. He
nce, we propose: 
P3: Process flexibility is positively related to Kn
owledge integration 
Previous studies have shown that knowledge integrat
ion leads to enhanced team efficiency and effective
ness (Basaglia et al., 
2010); increase in the quality of decision making (
Robert et al., 2008); increase in team creativity (
Tiwana and Mclean, 
2005); and reduction in software defects (Robert et
 al., 2008) .  
Tiwana and Mclean (2005) have studied team creativi
ty in the context of information systems developmen
t. In a software 
development context, team members from diverse back
grounds have different cognitive structures. Collab
oration of these 
  Dissanayake et al. 
 Knowledge Management in Software Development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 6 
members with different cognitive structures results
 in team creativity (Mumford and Gustafson, 1988). 
Further, they bring 
different ideas and expertise to the table.  Exposu
re to alternative ideas helps looking at the proble
ms in a completely 
different perspective. This in turn helps generatin
g creative solutions. Further, knowledge integratio
n facilitates teams to 
come together for a shared understanding of the pro
ject and the product. This common understanding hel
ps them to see the 
big picture and come up with more creative solution
s (Tiwana and Mclean, 2005). Thus, we propose: 
P4: Knowledge Integration is positively related to 
Team creativity. 
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 

Our study aims to address an area of research that 
has received scant attention in the literature. Spe
cifically, it endeavors to 
evolve a tentative model to explain the roles of kn
owledge integration and creativity in the context o
f software development. 
An obvious limitation of the study is that the mode
l has not been empirically validated. This includes
 testing for direct 
relationship between agile practices and team creat
ivity. Having said that, we would like to point out
 our articulation of a 
research model is the first step towards empirical 
assessment of knowledge integration and its outcome
s in a contemporary 
software approach. Future research may build on our
 efforts in the following ways: 
1. There are bound to be extraneous factors that af
fect the results of any empirical affirmation of th
e model. Therefore, 
appropriate control variables have to be identified
 prior to testing the model. 
2. The model may be extended to include outcome var
iables related to team performance, such as team re
flexivity, the ability 
of the team to adapt, team responsiveness, and know
ledge management effectiveness, to name but a few. 
 3. This research may be extended to explore the dif
ferences between best practices suggested by agile 
methodologies and 
knowledge management.  While much of our focus is o
n the synergies between agile methodologies and kno
wledge 
management, it would be interesting to explore the 
barriers that agile practices may present to the cr
eation and dissemination 
of knowledge.  

CONCLUSION 

Complex software projects entail creative solutions
 to meet the demands of an increasingly turbulent b
usiness environment. 
Our paper argues that knowledge integration is a li
kely determinant of creativity. Further, we assert 
that agile software 
development practices provide the right environment
 and opportunities for agile teams to effectively i
ntegrate the variety of 
knowledge that is typically used in software projec
ts. 
In this study, we developed a framework aligning No
naka™s (2003) ﬁbaﬂ characteristics with agile pract
ices. We further 
developed a conceptual model of agile practices lea
ding to creativity through knowledge integration.  
Our study contributes to theory and practice in the
 following ways. (i) It articulates a theoretically
-grounded research model 
to investigate knowledge integration in agile teams
, and (ii) Role of agile practices in promoting tea
m creativity. 
Creativity is an important aspect of software devel
opment practices. Organizations endeavor to build c
reative teams that can 
bring value. This study looks at the role of agilit
y in fostering creativity. Specifically, we look at
 agile practices such as self-
organizing teams, iterative development, and proces
s flexibility that might be useful in understanding
 team creativity in a 
software development context. This could be helpful
 to software organizations in their efforts to buil
d effective strategies to 
promote learning and to improve creativity of their
 software development teams.   
REFERENCES 

 
1.
 Amabile, T., R. Conti, H. C. and Herron, M. (1996).
 Assessing the Work Environment for Creativity. The
 Academy of 
Management Journal, 39(5), 1154-1184 
2.
 Ambler, S. (2002). Agile modeling: Effective practi
ces. John Wiley and Sons. 
3.
 Ambler, S. (2005). Quality in an agile world. 
Software Quality Professional, 7
(4), 34. 
4.
 Ashby, W. R. (1968). Variety, constraint, and the l
aw of requisite variety. 
Modern systems research for the behavioral 
scientist
, 129-136. 
5.
 Basaglia, S., Caporarello, L., Magni, M. and Pennar
ola, F. (2010). IT knowledge integration capability
 and team 
performance: The role of team climate. 
International Journal of Information Management, 30
(6), 542-551. 
6.
 Beck, K. (2000). Extreme programming explained. 
Extreme programming explained.
 New York: Addison-Wesley. 
 Dissanayake et al. 
 Knowledge Management in Software Development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 7 
7.
 Bonner, N. A., Teng, J. T. and and Nerur, S. (2010)
. The Perceived Advantage of Agile Development Meth
odologies By 
Software Professionals: Testing an Innovation-Theor
etic Model. 
AMCIS 2010 Proceedings.
 93.
 http://aisel.aisnet.org/amcis2010/93. 
8.
 Cavaleri, S. and Obloj, K. (1993). 
Management systems: A global perspective.
 Wadsworth Belmont, CA. 
9.
 Chau, T. and Maurer, F. (2004). Knowledge sharing i
n agile software teams. 
Logic versus approximation
, 173-183. 
10.
 Conboy, K., Wang, X. and Fitzgerald, B. (2009). Cre
ativity in Agile Systems Development: A Literature 
Review. 
Information SystemsŒCreativity and Innovation in Sm
all and Medium-Sized Enterprises, 122-134. 
11.
 Couger, J. D. (1990). Ensuring creative approaches 
in information system design. 
Managerial and Decision Economics, 
11
(5), 281-295.  
12.
 Highsmith, J. A. (2002). 
Agile software development ecosystems.
 Addison-Wesley Professional. 
13.
 Highsmith, J. and Cockburn, A. (2001). Agile softwa
re development: The business of innovation. 
Computer, 34
(9), 120-
127. 
14.
 Lee, G. and Xia, W. (2010). Toward agile: An integr
ated analysis of quantitative and qualitative field
 data on software 
development agility. 
MIS Quarterly, 34
(1), 87. 
15.
 Mangalaraj, G., Mahapatra, R. and Nerur, S. (2009).
 Acceptance of software process innovations - the c
ase of extreme 
programming. 
European Journal of Information Systems
, 1-11. 
16.
 Meso, P. and Jain, R. (2006). Agile software develo
pment: adaptive systems principles and best practic
es. 
Information 
Systems Management, 23
(3), 19-30. 
17.
 Morgan, G. (2006). 
Images of Organization.
 California: Sage Publication, Inc. 
18.
 Mumford, M. D. and Gustafson, S. B. (1988). Creativ
ity syndrome: Integration, application, and innovat
ion. 
Psychological Bulletin, 103
(1), 27-43. 
19.
 Nerur, S. and Balijepally, V. (2007). Theoretical r
eflections on agile development methodologies. 
Communications of 
the ACM, 50
(3), 79-83. 
20.
 Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R. and Mangalaraj, G. (2005).
 Challenges of migrating to agile methodologies. 
Communications of 
the ACM, 48
(5), 72-78. 
21.
 Nidumolu, S. R. and Knotts, G. W. (1998). The Effec
ts of Customizability and Reusability on Perceived 
Process and 
Competitive Performance of Software Firms. 
MIS Quarterly
, 22(2), 105-137. 
22.
 Nonaka, I. and Konno, N. (1998). The concept of "ba
": Building a foundation for knowledge creation. 
California 
Management Review, 40
(3), 40-55. 
23.
 Nonaka, I. and Von Krogh, G. (2009). Perspective - 
Tacit knowledge and knowledge conversion: Controver
sy and 
advancement in organizational knowledge creation th
eory. 
Organization Science, 20
(3), 635-652. 
24.
 Nonaka, I., Toyama, R. and Byosi`ere, P. (2003). A 
Theory of Organizational Knowledge Creation: Unders
tanding the 
Dynamic Process of Creating Knowledge.Oxford Univer
sity Press,491-517 
25.
 Patnayakuni, R., Rai, A. and Tiwana, A. (2007). Sys
tems development process improvement: A knowledge i
ntegration 
perspective. 
Engineering Management, IEEE Transactions on, 54
(2), 286-300. 
26.
 Prigogine, I., Stengers, I. and Toffler, A. (1984).
 Order out of chaos: Man's new dialogue with nature
. Bantam Books, 
New York.  
27.
 Robert, L., Dennis, A. and Ahuja, M. (2008). Social
 Capital and Knowledge Integration in Digitally Ena
bled Teams. 
Information systems Research, 19
(3), 314-334. 
28.
 Tiwana, A. and Mclean, E. R. (2005). Expertise inte
gration and creativity in information systems devel
opment. 
Journal 
of Management Information Systems, 22
(1), 13-43.
 