 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Organizing Projects for Innovation: A CollectiveMindfulness PerspectiveAmany ElbannaLoughborough UniversityDerrick MurrayMunich Re UK Life BranchAMCIS2009 Proceedings. A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
1 
 Americas Conference on Information Systems  
AMCIS2009 San Francisco 
 Organizing IS projects for innovation: A collective
 mindfulness 
perspective 
 
 Amany Elbanna 
Business School, Loughborough University, UK 
a.elbanna@lboro.ac.uk 
Derrick Murray 
Munich Re UK Life Branch 
  
 
ABSTRACT 

 
IS projects continue to present a problematic endea
vor for organizations.   A high percentage of IS pr
ojects fail to 
meet efficiency metrics of on time, on budget, and 
on initial specifications.  Even when projects meet
 these 
efficiency metrics, recent research and experience 
show that they fail to deliver business benefits.  
This paper 
presents an appreciative enquiry of a successful IS
 project that delivered an innovative business solu
tion that was 
highly appreciated and valued by the business.    A
nalysis of post-project data reveals the resemblanc
e of the project 
practices with the creation of a collective mindful
ness.  It suggests that the project practices suppo
rted by an Agile 
software development method allowed the organizatio
n the opportunity to create a ‚bubble™ of collectiv
e 
mindfulness.  This bubble of collective mindfulness
 had the capacity to sustain a high level of vigila
nce and 
sensitivity to business operations and needs which 
fostered business innovation and the delivery of a 
successful 
solution.  The paper empirically contributes to the
 understanding of how IS project management could e
nable 
business innovation.   Practitioners are invited to
 create a mindful organization for IS projects that
 embraces change 
and fosters business innovation.   

 
INTRODUCTION 

 
IS projects are notoriously surrounded by a high ra
te of failure; whether it is failure to complete th
e project, deliver 
specifications or meet time and budget allocation. 
 Even when projects successfully meet their perform
ance metrics 
(on time, on budget, and on specification), a recen
t study shows that they usually fail to deliver eff
ective business 
benefits (Ashurst et al. 2008).  A recently reporte
d business experience also shows that even when IT 
project 
managers celebrate the completion of their projects
 on budget and on time, the business side does not 
necessarily 
value the solution and may find the whole experienc
e painful and not worthwhile (Murray 2007).  This p
aradox 
presents a challenge for IS project management.  It
 shows that striving to meet efficiency metrics for
 completing 
projects on time and budget does not necessarily eq
ual with delivering a business-valued solution.   
 
However the field of IS project management has been
 concerned with organizing projects to meet efficie
ncy targets, 
little is known regarding the management of IS proj
ects to produce innovative business solutions. The 
thin strand of 
research on IS benefits realization focuses on how 
IS projects could produce the initially anticipated
 benefits (see for 
example: Karlsen 2008; Reymeni et al. 1997; Ward et
 al. 1999; Ward et al. 1996).  Research on IS benef
its 
 A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
2 
 realization implicitly or explicitly assumes that I
S projects are frozen in time and the benefits that
 have been agreed 
upon in the initial stages of the project will cont
inue to be required despite the passage of time, th
e change of 
business environment, and the evolution of business
 needs. 
 
This paper presents an appreciative enquiry of a su
ccessful IS project.  Success here is defined accor
ding to the 
outcome of the project as the production of a novel
 IS solution that is valued by the business.  It ai
ms to understand 
how and why business innovation could take place in
 the context of IS development?  The studied IS pro
ject took 
place in 2007 in the UK Life Branch of the internat
ional reinsurance company Munich Re.  Data collecti
on consisted 
of tape-recorded unstructured interviews and docume
nt reviews.  Collective mindfulness has been adopte
d as an 
analytical lens to make sense of the collected data
.   
 
Following the introduction, the paper proceeds as f
ollows.  The second section briefly reviews Agile s
oftware 
development since the studied project was supported
 by Agile methods.  The third section presents the 
theory of 
Collective Mindfulness.  The fourth section describ
es the data collection method and the case study.  
The fifth 
section presents the research findings following th
e previously presented framework of Collective Mind
fulness.  The 
last section discusses the findings and draws theor
etical and practical conclusions.    
  

AGILE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT FOR IS DELIVERY OR FOR B
USINESS INNOVATION 
 
Agile software development presents a practice-led 
movement that favours individuals and interaction, 
working 
software, customer collaboration, and responding to
 change over the traditional practices of focusing 
on processes 
and tools, comprehensive documentation, contract ne
gotiation, and following of a plan (Fowler et al. 2
001).  Agile 
software development includes many methods such as 
eXtreme Programming (XP)
 (Beck 2000), 
Scrum 
(Schwaber 
et al. 2002)
, 
the 
Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM) 
(Stapleton 1997)
, Crystal 
(Cockburn 2001),
 Agile 
Project Management (APM) 
(Highsmith 2004)
, Feature Driven Design
 (Coad et al. 2002),
 and
 Lean Software 
Development (LSD) 
(Poppendieck 2001).  All have been developed by sof
tware practitioners.  However these 
methods differ in their details, daily practices an
d emphasis, they share a general orientation toward
s short iterative 
cycles, frequent communication with customers, and 
constant adaptation and accommodation of change.  
 
There are ample practitioners™ publications that fo
cus on promoting Agile methods through the presenta
tion of 
successful case studies or suggest ways to extend A
gile to cover areas that are thought to be not well
 covered by the 
existing methods.  Practitioners™ publications main
tain a focus on Agile processes and the daily pract
ices.  They link 
success to the adoption of the methods in a linear 
cause and effect way ignoring the organizational co
ntext and 
adaptation.    Academic research continued to lag b
ehind practice in the area of Agile methods as it h
as been with 
other systems development methodologies (Fitzgerald
 2000).  There are a few studies, however, that att
empt to offer 
analyses and theorization of Agile.  Conboy and Fit
zgerald (2004) offer a broad conceptualization of a
gility based 
on manufacturing and systems thinking (Conboy et al
. 2004).   The claim of the Agile founders and advo
cates; 
Highsmith and Cockburn that Agile methods are roote
d on the view that organizations are complex adapti
ve systems 
has been adopted in academia.  For example, Meso an
d Jain (2006) and Vidgen and Wang (2006, 2007) adop
ted 
Complex Adaptive Systems (CAS) theory to develop a 
theoretical grounding for Agile software developmen
t 
practices (Meso et al. 2006; Vidgen et al. 2006; Wa
ng et al. 2007).  However useful, these studies mai
ntain a narrow 
focus based on analyzing the IS organization practi
ces of Agile methods and overlooking its business i
mpact and the 
quality of the delivered system.  Studies on Agile 
development continue to treat the subject as solely
 an IT issue 
forgetting the end product of the development effor
ts and the business organization that a developed s
ystem would 
serve.    

 
This paper goes beyond the narrow focus on Agile me
thods themselves: their details and daily practices
 within the 
IT organization to explore the wider picture of an 
IS development project based on Agile methods.  It 
investigates 
the impact of having an Agile-based software projec
t on the business organization.  It questions how a
nd why 
business innovation could take place in the context
 of Agile-based IS development.  
 A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
3 
  
COLLECTIVE MINDFULNESS 

 
The concept of collective mindfulness is rooted in 
Langer™s model of individual mindfulness (Langer 19
89b, p. 4).  
In her model the rich awareness involved in the ind
ividual mindful state is depicted through active di
fferentiation 
and refinement of existing categories and distincti
ons, creation of new categories out of the continuo
us streams of 
events that flow through activities, and a more nua
nced appreciation of context and of alternative way
s to deal with 
it (Langer 1989b).  Langer later explained: ﬁA mind
ful approach to any activity has three characterist
ics: the 
continuous creation of new categories; openness to 
new information; and an implicit awareness of more 
than one 
perspectiveﬂ (Langer 1997, p.4).  Mindlessness, in 
contrast, is characterized by entrapment in old cat
egories; by 
automatic behavior that precludes attending to new 
signals; and by action that operates from single pe
rspective 
(ibid).  Mindless practice would strictly follow th
e rules disregarding the context, novelty, and the 
differences in 
individuals™ abilities.  Langer argues that mindful
 learning - or what she calls ﬁsideways learningﬂ- 
of a subject or a 
skill makes us receptive to changes in an ongoing s
ituations.  Mindful or sideways learning involves: 
openness to 
novelty, alertness to distinction, sensitivity to d
ifferent contexts, implicit or explicit awareness o
f multiple 
perspectives, and orientation in the present (Lange
r 1989a; Langer 1997).  Weick and Colleagues (1999)
 extended 
this model from the individual level to the group l
evel.  They argue that in group level the rich awar
eness is 
expressed the same way as Langer™s model as a by-pr
oduct of five cognitive processes.  They explain th
at collective 
mindfulness is as much about what people do with wh
at they notice as it is about the activity of notic
ing itself: 
ﬁMindfulness is as much about the quality of attent
ion as it is about the conservation of attentionﬂ (
Weick et al. 
1999).  They focused on studying High Reliability O
rganizations (HROs) and how they could sustain atte
ntion to 
details and small failures in prevention of the esc
alation of any problem which might lead to a disast
er.   
 
According to Weick and colleagues (1999) mindfulnes
s in HROs involves: preoccupation with failure, rel
uctance to 
simplify interpretations, sensitivity to operations
, commitment to resilience, and under-specification
 of structure.   
Mannarelli and others (1996) argue that ﬁan increas
ing number of organizations may be required to oper
ate to nearly 
the same standards and, therefore, under nearly the
 same demands as the HROs ...ﬂ (Mannarelli et al. 1
996).  In their 
research they focus on less extreme organizations t
hat have opportunities for High-consequence acciden
ts not 
because of operating hazardous or complex technolog
ies as in HROs but because of increasing public sen
sitivity due 
to a combination of media, legal, and environmental
 concerns.   
 
Vogus and Welbourne (2003) theoretically and empiri
cally connect the literature on high-reliability or
ganization to 
even a broader set of organizations that they calle
d reliability-seeking organizations.  Unlike HROs t
hat operate 
high-hazard technologies, or less extreme organizat
ion that operate in a sensitive institutional and e
nvironmental 
condition, reliability seeking organizations are ti
ghtly coupled to their unpredictable and complex en
vironment.  
Vogus and Welbourne (2003) focus their study on sof
tware houses.  They show that software houses could
 well 
serve as an example of reliability-seeking organiza
tions.  Weick and Sutcliffe (2007) extended the col
lective 
mindfulness theorization to include other business 
organizations that seek a reliable performance (Wei
ck et al. 
2007b).   

 
Swanson and Ramiller (2004) applied and extended th
e concept of mindfulness to IT innovation adoption 
(Swanson 
et al. 2004).  They argue that a mindful firm atten
ds to an IT innovation with reasoning grounded in i
ts own 
organizational facts and specifics.  They contraste
d it with a mindless approach to IT innovation base
d on 
bandwagon effect and the ﬁme tooﬂ approach.  They c
onclude by pointing at the need for field studies t
o further the 
understanding of mindfulness in IS innovation.  The
y also highlight the need to ﬁknow how mindfulness 
embraces 
opportunities for continuous learning, as distinct 
from the taking of more prepackaged and pre-determi
ned 
approaches.ﬂ(ibid, p. 575).      

 
  A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
4 
 The constructs of collective mindfulness as develop
ed by Weick et al. (1999) and adapted to IT innovat
ion adoption 
by Swanson and Ramiller (2004) are further explaine
d as follows: 
 
Preoccupation with failure 

The mindful organization is not concerned with succ
ess as much as it is concerned with failure.  It tr
eats a quiet 
period with suspicion that it could be an indicatio
n of possible miss of trouble™s signals (Schulman 1
993).  These 
organizations would encourage the reporting of erro
rs and make the most of any failure that is reporte
d (Weick et al. 
1999).  It encourages sustained attention even duri
ng periods of success.  In the context of IT, it re
fers to the 
organizational alertness and detection of early sig
ns of failure.  Swanson and Ramiller (2004) note th
at a 
preoccupation with failure in IT context can aid in
 identifying opportunities for realizing value from
 an IT 
innovation (Swanson et al. 2004).     

 
Reluctance to Simplify interpretations 

Simplifications are potentially dangerous because t
hey limit both the precautions people take and the 
number of 
undesired consequences they could envision (Weick e
t al. 1999).  The mindful organization is reluctant
 to simplify 
events and produce a repetitive interpretation base
d on the past.  Since simplifications increase the 
likelihood of 
eventual surprise, a mindful organization actively 
entertains novel, diverse, and conflicting perspect
ives (Swanson et 
al. 2004).  This principle invites vigilance and di
vergence in analytical perspectives among members o
f an 
organization (Schulman 1993).   

 
Sensitivity to operations  

A mindful organization pays attention to day-to-day
 operations and the course of events as they unfold
.  Sensitivity 
to operations entails the frequent review of perfor
mance, operations, and environmental conditions.  I
t allows the 
detection of problems and opportunities sooner, dev
elops intuition and flexible options, deepens perso
nal knowledge 
of the enterprise, and facilitates improvisation to
 cope with the unclear and changing environment (Br
own et al. 
1997; Vogus et al. 2003).   

 
Commitment to resilience 

The mindful organization develops capacity to bounc
e back from errors and also to cope with surprises 
in the 
moment.  Weick et al. (1999) note that ﬁit is impor
tant to retain both connotations of resilience to a
void the idea that 
resilience is simply the capability to absorb chang
e and still persist.  To be resilient means to util
ize the change that 
is absorbedﬂ (Weick et al. 1999).  Mindful organiza
tions accept the inevitability of error and hence p
ay attention to 
its prevention and containment (ibid).  They favor 
effectiveness over efficiency (Weick et al. 1999). 
  In the context 
of IT innovation, commitment to resilience is of pa
rticular importance as time passes and unfolding re
ality departs 
from the firm™s initial expectations.  ﬁThis implie
s a practical and realistic view, one that acknowle
dges that trade-
offs between schedule, budget, and delivered functi
onality may need creative adjustmentﬂ (Swanson et a
l. 2004, 
p.561).    

 
Reliance on expertise over formal authority 

A mindful organization recognizes the diversity of 
expertise required for its operation.  In the IS in
novation context, 
it implies that expertise could be found in manager
s, users, and other business-side participants (Ros
s et al. 2002).  
Hence IT innovation should not be structured around
 the IT expertise ignoring the richness of the orga
nization.  The 
expertise needed for IS innovation is to a substant
ial degree constructed collectively through the ver
y process of 
innovation and hence organizational mindfulness dep
ends in part on the on-going learning that organiza
tional 
members can help to foster in one another (Swanson 
et al. 2004).    
 
  A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
5 
  
 RESEARCH METHODS 

The study adopts an interpretive approach to enquir
y (Markus et al. 1999).  It aims to understand how 
innovation 
could take place in Agile-based IS development proj
ects (Walsham 1995).  
 
The primary method for data collection was in-depth
 interviews with project stakeholders. The fieldwor
k involved a 
total of 12 formal interviews.  Interviewees includ
e an external consultant, project manager, members 
of the project 
team, and departmental managers. The interviews wer
e largely unstructured and general questions were a
sked to 
serve as prompts.  Interviews lasted between 45 min
utes and two hours and were conducted on-site at th
e 
interviewee™s premises.  All interviews were tape-r
ecorded upon the interviewee™s explicit agreement a
nd the audio 
recorder was clearly displayed during the interview
.  Data collection also included reviewing some of 
the project 
documents. 

 
The first author started the field work with an ope
n approach to enquiry that aims to understand the p
henomena as it 
happened in the organization.  However familiar wit
h many social theories, the first author had no the
oretical 
starting point for data collection.  The theory of 
collective mindfulness emerged as a possible theory
 that could 
explain the success of the project towards the very
 end of field work.  The theory of collective mindf
ulness was then 
applied Œ in retrospect - to make sense of the coll
ected data.  Data was coded and analyzed following 
the convention 
of qualitative data analysis (Miles et al. 1994).  
The second author works in the studied organization
 and was the 
organizational sponsor of the studied project.  He 
was involved in the final stages of the writing up 
of the paper.  
 
Case Study 

Munich Re group is an international organization th
at provides financial services of reinsurance, prim
ary insurance, 
and asset management.  It is the world™s largest re
insurer and the second largest primary insurer in G
ermany.  Group 
post tax profits for 2006 were EUR 3.54 billion.  O
n the reinsurance side, the company employs over 6,
500 staff 
worldwide in over 60 units of which UK Life Branch 
(UKLB) is one.  The study investigates a project wh
ich took 
place in 2007 to develop a new claims administratio
n system for UKLB.  It was the first attempt to ado
pt Agile 
software development methods in the organization an
d an external consultancy was hired both to support
 the 
adoption of Agile methods, and to provide the IT de
livery team.  Following Agile methods, the software
 was 
developed in short time-boxed iteration cycle of 3 
weeks and hence the first software code was receive
d 6 weeks 
after the project started.  The project was envisag
ed at the start to last for 12 iterations yet it ex
tended to have two 
extra iterations to cover for an emerging extension
 of scope.  The project was initially scoped to man
age the 
payment of claims & premium accounts for a particul
ar line of business, but was opportunistically exte
nded to cover 
additional lines, and additional claims assessment 
business processes. The project produced a highly s
uccessful 
system: ﬁat the end, it became a core business solu
tion to manage a claimﬂ.    The system has been per
ceived by the 
business users as a first class claims system that 
improved the workflow, improved controls, and allow
ed staff to 
work in a relaxing manner trusting the in-built con
trols in the system.  The system was later praised 
by the corporate 
audit team and given a best practice rating during 
the audit.   
 
ANALYSIS: THE CREATION OF A MINDFUL IS PROJECT 

 
From occupation with success to occupation with fai
lure 
UKLB used to follow a traditional approach to softw
are development where the IT project manager is res
ponsible 
for the delivery of the project according to effici
ency metrics of on time, on budget, and to specific
ations and where 
the business expect an IT manager to deliver initia
l requirements as in business case.  This approach 
was putting a 
burden on IT project managers who were often reluct
ant to report problems in the hope either that it w
ould be 
resolved or that they would figure out ways to reso
lve them later.  IT managers, being responsible for
 IS projects, 
felt that reporting problems would be a personal fa
ilure and breaking of business trust of their abili
ty to meet 
expectations.  This view has been expressed as foll
ows: 
 A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
6 
  ﬁWhen the project moves from the certainty of nice 
concrete plan and the reality is coming into view-a
nd 
reality is in plain view, you know, they [project m
anagers] struggle to come to express that to you.  
And 
that™s where you start to see the effect of their u
nderstanding of the expectations as you see the pre
ssure 
piling up on them ...they are extremely reluctant t
o say that things are not OK....That™s because the 
message is rarely received in a pleasant way.–.  ‚Do
n™t shoot the messenger™ doesn™t seem to work on 
IT for some reason...which leads to certain relucta
nce to tell it as it is.  This desire to succeed al
l the 
time;,  you have to get to a point where you can sa
y ‚no™ and say ‚it™s not working™ and it has to be 
ok.  
You™ve got to be in an environment when it is perce
ived as an opportunity to improve and change 
something and not as a failure; a personal failure 
of letting people down.ﬂ 
 
The Director of Operations (in his previous role as
 Head of IT Development) felt that a new model of w
ork needed 
to be introduced to allow IT managers to detach the
mselves from the happenings of the project and enco
urage them 
to detect and report problems.  This has been expre
ssed as follows: 
  
ﬁ[Reporting problems] almost gets [seen] as a perso
nal assessment of your worth as a human being. 
You [a project manager] get so entrenched with the 
project that you can™t step back and say ‚No, it™s 
not about me, it™s about business processesﬂ. [dire
ctor] 
 UKLB opted to pilot a move towards a different mode
l for IS development to change the IT development m
indset 
and ease pressure on IT managers.   A new model tha
t would not only  allow problems to be detected and
 reported 
early on and as soon as they are noticed but also t
o incorporate that detection and actions arising in
to the natural 
project cycle, so it would no longer be seen as a d
efect.  They sought to try an Agile-based model wit
h the support of 
an external consulting company.  As it was a new mo
del, team members were learning how to make it work
.  They 
were cautious of failure and were open in expressin
g their views, concerns, and fears.  The IT manager
 of the project 
was no longer hiding any discomfort or concerns on 
the hope that issues might get better and resolved.
  Instead IT 
managers and other team members were vigilant in no
ticing, forward in expressing any concern and takin
g steps to 
rectify situations.   This has been expressed by th
e project manager: 
  ﬁwhen off shore came with a different way of doing
 a user case, and someone altered the user case- 
he shouldn™t have done without discussing it with t
he business- then we had to put some controls in to
 
make sure that use cases were versioned and there i
s a certain sign off for itﬂ. [IT manager]   
 Team members were also more open to raise issues an
d concerns and discuss them with the rest of projec
t team and 
stakeholders.  This has been expressed: 
 
ﬁthe problem could be noted by one or two people in
 the project team and because they™re working on 
that area that they might consider it [a] medium or
 relatively minor problem but if you™re exposing 
that problem to the rest of the team, people who ca
n realize the implications of that would add their 
concerns at that point...and as a result it may get
 escalated more urgently.ﬂ [business team member3] 
 
Reluctance to simplify interpretations 

1.1.1 Labeling 

The Claims project allowed for IT and business side
s to engage in the development in new ways that ove
rcome the 
traditional labelling and divide between IT and bus
iness.  Having a project room, Wiki, daily stand up
 meetings, and 
team Velocity Burndown Chart allowed for the creati
on of an IT-Business enmeshed team that had one goa
l, which 
was to serve the business well.  A business raised 
issue was not simply labelled ﬁresistanceﬂ, ﬁlack o
f 
 A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
7 
 understandingﬂ, or ﬁlack of IT knowledgeﬂ and hence
 ignored but rather had to be well understood, furt
her explored, 
discussed, and acted upon during iteration meetings
: 
 
ﬁ it was a business project, we only supported them
ﬂ  
 
The business side also for the first time appreciat
ed the IT side and the technical issues and hurdles
 they need to 
overcome to produce certain requirements.  Conseque
ntly, IT were not labelled anymore as having no ide
a of the 
business and wanting to constantly push the IT agen
da regardless of the business needs.   
 
ﬁMeetings [stand up meetings] made me perhaps for t
he first time understand what IT people are doing, 
[and] their 
specializations; you know coders, testers, analysts
 etc.  It made me realise how much work goes into t
hese things.ﬂ 
[Business team member4] 

 
1.1.2 Discarding 

The Claims project was organized to have an extende
d meeting every iteration cycle.  This meeting was 
attended by 
the IT consultant, IT project manager, business sub
ject matter experts, business testers, IT developer
s and testers, 
and MD/Directors and other stakeholders.  The meeti
ngs were led by the business SME™s, and they also p
resented 
the functionality that was to be demonstrated.  The
se meetings allowed for in-depth discussion of syst
em™s options 
and exploration of requirements and their implicati
ons rather than simple stating and discarding of re
quirements 
from the outset: 

 ﬁ[the meetings included/contained]...the end users,
 the stakeholders, the designers so everyone gets 
together and if anyone has concerns then the whole 
group is there in one place to discuss the 
implication of that change or whether it should wor
k and ultimately the business decides on which 
way to go as a result of the three-weekly iteration
 discussionsﬂ. [business team member 1]  
  ﬁ[in this project the business] were able to look 
at what was coming and we prioritized so [the 
external consultant] would say to me: ‚well if you 
want these tables to do what you want them to do, 
then you have to sacrifice some other functionality
™ and I as a user could look at what is more 
important to me....I can make the judgment after di
scussing with a number of people and we can then 
say: ‚well, look!  – it should be in phase one funct
ionality and the other [item] we can do in a later 
phase™ﬂ. [business team member 3] 
 
Sensitivity to operations 

1.1.3 Business users aware of IT operations 

The Claims project created deep awareness and appre
ciation of the business side of the IT operations a
nd the details 
of their processes.  Interviewees from the business
 side were aware of IT operation and the cycle of w
ork as 
expressed: 

 ﬁ...you get code delivery every three weeks which i
s a massive bonus for the business because we 
started to see, and get a much earlier look and fee
l about the system and that code is meant to be a 
working code.  So... you see the system develops al
most in front of your eyes.ﬂ 
  A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
8 
 The business side appreciated the costing and timin
g issues involved in changing requirements which av
oided the 
typical frustration of delays and exceeding budget 
and the attribution of it to IT department malfunct
ion.  As a 
business user expressed it: 

   
ﬁ...including my area would certainly increase the 
cost; it required at least two more iterations to b
uild 
my side of things and there is a ripple effect.  Yo
u add another chunk, that obviously ripples out to 
your testers, not user acceptance tests, but the in
itial tests.ﬂ 
 1.1.4 Business areas made aware of each other™s ope
rations 
Quite a few departments were involved in the projec
t, however some that were involved were, functional
ity-wise,  
out of scope.  The idea was that they would be indi
rectly affected by the developed system and hence t
heir 
involvement would be beneficial:  

 ﬁI was involved from the beginning of the project -
 even [though] my area, technically speaking, from 
functionality point of view, was out of scope.  But
 clearly decisions made by [system™s initial 
beneficiary department] would impact upon my area.ﬂ
   
 
Allowing other departments to join the project, eve
n though they are out of scope, gave them opportuni
ty to rethink 
their own operations.  These departments later requ
ested to join the system and prepared their own bus
iness cases.    
 ﬁbecause of the wider Agile [business processes] be
ing built, I found it easy to persuade [the sponsor
] 
of why we should bulk this on [request to join the 
system] so we get much more end-to-end flow, 
otherwise we would™ve had a lovely smooth accountin
g system and a separate claims system that did 
not really have any obvious interface with it.  But
 that really got signed off after less than a third
 away 
from the end of the project.ﬂ    
 
Users were requested to prepare their own business 
case for joining the system  
ﬁwe had to prepare the business case, part of it wa
s about what would it cost to add full claims 
assessment to the existing scope. We had to ask [ex
ternal consultant] to cost that because there was 
the off-shore cost of building it.  Once we had a g
ood figure, we were able to put that to the MD –.ﬂ. 
 
The open practices of the project allowed for mista
kes to be detected early on:   
 ﬁwe have a variety of stakeholders, some of them ar
e sort of minor stakeholders.  Therefore, you may 
forget their requirements or [these] may not be so 
obvious.  Because of the demo, it was easier for th
e 
business to see if there is something missed. Befor
e, we were only involved to pick up these things 
later in the user acceptance testingﬂ   
 
1.1.5 Awareness of project™s team members work 

The project practice of daily stand up meetings gav
e team members from both the business and IT side t
he 
opportunity to exchange experience and learn what e
ach member is responsible for.  Each team member be
came 
aware of the daily practice of other members™ work 
and the issues they face.  A business team member e
xpressed 
this idea as follows: 

  A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
9 
 ﬁThe business users had much more involvement throu
ghout the project.  So everyday there was a 
scrum, the SMEs would go. We would say what we™ve d
one on the project the day before, what we™re 
going to do today and tomorrow, and whether there a
re any problems or issues... it was a stand up 
meeting.  It™s punchy but you also heard the story 
from IT perspective, from an architect point of vie
w 
against someone else™s point of view and that went 
all the way down the room including -obviously- 
[the external consultants] as well.  And that openn
ess I found refreshing.ﬂ [Business team member 2] 
 
Commitment to resilience 

The business side of the project team was allocated
 points to act as their virtual budget for the proj
ect.  When 
developing system™s features, the business members 
of the team would specify their requirements and le
ave them to 
IT to work out its effort value in terms of points.
  IT would allocate points based on development and
 testing time 
then convey that to the business.   The business th
en had to take a decision regarding the execution o
f these features.  
When there was a clash between the number of points
 required to develop features and the allocated poi
nts for that 
iteration, rather than simply re-prioritizing, the 
business also thought of alternatives: 
 ﬁ we find another way to serve our requirements to 
a point, then we can look at developing that furthe
r 
in the future....this is how we dealt with our prob
lems really, we did not drop it [particular functio
n] 
off scope completely, we™ve just reviewed it and pu
t it in a slightly different way so it can fit with
 the 
budget of the projectﬂ.  This helped the business t
o ﬁwork on this compromise arrangement rather than 
either push the budget too far or drop [scope] all 
togetherﬂ.  
 
When the project team detected the possible extensi
on of the system to include another department whic
h was out of 
the initial scope, they asked IT to value the amoun
t of work to include it.  The business side of the 
project went on to 
request the extra funding to implement this extensi
on. This ﬁtransparencyﬂ allowed for the business si
de to 
appreciate the exceeding of the initial budget and 
find it as a seized opportunity to improve operatio
n rather than the 
traditional view of IT failure to deliver on budget
.   It also allowed for IT to see the business valu
e of 
accommodating and embracing change rather than find
ing it a burden on the IT function.  A senior busin
ess 
manager said:  

 ﬁOur end product was not what we originally budgete
d for.  But we were able to re-budget and get 
more because we could see the considerable business
 advantages of doing soﬂ.  [business team 
member6] 

 The iterative cycle of the project gradually built 
the project team confidence of their ability to del
iver and cope with 
requirements™ change which allowed the team to exte
nd the scope of the project to add more departments
 and 
functions: 

 ﬁ With the iterative method, the team was proving i
t can deliver, proving it can deliver, proving it c
an 
deliver and therefore when they wanted to add chang
e controls to add two or three iterations, it was 
with a high degree of confidence because they knew 
the team would deliver, because the team had 
delivered before for, you know, several monthsﬂ  

 
ﬁAs we moved towards the end of the project, those 
[feature™s tests] that passed started to increase 
exponentially and those that fail dropped off ...so
 that was quite satisfying to see every three weeks
, it 
gave us the boost that we™re moving in the right di
rectionﬂ. 
  A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
10 
 The IT side of the project was also committed to ac
commodate business change and encourage the busines
s to go 
through their requirements, change and prioritize t
hem as they go along: 
 ﬁPrioritizing requirements was a business role this
 time.  So it is not the IT [team] going back to [a
] 
typical waterfall response: we cannot deliver, you 
cannot have what you want [even] though you do 
the role [of prioritizing or rejecting requirements
] and [so it™s] back to the argument [between IT an
d 
business].  This time, the users were involved.  We
 said no restriction for you to change something.  
Don™t worry if we give it to you now [at the end of
 iteration] and it is not what you want because I 
mis-understood you or you didn™t quite understand w
hat you wanted until you saw it working.  As the 
solution evolved, you realize how to change it so w
e made no restrictions [on the business to change 
or amend requirements].  We made it clear, you are 
not penalized for that at all but you must manage 
that requirements list up and down.  We will estima
te it in terms of size, will give you a velocity of
 the 
team™s general delivery and cost.  But you™ll [the 
business] have to make that line [deciding on 
requirements] ﬂ.    
 
Reliance on expertise 

The business side was heavily involved in the proje
ct in the form of Subject Matter Experts, testers, 
and 
stakeholders™ attendance of meetings every iteratio
n cycle.  This active involvement of the business a
llowed for 
continuous cross-learning between the business and 
IT.  This has been expressed by interviewees as fol
lows:  
 ﬁfrom non-IT point of view, it was educational for 
me to be able to see the work that was really 
happening behind the scenes as part of the developm
ent of the system, i.e. we [the business side] had 
no idea of how much work goes into the development 
and coding of a piece of software.  I would 
normally at the start of a project [an IS developme
nt project], sit down with someone telling him make
 
it [the developed system] do that please then he go
es away.  Six months later, he comes back with 
something that may or may not work.  With this I ca
n see every three weeks exactly what was going 
on.ﬂ 

 Involved users were not chosen for their seniority 
but rather for the extent of involvement of the ope
rations: 
 
ﬁI am not the most senior there, but because this i
s my job, it was perhaps felt I could contribute to
 
specs and workflows.ﬂ  
 
The involved users were empowered by their managers
 to take decisions which allowed IT people to inter
act 
directly with the decision makers of the business: 
 
ﬁPeople we were engaging with on daily basis were t
he people who do the work:  the actual people 
who run claims.  And they were there because their 
managers empowered them to take decisions 
directlyﬂ 
 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 

The Claims system was developed following new pract
ices for both project management and software devel
opment.  
The project created a bubble of collective mindfuln
ess where team members became concerned of failure,
 reluctant 
to simplify or discard issues, sensitive to both IT
 and business operations, willing to embrace and co
pe with change, 
and more reliant on direct expertise rather than li
ne of authority.  This state of mindfulness had the
 capacity to 
sustain a high level of vigilance and sensitivity t
o business operations and needs which fostered busi
ness innovation 
 A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
11 
 and the delivery of a successful solution.  The com
bination of these elements allowed the team to rede
fine their 
failure criteria from time and budget to delivering
 a system that serves the business well.   
 
The case study shows that project team members were
 occupied with failure.  They were vigilant in noti
cing issues 
and forward in reporting concerns.  The daily stand
-up meetings provided a platform for members to exp
ress 
concerns and report early signs of failures.  This 
fear of failure could have been partially infused b
y the novelty of 
the adopted Agile methods and the organizational at
tention it created.  Team members were also attenti
ve to 
possible opportunities to realize business value fr
om the system under development. 
 
The project members were also reluctant to simplify
 requirements and take decisions on them without ex
tended 
discussion.  They were keen to hear all points of v
iews; a practice that has been facilitated by the e
nd of iteration 
extended meetings and system demonstrations.  Issue
s raised were not discarded without discussion and 
further 
investigation.  This ability to entertain diverse a
nd conflicting perspectives or ‚conceptual slack™ a
s Schulman (1993) 
terms it allows vigilance (Schulman 1993) and ﬁis l
ikely to produce new ideas and modes of operating t
hat can 
become innovativeﬂ (Vogus et al. 2003, p.882).   

 
Project room, daily stand-up meetings, project wiki
, and published team burn down chart and velocity c
hart 
improved the team members™ sensitivity to operation
s.  Team members became aware of the day-to-day ope
rations 
of the project and each other™s roles.  It also dee
pened the knowledge of project members from the bus
iness side of 
the company and the internal operations of differen
t departments. These practices also allowed the bus
iness and IT 
to learn about each other™s internal operation whic
h facilitated the discarding of the traditional IT/
business labelling 
and overcame the widely reported business-technical
 gap (Hirschheim et al. 1989; Land et al. 1983).  T
his 
awareness of the diversity of operations and point 
of views improved the business ability to innovate 
and to extend 
the system to cover more business processes and dep
artments.  This finding supports the view that ﬁInn
ovation 
requires preserving (not reducing) the uncertainty 
and diversity in the environment within the organiz
ationﬂ (Van de 
Ven 1986, p.605). 

 
The studied project cultivated an environment that 
embraced change and developed a capacity to deal wi
th it.  This 
has been fostered partially by the short iteration 
cycles that gradually built the team confidence of 
their ability to 
cope with change and continue to successfully deliv
er.  Building the confidence to cope with change is
 not in Weick 
and Sutcliffe™s (2007) original model of mindfulnes
s and could be considered part of  its appropriatio
n in the IS 
context (Weick et al. 2007a).  

 
The team members™ increased awareness of both IT an
d business operations has also contributed to the s
ustainability 
of accepting change and finding practical and innov
ative solutions to deal with it.  The collaboration
 between IT and 
business based on costing points and the granting t
he business side the liberty to choose their option
s enhanced the 
business ability not only to prioritize requirement
s but more importantly to find alternative options 
for the system.    
 
The subject matter experts were chosen based on the
ir direct involvement of the business processes eit
her covered or 
affected by the Claims system and not according to 
their seniority.
  
  These users were also empowered by their line 
management to take design decision on the project. 
 The inclusion and empowerment of actual users in t
he project 
allowed for ideas to flow and get connected as argu
ed in (Beirne 2006).  This also rectified one of th
e major 
criticism of participative approaches which was the
 reliance on involving high level business particip
ants that their 
views not necessarily reflects the actual work bein
g done (Beirne et al. 1992).  Also having an extern
al consultant in 
the project to act as a coach and mentor in Agile i
ncreased the team members™ attention to their own b
usiness 
processes and practices in attempts to question the
 consultants practice and the advocated Agile metho
ds.  Langer 
(1989) notes that ﬁthe imaginative use of outsiders
 [e.g, independent consultants] can encourage ... m
indfulness 
...[and] can keep important questions flowingﬂ (Lan
ger 1989a, p.139). 
  A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
12 
 However Agile methods prescribe short iteration cyc
les, it was the practice of using these cycles as o
ccasions to 
have extended meetings where project stakeholders, 
team members, and consultants get together to atten
d the 
system demonstration and discuss requirements and t
heir implications that helped to sustain organizati
onal attention 
during the project.  This adaptation and addition t
o the methods or mindful adoption of Agile methods 
empirically 
asserts Swanson and Ramiller (2004) point that a mi
ndful adoption of an IT innovation would consider 
organizational specifics.  The mindful adoption of 
Agile methods in the case study encouraged creative
 thinking and 
team members™ ability to find alternative and compl
ementary ways that enhanced the management and deli
verables 
of the project.  This finding supports Wastell (199
6) argument that the strict adherence to the method
ology could 
hinder organizational creativity (Wastell 1996).   
It also invites practitioners to reappraise the con
cepts and 
usefulness of IS development methods and consider t
heir own organizational context in their adoption. 
 Adaptation 
and variations on IS development methods should be 
accepted and incorporated in their adoption and not
 considered 
as a failure of adoption (Fitzgerald et al. 1999) (
Avison et al. 2003).   
 
The study demonstrates that business innovation cou
ld take place in the context of IS development if t
he project 
could sustain a focus on business needs and require
ments and if business users and stakeholders could 
sustain 
attention and interest in the development project. 
 This sustainability of attention or mindfulness fr
om both the IT 
and business side would allow the business to bette
r express their needs and allow their requirements 
to evolve to 
better serve the business.  This finding takes user
s™ participation a step further than has been previ
ously advocated 
(Land et al. 1983; Mumford 1997).  This paper advoc
ates the vigilance and sustainable attention from b
oth the 
business and IT sides throughout IS development pro
ject.  
 
In conclusion, this study provides an empirical sup
port to Swanson and Ramiller (2004) endeavor to ada
pt the 
collective mindfulness concepts to IS innovation an
d extend it to cover IS project management.  It rev
eals that an IS 
project can be considered a reliability-seeking org
anization due to its complexity, the criticality of
 its output to the 
rest of the organization, and the serious repercuss
ions of its failure.  Accordingly, a mindful approa
ch to managing 
IS project that embraces rich interpretations, cont
extual sensitivity, and commitment to flexibility w
ould not only 
improves IS delivery but also encourage the busines
s to innovate while developing a system. 
 
LIMITATIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 

The research reported here presents a single case s
tudy and the framework needs to be refined and test
ed with 
further cases.  There is also a concern regarding t
he price of mindfulness.  However most of the liter
ature on 
mindfulness treats it as a positive phenomena (Lang
er 1997; Weick et al. 2007b), this study supports V
ogus et al. 
2003 argument that there is a cost associated with 
the creation and maintenance of mindfulness (Vogus 
et al. 2003, 
p. 881).  In the studied case, the project, whilst 
creating a mindful organization that allowed for bu
siness innovation, 
ended up over the initially envisaged budget and ti
me.    
 
Although this particular project within UKLB has be
en successful, it should be noted that ﬁit is this 
very success and 
the temptations that arise from it that define a ne
w form of failureﬂ (Weick et al. 1999, p.94).   The
refore, the 
research continues to study the IS development prac
tices after the organizational success of the Claim
s project   
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

This research has been funded by a British Academy 
grant number SG-48355 granted to the first author. 
 
REFERENCES 

Ashurst, C., Doherty, N.F., and Peppard, J. "Improv
ing the impact of IT development projects: the bene
fits 
realization capability model," European Journal of 
Information Systems (17:4) 2008, pp 352-371  
Avison, D.E., and Fitzgerald, G. "Where Now for Dev
elopment Methodologies?," Communication of the ACM 
(46:1) 2003, pp 79-82. 
 A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
13 
 Beck, K. Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Cha
nge Addison-Wesley, Reading, Mass., 2000. 
Beirne, M. Empowerment and innovation: managers, pr
inciples and reflective practice Edward Elgar Publi
shing, 
2006. 
Beirne, M., and Ramsay, H. "A Creative Offensive? P
articipative Systems Design and the question of con
trol," in: 
Information Technology and Workplace Democracy, M. 
Beirne and H. Ramsay (eds.), Routledge, London, 
1992, pp. 92-120. 
Brown, S.L., and Eisenhardt, K.M. "The Art of Conti
nious Change: Linking complexity theory and time-pa
ced 
evolution in relentlessly shifting organizations " 
Administractive Science Quarterly (42) 1997, pp 1-3
4. 
Coad, P., and Palmer, S. Feature-Driven Development
 Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, 2002. 
Cockburn, A. Crystal Clear: A human-powered softwar
e development methodology for small teams Addison-
Wesley, Reading, MA, 2001. 
Conboy, K., and Fitzgerald, B. "Toward a Conceptual
 Framework of Agile Methods: A study of agility in 
different 
discipline," in: ACM workshop on Interdisciplinary 
Software Engineering Research, CA, USA, 2004. 
Fitzgerald, B. "Systems Development Methodologies: 
 The problem of tenses," Information Technology & P
eople 
(13:3) 2000, pp 174-185. 
Fitzgerald, G., Philippides, A., and Probert, S. "I
nformation Systems Development, Maintenance and Enh
ancement:  
Findings from a UK study," International Journal of
 Information Management (40:2) 1999, pp 319-328. 
Fowler, M., and Highsmith, J. "The Agile Manifesto,
" Software Development:August) 2001, pp pp. 28-32. 
Highsmith, J. Agile Project Management Addison-Wesl
ey, Boston, MA, 2004. 
Hirschheim, R., and Klein, H.K. "Four Paradigms of 
Information Systems Development," Communications of
 the 
ACM (32:10) 1989, pp 1199-1216. 
Karlsen, J.T. "A Q-sort study of benefits realisati
on in IT projects," International Journal of Busine
ss Information 
Systems (3:4) 2008, pp 356 - 373. 
Land, F., and Hirschheim, R. "Participative Systems
 Design: Rationale, tools and techniques," Journal 
of Applied 
Systems Analysis (10) 1983, pp 91-107. 
Langer, E.J. Mindfulness Addison-Wesley, Reading, M
A, 1989a. 
Langer, E.J. "Minding Matters:  The consequences of
 mindlessness-mindfulness " in: Advances in Experim
ental 
Social Psychology, L. Berkowitz (ed.), Academic Pre
ss, San Diego, 1989b. 
Langer, E.J. The Power of Mindful Learning Da Capo 
Press, USA, 1997. 
Mannarelli, T., Hoberts, K.H., and Bea, R.G. "Learn
ing How Organizationa Mitigate Risk," Journal of 
Contingencies and Crisis Management (4:2) 1996, pp 
83-92. 
Markus, L.M., and Lee, A.S. "Special issue on inten
sive research in information systems:  Using qualit
ative, 
interpretive, and case methods to study information
 technology--forward," MIS Quartely (23:1) 1999, pp
 
35-38. 
Meso, P., and Jain, R. "Agile Software Development:
 Adaptive Systems Principles and Best Practices," I
nformation 
Systems Management (23:3) 2006, pp 19-30. 
Miles, M.B., and Huberman, A.M. Qualitative Data An
alysis:  An expanded sourcebook Sage Publications, 
1994. 
Mumford, E. "The Reality of Participative Systems D
esign:  Contributing to stability in a rocketing bo
at," 
Information Systems Journal (7:4) 1997, pp 309-322.
 Murray, D. "Agile: Breaking the Cycle of Distrust,"
 in: presentation at Agile Business Conference, Lon
don, 2007. 
Poppendieck, M. "Lean Programming," Software Develo
pment Magazine (9:5) 2001, pp 71-75. 
Reymeni, D., Sherwood-Smith, M., and White, T. Achi
eving Maximum Value from Information Systems: A pro
cess 
approach John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, 1997. 
 A. Elbanna & D. Murray 
 Organizing IS Projects for Innovation 
14 
 Ross, J.W., and Weill, P. "Six IT Decisions Your IT
 People Shouldn't Make," Harvard Business Review (8
0:11) 
2002, pp 84-92. 
Schulman, P.R. "The negotiated Order of Organizatio
nal Reliability," Administration and Society (25) 1
993, pp 
353-372. 
Schwaber, K., and Beedle, M. Agile Software Develop
ment with Scrum. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River,
 NJ, 
2002. 
Stapleton, J. DSDM: Dynamic Systems Development Met
hod. Addison Wesley, Harlow, England, 1997. 
Swanson, E.B., and Ramiller, N.C. "Innovating Mindf
ully with Information Technology," MIS Quarterly (2
8:4) 
2004, pp 553-583. 
Van de Ven, A.H. "Central Problems in the Managemen
t of Innovation," Management Science (32) 1986, pp 
591-
607. 
Vidgen, R., and Wang, X. "Organizing for Agility:  
A complex adaptive systems perspective on agile sof
tware 
development," in: Fourteenth European Conference of
 Information Systems, J. Ljunberg and M. Andersson 
(eds.), Goteborg, Sweden, 2006. 
Vogus, T., and Welbourne, T.M. "Structuring for hig
h reliability: HR practices and mindful processes i
n reliability-
seeking organizations," Journal of Organizational B
ehavior (24) 2003, pp 877-903. 
Walsham, G. "The Emergence of Interpretivism in IS 
Research," Information Systems Research (6:4) 1995,
 pp 376-
394. 
Wang, X., and Vidgen, R. "Order and Chaos in Softwa
re Development: A comparison of two software develo
pment 
teams in a major IT company," in: Fifteenth Europea
n Conference on Information Systems, R. Winter, et 
al. (eds.) (ed.), St. Gallen, Switzerland, 2007. 
Ward, J., and Elvin, P. "A New Framework for Managi
ng IT-enabled Business Change," Information Systems
 
Journal (9:3) 1999, pp 197-222. 
Ward, J., Taylor, P., and Bond, P. "Evaluation and 
the Realisation of IS/IT Benefits," European Journa
l of 
Information Systems (4) 1996, pp 214-225. 
Wastell, D. "The Fetish of Technique: Methodology a
s a social defence," Information Systems Journal (6
:1) 1996. 
Weick, K.E., and Sutcliffe, K.M. Managing the Unexp
ected: Resilient performance in an age of uncertain
ty John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc., San Francisco, CA, 2007a. 
Weick, K.E., and Sutcliffe, M. Managing the Unexpec
ted, (2nd edition ed.) John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 200
7b. 
Weick, K.E., Sutcliffe, M., and Obstfeld, D. "Organ
izing For High Reliability: Process of collective m
indfulness," 
Research in Organizational Behavior (21) 1999, pp 8
1-123. 
 
 
 