 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Critical Success Conditions for Enterprise SystemsChange ProjectsOdd FredrikssonKarlstad UniversityLennart LjungKarlstad UniversityAMCIS 2010Proceedings. Fredriksson et al.      Critical Success Conditions
 for Enterprise System Change Projects 
 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru,  August 12-15, 20
10. 1 
Critical Success Conditions for Enterprise Systems 
Change Projects 
      

       

       
Odd Fredriksson
  Karlstad University, Sweden 
Odd.Fredriksson@kau.se 
Lennart Ljung
  Karlstad University, Sweden 
Lennart.Ljung@kau.se
  
 
ABSTRACT 

Enterprise systems are configurable and customized 
computer-based information systems, claiming to pro
vide a total, 
integrated solution to firms™ information-processin
g needs. ‚Management support™, ‚User Involvement™, 
and ‚Project 
Management Experience™ are considered as three of t
he most important critical success conditions for E
nterprise systems 
change projects. The main purpose of this paper is 
to identify and discuss new preconditions for estab
lished critical success 
conditions in Enterprise systems change projects. T
raditional Enterprise systems technology and tradit
ional plan-driven 
project management methods are not in an effective 
way supporting the established critical success con
ditions for Enterprise 
systems change projects. Supported by the findings 
from one case study, we propose that new preconditi
ons, such as modern 
Enterprise systems technology, more narrowly define
d projects and agile methods are matching each othe
r. We also propose 
that this combination of new preconditions is more 
appropriate for supporting the realization of criti
cal success conditions for 
Enterprise systems change projects. 

 
Keywords
 Enterprise systems, critical success conditions, en
terprise systems change, project management, agile 
methods, web-based 
enterprise systems, sales portals, sales order proc
esses. 
 
ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS AND TRADITIONAL PROJECT MANAGEME
NT   
Enterprise Systems 

Today there is a booming market for software packag
es claiming to provide a total, integrated solution
 to firms™ information-
processing needs. Enterprise systems (ESs) are stan
dardized computer-based information systems for ent
erprise integration, 
internally as well as externally. ESs can be custom
ized in principally two ways: traditional parameter
-driven systems or the 
new type of systems built up by a user-friendly app
lication generator. ESs are characterized as all-em
bracing administrative 
information provision in organizations supporting t
he integration of business processes through shared
 information flows (cf. 
Shanks and Seddon, 2000). The integration of core b
usiness processes, for example accounting, order ma
nagement, logistics 
and human resources, is achieved through creation o
f a single system with a shared database.  
Over the past fifteen years many large and SME orga
nizations have adopted ESs expecting positive outco
mes. Many of these 
firms are now upgrading, replacing, or extending th
eir original ESs, facing major technical and organi
zational challenges. 
The reason is argued to be that the traditional ESs
 are monoliths with complicated code bases, which m
ake it difficult to 
design solutions meeting the needs of the individua
l firm. It is not either possible to pick just one 
improvement that the 
customer wants from an upgrade and skip the other. 
Vendors of traditional ESs are aware of the growing
 dissatisfaction 
among its users, who are forced to work in ineffici
ent ways, hire expensive consultants to manage the 
systems, and to 
perform Big Bang upgrades causing lots of disruptio
n and cost. 
 Fredriksson et al.      Critical Success Conditions
 for Enterprise System Change Projects 
 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru,  August 12-15, 20
10. 2 
Traditional Project Management 

The project management methods applied to handle mo
st IT projects, could be denoted as ‚traditional' a
nd originate from the 
large development projects carried out during the f
orties-fifties within the U.S. military industry. T
hese traditional methods 
feature extensive upfront planning as the basis for
 predictions, measurements and control during the p
roject life cycle (Nerur 
et al., 2005). Traditional project management is of
ten denoted as ‚plan-driven™ or ‚stage-gate™ projec
t management. 
Projects are generally defined as non-recurrent ass
ignments with well-defined goals, time-limit and bu
dget Œ but there is a 
wide range of project types, requiring a wide range
 of management methods. Still, most projects are ma
naged by the 
traditional principles using the same methods, usua
lly without further reflection, even in small proje
cts of short duration 
(Nilsson, 2008). Thus, the organizational learning 
within software development has been focused on red
ucing variance and 
on increasing process repeatability and control (Ly
ytinen and Rose, 2006) often by implementing qualit
y systems as CMM 
(Humphrey, 1989). Despite these efforts, software d
evelopment has not been consistently successful, th
us often resulting in 
delayed or abandoned software projects. Extensive r
esearch has proven that traditional project managem
ent methods are 
insufficient for project success within software de
velopment. The Standish Group International (2001) 
found that only 28% 
of 280,000 surveyed software development projects w
ere perceived as successful.  
CRITICAL SUCCESS CONDITIONS FOR ENTERPRISE SYSTEMS 
CHANGE 
In this paper, ‚ES change™ denotes the two mutually
 interdependent ES development and ES implementatio
n processes. The 
perceived need for improvements regarding ES change
, and the common view that all IT projects deal wit
h the same 
problems and opportunities, has inspired researcher
s and practitioners in the search of the most impor
tant factors deciding 
failure or success in IT projects. The Critical Suc
cess Factor (CSF) approach was originally suggested
 by Rockart (1979). A 
CSF indicates what has to be managed correctly to a
chieve successful results. 
There exists an established and acknowledged set of
 CFSs for ES change projects. The Standish Group In
ternational study ( 
2001), surveyed the strength of influences from dif
ferent factors on project success. The five most im
portant CSFs were 
‚Management support™, ‚User Involvement™, ‚Experien
ced Project Manager™, ‚Clear Business Objectives™ a
nd ‚Minimized 
Scope™.  

Other researchers (eg., Soh and Markus, 1995) advoc
ate process theory models, which contain arguments 
of the type 
ﬁnecessary, but not sufficientﬂ conditions to reali
ze effects as a result of the adoption and use of a
n IT artifact. A process 
theory maintains that the outcome will only occur u
nder the circumstances specified by the theory. At 
the same time a 
process theory states that the outcome may not occu
r even if all the specified prerequisites, or condi
tions, are in place (Mohr, 
1982). Acknowledging the dynamic contexts for ES de
velopment and ES implementation processes, we there
fore in this 
paper use the process theory concept Critical Succe
ss Condition (CSC) instead of the variance theory c
oncept Critical 
Success Factor. 

CHANGING PRECONDITIONS  

The ES change context is far from stable. There hav
e been continuous changes in technology, software d
evelopment 
methods, application areas, management techniques, 
etc, during the entire era of software development 
(Boehm, 2006). 
During the last decade, these changes have altered 
the preconditions for ES change projects, and also 
the possibilities for the 
acknowledged CSCs to be realized.   

Modern Technology Œ a Paradigm Shift from Tightly t
o Loosely Coupled Enterprise Systems 
The current movement to Service Orientation is indi
cating an era of enterprise computing based on open
 standards, Service 
Oriented Architecture (SOA), and optimized business
 processes. SOA is a style of enterprise architectu
re that enables the 
creation of applications and processes, built by co
mbining interoperable services in a loosely coupled
 fashion. These services 
interoperate based on a formal definition, independ
ent from the underlying resources and programming l
anguage. SOA offers 
more flexibility, lower costs and increased product
ivity (ComActivity, 2008), and enables the firm to 
make itself free from 
hard coded, heterogeneous, difficult to integrate a
nd fragmented applications (Björkman, 2008b). Furth
ermore, Internet 
technology has turned out to be a good environment 
for development in real time, allowing collaboratio
n in teams around the 
clock and around the world (Aoyama, 1998). This ind
icates a radical shift from today™s rigid and infle
xible systems towards 
loosely coupled approaches to ES change and diffusi
on.  
The Agile Perspective and Project Management 

Since the emergence of programming methods such as 
‚XP™, ‚Scrum™ and ‚Feature Driven Development™ in t
he late 1990™s 
(Boehm, 2006), there is a growing popularity of agi
le methods within ES change project management. Ins
tead of extensive 
upfront project planning as in traditional ‚stage-g
ate™ project management, project plans are made mai
nly for flexibility and 
 Fredriksson et al.      Critical Success Conditions
 for Enterprise System Change Projects 
 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru,  August 12-15, 20
10. 3 
changes, and the purpose of project evaluation is n
ot to compare the progress with the original plan, 
but to decide new roads 
of action for the project.  

Agile methods are characterized by short iterative 
cycles of development guided by product features, a
nd continuous 
integration of code changes during development. The
 deliverables from each development cycle is workin
g code that can be 
used by the customer. This is one reason why compan
ies adopting agile methods perceive fewer problems 
with customer 
relationships, since incrementally delivering funct
ionality in a sequence of releases appears to bette
r satisfy customer needs 
(Ceschi et al., 2005). Nerur et al., (2005) summari
ze that agile development is characterized by syste
m developers and end-
users both playing important roles and together for
ming teams that collaborate in repeated cycles of t
hought-action-reflection. 
Team roles are flexible and the communication is in
formal.  
Modern Technology as an Enabler of Agile Methods 

Modern technology (e.g., SOA and Internet-based app
lications) enables ES change projects to aim for pa
rtially, step-wise 
improvements instead of building one single ES from
 scratch, using several years from requirements col
lection to full ES 
implementation. The classical problem is that chang
es caused by new requirements from the business con
text are difficult to 
incorporate during the execution of an up-front pla
nned, large-scale project. Modern ES technology in 
combination with 
narrowly defined ES projects, give the opportunity 
to focus on results and effects in the receiving or
ganization as the base-
line for evaluation of the fulfilment of project ob
jectives, instead of adherence to the original proj
ect plan.   
Chow and Cao (2008) made an explorative study to fi
nd out which factors can positively influence on th
e success of agile 
system development projects. They identified 12 suc
cess factors, which were classified into five categ
ories: Organizational, 
People, Process, Technical and Project. One conclus
ion from this study is that modern ES technology en
ables flexible agile-
oriented development, in terms of allowing the proj
ect team to dynamically develop the ES in an iterat
ive way, markedly 
improving the possibility to achieve high customer 
value and high usability. Modern ES technology matc
hes what Nerur et 
al. (2005) claim to be a fundamental assumption for
 the path of agility:  ﬁ–, adaptive software which c
an be developed by 
small teams using the principles of continuous desi
gn improvement and testing based on rapid feedback 
and change.ﬂ In the 
Chow and Cao (2008) study, the Technical dimension 
(agile software techniques and delivery strategy) w
as found to be the 
most critical dimension in impacting the success of
 agile projects.  
More Narrowly Defined Projects 

According to Standish Group International (2001) th
ere is a trend towards smaller projects. But why ar
e projects turning 
smaller in time, cost and scope? One explanation is
 that it currently takes less time to produce each 
function in a software 
development project, due to new methods based on mo
dern technology. Another explanation is that top ma
nagement actively 
chooses to divide large complex assignments into sm
aller manageable phases, called projects.    
Willcocks and Sykes (2000) have stressed the import
ance of defining focused and short ES change projec
ts. To run a highly 
paced project during a long time period is trying f
or all those involved. To run a long project with a
 low pace makes it long-
winded, tiredness emerges and setbacks appear. Larg
e projects run in global, product-driven markets ar
e often managed 
through a ‚stage-gate™ model, enabling high-level m
anagement to control the overall project progress, 
while agile methods 
are derived from small-scale, contract-driven devel
opment projects (Karlström and Runeson, 2005).   
Increasing Management Competence  

The importance of top management support and commit
ment has been demonstrated in many studies. Duchess
i et al. (1989), 
in their survey study found that more support is gi
ven from top management teams in organizations whic
h successfully 
implement ESs than what is given in organizations w
hich have been less successful. If the top manageme
nt team is not aware 
of how to avoid the pitfalls, then things can go re
ally wrong. Along the same vein, Sumner (2005) advi
ce top managers to 
aim for reducing the risks associated with ES imple
mentation projects. This requires that top manageme
nt is capable of 
identifying the risks and can assess their amplitud
es.  
The top managers™ competence in IT-related question
s has most likely increased during the last decades
. The trend towards 
smaller software projects, using modern Internet-ba
sed technology which enables project results to be 
assessed continuously 
in relation to practical usage Œ instead of one lar
ge long-time, complex project Œ gives the opportuni
ty to the top management 
to assess and make decisions in the software projec
ts more often. This helps in overlapping the gap th
at reflects how the top 
management lack the understanding of how IT essenti
ally contributes to business value (Morgan, 2004). 
PURPOSE AND METHOD 

The main purpose of this paper is to identify and d
iscuss new preconditions for established critical s
uccess conditions in ES 
change projects. In this paper we focus on the new 
type of modern ESs based on user-friendly applicati
on generators. 
 Fredriksson et al.      Critical Success Conditions
 for Enterprise System Change Projects 
 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru,  August 12-15, 20
10. 4 
The research design applied in this paper is to use
 an explorative case study of a change from a tradi
tional ES to a modern 
ES, after a successful ES development process, to a
nalyse and discuss CSCs enabled by changing precond
itions in 
technology, project size, project management method
s and top management competence. The authors of thi
s paper belong to 
two different academic disciplines, which enables a
pplication and combination of the respective perspe
ctives on the problem 
area. One of the authors conducted the case study o
f the successful ES change, which is very briefly p
resented below. Mainly 
personal interviews and attending project meetings 
were used as methods for collecting empirical data.
 Personal interviews 
were made with top managers, one super user (the co
-worker being most knowledgeable about the focal ca
se firm™s sales 
order processes), order assistants, one logistics m
anager, finance assistants, and with ES vendor repr
esentatives. The case 
study was conducted from early 2006 until June 2008
. 
CASE STUDY 

The ES Vendor 

ComActivity, an ES vendor firm based in Stockholm, 
Sweden, with about 40 consultants, offers solutions
 belonging to this 
new modern ES generation, based on open standards s
uch as Java, Eclipse, Web 2.0, BPM and Model Based 
Applications 
(MBA). ComActivity™s graphic modeling, instead of c
oding when designing lean and flexible business pro
cesses, eliminates 
90 percent of the code necessary to represent a bus
iness process. One illustration of the difference i
n level of complexity is 
that the SAP system consists of about 45,000 tables
 while the ComActivity system consists of about 2,5
00 tables (Björkman, 
2008a). ComActivity™s approach is that new solution
s should be implemented step-by-step in relatively 
limited projects 
which create business value fairly immediately. 

The Focal Case Study Firm 

In 2007, the focal firm for the case study, Wermlan
d Paper (WP), chose to change ES from Movex (now re
named to Lawson 
M3) to ComActivity. WP is a sack paper producer, wh
ich holds market leading positions within selected 
niches for 
unbleached craft paper, both in Europe and globally
. WP has a 90% export share to customers in about 7
0 countries, and a 
fragmented customer structure with 800 customers. I
ts annual turnover in 2007 was about 1.1 billion SE
K and the number of 
employees was around 360. This middle-sized case fi
rm has two paper mills, located in the county of We
rmland, in western 
Sweden. It was concluded that in order for WP to su
rvive in evolving new market conditions, a clear st
rategy supported by a 
Web-based ES was needed. Since 2008, WP is part of 
the Nordic Paper group. 
The ES Change Project 

Main steps in the ES development project  

1. Redesign to a common sales order process for the
 two mills; 2. Choice of ES vendor to conduct a pil
ot study; 3. 
Acceptance-building meetings for the planned custom
er portal with co-workers and agents; 4. The board™
s decision to 
purchase a Web-based ES (modules for order, invento
ry and invoicing) from ComActivity;  5. Development
 phase with the 
main ComActivity developer and two super users. 

Business and organizational impacts from ES use aft
er one year 
In January 2007, the new Web-based order function, 
or sales portal, was opened for the internal users.
 In April 2007, this 
Sales Portal was opened for the agents. In Septembe
r 2007 five of its largest agents pre-booked 35% of
 WP™s total sales order 
volume. In March 2008, 40% of WP™s total sales orde
r volume was pre-booked by its larger agents. One y
ear after WP™s new 
ES ﬁwent liveﬂ, the development process of this mod
ern ES and the following implementation process bot
h were perceived 
by the different stakeholders to have been successf
ul. 
New functionality: The agents can all-around-the cl
ock visually access all necessary information via t
he sales portal; 
Improved sales order process, which consumes less t
ime and resources; Less errors since orders are pla
ced only once; Full 
traceability of data when customer complaints are m
ade; Correct inventory data. 
All sales order information is now on one screen, c
ompared to twelve screens before the ES change; Sin
ce the new ES is 
much simpler to learn and to use, many more co-work
ers at WP are placing sales orders than before. The
 order assistant role 
is removed; However, the market assistants can not 
be sure of that the agents have pre-booked their or
ders correctly via the 
sales portal. They still have to check the orders. 
They still have to contact production planning for 
setting delivery dates. 
For WP, the profit margins improved significantly o
ver the 2003-2007 period. In 2007, its profit margi
n exceeded 10 percent. 
The CEO of WP comments that ﬁa large proportion of 
our growth is attributable to the integration and d
ialogue with our 
customers. 70 percent of WP™s turnover consists of 
sales to customers to which WP is the dominant sell
er.ﬂ Thus, the Sales 
Portal  offered to its agents in spring 2007  is 
an important component in WP™s current strategy. 
 Fredriksson et al.      Critical Success Conditions
 for Enterprise System Change Projects 
 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru,  August 12-15, 20
10. 5 
DISCUSSION 

The discussion is structured along two perspectives
. The first perspective is case specific and focuse
s on some of the 
inductive conclusions drawn from the WP case study.
 Each one of the three general CSCs discussed below
 are argued to a 
high degree explain the perceived success for the s
tudied case firm. What are the main conditions expl
aining the successful 
ES change process of the case firm?  

In the second ‚contextual™ perspective we relate th
e observed CSCs in the case study to the described 
new preconditions 
(modern technology, agile methods, narrowly defined
 projects, higher management IT competence) in a ge
neral discussion. 
Which recent changes in preconditions within softwa
re development can contribute in realizing the CSCs
 in ES change 
projects?   

General CSC 1 Œ High Management Support and Commitm
ent 
The number one general CSC in ES change projects, i
s ‚Management Support and Commitment™. There are se
veral ways in 
which the management can support an internal improv
ement project. In the WP project, the management pl
ayed an important 
role by active participation. The three ﬂheaviestﬂ 
ambassadors in the top management team  the CEO, t
he marketing director 
and the IT director  all had experiences from ES c
hange processes which had turned into failures. In 
other words, the WP 
top management had competence about the challenges 
and pitfalls associated with ES change processes. T
herefore, relatively 
heavy argumentation from the IT director was requir
ed in order to convince the CEO and the marketing d
irector about the 
necessity to make the decision to change ES modules
. 
The positive side of inertia in organizations is th
at it makes you think and reflect. The top manageme
nt team wanted to be 
sure about a successful ES change process when it m
ade its decision. The insights of the three ambassa
dors in terms of 
knowledge about the history and about current ESs, 
their ﬁbadﬂ experiences, and their support and comm
itment altogether 
was an important condition explaining the success o
f this ES change project. Also, the ﬁambassadorsﬂ b
ecame part-owners of 
the case firm when they were recruited, which very 
likely strengthened their management commitment. 
Ł New preconditions Œ high management IT competence
 The proposal that support and commitment of manager
s at all levels are important (e.g., Duchessi et al
., 1989) for the success 
of ES change projects seems almost self-evident. No
t many major organizational undertakings would atta
in their goals 
without committed managers. But because IT nowadays
 is a natural part of almost all operations in orga
nizations, the 
managers™ competence about IT-related issues have i
ncreased over the last decades. The vast experience
 from IT project 
failures, have also made managers more aware of typ
ical pitfalls in ES change projects. 
General CSC 2 Œ High User Involvement 

The main ComActivity developer applied a people-cen
tric approach for the development work: short, iter
ative, test-driven 
processes that encouraged feedback from the super u
sers and also from the end-users. A small team with
 highly competent 
team members was picked: one ES developer/project m
anager in the forefront (with two developers back-f
ront), two super 
users (representing system users) and one ambassado
r (with two more top managers back-front). 
In the WP project, the end-users were involved as a
ctive participants in the development work. The hig
h competence of the 
super users was of great importance for the success
 of the ES change project. Also, the active partici
pation of the market 
assistants (i.e., end-users of the order system) in
 the project, which earlier had been critical towar
ds the ES, was another 
important success condition (cf. Gulliksen et al., 
2003). In addition, it is required that the sum of 
the individuals function as a 
good project team. There was a good symbiosis in pl
ace between highly competent system developers and 
super users in this 
ES change project. Such everyday professional coope
ration between the participating individuals is obt
ained if the project 
members work well together and ﬁswim in the same di
rectionﬂ.  
Feeny and Willcocks (1998) have stressed the import
ance of relationship building to establish understa
nding, trust, and 
cooperation among the end-users and the IT personne
l. The full potential from an ES can not be obtaine
d without a strong 
coordination of effort and goals across business an
d IT personnel. As Daghfous (2007) argues, learning
 alliances is a fast and 
effective mechanism of capability development. This
 was an important precondition for the user-driven 
processes to become 
successful and to result in positive outcomes.  

Ł New preconditions Œ modern technology, agile meth
ods and narrowly defined projects 
What makes it possible to involve end-users as acti
ve participants in ES change projects? An important
 precondition is the 
modern technology where user interfaces and functio
nality can be developed and tested in short cycles 
of ﬁanalysis-
development-deliveryﬂ. This enables the project tea
m to conduct its development and implementation wor
k according to 
 Fredriksson et al.      Critical Success Conditions
 for Enterprise System Change Projects 
 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru,  August 12-15, 20
10. 6 
agile method characteristics (cf. Nerur et al., 200
5). It is obvious how well the modern ES developmen
t technology supports 
and works together with agile methods.  

Furthermore, in a psychological sense, a small mana
geable assignment should make project members feel 
more involved and 
responsible for the project outcome, compared to a 
large-scale project, where each team member only co
ntributes with a 
fragment of the whole picture. The flexibility and 
simplicity associated with modern ES technology ena
bles for the end-users 
to have the system designed as they want it to be, 
avoiding the classical misalignment between the bus
iness processes and the 
ES package (see e.g., Sia & Soh, 2007). 

General CSC 3 Œ Deep Project Management Competence 
 The IT director of WP was full of faith when it cam
e to choosing the single most important success con
dition for successful 
ES changes: ﬁIt is enormously important to have the
 right ES consultant or consultantsﬂ. To engage a p
roject manager, unable 
to speak with the end-users, can be disastrous. Com
munication failures are argued to be one major caus
e for ES change 
project failures according to Sumner (2005). Alread
y back in 1983, Block (1983) identified inability t
o communicate with the 
system users as one of the cause categories for ES 
change project failures. The fact that the ComActiv
ity project 
manager/main developer spoke a language that the su
per users and end-users at WP could follow was a ce
ntral success 
condition. User contact failure risks, such as inef
fective user communication and lack of user commitm
ent (Keil et al., 1998), 
were offset by the communication skills competence 
of the ComActivity project manager. This, in turn, 
requires deep 
business process knowledge and high technical compe
tence of the project manager. Technology failure ri
sks such as, e.g., 
failure of the information system to meet specifica
tions was offset in the case firm by the flexibilit
y of the new modern ES 
and the highly competent ComActivity project manage
r/main developer. 
Ł New preconditions Œ balancing agile and tradition
al ‚stage-gate™ methods 
The trend towards agile methodologies and more narr
owly defined projects changes the competence requir
ements on project 
management. In traditional up-front planned project
s, the most important competence seems to be planni
ng skills, follow-up 
and assessment skills (according to the original pl
an), and formal reporting to stakeholders. Applying
 agile methods requires 
flexibility, informal communication skills and abil
ity to assess and decide how much planning is neede
d (Baskerville, 2006). 
The tension between the agility advocated by light 
methodologies and the perspective advocated by esta
blished process 
improvement frameworks, for instance CMM (Pries-Hej
e et al., 2004), has created two, at a first glance
, contradictive 
perspectives on ES change.  

Recent research indicates that a ‚synthesis™ betwee
n these two contradictive perspectives is emerging.
 Studies have shown 
that agile methods can give the traditional ‚stage-
gate™ models powerful tools for micro-planning, day
-to-day work control 
and progress reporting. ‚Stage-gate™ models give, i
n turn, a means to coordinate with other developmen
t teams and 
communicate with functions such as marketing and se
nior management (Karlström and Runeson, 2005). A sy
nthesis of the 
two perspectives could provide developers with a wi
de spectrum of tools and options (Boehm, 2002). 
Due to the balance needed between traditional ‚stag
e-gate™ and agile project management, formal focus 
on project structure is 
still required in most projects (Boehm, 2002). The 
required ability to handle both aspects in parallel
  the day-to-day 
activities in close collaboration with team members
, and the structured control of the ‚whole project 
picture™  bring a new 
dimension to project management competence in ES ch
ange projects. 
CONCLUSIONS AND FURTHER RESEARCH 

‚High Management Support and Commitment™, ‚High Use
r Involvement™ and ‚Deep Project Management Compete
nce™ are 
considered as three of the most important CSCs for 
ES change projects. But how are these conditions en
abled in practice? 
This paper proposes that several recent changes in 
the preconditions for ES change projects contribute
 greatly to realizing 
these CSCs.   

The increasing experience and competence of manager
s at all levels regarding IT-related issues, is one
 important 
precondition that enables active management commitm
ent and support. Traditional ES technology and trad
itional project 
management methods are supporting and matching each
 other, and are both necessary to handle large-scal
e projects, but they 
are not in an effective way supporting the CSCs for
 ES change.  
Supported by the findings from the Wermland Paper c
ase study and recent ES change research literature,
 we propose that 
new preconditions, such as modern ES technology, na
rrowly defined projects and agile methods are match
ing each other. In 
other words, modern technology and narrowly defined
 projects provides the required flexibility which m
akes it possible to 
put into practice the agile way of running projects
, both for the system supplier and for the customer
. We also propose that 
this combination of new preconditions is more appro
priate for supporting the realization of CSCs for E
S change projects.  
 Fredriksson et al.      Critical Success Conditions
 for Enterprise System Change Projects 
 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru,  August 12-15, 20
10. 7 
Not all projects are suitable for minimized scope a
nd agile methods, however. There are several advant
ages in plan-driven, 
‚stage-gate™ project management as well, and voices
 are now raised for a balance between the two, seem
ingly contradictive, 
perspectives. An interesting challenge in future re
search is to further investigate how different ES c
hange project types, with 
varying preconditions, require different methods, t
ools and management support. 
REFERENCES 

Aoyama, M. (1998) Web-Based Agile Software Developm
ent, 
IEEE Software
, 15, 6, 56-65. 
Baskerville, R. L. (2006) Artful Planning, 
European Journal of Information Systems
, 15, 2, 113-115.  
Björkman, P. (2008a) CEO ComActivity. Personal conv
ersation on January 14, Stockholm, and telephone co
nversation on 
May 18. 

Björkman, P. (2008b) SOA  idag och imorgon. Presen
tation at Computer Sweden™s SOA. 
Block, R. (1983) The Politics of Projects, Yourdon 
Press, Prentice-Hall, Englewood Cliffs. 
Boehm, B. (2002) Get Ready for Agile Methods, with 
Care, 
Computer
, 35, 1, 64-69. 
Boehm, B. (2006) A View of 20th and 21st Century So
ftware Engineering, in 
Proceedings of the 28th International 
Conference on Software Engineering
, Shanghai, China, New York, USA, ACM Publications,
 12-29. 
Ceschi, M., Sillitti, A., Succi, G. and Panfilis, S
. (2005) Project Management in Plan-Based and Agile
 Companies, 
IEEE 
Software
, 22, 3, 21-27. 
Chow, T. and Cao, D.-B. (2008) A Survey Study of Cr
itical Success Factors in Agile Software Projects, 
The Journal of 
Systems and Software
, 81, 961-971. 
ComActivity (2008) ComActivity Enables Your Service
 Oriented Architecture. Retrieved March 13, 2008 
from:http://www.comactivity.net/downloads/files/Com
Activity%20Enables %20Your%20SOA.pdf 
Daghfous, A. (2007) Absorptive Capacity and Innovat
ive Enterprise Systems: A Two-Level Framework, 
International 
Journal of Innovation and Learning
, 4, 1, 60-73. 
Duchessi, P., Schaninger, C. M. and Hobbs, D. R. (1
989) Implementing a Manufacturing Planning and Cont
rol Information 
System, 
California Management Review
, 31, 3, 75-90. 
Feeny, D. and Willcocks, L. (1998) Core IS Capabili
ties for Exploiting IT, 
Sloan Management Review
, 39, 3, 1-26. 
Gulliksen, J., Göransson, B., Boivie, I., Blomkvist
, S., Persson, J. and Cajander, Å. (2003) Key Princ
iples for User-Centred 
Systems Design, 
Behaviour & Information Technology
, 22, 6, 397-409. 
Humphrey, W. (1989) Managing the Software Process, 
Addison-Wesley, Reading, Massachusetts. 
Karlström, D. and Runeson, P. (2005) Combining Agil
e Methods with Stage-Gate Project Management, 
IEEE Software
, 22, 
3, 43-49. 

Keil, M., Cule, P. E., Lyytinen, K. A. and Schmidt,
 R. C. (1998) A Framework for Identifying Software 
Project Risks, 
Communications of the ACM
, 41, 11, 76-83. 
Lyytinen, K. and Rose, G.M. (2006) Information Syst
em Development Agility as Organizational Learning, 
European 
Journal of Information Systems
, 15, 2, 183-199. 
Mohr, L. B. (1982) Explaining Organizational Behavi
or. The Limits and Possibilities of Theory and Rese
arch, Jossey-Bass 
Publishers, San Francisco, CA. 

Morgan, A. E. (2004) Business Agility and Internal 
Marketing, 
European Business Review
, 16, 5, 464-472. 
Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R. and Mangalaraj, G. (2005) 
Challenges of Migrating to Agile Methodologies, 
Communications of the 
ACM
, 48, 5, 73-78. 
Nilsson, A. (2008) Projektledning i praktiken, Doct
oral dissertation, Umeå School of Business (in Swed
ish). 
Pries-Heje, J., Baskerville, R., Levine, L. and Ram
esh, B. (2004) The High Speed Balancing Game, 
Scandinavian Journal of 
Information Systems
, 16, 11-54. 
Rockart, J. F. (1979) Chief Executives Define Their
 Own Data Needs, 
Harvard Business Review
, 57, 2, 81-93. 
 Fredriksson et al.      Critical Success Conditions
 for Enterprise System Change Projects 
 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru,  August 12-15, 20
10. 8 
Shanks, G. and Seddon, P. (2000) Editorial, 
Journal of Information Technology
, 15, 4, 243-244. 
Sia, S. K. and Soh, C. (2007) An Assessment of Pack
ageOrganisation Misalignment: Institutional and On
tological 
Structures, 
European Journal of Information Systems
, 16, 5, 568-583. 
Soh, C. and Markus, M. L. (1995) How IT Creates Bus
iness Value: A Process Theory Synthesis, in DeGross
, J. I. , Ariav, G., 
Beath, C., Høyer, R. and Kemerer, C. (Eds.) 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth International Conferen
ce on Information Systems
, 
New York, USA, ACM Publications, 29-41. 

Sumner, M. (2005) Enterprise Resource Planning, Pea
rson Education, Upper Saddle River, NJ. 
The Standish Group International (2001) Extreme CHA
OS. Retrieved March 30, 2009 from: 
http://www.smallfootprint.com/Portals/0/StandishGro
upExtremeChaos2001.pdf
 Willcocks, L. P. and Sykes, R. (2000) The Role of t
he CIO and IT Function in ERP, 
Communications of the ACM
, 43, 4, 32-
38. 

 