 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Temple UniversityTemple UniversityAMCIS 2009Proceedings. Gradel et al.  Model of Critical Factors for Outsourcing Agile Development 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americ
as Conference on Information System
s, San Francisco, California August 6
th-9th 2009 1 
Model of Critical Factors for Outsourcing Agile 
Development Thomas Gradel Temple University 
tom@gradel.org 
John T. Nosek 
Temple University 
nosek@temple.edu 
 ABSTRACT 
Companies are beginning to combine outsourci
ng with Agile software engineering tech
niques with the goal of receiving the 
benefits of both Œ faster time to market, greater quality, and sm
aller costs.  Since Agile was originally developed to work 
principally with small collocated teams, scalability of Agile to 
the enterprise, and simultaneous use of Agile and outsourcing 
are questions concerning applicability of Agile techniques to
 global business environments.  This paper first summarizes 
current experience studies and research in Agile, enterprise Ag
ile and Agile outsourcing, to id
entify factors lik
ely to affect 
success on Agile projects.  It 
then extends a model originally developed by
 Chow and Cao (2007)
 to account for these 
factors.  Finally it outlines an experiment whose goal is to dete
rmine which of these factors drives successful projects that u
se 
both Agile and outsourcing. 
Keywords 
Agile, Model, Extreme Programming, XP, Scrum, Outsourcing, Global System Development 
INTRODUCTION 
Enterprise-level global applications of Agile are here, and have
 been for the past five years at Microsoft according to a recen
t report by Ade Miller (2008).  Industry reports are gradually
 adding evidence that outsourced, distributed, and massive 
software applications have been, and are currently being deve
loped using Agile software engineering techniques, proving that 
Agile can be successfully applied to large, geographically disp
erse, and internationally diverse environments.  The original 
definitions of XP (Beck, 2000), Scrum (Schwaber and Beedle, 2001) and other techniques that adhere to the Agile Manifesto 

(Agile Alliance, 2001) focused principally on small collocated 
teams.  Subsequent refinement of XP (Beck and Andres, 
2004) and Scrum (Schwaber, 2007) provided some guidelines for enterprise-level Agile and some success stories and support 
for claims that Agile could scale and provide significant bene
fits in quality, cost and time-to-market.  Case studies and 
industry reports such as those in the 
Agile™08 conference are adding experiences 
and lessons learned when applying these 
techniques. 
Agile is a philosophy that encompasses twelve principles of th
e Agile Manifesto (Agile Alliance, 2001), twelve practices of 
XP (Beck, 2001) and a myriad of other techniques from Scru
m (Schwaber and Beedle, 2001) 
when XP and Scrum are used 
together.  These techniques form a coherent and mutually inte
rdependent methodology for software development that should 
be studied together, but rarely are.  In
stead, much of past research focused on 
specialized Agile subsets such as pair 
programming (PP), test driven development (TDD) and applicatio
ns of Agile to teaching software engineering (Dingsøyr, 
Dybå and Abrahamsson, 2008).  There is
 little theoretical support to identify wh
ich Agile techniques drive project success, 
even though there is growing ev
idence that correct application of these techni
ques can bring about the desired effect, namely 
timely project completion with adequate scope, cost and quality. 
The need for outsourced software development is growing (Carmel and Tjia, 2005), and 20% of those who responded to a 
recent survey on Agile plan on applying 
outsourcing and Agile together (VersionO
ne, 2008).  The re
search community 
should provide theoretically sound recommendations for these new projects.  This paper first presents relevant background in 
Agile and outsourcing, then presents a mode
l for measuring critical factors that affect
 Agile, and finally extends this model t
o account for outsourcing.  Subsequent resear
ch will validate the model and model extens
ions to identify critical factors that 
affect Agile outsourcing. 
BACKGROUND 
Agile is a family of software engineering (SE) techniques that adhere to the philosophy and principles of the Agile Manifesto 
(Agile Alliance, 2001), which defines a pe
ople-centric approach to developing softwa
re focusing on adaptability (agility), by 
working closely with customers and producing frequent releases
 of working software.  Agile began to get wide recognition 
with Kent Beck™s seminal work defining Extreme Programming (XP)(2000), which was later followed by Schwaber and 
Beedle™s definition of Scrum (2002).  XP defines a set of twelve developer-centric practices that identify how code is to be 
 Gradel et al.  Model of Critical Factors for Outsourcing Agile Development 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americ
as Conference on Information System
s, San Francisco, California August 6
th-9th 2009 2 
defined, built, tested and integrated into periodic software re
leases named iterations.  Scrum adds management practices to 
iterations, defines the requirement for daily stand-up meetings for intra-team coordination and formalizes what XP would 
name the ﬁplanning gameﬂ, a set of practices that defines, pr
ioritizes and estimates the effo
rt necessary for incrementally 
integrating customer-specified features named ﬁb
acklog itemsﬂ (Scrum), or ﬁuser storiesﬂ (XP). 
Outsourcing is a form of global software development (GSD) that
 involves a contract
 to an organization that is supplying a 
service to a consumer organization.  Normally the outsourced supplier has an offshore component, so at least a portion of the 
work is accomplished in a country different from that of the consumer organization.  The outsourcing company may also 

have a onshore component, in the same co
untry as the consumer organization, but 
this is still consid
ered outsourcing.  
Outsourcing and offshoring are often used interchangeably even
 though they have different definitions. Offshoring can, for 
example, refer to projects shared by various teams within a multi-national organization. 
This section provides a brief summary of critical issues related to outsourcing projects using Agile.  
Rationale for Outsourcing Agile-based Development 
Agile adoption is growing and 20% of companies use, or plan to use Agile in outsourced development projects (VersionOne, 
2008).  Agile outsourcing attempts to blend the benefits of Agile (Table 1) with the benefits of outsourcing (Table 2) to 
realize the rewards of both (Moore and Barnett, 2004).  Early adopters of Agile using outsourced teams are beginning to 

document experience reports that provide insights into inte
ractions between these factors (Paasivaara, Durasiewicz and 
Lassenius, 2008; Summers, 2008
; Uy and Ioannou, 2008; Armour
, 2007; Miller and Carter, 20
07; Danait, 2005; Hazzan and 
Dubinsky, 2005; Yap, 2005; Martin, Biddle and Noble, 2004; Kussmaul, Jack and Sponsler, 2004;Simons, 2002) 
 Agile Benefit Description 
Time-to-benefits 
Frequent releases, continuous integration (CI) and burn-down charts show progress 
against milestones and provide timely feedback to customers and management. 
Overall quality and efficiency 
Test driven design (TDD) and pair programming (PP) are commonly used techniques 
that improve quality.  Iterative developmen
t adds efficiency because customers can 
correct product deficiencies earl
y, eliminating costly rewrites. 
Team morale 
Teams are self-directed and aided by management facilitators, leading to higher levels of 
developer buy-in, and corresponding levels of job satisfaction. 
Improved relationship between 

IT and business staff 
Business analysts are part of the team 
working along side development staff, and 
therefore have a greater oppo
rtunity for mutual trust. 
Table 1. Benefits of Agile Processes 
 Outsourcing Benefit Description 
Cost savings 
Cost savings is the prim
ary reason why co
mpanies are outsourcing software 
development.  Savings vary, but most report a minimum of 15% . 
Time-to-market 
Follow-the-sun strategies can provide round-the-clock development, provided daily 
handoff can be managed. 
Overall quality and efficiency 
CMM Level 5 provides mature development processes for achieving specified quality 
and efficiency goals, and many outsourcing firms have been assessed at this level. 
Table 2. Benefits of Outsourcing 
Agile Manifesto versus Outsourcing Agile 
Adhering to Agile involves accep
ting a set of practices that involve substantia
l changes to the methods traditionally used for 
outsourcing.  Table 3 summarizes why the philosophy suggested
 by the Agile Manifesto (Agile Alliance, 2001) could be 
antithetical to techniques commonly used when outsourcing.  Ho
wever, evidence is provided th
at outsourcing with Agile is 
still possible despite these inherent problems. 
 Gradel et al.  Model of Critical Factors for Outsourcing Agile Development 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americ
as Conference on Information System
s, San Francisco, California August 6
th-9th 2009 3 
Even though CMM/CMMI are technically complementary, firms that have achieved CMM Level 5 certification have 
invested significant resources in creating 
elaborate plan-based process management 
systems that are not 
easily adapted to  
Agile Manifesto Philosophy Effect on Outsourcing 
Individuals and actions over  
processes and tools 
India has many companies certified  in plan-based approaches such as Capability 
Maturity Model Integration (CMMI).  Belie
fs and training are against ad hoc SE 
methods such as Agile. 
Working software over 

comprehensive documentation 
Agile relies heavily on face-to-face co
mmunications to reduce the need for 
comprehensive documentation.  Pair programming uses code as documentation 

supplemented by verbal communications to develop working software. 
Customer collaboration over  

contract negotiation 
Outsourcing involves a contractual relationship between a supplier and consumer, and 
success factors are strictly stipulated in 
the contract.  Contracting consumers often 
prefer fixed price contacts which allow little room for negotiation on deliverables and 
timetables, and little room for agility. 
Responding to change over 
following a plan 
Changes are often controlled by a formal Engineering Change Notification (ECN) 
process, so that the size and impact of th
e change can be gauged before a change is 
permitted. 
Table 3. Agile Manifesto and Outsourcing Compared 
using Agile.  Agile and Capability Maturity Model (CMM) are both
 ways to reduce risk, but their approaches are different.  
Agile reduces risk by releasing software in short iterations that
 allow the customer to verify 
whether the product answers the 
customer™s needs.  CMM reduces risk by careful control of software processes.  Paulk (2001) argues that Agile and CMM 
need not be antithetical and this is now s
upported by Software Engineering Institute 
(SEI), the founders 
of CMM, in a recent 
technical note (Glazer, Dalton, Anderson, 
Konrad and Shrum, 2008).  However, co
mmon practices for reducing risk involve 
extensive plan-based controls (Hussey and Hall, 2008), processes that are not normally part of Agile project management. 
Working software requires extensive amounts of communication to define and refine requirements and to assure these meet 
the customer™s needs.  Agile™s depend
ence on face-to-face and informal communica
tion reduces the need for comprehensive 
documentation, but these communication modes become difficult with physical, language and cultural distance, forcing the 
need for additional communications channels.  For example, XP
™s pair programming is still possible, but developers sit 
together via virtual, rather than physical terminals.  Tabaka (2006) describes a number of techniques to enhance 
communications that could be implemented for distributed and outsourced Agile projects, and many of these techniques are 
reported in case studies involving outsourced Agile (Mille
r and Carter, 2007; Ramesh, Cao, Mohan and Xu, 2006). 
Companies must move to more flexible outsourcing relationships to allow the contractor to respond to Agile dynamism.  
Contracting relationships between companies define and constr
ain service suppliers to certain duties and obligations, and 
these contracts can have profound effects 
on whether or not a service supplier can move to Agile software development.  For 
example, a fixed price contract provides little freedom for a se
rvice organization to supply Agile teams subject to partially 
defined requirement that can evolve as software products are delivered.  However, organizations prefer fixed price contracts 
and fixed deliverables (Leffingwell, 2007).  
The SE community has mixed opinions with regard to how much planning is desirable in various organizational 
environments.  Agility versus planning is an ongoing debate in the Agile community (Beck and Boehm, 2003) with Beck 
favoring the need for XP principles and light-weight planning, and Boehm favoring more extensive planning, particularly in 

larger organizations.  Both agree that Agile is a disciplined approach, but Boehm makes the point that while 60% of software 
projects have ten or fewer deve
lopers and are thus more likely candidates for 
XP, this accounts for on
ly 17% of the world™s 
software development.  Larger projects, which develop the bulk
 of the software, are better suite
d to plan-based approaches.  
Boehm and Turner (2004) compar
e plan-based and Agile-based m
echanisms for evolution of the processes inherent in their 
respective approaches, and conclude that 
each approach can gravitate 
toward the other when there are environmental factors 
that favor the other approach.  An Agile
-based approach can evolve more plans 
and controls where necessary communication 
and feedback do not exist, and a plan-based approach can create more light-weight processes to respond more quickly to 
change. Agile Outsourcing Models 
Traditional outsourcing models need to be adapted to account for outsourcing Agile-based development.  The traditional 

assumptions for labor costs and outsourcing constraints gives ri
se to the Pyramid of Activities shown in Figure 1, adapted 
 Gradel et al.  Model of Critical Factors for Outsourcing Agile Development 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americ
as Conference on Information System
s, San Francisco, California August 6
th-9th 2009 4 
from a similar figure by Roussev and Akella (2006).  The arrow direction indicates increasing amounts of the specified 
factors, for example the labor cost arrow 
indicates increasing labor costs at the botto
m of the pyramid, and the arrow on the 
right indicates that risk increases moving
 toward the apex.  This ch
art shows that applications programming is a more likely 
candidate for outsourcing than architecture definition because it has high labor cost and lower risk (Carmel and Tjia, 2005). 
  Figure 1. Pyramid of Activities 
Traditional outsourcing models rely on cost curves for software development where costs dramatically increase when 
changes occur later in the development proc
ess.  XP and other Agile methods challeng
e the traditional cost curve by using an 
incremental development process. Figure 2 illustrates the cost-of-change curve that occurs when using XP versus the 
traditional SE processes (Beck and Andres, 2004). 
  Figure 2. Cost-of-Change Curve Using XP
 and Traditional Development Processes 
 There is only limited empirical evidence to support the XP co
st curve (Boehm and Turner, 200
4), although there is rationale 
that iterative development could flatten the cost-of-change curv
e.  XP does not simply divide software development into 
pieces and apply a mini-waterfall to each piece.
  If so, one would expect that the costs 
of each part would sum to at least the
  Gradel et al.  Model of Critical Factors for Outsourcing Agile Development 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americ
as Conference on Information System
s, San Francisco, California August 6
th-9th 2009 5 
total cost of the entire pr
oduct, and probably more due to in
efficiencies in separating and co
mbining the pieces.  Instead, the
 relatively flat cost-of-change cu
rve for XP is due to refactoring (Fowler, Beck, Brant, Opdyke and Roberts, 2000) followed 
by adding new functionality, a tw
o-step process where code is first adapted to
 accept new functionality, then new features are 
added to the code. 
The team structure for Agile does not lend itself well to the traditional Pyramid of Activities model.  Traditional business 
processes are shown adjacent to the righ
t arrow in Figure 1, which shows for example, that complexity and communication 
needs increase moving toward the tip of th
e pyramid.  A change to the domain knowl
edge has complex impacts that need to 
be communicated through the various layers down to the applications programming team.  However, corresponding impacts 
would not be expected for Agile teams since these teams cont
ain business analysts, architects 
and developers that jointly 
coordinate, so changes in domain knowledge can be immediately shared among all team members.  However, 

communication and complexity increase because coordination and communication among outsourced team members depends 
on a set of factors not covered by the traditional outsourcing model. 
Scaling Agility to Outsourcing 
Leffingwell (2007) systematically analyzes
 how Agile can be scaled to large, enterprise-wide organizations, including those 
that use outsourcing.  He identifies two sets
 of practices: those that natively scale to the enterprise level, and those that n
eed 
to be adapted for enterprise organizations.  Although Leffingwell includes two case studies that include outsourcing, he does 
not specifically identify practices that are sensitive to outsourcing.  Nevertheless, sensitivities exist because in one of the
 case 
studies, he establishes parallel roles for the outsourcing 
team, with overlapping responsibilities between onshore and 
offshore, thus apparently duplicating effort to offset communi
cations issues between onshore and offshore teams.  In the 
other case study, the outsourced team is responsible for integra
tion and testing, rather than being an equal partner in both 
development and testing. 
Leffingwell™s (2007) scaleable and non-scal
eable practices are described in Table 4 
and Table 5, annotated with research 
questions related to outsourcing. 
 Practices that scale to the 
enterprise 
Outstanding questions related to outsourcing 
Define/build/test component 
team 
Teams should each define/build/test their own 
components.  Are parallel teams (case study 
1), or non-developer  teams (case study 2) due to the effects of outsourcing? 
Two-level planning and 

tracking Does outsourcing require changes to the course-grain (release) or fine-grain (iteration) 
planning?  Are there any special integratio
n requirements due to integration with 
outsourced teams? 
Mastering the iteration 
If offshore teams are integrated with onshor
e teams, does increased communications delay 
make iterations longer?  If teams are separate, does integration of offshore and onshore 

features add additional overhead? 
Smaller, more frequent 

releases 
Two-week iterations and quarterly releases ar
e typical for collocated teams.  Should the 
iteration size or release schedule be adjusted for outsourced teams? 
Concurrent testing 
Will outsourced teams be equal, or will they
 receive special testing due to potential 
miscommunication?   Will the reverse occur, wh
ere testing is relegated to outsourced teams 
who are not as deeply involved with development? 
Continuous integration 
Will the offshore team be equal and responsib
le for maintaining a common code base, or 
will there be special rules that apply? 
Regular reflection and 
adaptation Will the outsourced team or team members be given equal weight when considering 
process modifications? 
Table 4. Practices that Scale to the Enterprise Annotate
d with Outsourcing Questions 
  Gradel et al.  Model of Critical Factors for Outsourcing Agile Development 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americ
as Conference on Information System
s, San Francisco, California August 6
th-9th 2009 6 
Practices that do not scale 
to the enterprise 
Outstanding questions related to outsourcing 
 Intentional architecture 
Agile normally has an evolutionary architecture 
that changes as new features are added, but 
this becomes problematic when scaling to the enterprise.  Does outsourcing add additional 

needs for more precise architecture or design? 
Lean requirements at scale: 

vision, roadmap and just-in-

time elaboration 
Agile develops minimally sufficient requirements (lean) which need additional definition 
for larger project (scaling).  The vision and roadmap for doing this need to be understood 

by all teams so that elaboration is just-in-time,
 or wasted effort will occur.  Specification of 
non-functional requirements such as performan
ce, reliability and scalability of the system 
must be done first, since these are needed to develop individual components.  Are there any 

special constraints for sharing the visi
on and roadmap to outsourced teams? 
System of systems and the 
Agile release train 
Individual Agile teams are optimized to write software quickly, so integration and 
management of releases becomes a limiting f
actor.  Are there any sp
ecial considerations 
necessary for integrating both offshore and onshore products from feature teams? 
Managing highly distributed 
development 
There are unique aspects, such
 as contract management that apply to outsourced teams.  
Are there other unique characteristics and how should these be managed? 
Impact on customers and 

operations 
This refers to impacts on sales and marketing due to more frequent releases of software.  
There appear to be no implications to sales and marketing  specifically due to outsourcing. 
Changing the organization 
Agile requires organizational changes to remove impediments for developer teams.  Are 
there any special impediments that apply to outsourcing? 
Measuring  business 

performance 
Optimizing teams to produce more code is not the only measure of performance.  
Measuring performance and rewards for outsourced teams will impact future performance.  
What specific needs exist for outso
urced teams and their companies? 
Table 5. Practices that Do Not Scale to the En
terprise Annotated with Outsourcing Questions 
 Conchir, Holmstrom and Agerfalk (2006) provide an evaluation of the assumed benefits of Global Software Development.  
Table 6 provides these benefits together with the potential benefits of applying Agile. 
 Benefits of global software 
development 
Potential benefit with Agile 
Reduced development costs, 
for example an eight-fold 

salary differential between 

the US and India (Carmel 
and Tjia, 2005) 
Salary costs are only one factor, and determining precise cost benefits is a complex metric.  
However, cost benefits that exists for ex
isting outsourced development activities is likely 
to be transferable to an Agile environment. 
Leveraging time-zone 

effectiveness by using 
follow-the-sun for 
development activities, or 

subsets of development such 
as testing, or production 
Teams that include a mix of onshore and offs
hore resources will need daily handoffs to 
work as an integrated Agile team, but this could provide follow-the-sun benefits.  Special 
offshore teams can exist for integration and 
production.  Offshore resources can also 
provide additional feature teams increasing ove
rall project throughput.  Regardless of the 
structure, each team must feel responsible 
for project goals; there should be no ﬁsecond 
classﬂ teams. 
Cross-site modularization of 

development work can be 
used to reduce the amount of 

cross-site communication. 
There are no specific requiremen
ts in Agile for how teams should be established, or what 
work they should do.  Additional architecture and design decomposition is normally a part 
of distributed software development projects even though most Agile methods minimize 

the effort spent in up front design. 
Table 6. Potential Benefits of Global Software Development With Agile 
  Gradel et al.  Model of Critical Factors for Outsourcing Agile Development 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americ
as Conference on Information System
s, San Francisco, California August 6
th-9th 2009 7 
 Access to large skilled-labor 
pool. 
High attrition levels in outsourced rapid 
growth areas can lead to reduced team 
effectiveness, since team dynamics change when
ever a team member is added or removed.  
This might have a larger affect in Agile than traditional methods which depend on 
documentation as a means of recording project history.  This could be countered if pair 
programming is used to provide to
tal redundancy for each developer 
Innovation and shared best 
practice 
Agile encourages innovation at the team level 
and encourages trust to share best practices 
across teams 
Closer proximity to market 

and customer 
Agile encourages increased travel to disseminate customer and team goals, so the resulting 
product should be more aligned to markets. 
Table 6. Potential Benefits of Global So
ftware Development With Agile (continued) 
MODEL FOR OUTSOURCING AGILE SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 
The following sections propose a way to measur
e the effects of outsourced development.
  First a model is developed that will 
allow a factor analysis of those items that affect success.  
Then a set of propositions are developed based on the model. 
Model Development 
Agile involves a complex set of interactions among people, processes and environments.  Studies of individual practices such 
as test-driven design (TDD) or pair programming (PP) provide insights into the merit of particular facets of Agile, but do not 
account for the effects of synergies betwee
n these techniques.  Instead, a more c
ohesive model is necessary to determine 
which factors are critical to development success.  Chow and Cao (C&C) (2007) performed such a study, and a summary of 
their results are shown in Figure 3.  Th
ey classified various Agile principles and techniques into organizational, people, 
process, technical and project factors, and prepared a survey-based study to determine which of these caused significant 
impact to project success.  Factors that impact the success m
easures of quality, scope, time or cost are identified in the figu
re with an asterisk (*). 
A proposed model for determining the effects of outsourcing Agile development will expand on the C&C model by 
augmenting each of the categories to accoun
t for additional factors due to outsourcing.  Table 7 summarizes the items that 
will be added to the model. 
Hypotheses 
The following are a set of hypotheses (expressed in the negative) that will be tested in the augmented C&C model.  A survey-

based approach will be used to test these hypotheses. 
Hypothesis 1
:  There is no effect on project su
ccess factors when the teams are collocat
ed versus when they are outsourced. 
Survey questions will include information on the team locatio
ns, total team size, and size at
 each offshore location.  A 
qualitative success factor for the mo
st recent project (Agile or non
-Agile) will also
 be recorded. 
Hypothesis 2
: There is no effect on project 
success factors when teams have same- versus cross-country members. 
Survey results will indicate whether most teams have members 
all from the same country, or whether most teams have 
members from each of the distributed locations. 
Hypothesis 3
:  There is no effect on project succe
ss when the reward factors are tied to team™s success versus measures of 
effectiveness tied to th
e contracted company. 
A question will exist as to whether rewards were by company, by team, both, or neither. 
Hypothesis 4
:  There is no effect on project su
ccess if customer representatives ex
ist for each country versus a single 
customer representative for several countries. 
One or more questions will exist to determine the periodicity 
of travel for customer representatives and technical team 
members.  Disbursement of product/custo
mer knowledge will likely be examined by determining whether customer liaisons 
exist from all countries involved, or only from one. 
   Gradel et al.  Model of Critical Factors for Outsourcing Agile Development 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americ
as Conference on Information System
s, San Francisco, California August 6
th-9th 2009 8 
ORGANIZATIONAL
FACTORS
Management
Commitment
Organizational
Environment
*Team
Environment
PEOPLE
FACTORS
*Team
Capability
*Customer
Involvement
PROCESS
FACTORS
*Project
Management
Project
Definition
TECHNICAL
FACTORS
*Agile
Software
Techniques
*Delivery
Strategy
PROJECT
FACTORS
Project
Nature
Project
Type
Project
Schedule
PERCEIVED
SUCCESS
OFTHE
AGILE
SOFTWARE
DEVELOPMENT
PROJECT
Quality
Scope
Time
Cost
*indicates
significant
effect
inChow
andCao(2007)
study Figure 3. Model of Critical Agil
e Success Factors (Chow and Cao, 2007) 
  Gradel et al.  Model of Critical Factors for Outsourcing Agile Development 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americ
as Conference on Information System
s, San Francisco, California August 6
th-9th 2009 9 
 Additional 
Factors due to 
Outsourcing 
 Description 
Organizational 
Factors 
Outsourcing creates additional organizational requirements necessary to deal with offshore and 
contracted relationships.   
The team environment can consist of collocated feat
ure teams, increasing integration difficulties, or 
follow-the-sun teams that required daily handoffs. 
The reward system must be appropriate to Agile, 
so team success rather than contractual success will 
affect long term team health. 
Tools play an increasingly important role, since these must help to minimize communications gaps. 
People Factors Different countries have varying work habits and cultures. 
Different countries offe
r labor pools with different skill levels.  
Managers and staff are more or less rigid and more likely to work well within an Agile environment. 

Customers, or customer spokesperso
ns are most likely to come from 
one country, so interfaces to the 
customer may be better for same-country
 rather than cross-country teams. 
The ability to ﬁbuy-inﬂ may be cultural and may need to be learned. 
Process Factors The degree which the design needs to be
 architected, designed and 
documented could change. 
Honoring regular working schedules may be difficu
lt if there is need for face-to-face communication. 
Technical Factors 
Pair programming may be less feasible with cross-country teams than with same-country teams. 
Technical training could vary due to language barriers, because material not translated from English may 
not be read by non-native English speakers who prefer training material in their native language. 
Project Factors 
Highly innovative projects may result in the need for more communication, and thus may work better 
with some of the factors above, and worse with others. 
Table 7. Augmenting C&C Model for Outsourced Global Software Development 
 Hypothesis 5
:  There is no effect on project 
success by increasing the am
ount of required specifica
tions and documentation 
for outsourced teams versus maintaining the same level as for collocated teams. 
Questions will be asked about whether specific types of docu
mentation were prepared such as a high level architecture 
document, high level design documents and low level design documents. 
Hypothesis 6
:  There is no effect on project su
ccess when adjustments in time and sche
dule are made to maximize overlap in 
face-to-face communication versus maintainin
g a standard work week for teams. 
Questions will be asked about adjusting 
working hours to accommodate face-to-f
ace communication, and whether this was 
all teams, team leads, or management. 
Hypothesis 7
: There is no effect on project success if specialized training is made to equalize team capabilities versus 
allowing teams that use their existing skill sets. 
Questions will be asked about training in Agile and technical training before and during the project. 

Hypothesis 8
: There is no effect on project success for highly innovative software versus software with known previous 
versions. 
A question will be asked about whether the 
project was an extension to an existin
g piece of software or a major change 
and/or new software release. 
SUMMARY AND FUTURE RESEARCH 
A model for measuring the factors that effect Agile outsourcing was presented, together with a set of hypotheses to validate 
the model and provide answers to sensitivities surrounding combin
ing Agile with outsourcing.  
Future research will validate 
 Gradel et al.  Model of Critical Factors for Outsourcing Agile Development 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americ
as Conference on Information System
s, San Francisco, California August 6
th-9th 2009 10 
this model and use it to provide insights in
to factors that drive Agile 
project success.  The proposed experiment is expected t
o have the following outcomes: 
 Repeats and independently valid
ates the C&C model (2007) 
 Determines whether there are significa
nce differences between outsourced and non-outsourced Agile environments 
 Provides insight into exactly which 
factors are important to driving succes
s when combining Agile and outsourcing 
We hope that readers of this paper would like to contribu
te, and encourage them to cont
act the author for additional 
information. 
REFERENCES 
1. Agile Alliance (2001) Manifesto for Agile software developm
ent, http://www.agilemanifesto.org, retrieved February 15, 
2008. 
2. Armour, P. (2007) Agile and offshore, 
Communications of the ACM,
 50, 1, 13-16. 
3. Beck, K. and Boehm, B. (2003) Agility through discipline: a debate, 
Computer,
 36,  6, 44-46. 
4. Beck, K. (2000
) Extreme programming explained: embrace
 change, Addison-Wesley, Boston. 
5. Beck, K. and Andres, 
C. (2004) Extreme programmi
ng explained: embrace change
, Addison-Wesley, Boston. 6. Boehm, B. and Turner, R. (2004) Balancing agility and 
discipline: a guide for the perplexed. Addison-Wesley 
Professional, Boston. 
7. Carmel, E. and Tjia, P (2005) Offshoring information technology,
 Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
8. Chow, T. and Cao, D. (2008)  
A survey of critical success fact
ors in Agile software project, 
Journal of Systems and 
Software,
 81, 6, 961-971 
9. Conchúir, E. O., Holmström, H., Ågerfalk, P. J., Fitzgerald, B. (2006) Exploring the assumed benefits of global software 
development." 
IEEE International Confer
ence on Global Software Engineering (ICGSE'06)
. 10.
 Danait, A. (2005) Agile offshore techniques: a case study, 
Proceedings of
 Agile Conference 2005,
 24-29. 
11.
 Dingsøyr, T., Dybå, T. and Abrahamsson, P (2008) A preliminary roadmap for empirical research on Agile software 
development, 
Agile 2008
, 83-94 
12.
 Fowler, M., Beck, K., Brant, J., Opdyke, W. and Roberts, D. (2000) Refactoring: improving the design of existing code
. Addison Wesley Professional, Boston. 
13.
 Glazer, H., Dalton, J., Anderson, D., 
Konrad, M. and Shrum, S. (2008) 
CMMI or Agile: why not embrace both! 
http://www.sei.cmu.edu/pub/documents/08.report
s/08tn003.pdf, accessed 
February 13, 2009. 14.
 Hazzan, O. and Dubinsky, Y. (2005) Clashes between culture 
and software development met
hods: the case of the Israeli 
hi-tech industry and extreme programming, 
Proceedings of
 Agile Conference, 2005
, 59-69. 
15.
 Hussey, J. M., and Hall, S.E. (2008) Managing Global Development Risk, Auerbach Publications, Boca Raton. 
16.
 Kussmaul, C., Jack, R. and Sponsler, B. (2004) Outsourcing and offshoring with agility: a case study, 
4th Conference on 
Extreme Programming and Agile Methods,
 Calgary, Canada, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg 
17.
 Leffingwell, D. (2007) Scaling software agility: best practi
ces for large enterprises, Ad
dison Wesley Professional, 
Boston 
18.
 Martin, A., Biddle, R. and Noble, J. (2004) When XP met outsourcing, 
5th International Conference, XP 2004,
 Garmisch-Partenkirchen, Germany, Springer Berlin / Heidelberg 
19.
 Miller, A. (2008) Distributed Agile development at Micr
osoft patterns & practices, http://download.microsoft.com/-
download/4/4/a/44a2cebd-63fb-4379-898d-
9cf24822c6cc/distributed_agile_development_at_microsoft_patterns_and_practices.pdf, retrieved Februay 15, 2009. 
20.
 Miller, A. and Carter, E. (2007) 
Agility and the inconceivably large, 
Agile 2007,
 Washington, D.C., IEEE Computer 
Society, 304-308 
21.
 Paasivaara, M., Durasiewicz, S and Lassenius, C. (2008) Us
ing Scrum in a globally distributed project: a case study, 
Software Process Improvement and Practice,
 13, 527-544. 
22.
 Paulk, M. C. (2001) Extreme programming from a CMM perspective, 
IEEE Software,
 18, 6.  Gradel et al.  Model of Critical Factors for Outsourcing Agile Development 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americ
as Conference on Information System
s, San Francisco, California August 6
th-9th 2009 11 
23.
 Ramesh, B., Cao, L., Mohan, K. and Xu, P. (2006) Can distributed software development be agile?, 
Communications of 
the ACM, 49, 10, 41-46. 
24.
 Roussev, B. and Akella, R. (2006) Agile outsourcing projects: structure and management, 
International Journal of e-
Collaboration
, Oct/Dec, 37-42. 
25.
 Schwaber, K. (2007) The enterprise and scrum, Microsoft Press, Redmond. 
26.
 Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M. (2001) Agile software deve
lopment with scrum, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River. 
27.
 Summers, M. (2008) Insights into an 
Agile adventure with offshore partners, 
Agile 2008,
 333-338. 
28.
 Tabaka, J. (2006) Collaboration explained: facilitation skills fo
r software project leaders, Addison Wesley Professional, 
Boston 
29.
 Uy, E. and Ioannou, N. (2008) Growing and sustaining an offshore scrum engagement, 
Agile 2008,
 345-350. 
30.
 VersionOne (2008), State of agile development survey 2008, http://www.versionone.com/pdf/-
3rdAnnualStateOfAgile_FullDataReport.
pdf, retrieved February 15, 2009. 
31.
 Yap, M. (2005) Follow the sun: distributed extreme programming development, 
Proceedings of Agile Conference, 2005,
 24-29. 
