 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Agile Methods: Fast-Paced, but How Fast?Michael L. HarrisIndiana University - SoutheastRosann Webb CollinsUniversity of South FloridaAlan R. HevnerUniversity of South FloridaAMCIS 2009Proceedings.  
 
 
 Agile Methods: Fast-Paced, but How Fast? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Michael L. Harris 
School of Business 
Indiana University - Southeast 
harris60@ius.edu 
 
 
 Rosann Webb Collins 
Information Systems and Decisions Sciences 
College of Business 
University of South Florida 
rcollins@coba.usf.edu 
 
 
 Alan R. Hevner 
Information Systems and Decisions Sciences 
College of Business 
University of South Florida 
ahevner@coba.usf.edu 
 
 
 
 
 
 Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems
 San Francisco, California August 6th-9th 2009 
 Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 1 
Agile Methods: Fast-Paced, but How Fast? 
 ABSTRACT 

What are the roles of time and time pressures in de
sign and performance of agile processes for softwar
e development? How 
do we plan our rapid development activities given t
he constraints of due dates? What does it mean to b
e on ‚internet time™? 
Agile methods are meant to be fast-paced, but are t
hey fast in an effective way? How do time-pressures
 influence the 
productivity of a project team and how do they impa
ct the motivations of developers?  This paper consi
ders the time issues in 
agile approaches to managing software projects and 
posits research propositions to guide further study
 of this area.    
 
Keywords 

Software Product Development; Time Pressures; Adapt
able Software Development. 
 
THE COMPLEX ROLE OF TIME PRESSURES 

Agile methods are associated with rapid development
 techniques, with short iterations leading to frequ
ent software releases.    
Fast-paced development with frequent deadlines leve
rages the 
deadline effect
: as deadlines near, employee motivation and 
work accelerates, leading to higher productivity.  
But when an entire project needs to be delivered on
 an aggressive schedule 
a plan-driven approach, similar to the waterfall de
velopment method, often may be quicker than an agil
e approach.  It is 
important to understand under what circumstances ag
ile methods adapt effectively to the demands of tim
e constraints and 
when they may be counterproductive.  

The guidelines of method engineering suggest that t
he software development method chosen to manage a p
roject should vary 
based on the characteristics of a project (Fitzgera
ld, et al. 2006). As we focus our attention on the 
dimension of time, we 
consider the ways that time pressure can influence 
the choice of software processes and development me
thods. This paper 
contains a conceptual analysis of time illustrated 
by examples extracted from a qualitative study of t
wo software development 
organizations and the literature on the management 
of software projects that employ agile methods. 
The importance of time pressure in software develop
ment project was identified in many of the intervie
ws that we performed 
in the two organizations. A typical example: 

Interviewer: So, could you have somehow waited to s
tart development until they knew more of what the d
etails were? 
Response:   No, – it was going to go live – as mand
ated by [the government] we had to have our product
 ready to collect 
data – 

Pressure to meet a market entry date with a minimum
 set of acceptable features may override other deve
lopment priorities 
and influence the selection of the ‚best™ developme
nt process. The following quote illustrates the sel
ection of development 
method under extreme time pressure. 

ﬁ – [management says] oh by the way, we need this i
n 35 days.  –. we have methods to try and do that k
ind of procedurally, 
but if, at the extreme what you start doing is real
ly just, is balancing risk with quality then and cu
tting corners.  – there are 
certain [times] where you have to break out of the 
box and kind of just get something doneﬂ 
Development tradeoffs with time pressure are as com
plex and the effect of time pressures on the choice
 of development 
processes and methods is far from simple. If market
 uncertainty is low and system requirements are wel
l-defined, a plan-
driven approach may be the quickest way to complete
 a project. With extreme time pressure, it may be i
mpossible to 
complete a plan, but an agile approach may not be f
aster. An agile approach may involve a search proce
ss and feedback 
cycles that can result in rework, and thus can slow
 delivery.  If there is not time for a plan-driven 
approach, and not enough 
time for the rework of an agile approach, the team 
must accept increased delivery risk. 
In this paper, we consider the role of time constra
ints in agile software development. We explain how,
 and why, agile 
methods may be considered to operate under time pre
ssure, but we show that the fast-paced development 
that is used by agile 
methods is not necessarily equivalent to a short-ti
me to completion. We provide a conceptual analysis 
of the nature of time 
constraints and their impact on process selection. 
The paper concludes with a set of research proposit
ions for future research 
investigations on the role of time in the selection
 and performance of agile processes and methods.  
 Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 2 
 
THE NATURE OF DEADLINES 

Deadlines or due dates on a project may be driven f
rom two different sources. Developers work from the
 bottom-up based on 
the requirements and resources to determine the tim
e required to complete a project. Management establ
ishes goals based on 
their priorities and on exogenous factors. The dead
line is negotiated between developers and managers 
based on the 
information that each brings to the discussion. 

If perfect information is available, it would appea
r that a due date would be a single, objective date
. This date would be the 
time required to complete the project. In the real 
world, there are many sources of uncertainty that l
ead to imperfect 
information. Requirements are often fuzzy and may e
merge throughout the process. Design is still an ar
t, and two different 
software architects may develop different designs t
o solve the same problem. As a result of varying re
quirements and 
potentially different design decisions there can be
 variability in the scope of the project. Execution
 of the plan can also vary 
since developers are human, not machines. Since the
re are multiple sources of potential variability, i
t can be difficult to prove 
that a given estimate is an unbiased estimate of th
e project duration. This can lead to second guessin
g of time estimates.  
Management may see due dates as project controls th
at can be manipulated to achieve management objecti
ves. One view is 
based on Parkinson™s Law (Parkinson, 1993) that ava
ilable work will expand to fill the available time.
 If management is 
guided by this viewpoint they may feel a need to sh
orten estimates in order to eliminate unnecessary e
ffort. Management may 
also use due dates to signal the priority of a proj
ect through its urgency.   
Deadlines also serve to motivate work, through the 
deadline effect
: as deadlines near, employee motivation and work 
accelerates, leading to higher productivity.  This 
phenomenon is observed in many settings, and employ
ees themselves report 
that deadlines are among the key factors that lead 
to higher productivity (White and Locke, 1981). 
Project scope can also be signaled through the esta
blishment of a due date. Consider a project team ch
arged with delivering a 
new accounting system. Ideally, the project may req
uire 52 weeks of development and management may hav
e the leeway to 
negotiate that estimate to 51 or 50 weeks. However,
 if management has a firm requirement to deliver th
e project in three 
months the only way to accomplish the goal is to co
mpletely change the scope of the project. 
When management manipulates due dates to control or
 signal team members they are manipulating subjecti
ve time (He and 
Souren, 2008). Subjective or perceived time pressur
e (Austin, 2001) is used to create a deadline effec
t and it may be 
independent of any objective due date for the proje
ct. These subjective due dates can be perceived as 
useful (as noted earlier, 
through the 
deadline effect
), but they may also create unnecessary pressure fo
r the developers. For example in one interview, 
a developer stated: 
ﬁA long time ago when I was having migraines and al
l that stuff, doctor took .. well, he said –  just 
take it easy.  
And, that™s what I do.  So, timelines – I think the
y™re important for managers –  So, timeline just pu
ts unnecessary 
pressure.ﬂ 
 
Individual developers may also have their own conce
rns when calculating delivery dates. For example, t
he same developer 
quoted above stated: 
ﬁOther people like to have the code done in the sho
rtest amount of time and I™m like, well that™s not 
really important 
if it™s not maintainable, cause then I™m going to b
e spending my time afterwards to maintain this thin
g.  So, I™d 
rather spend some more time in making it maintainab
le.ﬂ 
 As a result of legitimate differences and varying a
gendas there can be considerable controversy in the
 negotiation of a project 
due date. This may lead to game playing in estimate
s. Parties may arbitrarily pad or cut estimates in 
expectation of future 
negotiations. 

In addition to a negotiated, subjective due date th
ere may be an objective due date. This objective du
e date is given by 
exogenous factors. For example, a Y2K fix must be d
elivered by midnight on the last day of 1999. When 
these exogenous 
factors are sufficiently distant compared to the sc
ope of the project they may not change the negotiat
ed due date. However, an 
emergency may occur when a due date is shorter than
 the required time to complete the project. 
  Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 3 
INTERPLAY BETWEEN PROJECT DUE DATES AND METHODS 

In order to understand the effects that due dates a
nd time pressures have on methods we begin with som
e definitions. 
We start by considering the requirements of a proje
ct. There is a difference between the full set of r
equirements and the 
minimum needed to meet a given due date. This was i
llustrated by the comment from the following develo
per: 
ﬁI would say about 20% of the projects are not done
 the way a developer would have liked it done becau
se of time 
constraints.  But we have what we have done in thos
e cases we have said O.K.; here is what we want to 
do what is 
going to be absolutely needed to meet the client™s 
requirement.  This is what we will do right now and
 this portion 
that we don™t do at the moment gets put in detail i
nto the [tracking] system to be able to be implemen
ted at a later 
date.ﬂ 
This leads us to the following distinction in type 
of requirements: 
 Minimum Requirements:
 Recognizing that it may be possible to deliver the
 project in phases, these are the 
minimum features required in the first phase. This 
is assumed to be a subset of the full requirements.
   Full Requirements:
 The minimum requirements plus other capabilities t
hat are justifiable. 
 
Next we consider the time that it will take to deli
ver these features. As these definitions state, the
se times assume varying 
levels of ‚ideal™ performance, and are unlikely to 
be achieved in reality. 
 Theoretical Minimum Completion Time (Theo-Min): 
Assume that a perfect team exists (i.e. it never ma
kes 
mistakes) and that it has perfect knowledge. This i
s the time that the team would take to complete and
 deliver a 
product that meets the minimum requirements with no
 planning time (perfect knowledge), no testing time
 (perfect 
team), and instantaneous rollout. Unless the projec
t is trivial it is assumed that no real team can co
mplete the project 
this fast. 

  Exogeneous Due Date (Exo-Due):
 The fixed due date that is derived from exogeneous
 factors. For example, the 
date of midnight on the last day of 1999 was the ex
ogeneous due date for Y2K fixes. Some sources of ex
ogeneous 
due dates include regulatory requirements, competit
ive activities, and customer contract requirements.
 At times 
there may not be any exogeneous due date and the du
e date will be solely based on management and team 
priorities. 
 
TYPICAL WATERFALL SOFTARE DEVELOPMENT LIFE CYCLE 

Now let™s consider how the due dates are set for a 
team that uses a typical waterfall-style SDLC. Firs
t, we assume that the 
project is appropriate for a waterfall approach. Fo
r example, we assume that there is not a high level
 of uncertainty (Harris et. 
al., 2009). We assume that this team does not have 
perfect knowledge, and that it needs to get its req
uirements from 
stakeholders. Furthermore, although the team is ver
y good, it is not perfect; therefore it needs to fo
llow ordinary best 
practices in terms of quality control, documentatio
n, and rollout transitions. 
 Ideal Minimum Completion Time (Ideal-Min):
 Stakeholders with perfect knowledge are available 
and the 
technology is well-understood. As a result, the tea
m can develop a clear plan upfront and deliver with
out requiring 
adjustments or changes to the plan. The team perfec
tly executes a best practices process. This perfect
 execution 
means that a team follows all required steps, but t
hat they get everything right the first time. 
  Real Minimum Completion Time (Real-Min):
 This is the same as the ideal minimum completion t
ime, but it 
assumes a ‚normal™ amount of friction in the proces
s. This friction appears as miscommunications, over
sights, and 
mistakes. It results in some rework and in late cha
nges to the software. 
 Given the previous definitions, consider the timeli
ne in figure 1 below: 
 Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 4 


 Figure 1: Exogeneous Due Date versus Actual Due Dat
e 
 
Examine figure 1, and assume that the Exogenous Due
 Date is in the range marked (3). This would imply 
that we can 
realistically expect to complete the project (Real-
Min) before the project needs to be completed (Exo-
Due). The project team 
can use a typical waterfall approach and achieve ac
ceptable results as long as the project is of low u
ncertainty (Harris et. al., 
2009). Although the Exogenous Due Date does not con
fine the project team, management may choose to set
 a more 
aggressive goal in order to exercise control on the
 team. 
Now consider the circumstance where the Exogenous D
ue Date is in the range indicated by (2) in figure 
1. If everything 
works perfectly the team can complete the project i
n ideal time and finish on time. The closer the exo
genous due date 
approaches the ideal minimum the less likely the pr
oject can be completed on time. If management finds
 that it needs its 
actual delivery to approach the ideal minimum it ma
y want to consider adjustments to allow the team to
 meet the due date. 
Staffing the team with the organization™s best deve
lopers can reduce the project time towards the due 
date. Assigning a 
customer contact full-time to the team may reduce t
he impact of mis-communication in the plan. Pair pr
ogramming may 
increase the likelihood that team members will get 
the solution right the first time. Of course, all o
f these adjustments carry 
an additional cost to the base project cost. 

As the Exogenous Date approaches the ideal minimum,
 and even passes it (1), the due-date becomes infea
sible if the best 
practices approach is used. In order to reduce the 
work time below the required time, shortcuts may be
 required (Austin, 
2001). For example, the team might not conduct thor
ough planning or may reduce testing. One software m
anager described 
his approach in these circumstances. 
ﬁIt™s like, oh by the way, we need this in 35 days.
  So – at the extreme what you start doing is reall
y just .. is 
balancing risk with quality then and cutting corner
s.ﬂ 
 
Taking shortcuts may offer the chance of on time de
livery, but as the magnitude of shortcuts increase 
the probability of 
achieving the on time delivery will decrease. At th
e limit, development without any controls and witho
ut any planning carries 
a high risk of non-delivery. 

Finally, we consider range (0) where the exogenous 
date is at or below the theoretical minimum. It wil
l not be possible for 
the team to meet its due date given the planned app
roach. One option is to consider alternative soluti
ons that change the 
playing field. For example, adopting an existing se
rvice bureau approach rather than building a custom
 solution. However, 
short of creative options, the team will be unable 
to meet the required deadline. 
 
AGILE METHODS 

Agile methods have a reputation for being fast-pace
d.  The first principle in the Agile Manifesto is t
hat ﬁOur highest priority 
is to satisfy the customer through the early and co
ntinuous delivery of valuable softwareﬂ (
http://agilemanifesto.org
).  As an 
example, consider eXtreme Programming (Beck & Andre
s, 2004). Every morning, team members report on the
 previous 
day™s progress. Daily software builds insure contin
uous attention to details. At any given time, the n
ext release is no more 
than a week or two away. Even when agile projects a
re large, practitioners believe that it is critical
 to keep iterations of 
releases to weeks rather than months (Reifer et al.
, 2002).  All of these techniques make work visible
. If team members slack 
 Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 5 
off for a day it will be very visible to their peer
s. These techniques insure there is no let-up in th
e development pace.  A 
continuous series of short, achievable deadlines ke
ep employees motivated and should result in higher 
productivity.  
However, as noted earlier, this could also lead to 
higher employee stress. 
Such positive (increased productivity) and negative
 (higher employee stress) within-project effects of
 the accelerated pace of 
agile methods are different from the issue of faste
r overall time-to-completion of a software project.
  In a survey of 
organizations using agile methods, Reifer (2002, p.
 16) found that a prime motivation for adopting agi
le methods  was time: 
the organizations™ ﬁpoor record of delivering accep
table products on time and within budget.ﬂ  
 However, we note that there is a distinction betwe
en a fast pace and a fast completion. As an illustr
ation, consider a race 
from A to D in the diagram below. A fast-paced runn
er who travels from A to B to C to D (the agile app
roach) might be 
defeated by a walker who travels from A directly to
 D (the plan-driven approach when it is possible to
 know where you are 
going). 



 Figure 2: The Shortest Path from A to D is a Straig
ht Line 
 
This is not to imply that agile approaches are inef
ficient. They are quite efficient in conditions of 
uncertainty (Harris et. al., 
2009). The agile development process resembles a se
arch process. Iterations deliver estimated feature 
subsets, and generate 
feedback for future iterations. Although this may w
ork as a search process, a more direct route may be
 possible if the 
destination is known a priori. 

These differences can be further illustrated if we 
compare the agile processes to a waterfall approach
. The agile approaches 
save project time to the extent that they do not de
velop a complete plan before development begins. Ev
en when agile projects 
are large, practitioners recommend that the up-fron
t planning should primarily focus on the developmen
t of a strong, guiding 
software architecture rather than detailed system s
pecifications (Reifer et al., 2002).  However, this
 savings in up-front 
planning is offset by rework and by abandoned work 
that occurs when feedback is received after an iter
ation is completed.  
The agile approach will also work well if the devel
opment environment is highly uncertain in either th
e requirements or 
technology (Harris et. al., 2009). In this latter c
ase, the agile search process is appropriate given 
the uncertainty that exists. 
Likewise, the upfront plan of a waterfall process i
s likely to be wasted because the uncertainty will 
make it difficult to 
develop a priori plans. However, when uncertainty i
s low, planners will be able to develop an a priori
 plan before 
development begins and this will eliminate rework a
nd eliminate time spent on abandoned features.  In 
the low-uncertainty 
setting, therefore, a more plan-driven approach sho
uld result in a faster time-to-completion. 
 
THE LEAST TIME APPROACH 

The least time approach will therefore depend on th
e conditions. If uncertainty is high, an agile appr
oach may deliver the 
quickest feasible solution. However, the agile sear
ch process can still take substantial time to compl
ete and although this is 
the quickest feasible approach it is not necessaril
y a quick approach. Moreover, the continuous short 
deadlines could lead to 
increased employee stress, which could negatively i
mpact productivity.  The delivery time can be short
ened if we can replace 
the search process with a thorough upfront plan, su
ch as the plan in the waterfall process. However, t
his requires a low 
uncertainty project so that the upfront plan is eff
ective. If the required due date (exogenous due dat
e) is sooner than the plan-
driven approach can deliver, the project team may b
e able to hit the due date by taking shortcuts. How
ever, each shortcut 
taken increases the risk of non-delivery or poor qu
ality. As the required due date becomes close to th
e theoretical minimum 
the number of shortcuts required will increase the 
risk beyond reasonable levels. At this extreme, the
 team will need to either 
find new delivery options or they will be unable to
 meet the required date. 
  Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 6 
RESEARCH PROPOSITIONS 

As we can see from this discussion, the time-relate
d conditions that guide the choice of development a
pproach are complex, 
and research is needed to untangle and understand t
he various relationships.  Based on the conceptuali
zation of the time 
issues in the use of agile methods presented in thi
s paper, we posit the following research propositio
ns: 
1.
 When agile methods are used that employ development
 iterations with continuous, short deadlines, emplo
yee 
motivation within iterations will be higher than fo
r development using a single, longer-term deadline.
 2.
 When agile methods are used that employ development
 iterations with continuous, short deadlines, emplo
yee stress 
within iterations will be higher than for developme
nt using a single, longer-term deadline. 
3.
 In higher-uncertainty software development projects
, an agile approach will result in faster overall t
ime-to-
completion than a plan-driven approach. 
4.
 In lower-uncertainty software development projects,
 a plan-driven approach should result in faster ove
rall time-to-
completion than an agile approach.  However, an alt
ernative proposition is that even when there is low
er 
uncertainty, the increased motivation from continuo
us, short deadlines in the agile approach may also 
result in 
faster overall time-to-completion. 
 
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 

In our on-going research, we have studied the selec
tion and adaptation of agile processes and methods 
under conditions of 
market uncertainty (Harris et. al., 2009). However,
 we also found that other project priorities may ap
ply in other conditions, 
such as a requirement for extreme time pressure. Th
is suggests a portfolio of agile control choices an
d that selection of 
specific agile techniques would depend on the manag
ement priorities of the project at hand. In one cas
e the priority might be 
market uncertainty, in another case time pressure, 
in a third case system reliability, and so on. In t
his regard, we call for 
further research into the conditions that shape the
 choice of methods used. We also recognize that con
ditions may not be 
clearly separable. For example, a project may requi
re extreme reliability and may have hard time const
raints to meet 
development milestones. Therefore, future research 
needs to address tradeoffs in these complex situati
ons. The propositions 
proposed in the previous section provide a starting
 point for our future research directions in the st
udy of time in agile 
process and method design and performance. 

 
REFERENCES 

1.
 Austin, Robert; ﬁThe Effects of Time Pressure on Qu
ality in Software Development: An Agency Model,ﬂ 
Information 
Systems Research,
 (12:2), June 2001, pp. 195-207. 
2.
 Beck, K. and Andres, C., 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change,
 2
nd
 ed. Addison-Wesley, Boston, MA, 
2004 
3.
 Fitzgerald, B., Hartnett, G., and Conboy, K., ﬁCust
omizing Agile Methods to Software Practices at Inte
l Shannon,ﬂ 
European Journal of Information Systems,
 (15:2), April 2006, p. 200. 
4.
 Harris, M.L., Collins, R.W., and Hevner, A.R.., ﬁCo
ntrol of Flexible Software Development under Uncert
ainty,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research (20:3), September 2009
 5.
 He, Fang and Souren, Paul, ﬁAn Empirical Investigat
ion of the Roles of Outcome Controls and Psychologi
cal Factors in 
Collaboration Technology Supported Virtual Teams,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 41st Hawaii International Confer
ence on 
System Sciences
, 2008 
6.
 Parkinson, C.N., ﬁ
Parkinson's Law
,ﬂ Buccaneer Books, Cutchogue, NY, February, 1993. 
7.
 Reifer, D.J., ﬁHow Good Are Agile Methods?ﬂ 
IEEE Software
, (19:4), July/August 2002, 16-18. 
8.
 Reifer, D.J., Maurer, F., and Erdogmus, H., ﬁWhen A
gile Methods are Difficult to Use with Larger Proje
cts,ﬁ 
IEEE 
Software
, (20:4), 2002, 12-14. 
9.
 White, F.M. and Locke, E.A., ﬁPerceived Determinant
s of High and Low Productivity in Three Occupationa
l Groups: A 
Critical Incident Study,ﬂ 
Journal of Management Studies
, (18:4), October 1981, 375-387. 
