 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)University of Nebraska at OmahaUniversity of Nebraska at OmahaUniversity of Nebraska at OmahaAMCIS 2008 Proceedings. Hoff et al. Requirement Prioritization Decision Factors for Agile Development Environments 
 Proceedings of the Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, ON, Canada August 14
th-17
th 2008 
1Requirement Prioritization Decision Factors for  
Agile Development Environments 
 Greg Hoff 
University of Nebraska at Omaha 
ghoff@unomaha.edu 
 Ann Fruhling 
University of Nebraska at Omaha 
afruhling@unomaha.edu 
 Kerry Ward 
University of Nebraska at Omaha 
kwward@unomaha.edu 
ABSTRACT 
In an agile development environment, project planners continuously prioritize work tasks so requirements that provide the 
most value are delivered first.   This strategy is based on Value Based Software Engineering principles that different 
requirements deliver different levels of value and diverse stakeholders view the importance of the value of various 
requirements differently and thus, will prioritize them differently. However, we found that there are several core values that 
stakeholders have more agreement in terms of relevancy and importance than others.  By knowing these core values, project 
planners have increased insights as to which requirements should be prioritized higher, hence, hopefully increasing overall 
stakeholder satisfaction and reducing project risk. 
Keywords 
Value Based Software Engineering, Agile Development, Requirements Engineering. 
INTRODUCTION 
The prioritization of system requirements provides a roadmap for agile software development projects. In an agile 
development environment, stakeholders are required to prioritize requirements so the most important requirements are worked 

first.  Often there are competing goals among stakeholders.  Executives and shareholders want systems that make the 

organization more effective and efficient, thus leading to increased profitability.  System users want systems that make their 

jobs easier to accomplish.  System developers are concerned with responding to production problems.   And, system architects 

may favor implementing new and novel technology.   
Adding to the complexity of the problem is that requirements and priorities are constantly changing.  These changes may be 
due to:  1) changing users 2) changing business problem 3) changing technology and 4) changing markets.  The challenge 

then is how does the project manager and business owner rank requirements and account for all the competing factors?   What 

criteria govern the selection of which requirements to be included in the next software build?  
There are several effective approaches to dealing with these competing goals such as expectation management, visualization 
and trade-off analysis techniques, prioritization, groupware, and business case analysis [3].  In this research we further 

examine the prioritization approach.   
In our study we solicited the perceived relevance and importance requirement criteria from information technology 
professionals and other stakeholders from medium to large corporations.   Gaining a better understanding of the stakeholders™ 

motives for requirements selection and prioritization has several implications.   First, understanding stakeholders™ motives 

should allow practitioners to address these motives directly, increasing stakeholder satisfaction.   Second, this understanding 

should lead to more effective management decisions as to whether requirements should be included and their priority in a 
 Hoff et al. Requirement Prioritization Decision Factors for Agile Development Environments 
 Proceedings of the Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, ON, Canada August 14
th-17
th 2008 
2software build.  Third, this understanding of motives and expected impact on requirements determination should reduce the 
risk of project failure.   
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.  Section 2 discusses system requirements importance, value-based 
software engineering principles, agile development approaches, and system risk management.  Section 3 describes the various 

decision factors for the inclusion and prioritization of system requirements.  The research method is discussed in Section 4.  

Section 5 presents our findings.   Lastly, Section 6 discusses the implications of our research, limitations and future direction. 
LITERATURE REVIEW 
Importance of Requirements 
The main purpose of identifying and defining requirements is to describe the functions for an information system that needs to 
be developed and to guide the system design architecture.  Requirements are important to systems analysts for several reasons. 
First, requirements identify what a system should and should not do.  Second, requirements define what can be changed, what 
cannot be changed and what should be changed.  Third, when system analysts do not have control of all the systems under 

development, requirements can be a starting point to help coordinate among many parties. Finally, it is important to have 

clear, well-defined requirements that can guide system design so that the problems being addressed are solved as efficiently as 

possible.   
Requirements are also important in managing the risk associated with project failure [16].  Several aspects of requirements 
such as poorly defined or inadequate requirements increases the likelihood that they system will fail to meet the needs of the 
users and the organization.  Requirements can also indirectly impact risk management by triggering other risk factors such as 
cost overruns.  Improving the requirements analysis process and understanding the requirement selection criteria (referred to 
as decision factors) can further improve the success of system development projects.  
Value Based Software Engineering 
Value Based Software Engineering (VBSE) theory states stakeholders beyond users are critical to the success of the software 
development project and must be considered. VBSE asserts that traditional software engineering practice and research is 

value-neutral where each deliverable is given equal importance across the board i.e. no prioritization is done and no cut-offs 

are set when unit costs exceed derived unit benefit [2].  Additionally, VBSE makes the assumption that traditionally software 
engineers confine themselves to software development and do not consider business impacts or concerns.  The goal of VBSE 
is thus to change the frame-of-mind of software engineers in which decisions are made within a software development project 
so that factors that more truly determine success and cost/benefit analysis are taken into account.  In other words, VBSE 
represents a paradigm shift from value-neutral to value-based thinking.  
At the core of Value Based Software Engineering is Theory W.  Theory W is defined by Boehm [2] as determining what is 
important to each of the success-critical stakeholders (SCS) and defining how success is assured for all SCSs. The desired end 

state for requirements then is a negotiated win-win state in which the system stakeholders agree to an option from which all 

can derive benefit.  The win-win scenario usually takes greater effort to achieve and requires a change in mindset away from 

constant competition.  In the case of requirement negotiation a win-win outcome is optimal.  Because of the focus on multiple 

stakeholder ﬁwinsﬂ, VBSE has been viewed as a valid risk reduction strategy for managing systems development risk.  In 

particular, theory W has been cited as a way to mitigate project risk associated with lack of management and user project 

commitment [9]. 
Agile Development Approach 
The recent introduction of the agile software development approach was motivated partially by the notion that traditional 
plan-driven software teams are hampered by an ever-increasing amount of processes and documentation.  The aim of the agile 

approach is to streamline the software development process.  Whereas traditional plan-driven development is perceived to be 

rigid and cumbersome, agile approaches acknowledge volatile and emerging requirements management.   Agile methods 

allow users to alter their requirements once they see and test the system.  This often occurs in iterations.  Each new iteration 

includes reprioritizing requirements as one of the first steps.   In an iterative environment not only is it important to prioritize 

the requirements quickly, it is also important to consider the needs of the various stakeholders.  Following an iterative and 

reprioritization process may assist in minimizing some of the risks of project failure because of the increased user 

involvement. 
 Hoff et al. Requirement Prioritization Decision Factors for Agile Development Environments 
 Proceedings of the Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, ON, Canada August 14
th-17
th 2008 
3Risk Management  
Managing risks associated with software development project failure has become a substantial concern for organizations [16].  
Risk management is the active process of controlling risk and includes the identification of potential threats (risk assessment) 

and taking actions to eliminate or minimize the threats (risk mitigation).  Given the well publicized catastrophic failure of a 
number of high profile software development projects - for example the FAA™s $2.6 billion air traffic control system failure - 
it is easy to understand the importance of managing the risk of software development projects (see also [4] for additional 

examples of high profile software project failures).   
One specific source of software project risk is requirements determination and prioritization.  In general requirements risk 
refers to the uncertainty related to requirements [16].  Risks associated with requirements development can be of three types: 

1) requirements identity Œ the ability to correctly identify requirements, 2) requirements volatility Œ how likely the 

requirements are to change, and 3) requirements complexity Œ how clearly the requirements can be established and understood 
[11]. What makes the risks associated with requirements determination of particular importance is that while a lot of software 
project risks lie outside the direct control of the project manager, risks associated with requirements are risks the project 

manager can control [9].  It has been suggested that project managers can mitigate the risk associated with requirements by 

managing the change and ambiguity, for example by using evolutionary (agile) approaches to systems development and 

making sure the users are driving the requirements [9] 
CONCEPTUAL FOUNDATION Œ REQUIREMENT DECISION FACTORS  
Requirements can be categorized according to their intended purpose or the effect they will have on the proposed system.  In 
the context of this paper, the intended purpose or effect is referred to as a decision factor.  Examples of requirement decision 
factors are: cost-benefit to the organization, complexity, impact of maintenance, increased performance, etc.  There are 
different opinions on which decision factors are the most important when determining the highest priority requirements.    A 

summary of the various requirement decision factors is shown in Table 1.  A discussion of the literature associated with each 
decision factor follows.  
Wohlin and Aurum [17, 18] find that the stakeholder priority of requirement, delivery dates, requirement™s issuer and 
development cost-benefit are the most important decision factors when prioritizing requirements.  Stakeholder priority takes 
into account how customers and external market forces view the importance of a requirement.  Delivery dates are common 
schedule pressures associated when a requirement has been promised.  Requirement issuer focuses on who requested the 
functionality.  Development cost-benefit compares the resources expended to implement functionality versus the gain the 
business will receive for having implemented the functionality. 
Sommerville and Sawyer [14] prioritize requirements based on the "importance to stakeholders" and contribution to the 
"overall success of the system".  These prioritization attributes are reflected as "Stakeholder priority of requirement" and 
"Cost-Benefit to the Organization". 
Davis [5] advocates evaluating each requirement's priority according to the available resources to implement the requirement 
which then can be used to calculate the requirement™s probability of success.  Requirements with greater success probabilities 

are delivered first.   
Lutowski [10] prioritizes requirements based on "importance or immediacy of need", referred to as ﬁImpact to the 
Organizationﬂ.  Functionality that is needed the soonest and the most in the organization is identified.   
Royce [12] discusses assessing requirements based on consistency of requirements to organization vision. Requirements are 
derived from business cases.  The compliance to organizational vision from the business case is interpreted as "Stakeholder 

priority of requirement".  In this case the stakeholders are more likely to be executives who are responsible for developing the 

vision instead of system users.  The second contribution Royce [12] makes falls under the decision factor of "requirement 

volatility" i.e. taking into account the impact of changing requirements to the system. 
Arequirement prioritization strategy could be based on cost reduction.  Requirements that minimize organizational costs are 
given higher priority.  Factors that contribute to software costs are related to the technical environment, participant 

competencies, quality goals, timeframe, documentation required, amount of available reusable software, complexity, and 

requirement stability [1]. 
Almost all requirements for a system are negotiable and even more so when requirements are changing.  Favaro [6] advocates 
looking for the right mix of requirements that will maximize value for the organization through cost-benefit analysis. Further, 
 Hoff et al. Requirement Prioritization Decision Factors for Agile Development Environments 
 Proceedings of the Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, ON, Canada August 14
th-17
th 2008 
4given the importance of managing the risk to the project, it is intuitive that factoring the risk related to project failure should 
be considered in the final prioritization of requirements. 
 Competitors/marketforcesRequirement'sissuerStakeholderpriorityofrequirementRequirementsVolatilitySupportforEducation/TrainingCost-benefittotheorganizationResources/competenciesDeliverydate/scheduleSystemImpactComplexityRequirementdependenciesEvolutionImpactofmaintenanceFixeserrorImpacttotheorganizationProbabilityofsuccessTestabilityBoehm [1]    
LLLLLLLLDavis [5]                
LFavaro [6]      
LJung [9]      
LKarlsson [8]      
LLutowski 
[10] 
 LRoyce [12]   
LLLLLLRuhe & 
Saliu [13] 
 LLLLSommerville 
[14] 
 LLThayer [15]   
LLLWohlin & 
Aurum [17] 
LLLLLLLLLLLLLYoung [19]  
LLLPilot Study              
LTable 1. Summary of requirement decision factors 
METHODOLOGY 
The survey research methodology is employed in this study.  It is one of the most commonly used research methodologies in 
empirical MIS research [7].  Survey research has three important characteristics for theory development.  First, the 

information collected is from asking people for information in some structured format.  Second, it has a quantitative 

orientation and lastly, it samples the population with the intention of being able to generalize findings [7].  Survey research 

can be classified into two categories:  exploratory research and explanatory research.    Exploratory research or descriptive 

research is used to understand more about the topic; whereas, on the other hand, explanatory research analyzes the causal 

relationships among variables.  This research focuses on the exploratory emphasis of survey research. 
The Requirements Decision Factors survey is an extension of the work done by Wohlin and Aurum [17, 18].In our study, we 
expanded the survey to include a more comprehensive list of requirement decision factors based on the literature. The 

respondent pool was broadened by including a more diverse set of companies.   Our literature review confirmed the use of 

most of Wohlin and Aurum reported attributes, although, we also identified four additional decision factors which are:  
 Hoff et al. Requirement Prioritization Decision Factors for Agile Development Environments 
 Proceedings of the Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, ON, Canada August 14
th-17
th 2008 
51. Impact to the organization - Is this requirement something that will cause significant change or disruption?  The greater 
the change or potential disruption to the organization, the greater risk the potential project failure is to the organization.  
Furthermore, we may not want to include a high impact requirement until additional process changes, training, support 
structures, etc. are in place. 
2. Probability of success - Are there more factors contributing to a satisfactory system completion state versus 
unsatisfactory?  Requirements that have a low probability of success or have elements working against succeeding may 
not want to be attempted. 
3. Fixes error - In a previous delivery, a requirement was incorrectly implemented and is now being rectified. Therefore, a 
new requirement is added to the queue to fix an unforeseen problem and needs to be included in the prioritization.  
4. Testability Œ A test exists for the requirement so it can be unambiguously passed or failed.  In other words, how easy or 
difficult is it to validate the requirement.  Requirements requiring subjective evaluation are more difficult to reach 
stakeholder consensus in determining completion than those that have objective evaluation. 
The decision factors are grouped into three categories.  Each category represents a different perspective for approaching 
requirement selection and prioritization.  The external market / customer category contains factors from outside the 
organization.  The company management categories are business considerations internal to the organization.  And, the 

development / maintenance category are internal technical considerations.  In Table 2 we list the decision factors associate 

with each category.   
 Category Decision Factors Comments 
External market / 
customer 
Competitors The status of the competitors with respect to the requirement. In other 
words, it is taken into account whether a competitor has the implied 

functionality implemented or not. 
Requirement's issuer The actual issuer of the requirement is taken into account, i.e. which 
stakeholder (internal or external) generated the requirement. 
Stakeholder priority of 
requirement 
The importance of the requirement from stakeholders' perspectives.  
For example, this could include usability for system users, or strategic 

initiatives from business owners, or regulatory requirements from 

society. 
Requirements volatility This criterion is related to whether the requirement is likely to change 
or not.  Requirements volatility is a known requirements 

determination risk [11]. 
Company 
management 
Support for 
Education/Training 
The ability and possibility to provide technical support, education, 
and/or training to customers, markets and so forth with respect to the 

requirement. 
Development cost-benefit The benefit derived by implementing the requirement is greater than 
the cost of development and implementation, i.e. the value-added to 

the organization. 
Resources/competencies The availability of resources with the right competencies to implement 
the requirement. 
Delivery date / Calendar 
time 
The ability to meet the project deadline. 
*Impact to the organization Will this requirement cause significant change or disruption?  We may 
not want to include a high impact requirement until additional process 

changes, training, support structures, etc. are in place.   
*Probability of success Are there more factors contributing to satisfactory completion state 
versus unsatisfactory.  Requirements that involve high risk or have 

elements working against succeeding may not want to be attempted 
Development / 
maintenance 

personnel 
System impact The impact of the requirement on the existing system.   
 Hoff et al. Requirement Prioritization Decision Factors for Agile Development Environments 
 Proceedings of the Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, ON, Canada August 14
th-17
th 2008 
6Category Decision Factors Comments 
Complexity The estimated complexity of the requirement and the associated 
challenges in implementing it.  Requirements complexity is a known 

requirements determination risk [11] 
Requirements dependencies The dependencies between this specific requirement and other 
requirements, either already implemented or other posed 

requirements. 
Evolution The impact on the future evolution of the system.  Evolution is 
associated with requirements volatility, a requirements determination 

risk[11].  
Maintenance The impact, positive or negative, on the maintenance of the current 
system. 
*Fixes error In a previous delivery, a requirement was incorrectly implemented and 
is now being rectified. We may want to include a fix with an 

importance higher than the requirement's previous importance due to 

the stigma of delivering 'buggy' software. 
*Testability A test exists for the requirement so it can be unambiguously passed or 
failed.  Requirements requiring subjective evaluation are more 

difficult to reach stakeholder consensus in determining completion. 
Table 2. Decision Factor Categorization [17, 18] 
*New Requirement Decision Factor 
 SURVEY RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 
Analysis of the Stakeholders 
The field survey occurred at a large information technology conference for IT professionals in the Midwest.  Twenty-nine 
surveys were collected. Seven were discarded due to incompleteness.  The demographic information collected indicated a 

range of experience and roles listed in Table 3 and 4, respectively.  Over half of the participants had more than ten years of 

information technology experience.   The roles of the participant in the organization were fairly distributed.  Also, the 

diversity of the industries is shown in Table 5.   
 Valid 
responses 
 Under one year 2 9% 
One to five years 4 18% 
Five to ten years 4 18% 
Over ten years 12 55% 
Table 3. Years of experience with software 
development and/or acquisition 
 Hoff et al. Requirement Prioritization Decision Factors for Agile Development Environments 
 Proceedings of the Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, ON, Canada August 14
th-17
th 2008 
7Valid 
responses 
 Executive 2 9% 
Manager / team lead 5 23% 
Business analyst 0 0% 
Programmer 8 36% 
Engineer/technical 5 23% 
Testing 1 4.5% 
Non-professional 1 4.5% 
No response 0 0% 
Table 4. Participant's role in their organization 
Valid 
responses 
 Services 2 9% 
Products/manufacturing 7 32% 
Financial 6 27% 
Government 2 9% 
Military 3 14% 
Healthcare 1 4.5% 
Other 0 0% 
No response 1 4.5% 
Table 5. Industry of participant's organization 
Analysis of the Data 
We analyzed the requirement decision factors from two perspectives:  relevancy to the stakeholder and the importance in 
comparison to other decision factors.   We begin our discussion examining the stakeholder consensus on requirement decision 

factor relevancy.  
Decision Factor Relevancy  
The response on whether each decision factor was relevant to the decision maker is shown in Table 6.  The two decision 
factors that ranked the highest in relevancy were Fixes Errors and Cost-Benefit to the Organization.  In fact, 91% of the 

respondents rated these as high relevancy. Therefore, when system managers are prioritizing requirements these two decision 

factors should be considered first when trying to build consensus and deciding which requirements to include in the next 

iteration.  Because of the high rating one could expect that most stakeholders would be in agreement (win-win) with 

requirements associated with these intended values.  
The decision factor Fixes Errors was suggested during the pilot test as a primary motivation for prioritizing a requirement 
high.  Strictly speaking using plan-based development, if a requirement has not been previously implemented properly, the fix 

would not create a new requirement; however, when following an agile approach and in an iterative environment Fixes Errors 

becomes more relevant.   Also, since we surveyed businesses where they are measured on financials it makes sense that Cost-

Benefit was one of the most agreed upon decision factors.   
The next set of factors that received fairly high consensus was Requirement Dependencies, Delivery Date/Schedule and 
Complexity.  Requirement Dependencies and Delivery Date/Schedule seem logical because of their importance to project 

planning.  It is interesting that Complexity has so much agreement on relevancy. We discuss Complexity more below.  
 Hoff et al. Requirement Prioritization Decision Factors for Agile Development Environments 
 Proceedings of the Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, ON, Canada August 14
th-17
th 2008 
8The two decision factors that had the lowest relevancy were Evolution and Support for Education/Training.  Given the 
industries and the demographics of the respondents it is not a complete surprise that Support for Education/Training was low.  
Education and training is not usually in the forefront of the individuals surveyed.  With regards to Evolution, there were a few 
comments that this term was vague and thus, not understood.  Overall, 9 out of 17 decision factors had greater than 81% 

consensus that they are relevant.   
The Development/Maintenance and Company Management Categories decision factors had more consensus than External 
Market Factors.   
From a risk management perspective, the high agreement on the relevancy of Cost-Benefit to the Organization indicates that 
stakeholders are concerned about risk that limits loss to the organization from project failure in their decisions.  Also, 
Complexity another decision factor related to risk had high consensus on its relevance.  However, Requirements Volatility 
and Evolution which may also influence project risk only had 73% and 55% agreement, respectively.  These mixed results 

may indicate that stakeholders have a more diverse view on requirement decision factors associated with risk and that those 

surveyed do not directly associate requirements determination factors with the risks posed to the organization.  This finding 

suggests further research is warranted. 
 Decision Factor  Yes No Percent 
Yes 
Category 
Fixes error 20 2 91% 
Development / maintenance 
Cost-benefit to the organization 20 2 91% 
Company management 
Complexity 19 3 86% 
Development / maintenance 
Requirement dependencies 19 3 86% 
Development / maintenance 
Delivery date / schedule 19 3 86% 
Company management 
Impact of maintenance 18 4 82% 
Development / maintenance 
Impact to the organization 18 4 82% 
Company management 
Resources / competencies 18 4 82% 
Company management 
System Impact 18 4 82% 
Development / maintenance 
Probability of success 17 5 77% 
Company management 
Stakeholder priority of requirement 16 6 73% External market / customer 
Requirements Volatility 16 6 73% External market / customer 
Testability 15 7 68% 
Development / maintenance 
Requirement's issuer 15 7 68% External market / customer 
Competitors / market forces 14 8 64% External market / customer 
Evolution 12 10 55% 
Development / maintenance 
Support for Education / Training 11 11 50% 
Company management 
Table 6 Œ Decision factor relevancy 
 Hoff et al. Requirement Prioritization Decision Factors for Agile Development Environments 
 Proceedings of the Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, ON, Canada August 14
th-17
th 2008 
9Decision Factor Importance  
Next, we asked the participants to rank the decision factors in importance compared to one another.  Participants were asked 
to consider the importance from two perspectives, how important the decision factor is today in their organization (see Table 
7) and how important they perceive the decision factor should be in a ﬁperfect worldﬂ environment (See Table 8).  In other 

words, we wanted to compare ﬁrealityﬂ to ﬁidealﬂ.  As shown below, the weighted importance of criteria Impact to the 
Organization, Fixes Errors, Delivery Date/Schedule were relatively high and Requirement's issuer, Volatility and Support for 
Education/Training were ranked low.   
 Requirement attribute Importance 
Percentage * 
Category 
Impact to the organization 10.3% 
Company management 
Fixes error 8.7% 
Development / maintenance 
Delivery date / schedule 8.1% 
Company management 
Cost-benefit to the organization 7.4% 
Company management 
System Impact 7.0% 
Development / maintenance 
Stakeholder priority of requirement 6.4% External market / customer 
Resources / competencies 5.9% 
Company management 
Probability of success 5.8% 
Company management 
Requirement dependencies 5.6% 
Development / maintenance 
Competitors / market forces 5.2% External market / customer 
Complexity 5.1% 
Development / maintenance 
Impact of maintenance 5.1% 
Development / maintenance 
Testability 4.7% 
Development / maintenance 
Evolution 4.1% 
Development / maintenance 
Requirement's issuer 3.9% External market / customer 
Requirements Volatility 3.6% External market / customer 
Support for Education / Training 3.2% 
Company management 
Table 7 - Importance of decision factors Œ Reality
 *Percentage of points assigned by survey respondents asked to consider the importance of the attribute 
when prioritizing requirements in a software release or project. 
 Of the four new criteria introduced into this study, Fixes Errors and Impact to the Organization were shown to be of relative 
high importance with Probability of Success and Testability not rating as high in reality.   
Astatistical analysis using t-tests for each variable was done to determine if there was a significant difference.  The results did 
not show any statistical significant difference between the reality decision factors and the ideal decision factors at a 95% 

confidence level.  We included the Bonferroni correction as part of our statistical analysis.   So, one may conclude that the 

stakeholders surveyed are consistent and not compromising their decision criteria.    
 Hoff et al. Requirement Prioritization Decision Factors for Agile Development Environments 
 Proceedings of the Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, ON, Canada August 14
th-17
th 2008 
10 Requirement Attribute * Importance 
Percentage 
Category 
Impact to the organization 9.5% 
Company management 
Cost-benefit to the organization 9.1% 
Company management 
Probability of success 8.2% 
Company management 
Fixes error 8.1% 
Development / maintenance 
Delivery date / schedule 6.7% 
Company management 
System Impact 6.7% 
Development / maintenance 
Stakeholder priority of requirement 5.6% External market / customer 
Competitors / market forces 5.5% External market / customer 
Resources / competencies 5.4% 
Company management 
Complexity 5.4% 
Development / maintenance 
Requirement dependencies 5.4% 
Development / maintenance 
Impact of maintenance 5.2% 
Development / maintenance 
Testability 4.7% 
Development / maintenance 
Evolution 4.0% 
Development / maintenance 
Requirements Volatility 3.7% External market / customer 
Support for Education / Training 3.5% 
Company management 
Requirement's issuer 3.2% External market / customer 
Table 8 - Importance of decision factors - Ideal 
*Percentage of points assigned by survey respondents asked to consider the importance of the attribute 
when prioritizing requirements in a software release or project. 
 CONCLUSION 
We found that there are several core decision factors that stakeholders have more agreement in terms of relevancy and 
importance than others.  By knowing these core decision factors project planners have additional insights as to which 

requirements should be prioritized higher according to their value, hence, this may increase the overall stakeholder 

satisfaction and reduce project risk.   The insights into stakeholders™ motives for requirements selection and prioritization may 

also increase win-win solutions that could directly impact stakeholder satisfaction.  Better requirement management and 

increase stakeholder commitment all decrease the likelihood of project failure.   
The results from this study found that the decision factors Fixes Errors, Cost-Benefit to the Organization, Complexity, 
Requirement Dependencies, and Delivery Date/Schedule have the most relevancy consensus among stakeholders when 

evaluating the value of a system requirement.  The data suggests that Impact to the Organization, Fixes Errors, Cost-benefit to 

the Organization are the most important decision factors when prioritizing requirements for implementation.  It appears that 

Evolution was the least intuitive and perhaps may not really be a decision factor.  Likewise, Support for Training and 

Education maybe should also be eliminated.   
Further research may help determine whether additional demographics such as company size, development staff attributes and 
context have an effect on decision factors™ importance.  Secondly, future research needs to understand more how risk 

management affects requirement prioritization in an agile development project.  The main limitations of this research are the 

small sample size and the inability to generalize the results.   
 Hoff et al. Requirement Prioritization Decision Factors for Agile Development Environments 
 Proceedings of the Fourteenth Americas Conference on Information Systems, Toronto, ON, Canada August 14
th-17
th 2008 
11 REFERENCES 
[1] Boehm, B.W., "The High Cost of Software" 
Practical Strategies for Developing Large Software Systems
 ed. E. Horowitz, Addison-
Wesley, Reading MA, 1975. 
[2] Boehm, B.W., and Ross, R. "Theory-W Software Project Management: Principles and Examples" 
IEEE Transactions on Software 
Engineering
,Vol. 15, No. 7, July 1989, pp. 902 - 916. 
[3] Boehm, B.W., "Value-based software engineering" 
ACM SIGSOFT Software Engineering Notes
,Vol. 28 No. 2, March 2003, pp 1 - 12. 
[4] Charette, R.N., ﬁWhy Software Failsﬂ  IEEE Spectrum, Vol. 42 No. 9 pp 42- 49 
[5] Davis, A., "The Art of Requirements Triage", 
IEEE Computer
,Vol. 36, No. 3, March 2003, pp. 42-49. 
[6] Favaro, J. "Managing requirements for business value", 
IEEE Software,
 Vol. 19, No. 2, Mar/Apr 2002, pp. 15-17. 
[7] Grover, V., ﬁA tutorial on survey research:  from constructs to theory," http://dmsweb.badm.sc.edu/grover/survey/MIS-SUVY.html, 
1998. 
[8] Jung, Ho-Won "Optimizing value and cost in requirements analysis" 
IEEE Software
 Vol. 15, No, 4, July-Aug. 1998, pp 74 - 78. 
[9] Keil, M., Cule, P.E., Lyytinen, K. and Schmidt, R.C. A Framework for Identifying Software Project Risks, Communications of the 
ACM, Vol. 41, No. 11, November 1998, pp 76-83. 
[10] Lutowski, R., Software Requirements, Auerbach Publications, Boca Raton, 2005. 

[11] Mathiassen, L., Tuunanen, T., Saarinen, T, and Rossi, M. ﬁA Contigency Model for Requirements Developmentﬂ 
Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems
,Vol. 8, No. 2 pp 569-597. 
[12] Royce, W. 
Software Project Management. A Unified Framework
,Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 1998. 
[13] Ruhe, G., and M.O. Saliu, "The Art and Science of Software Release Planning" 
IEEE Software
,Vol. 22, No. 6, Nov.-Dec. 2005, pp 
47 - 53. 
[14] Sommerville, I. and P. Sawyer, 
Requirements Engineering: A Good Practice Guide
,John Wiley & Sons, Chichester, England, 1997. 
[15] Thayer, R. and M. Dorfman 
Software Requirements Engineering,
 2nd ed., IEEE Computer Society, Los Alamitos, CA, 2000. 
[16] Wallace, L., Keil, M. and Rai, A. How Project Software Risk Affects Project Performance: An Investigation into the Dimension of 
Risk and an Exploratory Model, Decision Sciences, Vol. 35, No. 2, Spring 2004, pp 289-321. 
[17] Wohlin, C. and A. Aurum, ﬁCriteria for Selecting Software Requirements to Create Product Value: An Industrial Empirical Studyﬂ, 
Value-Based Software Engineering
,eds. S. Biffl, A. Aurum, B. Boehm, H. Erdogmus, P. Grünbacher, Springer, Berlin, 2006. 
[18] Wohlin, C.; Aurum, A., "What is important when deciding to include a software requirement in a project or release?" 
International 
Symposium on Empirical Software Engineering
,Nov. 2005, pp 246-255. 
[19] Young, R.R., 
The Requirements Engineering Handbook
,Artech House, Inc., Boston, 2004. 
