 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Utah State UniversityAMCIS 2007 Proceedings. An Exploratory Study on Management of Virtual 
Teams in Distributed Scrum Software 
Development Method for Large-Scale and 
Complex Projects 
 Juyun Cho 
Utah State University Email: jcho@cc.usu.edu   INTRODUCTION The conventional heavyweight, document-driven software development method requires extensive 
planning, codified processes, and rigorous reuse (Boehm, 2002).  This method works best when developers 
know all of the requirements in advance, and when re
quirements are relatively stable (Hickey and David, 
2005; Schach, 2004).  The conventional method is still la
rgely used in industry due to its straightforward, 
methodical, and structured nature (Fruhling and De Vreede, 2006).  However, this method has a number of 

key shortcomings that have been widely reported, including the inability to effectively handle changing 
requirements, and the tendency to significantly be
 over budget and behind schedule (Sommerville, 2004; 
Watson, 2004; Schach, 2004; Boehm, 2002).  To address some of the conventional method shortcomings, 
agile methods were proposed such as Scrum, eXtreme Programming (XP) and Crystal (Beck, 2000; 
Highsmith, and Cockburn, 2001).  Many research papers reported agile methods™ potential benefits such as 
greater customer satisfaction, faster adaptation to changing circum
stances, lower defect rates, and faster 
development time (Augustine et al., 2005; Boehm and Turner, 2005; Little et al., 2004; Parrish et al., 2004).  
 Among several agile methods, a team-based light weight software development method named 
Scrum is claimed to be suitable for large-scale project (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002).  However, very little 

research has been done on whether the Scrum method 
is viable when it is u
tilized for large-scale and 
complex projects. Further, the majority of research on the agile methods was conducted in environments 
where all of the developers were in the same geographic location. However, many software companies deal 
with large-scale projects w
ith developers scattered in different geographic location. For example, two 
global companies, Hewlett Packard and Intel Corpora
tion, have been using the agile methods among their 
scattered branches for about three years (Holmstrom
 et al., 2006). Many global companies are getting 
involved in more distributed software development environments due to the influence of globalization of 

information technology and information systems development. Also, the potential of delivering high-
quality software in a timely and economical manner (Bat
ra et al. 2006; Gopal et al. 2002) attracts many 
global organizations to involve in distributed virtual team environment. As interest in distributed software 
development using the agile methods is growing in the software industry, it is be very important to study 
various issues and challenges arising in managing virtual teams that are scattered in geographically, 
culturally, and temporally different locations. 
As a first step, an in-depth case study will help to understand the viability of the distributed Scrum 
method, and how distributed Scrum can 
be utilized in managing virtual te
ams.  Therefore, an exploratory 
research will be conducted at a company that uses 
the Scrum method for large-scale and complex projects 
with developers in two different geographical locations. 
  - 1 - 1 Purpose of the Study 
The main focus of the study is to find the solutions for management issues of virtual software 
development teams in different geographical locations
 as the agile methods applied to large-scale and 
complex projects. In addition, we 
would like to find the viability of 
the Scrum method in the distributed 
software development milieu. The following research questions will be probed through the study. 
1. What are the best practices to manage virtual teams using distributed Scrum? 
2. What technologies are appropriate to mitigate the well-known issues including communication, 
control, and coordination (Ghosh, et al., 2004; Holmstrom et al., 2006; Ramesh, et al., 2006) 
among virtual teams? 
3. Which aspects of Scrum should be successfully 
adopted for large-scale 
projects in distributed 
environment? 
4. What are the key factors of distributed Scrum to improve the quality of large-scale projects in 
terms of bug rates, development time, and cost? 
Research Plan and Research Method  
A case study will be conducted at a company founded in 1978.  This company has been 
developing and maintaining software for more than 500 
clients across 36 states in the USA.  In particular, 
this company specializes in mission
-critical and sophisticated public safety software, such as jail 
management system, fire/emergency medical service (EMS) management system, computer-aided E911 

dispatch system, mobile communications system
, and records management systems (RMS).   
The company has a total of 30 software developers and QA personnel, which are divided into five 
development teams in the software division.  After 
more than twenty years of conventional software 
development methods usage (e.g. waterfall), the company switched to the Scrum software development 
method in April, 2005 and has been actively engaged in all aspects of the Scrum method. About four 
months after the company decided to use the Scrum method, the main part of the company moved to a 
different city. Since then, the company has kept tw
o work places and software
 development teams have 
been divided between the two locations.  
Three types of data will be gathered to triangul
ate findings and enhance trustworthiness (Glesne, 
2006). Both quantitative and qualitative data will be co
llected. The quantitative data will include two-year 
accumulated bug rates, development time, and develo
pment costs that were stored in the company™s 
database. The bug rates will be examined not only to see if there is any significant change after 
implementation of the distributed Scrum, but also to check if there are any patterns or trends among bug 
rates. The development time and development costs will also be measured in terms of work progress per 

month. The qualitative data will contain answers from
 open-ended surveys and interview questions as well 
as field notes from an observation. The surveys and 
face-to-face individual interviews will be conducted 
among software developers, QA (Quality Assu
rance) personnel, and product managers.  
Expected Contributions of the Study 
We expect that the research results will provide valuable insights into decision makings at 
operational, managerial, and strategic level.  For operational decision making, our findings will give 

guidelines to organizations that are already using the Scrum method in distributed team environment by 
providing the best practices to manage the virtual teams to deliver high-quality software product in a timely 
and economical manner.  For managerial decision ma
king, our findings will help organizations make 
decisions on whether it is cost effective and productive to outsource their projects to geographically 
separated virtual teams. For strategic decision making, the findings will help organizations that use a 
traditional software development method make decisions on adopting the distributed Scrum method as a 

future development tool. Overall, we believe knowing how to manage virtual Scrum team could lead to 
significant improvements in software industry. 
 - 2 - 2  References Augustine, S., Payne, B., Sencindiver, F., and Woodcock, S. ﬁAgile project management: Steering from the 
edges,ﬂ 
Communication of the ACM 
(48:12), 2005, pp.  85-89. 
Batra, D., Sin, T., and Tseng, S. ﬁModified ag
ile practices for outsourced software projects,ﬂ 
Proceedings 
of the twelfth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Acapulco,
 Mexico August 4-6, 2006, pp. 
3872-3880. 
Beck, K. Extreme programming explained: Embrace change
, Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA, 2000. 
Boehm, B. W. ﬁGet ready for agile methods with care,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer, 
(35:1), 2002, pp. 64-69. 
Boehm, B., & Turner, R. ﬁBalancing agility and discipline: Evaluating and integrating agile and plan-
driven methods,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 26
th International Conference 
on Software Engineering, 
2004, pp. 
718-719. 
Boehm, B., & Turner R. (2005). ﬁM
anagement challenges to implementing agile processes in traditional 
development organizations,ﬂ 
Software, IEEE, 
(22:5), 2005, pp. 20-29 
Fruhling, A., & De Vreede, G. ﬁField experiences with eXtreme programming: Developing an emergency 
response system,ﬂ 
Journal of Management Information Systems, 
(22:4), 2006, pp. 39-68.
  Glesne, C. 
Becoming qualitative researchers: An introduction
, Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon, 2006.   
Gopal, A., Mukhopadhyay, T., and Krishnan, M. (2002). ﬁThe role of software processes and 
communication in offshore software development,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM, 
(45:4), 2002, pp. 
193-200. 
Ghosh, T., Yates, J., and Orlikowski, W. ﬁUsing communication norms for coordination: Evidence from a 
distributed team,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 25
th International Conference on Information Systems (ICIS™04)
, 2004, pp. 115-127. 
Highsmith, J., and Cockburn, A. ﬁAgile software development: The business innovation,ﬂ 
Computer,
 (34:9), 2001, pp. 120-122. 
Hickey, A. M., and Da
vid, A. M. ﬁA unified model 
of requirements elicitation,ﬂ 
Journal of Management 
Information Systems,
 (20:4), 2005, pp. 65-84. 
Holmstrom, H., Fitzgerald, B., Agerfalk, P., and Conchuir, E. (2006). ﬁAgile practices reduce distance in 
global software development,ﬂ 
Information Systems Management
, (23:3), 2006, pp. 7-18. 
Parrish, A., Smith, R., Hale, D., and Hale, J (2004). ﬁA field study of developer pairs: Productivity impacts 
and implications,ﬂ 
IEEE Software, 
(21:5), 2004, pp. 76-79.  
Ramesh, B., Cao, L., Mohan, K., and Xu P.  ﬁCan distributed software development be agile?ﬂ 
Communication of the ACM, 
(49:10), 2006, pp. 41-46. 
Watson, R. T., Kelly, G., Galliers, D. and Brancheau, 
C. ﬁKey issues in inform
ation systems management: 
An international perspective,ﬂ 
Journal of Management Information Systems,
 (13:4), 1997, pp. 91-115. 
Schach, S. R. 
An introduction to object-oriented systems analysis and design with UML and the unified 
process. Boston: McGraw-Hill, 2004. 
Schwaber, K., and Beedle, M. 
Agile software development with Scrum
, Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, 
NJ, 2002. 
Sommerville, I. 
Software Engineering. 
Boston,: Addision-Wesley, 2004. 
Stephens, M., and Rosenberg, D. ﬁThe irony of eXtreme programming,ﬂ 
Dr. Dobbs Journal
, (29:5), 2004, 
pp. 44-47. 
  - 3 - 3