 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Social Traps of Agile methodsAdarsh Kumar KakarManagement Information Systems, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, United States.Joanne HaleManagement Information Systems, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, United States.David HaleManagement Information Systems, University of Alabama, Tuscaloosa, AL, United States.AMCIS 2012 Proceedings. Social Traps of Agile Methods 
 Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Seattle, Washington, August 9-12, 2012
. 1 
Social Traps of Agile methods 
   Adarsh Kumar Kakar 
University of Alabama 
askakar@crimson.ua.edu 
Dr. Joanne Hale 
University of Alabama 
jhale@ua.cba.edu 
                          
    Dr. David Hale 
University of Alabama 
dhale@ua.cba.edu 
 
ABSTRACT  
Social  traps are  situations within which individu
als  or groups  face  the prospect of  adopting see
mingly beneficial 
behaviors  that have negative consequences over  ti
me  or  for  a  larger collective  (Platt, 1973). W
hile on the one hand, the 
Agile manifesto has been welcomed by many in the so
ftware developer community who often perceived form
al processes as 
management generated inefficiency that gets in the 
way of productivity (Anderson, 2005). On the other 
hand proponents of 
formal plan-driven approaches argue that in spite o
f the lofty ideals and claims made, Agile developme
nt only postpone costs 
for the developing organization. Following the thre
ads of this debate through a review of extant liter
ature this conceptual 
study suggests that there is a real risk of develop
ers using Agile methods falling into "social trap' 
of compromising the long-
term goals for short-term gains.  
Keywords  
Social traps, Agile development 
INTRODUCTION 
The raging debate over plan-driven versus Agile met
hods of software development continues. The 2001 Ag
ile manifesto 
(http://agilemanifesto.org), can be seen as a react
ion to three decades of domination of planned proce
sses for software 
development, since the waterfall model was first in
troduced in 1970s. The Agile manifesto has been wel
comed by many in 
the software developer community who often perceive
d formal processes as management generated ineffici
ency that gets in 
the way of productivity (Anderson, 2005).  

Proponents of the Agile methods argue that software
 development is a complex undertaking beset with ma
ny problems 
 called ﬁwicked problemsﬂ by Horst Rittel, an urban 
planner who pioneered the concept of issue-based in
formation systems to 
facilitate the formulation and clarification of com
plex administrative decisions (Nerur and Balijepall
y, 2007). These problems 
tend to be unique and difficult to formulate, and s
olutions evolve continually as both the user and de
signer gain a greater 
appreciation of what must be solved. Agile Develope
rs question the assumption that change and uncertai
nty can be controlled 
through a high degree of formalization and have dis
covered inadequacies in formal design that follow s
ystematic procedures 
dictated by rigid processes (Nerur and Balijepally,
 2007). 
They pride themselves on highly productive, respons
ive, low ceremony, lightweight, tacit knowledge pro
cesses with little 
waste, adaptive planning and frequent iterative del
ivery of value (Anderson, 2005). By contrast, forma
l or plan-driven 
methods are often associated with conformance to pl
an, low trust environments, with command and contro
l structures 
(Anderson, 2005). They require a big design up fron
t approach with auditing of conformance and by impl
ication punishment 
for non-conformance.  

However, the proponents of plan-driven methods feel
 that Agile practices are rarely applicable in indu
strial settings and for 
industrial strength applications there is no altern
ative to formalized processes and plan-driven devel
opment. They argue that 
in spite of the lofty ideals and promises of Agile 
methodologies they are not delivering the goods. Th
ere is little scientific 
 Social Traps of Agile Methods 
 Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Seattle, Washington, August 9-12, 2012
. 2 
support for the claims made by the Agile community 
(Dyba and Dingsoyr, 2008), and that whatever eviden
ce presented in its 
favor is mainly anecdotal (Turk et al., 2002).  

Further, the Agile approach follows the line, don™t
 do anything today that you can postpone to tomorro
w (Kajko-Mattsson, 
Lewis, Siracusa, Nelson, Chapin, Heydt, Nocks, and 
Snee, 2006). In other words the original developmen
t project is stripped 
to the bare minimum. This may be a good way of keep
ing tight deadlines, but it is not the best way to 
save costs. It is only 
postponing costs which then come later in the maint
enance phase multiplied many times over.  Software 
systems live long 
after they once go into production. The insignifica
nt role that software architecture and documentatio
n plays in Agile 
methodologies is an impediment to long-term softwar
e maintenance (Stammel, Durdik, Korgmann, Weiss and
 Koziolek, 
2011).  

It is argued that Agile approach builds software fo
r short-term needs and does not provide the foundat
ions for building 
enterprise level software. Integrative processes su
ch as multi-project planning, overall software arch
itecture and business 
process modeling are barely mentioned (Kajko-Mattss
on, Lewis, Siracusa, Nelson, Chapin, Heydt, Nocks, 
and Snee, 2006). 
Agile methodologies meet local needs that may or ma
y not benefit the organization as a whole.  It is a
n instance of the classic 
sub-optimization problem in allocating organization
al resources.  
A review of extant literature suggests that there i
s more than a grain of truth to the arguments made 
by critics of Agile 
methods. This study draws upon the social trap theo
ry to perform a socio-psychological analysis of the
 phenomenon to 
demonstrate how practitioners of Agile methods may 
be unwittingly falling into a ﬁsocial trapﬂ situati
on of sacrificing the 
long-term interests of an IS organization for near-
term gains.  
LITTERATURE REVIEW 
Social  trap  theory has  potential  to  shed  ligh
t  on  real-world  problems  having roots  in  coll
ective,  selfish  behavior-what  
Schelling  (1971: 68) called  "the frequent  diverg
ence  between  what  people  are  individually  mot
ivated  to do and what  
they might  like  to accomplish  together."  

What are social traps?  

Platt (1973) identifies three major types of social
 traps: 
1. One-person social trap or self trap: 
One person traps are situations which provide short
-term benefits for the individual at 
long-term costs. For example c
igarette smoking is a self trap because the short-r
un pleasure and social status associated with 
smoking, may lead to earlier death from smoking-ind
uced cancer. More important, once this road has bee
n taken it is very 
difficult to change; it may not be easy to quit smo
king.    
2. Missing hero trap or Volunteer dilemma: It descr
ibes situations whereby a group reaps benefits only
 if an individual or a 
requisite subgroup volunteers to incur personal cos
ts (e.g., time, effort, money). Schelling™s (1971) 
article provides an 
illustration. Consider the situation, on a summer S
unday evening, when thousands of cars are coming ba
ck from Cape Cod 
weekend on a two-lane road and a mattress falls unn
oticed from the top of a station wagon and lies in 
the northbound lane. 
All of the cars behind, being uncertain, go around 
the mattress, waiting for the cars in the southboun
d lane to go by, and the 
result is a traffic jam that backs up for miles. No
w who moves the mattress? The answer is generally, 
no one. People far back 
in the line do not know what the trouble is and can
not help. And the drivers close to the mattress are
 thinking only how to go 
around it quickly Œ and after they have spent so lo
ng in line they are damned if they will spend anoth
er several minutes, 
perhaps endangering themselves, to stop to move the
 thing. Those who have gone past, of course, of cou
rse no longer have 
the incentive for moving it. In such a situation it
 is true that sometimes a hero does come forward. H
owever the lack of a 
heroic act lands the group in a persistent problem.
  
3. Collective trap: Collective traps are situations
 where the common pursuit of ﬁindividual goods lead
s to collective badsﬂ 
(Platt, 1973). Garrett Hardin's (1968) article "The
 Tragedy of the Commons," cited the dilemma that ar
ises when herdsmen 
graze cattle in a common pasture. Individual herdsm
en seek to maximize their gain by grazing more and 
more cattle on the 
commons. Eventually, the pasture is overgrazed and 
the short-term individual gain-seeking behavior lea
ds to long-term 
collective disaster.  

Causes of Social traps 

In general, social traps exist when "some of the co
sts or damages of what people do occur beyond their
 purview, and they 
either don't know or don't care about them" (Schell
ing, 1978). Failure to pursue collective interests 
in harvesting from a 
common resource pool is related to failure to pay s
ufficient cognitive attention to the effects of lon
g-term consequences 
(Schroeder and Johnson, 1982). Koestler (1968) sees
 social traps as arising due to a conflict between 
the lower instinctive 
 Social Traps of Agile Methods 
 Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Seattle, Washington, August 9-12, 2012
. 3 
brain and the recently evolved higher rational brai
n. One-person and collective social traps are time-
delay traps resulting 
from the fact that the positive and negative reinfo
rcements are separated; the rewards are immediate b
ut the costs are delayed. 
Collective social traps may arise because individua
ls and groups or organizations are unable to cooper
ate owing to mutual 
distrust, even where cooperation would benet all. 
People will cooperate only if they can trust that o
thers will also cooperate 
(Rothstien, 2005). On the other hand, a missing her
o trap occurs because unadulterated altruism is a r
are bird.  
Escaping Social traps 

Like animal traps,  social  traps  lead  an  unwary
 victim into the jaws of disaster with a tempting  
bit  of  bait,  and,  once  the 
victim  is caught, make  escape  extremely difficul
t (Constanza, 1987). However, many ways of avoiding
 social traps are 
suggested in literature (e.g., Cross & Guyer, 1980;
 Dawes, 1980; Edney, 1980; Messick & Brewer, 1983; 
Platt, 1973; Rutte, 
1990; Van Lange, Liebrand, Messick, and Wilke, 1992
). Some of the more salient ones are listed below: 
Education: Individuals are more likely to sacrifice
 self-interest for cooperation when they have infor
mation about the 
underlying dynamics of a trap (Neidert and Linder, 
1990; Rapoport, 1988). Education can be used to war
n people about the 
detrimental long term impacts of short term actions
 such as through warning labels on cigarette packag
es.  
Change the time-delay: By converting long term cons
equences (costs) into more immediate ones. Example 
includes solving 
the highway traffic jam problems through toll road 
corporations. Drivers were glad to pay the toll (im
mediate costs) for their 
immediate pleasure (rewards).   

Add Counterreinforcers: Social incentives or punish
ments to encourage or discourage behaviors. Example
s include punitive 
laws for traffic offenders and lower interest rates
 on loans for paying on time (high credit rating). 
 Set up Superordinate authority: A superordinate aut
hority can be set up to present entrapments, alloca
te resources, mediate 
conflicts and redirect reinforcement patterns. For 
example governments can forbid or regulate certain 
actions that have been 
deemed socially inappropriate.  

Changing a trap to a tradeoff: A trap may be change
d to a tradeoff by imposing compensatory fees. For 
example, for resource 
stability, consumption above the optimum level may 
be taxed.  
Get outside help for changing in reinforcement patt
erns: In many of our personal traps, a skilled outs
ider can help us see 
through our traps and change to a new pattern which
 we cannot easily on our own. Social security deduc
tions is an example 
of an outside agency action to protect improvident 
man. 
Communication amongst groups: Edney and Harper (197
8) observed in a resource management study that tea
m-member 
communication increased heroic acts. It permitted g
roups to anticipate traps and induce heroic acts.  
Making individuals and groups to work together: The
 contact hypothesis (e.g., Allport, 1954), proposes
 that interaction 
across group boundaries attenuates intergroup confl
ict, permitting cooperation amongst groups. Social 
proximity brings 
greater opportunity for personal acquaintance and e
qual status, increasing the likelihood that differe
ntiated interaction will 
displace group categorizations. The social identity
 theory (Tajfel & Turner, 1985) describes self-cate
gorization processes that 
make boundaries between groups less salient cogniti
vely for individual group members as a result of co
operative interaction. 
 Potential Social traps for projects using Agile met
hods  
Agile methods focus on eliciting functional require
ments. Its handling of non-functional requirements 
is ill defined (Paetsch, 
Eberlein and Maurer, 2003). Customers or users talk
ing about what they want the system to do normally 
do not think about 
resources and long term issues such as maintainabil
ity, portability, or performance. Some non-function
al requirements such 
as user interface or safety can be elicited during 
the development process and still be integrated. Bu
t most non-functional 
requirements should be known early in development b
ecause they can affect resource planning and qualit
y. Not considering 
these issues early in the development lifecycle do 
have long term quality repercussions.   
Agile methods and processes are not conducive to pr
oducing reusable artifacts and preclude developing 
generalized  
solutions  even when  it  is  clear  that  this  co
uld yield  long-term  benefits (Turk et al., 2002).
  The project/product-specific 
development in an Agile environment does not stress
 on the broader objectives of development of genera
lized solutions and 
other forms of reusable software. The processes use
d to build the reusable artifacts emphasize quality
 control because the 
impact of  low quality is as wide  as  the  number 
 of  applications  that  reuse  the  artifact. This
 may not be achievable in the 
Agile environment of informal reviews and paired pr
ogramming. Agile developers view the introduction o
f formal evaluation 
and testing techniques for reusable artifacts as in
creasing project costs for something which may or m
ay not be used in the 
future, yet their overall effect is to reduce the t
otal cost of development. Studies have found a stat
istically significant 
relationship between reuse levels and lines-of-code
 productivity (Cusumano, MacCormack, Kemerev and Cr
andall, 2003).  
 Social Traps of Agile Methods 
 Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Seattle, Washington, August 9-12, 2012
. 4 
The Agile view is that documents are not software a
nd software development should develop software, no
t documents. This 
deliberate avoidance of documentation might also ca
use long-term problems for organizations adopting A
gile methods. 
Documentation is used for sharing knowledge between
 people. A new team member will have many questions
 regarding the 
project. These can be answered by other team member
s or by reading and understanding ﬁgoodﬂ documentat
ion. Asking 
other team members will slow down work because it t
akes some time to explain a complex project to some
one. Talking is a 
very effective way to communicate but is also very 
ephemeral.  Once the conversation is over, it is ha
rd to quickly reach the 
precise information you are searching for. Document
ation reduces knowledge loss when team members beco
me unavailable 
as they move to another company or work on a new pr
oject. Lack of documentation frequently becomes an 
issue because 
most business softwares need to be maintained in th
e long run (Paetsch et al., 2003).   
The small role that software architecture plays in 
Agile methodologies is another impediment to long-t
erm software 
maintenance. Maintainability is a quality attribute
 that has to be built into the architecture of a sy
stem. The agile method  
seems to work well in a set of ideal conditions tha
t do not hold true in many projects (Kajko-Mattsson
 et al, 2006) such as: 
the same people will be maintaining the software sy
stem throughout its entire life cycle, adding a fea
ture is a simple task that 
should not have a major effect on the system and if
 it does have an effect, there is time to ﬁsit back
ﬂ and re-design or re-
factor, either now or later. 

This approach will only postpone costs which then c
ome later in the maintenance phase.  Quality has it
s price. It has to be 
paid sooner or later. The Agile methods approach fo
llows the line, don™t do anything today that you ca
n postpone to 
tomorrow. In other words the original development p
roject is stripped to the bare minimum. This may be
 a good way of 
keeping tight deadlines, but it is not the best way
 to save costs. The fact is that the costs of addin
g quality later are much 
higher than building in the quality from the start.
 Perhaps when users realize this, they will be less
 enthusiastic about the 
Agile practices (Kajko-Mattsson et al, 2006). 
 Agile processes emphasize the code focus. Proponent
s  of Agile methods often  argue  that  code  is  t
he  only  deliverable 
that matters, and marginalize the role of analysis 
and design models  and  documentation  in  software
  creation  and 
evolution (Turk et al., 2002). The output of iterat
ive development often resembles unmanageable ﬁspagh
etti codeﬂ that is 
difficult to maintain and integrate, a situation si
milar to the ﬁcode and fixﬂ problems that the water
fall model was originally 
intended to correct. In ﬁLong-term Life Cycle Impac
t of Agile Methodologiesﬂ (Kajko-Mattsson et al, 20
06) one of the 
authors who participated in the debate lucidly expl
ains the problem through a practical example: ﬁIn t
he projects that I have 
been involved in, which were conducted according to
 the Agile philosophy, such as the web portal for t
he German state of 
Saxony, the deadline was met and the budget was kep
t, but at what a price. The error rate was as high 
as 18 defects per kilo 
instructions. Through this approach they may build 
software that meet short-term, individual project n
eeds, but that do not 
necessarily lead to software systems suitable for l
ong-term ﬁenterpriseﬂ software. The contractors pur
posely bid at a low cost 
and a tight deadline in order to win the project. H
owever, they then spend the next two years debuggin
g and cleaning up the 
product, something they should have done from the s
tart. For that they are paid extra from the mainten
ance budget. My 
standpoint is that such Agile development is only p
ostponing costs which then come later in the mainte
nance phase.ﬂ  
 
DISCUSSION 
 
IS organizations, such the MIS department of an org
anization or a software development company, manage
 a basket of 
projects within budgeted resources. The projects in
clude development projects, deployment projects and
 maintenance 
projects. New projects are continually added to the
 basket and existing projects prematurely discontin
ued or retired. Just as an 
individual project fulfills user requirements by bu
ilding them into a IS product, an IS organization f
ulfills business goals 
through the products and services offered by the ba
sket of projects. Also, just as different requireme
nts have different user 
priorities, different projects have different busin
ess priorities. And just as the backlog of user req
uirements at the project level 
is actively managed by considering the smallest and
 most important of user requirements to be built in
to the product, the 
backlog of active projects at the IS organization l
evel is actively and continuously managed to maximi
ze the business value 
for the organization. 
 Projects thus compete for firm™s resources. Althoug
h most literature on Agile project  management  hav
e  tended  to  be  
written with  the  overriding  assumption  that  th
e  projects  are managed as  single  projects, it i
s a simplification and does 
not reflect the real situation. Projects are not is
lands by themselves. From the perspective of an IS 
organization they are 
managed as a portfolio of projects. These processes
 are explicit as in many large organizations or imp
licit as in many small 
organizations (Vähäniitty, Rautiainen. and Lasseniu
s, 2010).
 The goal at the level of IS organization is not loc
al 
 Social Traps of Agile Methods 
 Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Seattle, Washington, August 9-12, 2012
. 5 
maximization at the project level, which is easier 
to achieve, but global maximization. It helps avoid
 situations in which a 
part of the system is optimized but the larger syst
em is worse off as a result.  
Agile projects are aligned to quickly meet the need
s of its users. However, the agile principle of wel
coming changing 
customer requirements has its own costs. While agre
eing to every change suggested by the customers wil
l keep them happy 
and contribute to project success it may impact the
 viability of other projects within the IS organiza
tion by expending more 
than their share of resources from the common pool.
 In addition, in the absence of a formal change con
trol, this practice may 
proliferate redundancy by duplicating efforts made 
in other projects.  
While Agile projects take the required resources fr
om the common pool for their own consumption, they 
may not contribute 
significantly to other projects and to the IS organ
ization as a whole. For example, a mature IS organi
zation would be 
interested in maintaining a large growing repositor
y of reusable components from its current and previ
ous projects. However, 
in Agile projects, little support documentation cou
pled with time constraints and inadequate quality c
ontrol  mechanisms are 
an impediment to producing reusable artifacts which
 can be used by other projects to increase the over
all productivity of the 
IS organization. The lack of adequate documentation
 is also responsible for inadequate transition supp
ort from development 
phase to deployment and maintenance phases. Unless 
deployment and maintenance is done by the same team
 that did the 
development, the absence of documentation will requ
ire support teams to invest additional resources fo
r doing the same 
amount of work. The observation that support team m
embers spend a major portion of their time reading 
source code and the 
comments they contain (De Souza, Anquetil and De Ol
iveira, 2005; De Souza, Anquetil and De Oliveira, 2
007) are typical of 
the additional costs that are carried over from the
 development phase. 
These situations represent typical cases of collect
ive social trap where one group consumes resources 
from the common pool 
for its individual ﬁgoodﬂ but results in collective
 ﬁbadsﬂ for the organization as a whole. Even if th
e deployment and 
maintenance were to done by the same team that did 
its development, it would still be a case of indivi
dual trap or self trap. 
The short term reward of developing the system quic
kly will have its long term costs in additional eff
orts required during 
deployment and maintenance phase due to information
 loss and ﬁspaghettiﬂ code. Under schedule pressure
 and lack of 
process discipline code refactoring suffers. 
Refactoring cannot be done effectively by one or tw
o persons in Agile projects in 
the same way as design changes are managed by a few
 persons in plan-driven projects. In Agile projects
 each person has to 
refactor his own code due to different styles and l
ack of a uniform standard. To compound the problem 
it's very hard to tell if 
refactoring is actually happening. As a result t
he deployment groups and the maintenance types are 
like the incoming cars of 
the ﬁmattressﬂ example. They do not know the cause 
of the traffic jam until they come across the mattr
ess. In the absence of 
disciplined processes the deployment and the mainte
nance groups can only expect ﬁheroicsﬂ to save the 
day. They are the 
mercy of ﬁmissing heroesﬂ of the development team t
o refactor the code and make them easier to read, u
nderstand and 
correct.  

Taking advice from literature there are ways to avo
id these social traps. Most Agile methods assume th
at development starts 
from scratch and ends with a release (Hanssen, Yama
shita, Conradi, and Moonen, 2009). The Agile team s
hould be educated 
about the requirements of life cycle phases beyond 
the development phase and the overall goals of the 
IS organization. 
Transition to subsequent phases should take in cons
ideration the needs of deployment and maintenance t
eams for adequate 
documentation and refactoring of code in a discipli
ned manner. Projects should value-add even when the
y are prematurely 
discontinued or retired. Agile projects when discon
tinued do not leave behind worthwhile artifacts suc
h as reusable code or 
lessons learnt. The only benefit is the tacit knowl
edge gained by the project team members. Even this 
learning may not get 
institutionalized for the benefit of others. It get
s lost along with the team members when they leave 
the organization. 
However, education about these issues by itself may
 not be enough to escape the ﬁsocial trapsﬂ. Althou
gh it goes against the 
grain of the Agile philosophy, these educational pr
ograms may have to be coupled with counterreinforce
rs that will provide 
incentives or punishments to encourage or discourag
e behaviors. Good readable and adequately documente
d programs that 
meet the needs of all relevant stakeholders should 
be singled out as examples for others to emulate.  
The other option is to bring Agile development unde
r the preview of a superordinate authority (Platt, 
1973). Regular quality 
assurance activities such as code inspections and p
rocess audits can be conducted to ensure that the p
rojects do not sacrifice 
the long term consideration such as a well written,
 easily understood and reusable code for the short 
term considerations like 
quick delivery of working products. However this wo
uld be an expensive and bureaucratic way to overcom
e the social trap 
and would perhaps be a retrograde step. It would to
 some extent be a reversal to the plan-driven parad
igm without reaping the 
benefits of Agile practices.  

Yet another option is to promote cooperation amongs
t groups by involving the product managers and main
tenance/ 
operations people who have a long term stake in the
 product, during the development process.  Interact
ion across groups will 
enhance understanding and attenuate conflicts. It w
ill narrow the divergence between in-group motivati
ons and collective 
goals, thereby evading ﬁsocial trapsﬂ.  
 Social Traps of Agile Methods 
 Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Seattle, Washington, August 9-12, 2012
. 6 
CONCLUSION 
The Agile principles are insufficiently grounded in
 theory (Conboy and Fitzgerald, 2004). As a result 
the ongoing debates on 
the efficacy of Agile methods produce more sound th
an light. The ﬁsocial trapﬂ theory coupled with an 
analysis from the 
broader perspective of an IS organization, rather t
han the narrow domain of an individual project, off
ers interesting insights.  
The study reveals that although Agile methods provi
de rapid development of working products and respon
siveness to users, 
lurking just below the surface are ﬁsocial trapsﬂ t
hat the IS organizations needs to be wary of. Agile
 projects are likely to fall 
victim to all three types of ﬁsocial trapsﬂ. While 
the project objectives may be achieved the effectiv
eness at the IS 
organization level are likely to be compromised. Th
is study has implications for practice. In addition
 to identifying the 
potential ﬁsocial trapsﬂ of using Agile methods, it
 provides guidance to IS organizations on how to es
cape them. 
REFERENCES   
1. Allport, G. W. (1954) The Nature of Prejudice, R
eading, MA, Addison-Wesley. 
2. Anderson, D. J. (2005) Stretching Agile to fit C
MMI Level 3 - the story of creating MSF for CMMI ® 
Process 
Improvement at Microsoft Corporation, 
presented at Agile2005 Conference
, http://agile2005.org/. 
3. Conboy, K. and Fitzgerald, B. (2004) Toward a co
nceptual framework of agile methods: a study of agi
lity in di
erent 
disciplines, 
in: Proceedings of XP/Agile Universe
, Springer Verlag. 
4. Constanza, R. (1987) Social traps and environmen
t policy, BioScience 37:407-412. 
5. Cross. J.  G. and Guyer, M. J.  (1980) Social tr
aps, Ann Arbor: University of  Michigan Press. 
6. Cusumano, M., MacCormack, A., Kemerev, C. F. and
 Crandall, B. (2003) Software Development Worldwide
: the state of 
the practice, IEEE Software.   

7. Dawes, R. M.  (1980) Social dilemmas, Annual Rev
iew of Psychology, 31, 169-193. 
8. De Souza, S. C., Anquetil, N., and De Oliveira, 
K. M. (2005) A study of the documentation essential
 to software 
maintenance, 
Proceedings of the 23rd Annual International Confer
ence on Design of Communication: Documenting and 
Designing for Pervasive Information (SIGDOC 2005),
 Coventry, UK, 68-75. 
9. De Souza, S. C., Anquetil, N., and De Oliveira, 
K. M. (2007) Which documentation for software maint
enance?, 
Journal of 
the Brazilian Computer Society
, 13(2), 31-44. 
10. Dyba, T. and Dinsoyr, T. (2008) Empirical Studi
es of Agile Software Development: A Systematic Revi
ew, 
Information 
& Software Technology
, 50(9-10), 833-859.   
 
11. Edney. J.  J. (1980) The commons problems: Alte
rnative  perspectives., 
American  Psychologist
, 35,  131-150. 
12. Edney, J. J. and Harper, C. S. (1978) The commo
ns dilemma: A review of contributions from psycholo
gy, 
Environmental 
Management
, 2, 491-507. 
13. Guntamukkala, V., Wen, H. J. and Tarn, J. M. (2
006) An empirical study of selecting software devel
opment lifecycle 
models, 
Human Systems Management
.  
14. Hanssen, G.K, Yamashita A.F., Conradi, R. and M
oonen, L. (2009)  Maintenance and agile development
: Challenges, 
opportunities and future directions. 
In: Software Maintenance, IEEE International Confer
ence on Software Maintenance
. 
15. Hardin., G. (1968) The tragedy of commons. 
Science
, 162,  1243. 
16. Kajko-Mattsson, M., Lewis, G. A., Siracusa, D.,
 Nelson, T., Chapin, N., Heydt, M., Nocks, J. and S
nee, H (2006) Long-
term Life Cycle Impact of Agile Methodologies, In 
Proceedings of the 22nd IEEE International Conferen
ce on Software 
Maintenance (Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA, Sept.
, 2006). IEEE Computer Society
, 422-425. 
17. Koestler, A.(1968) The ghost in the machine, Ne
w York: Macmilan. 
18. Messick. D. M. and Brewer. M. B. (1983) Solving
 social dilemmas, In L. Wheeler and P.  Shave (Eds.
), 
Review of 
personality and social psychology:  11-44, Beverly 
Hills: Sage
.  
19. Neidert, G. P. M., and Linder, D. E. (1990) Avo
iding social traps: Some conditions that maintain a
dherence to restricted 
consumption, 
Social Behavior
, 5, 261-284. 
 Social Traps of Agile Methods 
 Proceedings of the Eighteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Seattle, Washington, August 9-12, 2012
. 7 
20. Nerur, S. and Balijepally, V. (2007) Theoretica
l reections on agile development methodologies, 
Communications of the 
ACM
, 50 (3), 79Œ83. 
 
21. Paetsch, F., Eberlein, A., and Maurer, F. (2003
) Requirements Engineering and Agile Software Devel
opment, 
Proceedings of the 12
th
 IEEE international Workshops on Enabling
. 
22. Platt, J. (1973. Social traps
, American Psychologist 2
, 641-651.  
23. Rapoport, A. (1988) Provision of public goods a
nd the MCS experimental paradigm, 
American Political Science Review,
 79,148-55. 

24. Rothstien, B. (2005) Social Traps and the Probl
em of Trust. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Pr
ess. 
25. Rutte. C. G. (1990) Solving organizational soci
al dilemmas, 
Social Behavior
, 5, 285-294. 
26. Schelling, T. (1971) On the ecology of micromot
ives, 
The Public Interest
,  25, 59-98.  
27. Schelling,  T. C.  (1978) Micromotives and macr
obehavior, New York: Norton. 
28. Stephens, M. and Rosenberg, D. (2003) Extreme P
rogramming Refactored: The Case Against XP, Apress,
 Berkeley, CA.   
Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Ente
rprises, 308 Œ 313.  
29. Stammel, J., Durdik, Z., Korgmann, K., Weiss, R
. and Koziolek, H. (2011)  Software Evolution for I
ndustrial Automation 
Systems: Literature Overview, 
Karlsruher Institut für Technologie
. 
30. Schroeder, D. A. and Johnson, D. E. (1982) Util
ization of information in a social-trap situation, 
Psychological Reports
, 
50, 107Œ113. 

31. Tajfel,  H. and Turner,  J. C. (1985)  The  soc
ial identity  theory  of intergroup  behavior, In S
. Worchel & W. G. Austin 
(Eds.), Psychology  of  intergroup  relations  (2nd
  ed.,  7-24). Chicago: Nelson-Hall. 
32. Turk, D., France, R. and Rumpe, B. (2002) Limit
ations of Agile Software Processes, 
in Proceedings of Third 
International Conference on eXtreme Programming and
 Agile Processes in Software  Engineering
, Italy.   
33. Vähäniitty, J. Rautiainen, K. and Lassenius, C.
 (2010) Small software organisations need explicit 
project portfolio 
management,  
IBM J. RES. & DEV.,
  54, 1-12.   
33. Van Lange, P. A. M.. Liebrand. W. B. G., Messic
k, D. M. and Wilke, H. A. M.  (1992) Introduction a
nd literature review, 
In W. Liebrand, D. Messick, & H. Wilke (Eds.), Soci
al dilemmas: Theoretical issues and research findin
gs (pp. 3-28), 
Oxford, England: Pergamon Press. 

 