  Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Agile Development at ABC Ð What Went Wrong?Cristina KarekarUniversity of Nebraska-OmahaAlvin TarrellUniversity of Nebraska-OmahaAnn FruhlingUniversity of Nebraska at OmahaAMCIS 2011Proceedings - All Submissions. Karekar, et al  
 Agile Development at ABC Œ What Went Wrong? 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 1 
 Agile Development at ABC Œ What Went Wrong? 
 Cristina Karekar 
University of Nebraska-Omaha 
(Email withheld) 
 Alvin Tarrell 
University of Nebraska-Omaha 
atarrell@gmav.unomaha.edu 
Dr. Ann Fruhling 
University of Nebraska-Omaha 
afruhling@mail.unomaha.edu 
 ABSTRACT 

Agile development methods continue to enjoy widespr
ead use, with more and more companies transitioning
 to agile methods.  
Current literature suggests that most of those comp
anies are successful in making the transition, but 
others are not so 
successful.  This paper examines one such company Œ
 referred to within as the ‚ABC Company™ to maintai
n their privacy Œ 
and analyzes and discusses their struggles with imp
lementing agile methods.  In short, it appears that
 lack of firm leadership 
commitment to agile, absence of a clearly defined c
ustomer to provide clearly defined requirements or 
push for additional 
software capabilities, failure to provide adequate 
initial or ongoing training and support to the orga
nization as a whole, and 
underestimating the change management requirements 
were contributing factors to ABC™s struggles with i
mplementing agile 
methods.  These conclusions were reached based on a
 series of interviews with company employees, revie
w of the relevant 
literature, and comparisons with other similar case
 studies. 
Keywords 

Agile software development 

INTRODUCTION  

Companies today deal with continual change, and tho
se who effectively deal with that change are common
ly described as 
being ‚agile™ organizations.  Agility has been wide
ly used in the software development industry for se
veral years now, with 
‚agile development methods™ commonly touted as solv
ing the problems arising from use of more tradition
al, plan-driven 
development methods.  Unfortunately, a successful t
ransition to use of agile development methodologies
 involves much more 
than simply making the decision to do so.  Most org
anizations making the switch are very successful; o
ther organizations are 
not so successful at making the transition, with di
fficulties arising in one or more aspects of the mi
gration.  Leaders of 
software development organizations must understand 
and address the critical factors involved in determ
ining success or 
failure of these efforts before making the decision
 to transition to agile development methods. 
This article examines what we call the ﬁABC Company
ﬂ, a mid-sized software development company headqua
rtered in the 
central United States.  
(This company is well known in the industry, so we 
chose to call it ABC to maintain confidentiality.  
Similarly, quotes and feedback will not be attribut
ed to specific individuals to maintain their person
al privacy.)
  ABC made 
the decision to transition to agile development met
hods in 2007, and shortly became very successful an
d increased their 
development efforts there ten-fold.  However, one y
ear later ABC had stepped away completely from agil
e methods, 
returning to a structured development methodology m
ore closely aligned with more traditional technique
s.  This case study 
examines ABC™s history and focuses on describing th
eir experiences with agile development, finding rea
sons behind their 
temporary success and eventual change of heart, and
 development of recommendations for preventing recu
rrence.  
Information for this case study was drawn from a se
ries of interviews conducted with several developer
s and managers at 
ABC, as well as from a review of the literature and
 comparisons against widely recognized best and sug
gested practices.   
Our intent is to provide practical guidance for tho
se leaders who are considering transitioning their 
development 
organizations to use of agile methods, hopefully po
inting out some of the aspects which need to be eva
luated when deciding 
for or against moving to agile development methodol
ogies. 
 Karekar, et al  
 Agile Development at ABC Œ What Went Wrong? 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 2 
This paper will also benefit the research community
, as it details the specific conditions found at an
 organization which was 
unsuccessful at implementing agile development meth
ods.  This type of outcome has been underrepresente
d in the literature, 
so this case study may provide some previously miss
ing insight for the research community.
 BACKGROUND 

Research Design 

This research was conducted as a case study due to 
the limited time and resources available for the ef
fort.  We were initially 
looking to study unsuccessful transitions to agile 
methodologies in general, but we found a dearth of 
published literature on 
that topic, so in-depth study of this particular ca
se seemed well worthwhile.   
We chose to utilize interviews for much the same re
asons, first talking with thirteen members of the a
gile development team 
at the ABC Company, and then doing follow-up teleph
one and face-to-face interviews with two of the mor
e prominent 
members of the team.  This singular focus on a sing
le organization brings some recognized shortcomings
 Œ small sample size, 
inherent biases, and lack of generalization among t
hem Œ but we believe the results are still interest
ing and somewhat unique.  
We also minimize these problems as much as possible
 by comparing and contrasting them to results obtai
ned in earlier 
research involving eleven companies conducting agil
e development projects for the U.S. Department of D
efense, and also by 
comparing them to results obtained from a recent an
nual survey of organizations currently applying agi
le methods on some or 
all of their projects. 
 Literature Review 

There is not one universal methodology for system d
evelopment that will work for all projects (Iivari,
 Hirschheim, and Klein,  
2001) and all environments.  The traditional plan-d
riven system development methodology requires exten
sive planning, 
codified processes, and rigorous reuse (Boehm, 2002
).  This methodology works best when requirements a
re known in 
advance Œ including prototyping Œ and when the requ
irements are relatively stable.  The plan-driven mo
del is often used in 
practice because of its straightforward and methodi
cal, structured nature.  However, in practice, the 
plan-driven model has a 
number of widely-reported shortcomings, including t
he inability to effectively handle changing require
ments, and the 
tendencies to be both significantly over budget and
 behind schedule (Boehm, 2002; Standish Group, 2005
; Watson, Kelly, 
Galliers, and Brancheau, 1997).  As new technologie
s, infrastructure, and expectations evolve at today
™s pace, the plan-driven 
system development methodologies struggle to keep p
ace. 
To address some of these shortcomings, new system d
evelopment models were proposed, including the spir
al model and 
agile approaches (e.g.  Scrum, eXtreme Programming,
 and Crystal) (Highsmith and Cockburn, 2001).  Thes
e efforts 
ultimately led to issuance of ‚The Agile Manifesto™
 in 2001 by a consortium of developers active in th
is arena.   
Leffingwell (2007) provides a simple explanation of
 the primary philosophical differences between trad
itional plan-driven 
methods and newer agile techniques;  Figure 1 shows
 this differentiation pictorially.  Traditional met
hods involve a fixed set 
of requirements, generally negotiated in advance, a
nd then adjust resource levels and delivery schedul
es as necessary to allow 
implementation of those requirements.  Agile method
s take the opposite approach, using predetermined d
elivery schedules 
and staffing levels, and adjusting the requirements
 for each software release to work within those res
ource constraints.  It is a 
fundamentally different approach, and one which oft
en results in an iterative development cycle which 
rapidly converges on 
a fully functioning product. 
  Figure 1:  
Traditional (plan-driven) versus Agile (value-drive
n) methods 
(Leffingwell, 2007)
    Karekar, et al  
 Agile Development at ABC Œ What Went Wrong? 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 3 
This article is designed to provide information, in
sights, and practical, actionable advice to Informa
tion Technology (IT) 
managers and analysts to help them better prepare f
or a move to an agile system development environmen
t.  We examine the 
experiences of an organization that attempted the t
ransition, and provide our interpretation of what l
ed to failure of the effort.  
We also compare those ideas to the findings of an i
ndustry-wide survey looking at experiences with use
 of agile methods.   
Company Background  

 
The ABC Company is a mid-sized company, with branch
 offices spread over a five state region in the cen
tral U.S.  ABC 
provides a variety of software- and services-based 
solutions, and they have a twenty-five year history
 in this business, with 
annual revenues topping $400M.  ABC states that the
ir transaction processing software interacts with o
ver 50% of 
households in the United States, so they are very m
uch a major force in the industry.  ABC generally b
uilds software for 
release to the industry as a whole rather than for 
specific customers, so products tend to be somewhat
 universally applicable 
and general rather than specific and specialized.  
 Software development efforts at ABC are distribute
d across these multiple 
offices, rather than being concentrated at a single
 location.   (
Specifics shown here are from the ABC website;  dir
ect citation 
will not be provided so that confidentiality can be
 maintained.)
 In early 2006, ABC acquired a successful private pr
ovider of Operations Support System software that e
nabled 
communications companies to bring bundled, advanced
 services to market quickly and effectively. 
 This company had used 
agile methods in their software development efforts
 for several years, and had become very comfortable
 and proficient in 
agile software development as a result.  The acquis
ition was meant to expand ABC™s ability to support 
cable and satellite 
operators as they deliver advanced IP-based service
s, designed to attract and retain consumers who exp
ect the availability of 
video, voice and data services over nearly any devi
ce at the time and location they choose. 
Transition to agile 

In 2007 ABC announced the launch of a new software 
product suite that would increase competitive advan
tage in the 
customer care and billing market by providing a sta
te-of-the-art customer offer configuration, order f
ulfillment, and billing 
solution.  Seeking agility, the ABC executive leade
rship was convinced to undertake this effort using 
agile development 
methods.  ABC itself had no prior agile development
 experience, and the recently-acquired agile develo
pment team leaders 
were established as the champions of agile software
 development within ABC.  These agile champions use
d the following 
benefits Œ established based on their experience at
 their prior company Œ to convince the ABC leadersh
ip to make the 
transition: 
 Agile methods improve visibility into the developme
nt process Œ team members at all levels of the orga
nization have a 
much clearer picture of the requirements, what has 
been done, and what remains to be done 
 Provide earlier identification and better understan
ding of risks Œ empirical evidence shows that agile
 methods allow 
identification of schedule and cost risks up to two
 months in advance of that provided by plan-driven 
methods 
 Use ﬁchangeﬂ to better motivate teams and help them
 recover from issues that arise in the development 
process.  
Growth comes from change, so use these issues to pr
omote growth. 
ABC recognized that this would be a major transitio
n, and company leadership was apprehensive in many 
ways.  They 
recognized that this was in fact as much a cultural
 shift as it was a change in development methodolog
ies, and they were 
somewhat concerned about a perceived lack of contro
l over the process.  To ease the transition, ABC in
vested in a one-week 
training session for the soon-to-be agile developme
nt team Œ including the developers, systems analyst
s, product managers, 
quality assurance testers, and project planning per
sonnel.  Based on the ﬁAgile Release Trainﬂ concept
 presented by 
Leffingwell (2007), this training was to form the b
asis and understanding of agile development methodo
logies for most 
members of the agile development teams at ABC. 

In part because of leadership concerns, ABC also ma
de the choice to not fully transition to agile meth
ods in this development 
effort.  The current schedule of three software rel
eases per year to the customer was maintained, with
 some portions of each 
release cycle being completed with agile methods an
d the remainder continuing to be developed using tr
aditional plan-driven 
methods.  These release cycles Œ including the func
tionality expected and projections of the level of 
effort (staffing and other 
resources) required to attain them Œ were projected
 out two years in the future for both agile and pla
n-driven portions of the 
effort. 
 Karekar, et al  
 Agile Development at ABC Œ What Went Wrong? 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 4 
Early success 

Agile methods caught on quickly at ABC, and they mo
ved from a single team of 8 individuals using these
 methods to 11 or 
12 development teams totaling over 130 personnel pe
rforming agile development in less than a year.  Ag
ile teams at ABC 
were organized to be internally multifunctional, bu
t were designed to concentrate on one key area of e
xternal functionality in 
their efforts.  Agile teams were designed to be sta
nd-alone and autonomous, and consisted of some comb
ination of the 
following: 
 Product owner (may be shared across teams) 
 Lead Architect 
 Scrum Master 
 Lead Developer 
 Developer(s) 
 Tester(s) 
 Technical Writer 
 
The relatively small size of these agile teams, cou
pled with the wide variety of skills needed across 
the team, required each 
person to be somewhat more versatile and open to ne
w responsibilities within the development project c
ompared to their 
roles on traditional development efforts.  The degr
ee of interaction and cross-training of course vari
ed from team to team 
depending on the characteristics of the persons for
ming each team, but in general the agile teams expe
cted their members to 
be much more involved in multiple facets of the ope
ration than their plan-driven counterparts. 
ABC used a customized version of Scrum in their agi
le development efforts.  The initial training provi
ded a starting point, 
but most of these customized agile processes were d
eveloped on the fly during the early stages of this
 effort.  Interviewees 
provided the example of adjusting agile release cyc
les to correspond to the waterfall / plan-driven re
lease cycles to illustrate 
how their agile processes were customized to meet o
rganizational needs. 
A common integration testing scheme and schedule wa
s used, so it was also necessary to keep the two de
velopment efforts in 
synch with each other.  That was the primary driver
 of the development schedule, although specifics wi
thin each major 
iteration were somewhat flexible.  At least two dai
ly meetings were held to facilitate this coordinati
on process.  The first, 
hosted by the waterfall development leaders and att
ended by them as well as the agile Scrum Masters an
d other leaders, 
ensured that the agile development teams were aware
 of progress on the waterfall portions of the proje
ct as well as 
requirements placed on the agile teams.  The agile 
development leaders hosted a similar meeting later 
in the day, ensuring 
that the waterfall development leads were also full
y apprised of the status and needs of the agile dev
elopment portion of the 
effort. 

Agile no more 

 
In spite of these efforts, agile development effort
s at ABC came to an end roughly one year later.  To
day they are using a 
hybrid method developed in-house, but it is self-de
scribed as much more tightly controlled than agile 
methods would allow.  
An additional level of control and oversight has be
en added to the process, and release dates and func
tionality are very 
closely monitored and controlled.  Interviewees in 
general felt this movement away from agile methods 
was due to lack of 
firm leadership commitment to the process of conver
ting to agile methodologies; more details and analy
sis will be provided 
in the sections below. 

 
 ANALYSIS AND COMMENTS  

 
Failure of agile methods at ABC (they would not cal
l it ‚failure™) can be attributed to some combinati
on of the following: 
 Karekar, et al  
 Agile Development at ABC Œ What Went Wrong? 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 5 
Lack of leadership commitment  

Previous research has shown that management and lea
dership support is critical to success of the trans
ition to agile methods 
(Fruhling and Tarrell, 2008; Schatz and Abdelshafi,
 2005).  Respondents to VersionOne™s annual survey 
of agile practitioners 
lists ﬁmanagement supportﬂ as one of the top 5 barr
iers to further adoption of agile methods within th
eir organization,  with 
nearly one-third of respondents including that as a
 limiting factor (VersionOne, 2008).  Several obser
vations in this case 
make it evident that ABC™s leadership was not fully
 supportive of this effort: 
 In spite of constant requests from a project manage
r experienced in agile methods, it took nearly two 
years after 
acquisition of a company who had successfully imple
mented agile methods before ABC™s management would 
allow 
use of similar methods on their own projects.   
 Once the decision was made to try agile methods, AB
C still only went part way Œ they used agile method
s for only 
certain portions of certain projects, and used trad
itional plan-driven methodologies for the controlli
ng path effort.  
Management continued to require two-year plans for 
staffing and addition of functionality, in direct c
ontrast to the 
concepts presented by Leffingwell (2007).  Project 
delivery timelines were still tied to these plan-dr
iven portions of 
the project, so no real ﬁagilityﬂ was added to the 
process as a whole. 
 This failure to adjust the development cycle meant 
customer saw no benefits from the movement to agile
.  This 
minimized the effect of the incremental releases th
at provide some of the key benefits of agile develo
pment methods, 
so there was no customer-driven support for the tra
nsition to agile. 
 
Lack of adequate training  

Adequate training is also an important factor in en
suring the success of the movement to agile methods
.  This training should 
cover the full range of the development staff, and 
should also include non-IT management, business ana
lysts, and customer 
representatives if possible (Fruhling and Tarrell, 
2008).  VersionOne™s results (2008) bear this out a
s well, with 42% of 
respondents identifying lack of training or experie
nce with agile methods as a barrier to further use 
of agile methods within 
their organizations, and 26% identifying those same
 factors as the leading cause of unsuccessful agile
 projects.  Specifics at 
ABC include: 
 One week of initial training was provided, but this
 training was geared towards the development staff 
particularly, 
rather than toward the organization as a whole as r
ecommended above. 
 This training was good as a start, but there was al
so a need for ongoing training and monitoring.  Sev
eral interviewees 
commented that they had to ﬁdiscover for themselves
ﬂ which agile practices were most applicable to the
ir effort; some 
of that discovery is unavoidable, but ongoing train
ing and coaching support has been shown to be valua
ble to those 
successfully making the transition to agile methods
 (Fruhling and Tarrell, 2008).   
 Organizations successfully making the transition to
 agile methods have employed an agile champion team
 as well 
(Fruhling and Tarrell, 2008).  This team consists o
f those most experienced with and supportive of agi
le methods 
within the organization, and is charged with minimi
zing roadblocks in the transition process and conti
nuously fine-
tuning the agile approach within the organization. 
Training is critical to the success of this team, a
nd ABC made no 
real effort to ensure this success. 
 
No ﬁRealﬂ Customer 

In the researchers™ opinion, this may be one of the
 primary causes of failure of agile methods at ABC.
  Agile literature is 
filled with evidence supporting the importance of a
n on-site customer to successful completion of agil
e development projects 
(Bradbury, 2007; Sutherland, 2005; Beck, 2000).  In
 practice this is often difficult to achieve, howev
er, and many agile 
projects are successfully completed without the ben
efit of a full-time customer representative co-loca
ted with the 
development team (Fruhling and Tarrell, 2008).  ABC
 had some unique challenges in this area as well, s
pecifically: 
 ABC™s products are generally developed for the mark
et as a whole rather than for one specific customer
.  That 
essentially precludes them from having an on-site c
ustomer Œ or even ready access to an off-site custo
mer Œ since ﬁthe 
marketﬂ is a very amorphous concept.  Lack of a tru
e and dedicated customer makes it very difficult to
 define precise 
requirements and to get feedback on ideas and imple
mentations, both of which hamper the development en
vironment.    
 Karekar, et al  
 Agile Development at ABC Œ What Went Wrong? 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 6 
 Lack of a clear and present customer also makes it 
difficult to demonstrate incremental progress.  Del
ivering new or 
improved functionality in this environment requires
 actually taking a product to market Œ a time-inten
sive and 
potentially expensive undertaking in the commercial
 world.  It simply is not feasible to do this roll-
out on a frequent 
basis, further hampering the benefits seen from use
 of agile methods. 
 ABC used a ﬁProduct Ownerﬂ as a proxy for a residen
t customer representative.  That Product Owner need
ed to not 
only represent the customer to ABC, he/she also had
 to represent ABC to the customer.  This dual role 
led the Product 
Owners to often be out interacting with the market 
to determine needs, leaving them less time to inter
act with and 
support the agile development effort.  This again i
s a problem at many organizations practicing agile 
software 
development, but seemed more acute at ABC as they s
truggled to identify who the real customer was and 
exactly what 
the needs were.  One interviewee Œ one of the agile
 project managers Œ identified this as a ﬁhugeﬂ gap
, and said that 
ﬁABC will not be successful with agile until this i
ssue is addressed.ﬂ 
 
Failure to Address Change Management 

Transition to agile development methods is very muc
h a change that affects the entire organization, an
d it is important to not 
underestimate the degree of change management effor
ts that may be required.  For example, Fruhling and
 Tarrell (2008), 
based on literature review and interviews with elev
en organizations practicing agile development, sugg
est assessing corporate 
culture and organizational readiness for change as 
the first factor to consider when deciding whether 
agile is a good fit for an 
organization.  ABC had some specific characteristic
s that may have complicated this transition, and al
so failed to address 
some more general change management concerns, both 
of which may have contributed to their lack of succ
ess with agile 
methods.  Specifically:  
 This effort involved a large group of people from t
he ﬁoriginalﬂ ABC and its plan-driven culture and a
 smaller group 
of people from an agile-driven acquired subsidiary.
  This left ABC with a shortage of mid-level agile 
champions, and 
there may have simply not been enough advocates to 
help lead the migration.  There was a marked differ
ence in 
corporate culture between the two groups, and that 
mismatch and tension may have contributed to the la
ck of success 
with agile methods. 
 Agile methods also require development staff to tak
e on additional roles and responsibilities, and som
e developers are 
not willing or able to take on that extra tasking. 
 For example, coders have much more ownership of th
e analysis and 
design when using agile methods Œ some developers e
mbrace that, others do not want that extra responsi
bility.  Other 
organizations have reported similar findings as wel
l when making the transition to agile methods (Fruh
ling and Tarrell, 
2008).  Failure to recognize this phenomenon and pr
operly prepare for it through training and/or perso
nnel selection 
can impede successful transition to agile methods. 
 People in general fear and resist change (Diefenbac
h, 2007), and that was likely a factor here as well
.  There may have 
been fear of the ﬁnew companyﬂ taking over from the
 ﬁoldﬂ developers, and there was a tone of negativi
ty towards 
agile from many of those involved.  According to on
e interviewee, agile methods will help ﬁidentifyﬂ p
roblems, but 
management needs to then ﬁsolveﬂ those problems Œ a
gile cannot do that on its own, and agile will not 
be successful 
until management actively supports it sufficiently.
  
Distributed development 

Distributed software development using agile method
s is not impossible Œ 57% of the teams responding t
o VersionOne™s 
annual agile survey reported conducting distributed
 development (VersionOne, 2008)  Œ but doing so on 
an initial transition 
project may have been ill-advised.  Information gat
hered from literature reviews and previous surveys 
recommends starting 
first on a small, in-house, non-mission critical pr
oject and then scaling up from there as success is 
achieved and experience 
grows (Fruhling and Tarrell, 2008).  ABC did not pr
oceed in that manner, and doing so may have contrib
uted to their lack of 
success. 

DISCUSSION   

This section will address the findings of this rese
arch as well as some limitations of the case study 
and suggestions for 
follow-on research. 
 Karekar, et al  
 Agile Development at ABC Œ What Went Wrong? 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 7 
 
Research Findings 

This case study revealed several key factors which 
influence the success or failure of agile software 
development projects.  
Specifically:  
 Leadership commitment and support is vital to succe
ss of agile development projects.  As previously re
ported 
(Fruhling and Tarrell, 2008; Schatz and Abdelshafi,
 2005), leadership and management backing of the ag
ile 
development process is vital, and needs to be commu
nicated from the top down.  There must be horizonta
l and vertical 
dedication to the agile process across the organiza
tion.  Many of these factors were clearly lacking a
t ABC. 
 Presence of a knowledgeable, empowered, and decisiv
e local customer representative has been shown to b
e critical to 
agile software development projects (Adkins, 2008; 
Fruhling and Tarrell, 2008; Mohammadi, Nikkhahan, a
nd Sohrabi, 
2008).  Problems develop when any of these capabili
ties are lacking, including requirements which are 
inadequately 
developed, unclear, or worse yet wrong (Cao and Ram
esh, 2005).  This is the situation that ABC found i
tself in Œ they 
had no clearly defined customer, and so had no one 
to clearly define precise requirements.  They used 
a ‚Product 
Owner™ as a proxy for a local on-site customer, but
 in this case it appears the association was too es
oteric to be 
successful.  One of the basic tenets of the agile m
ovement is ‚collaboration with the customer over co
ntract 
negotiation™ (Beck, et al, 2001), and it is difficu
lt to meet that goal without a readily available, c
learly defined 
customer. 
 Agile software projects must also provide some incr
eased benefit to the customer relative to more trad
itional methods.  
In fact, at least two of the twelve principles of a
gile development attest to that:  ‚Our highest prio
rity is to satisfy the 
customer through early and continuous delivery of v
aluable software™ and ‚Deliver working software fre
quently, from 
a couple of weeks to a couple of months, with a pre
ference to the shorter timescale™ (Beck, et al, 200
1).  ABC™s agile 
development effort chose not to adhere to those pri
nciples, as they embedded the agile processes withi
n their existing 
plan-driven methods, and so provided no evidence to
 the customer that agile methods were in use at ABC
.  This 
appears to be one reason behind their lack of succe
ss in implementing agile development methods. 
 One must also not neglect the organizational change
s brought about by use of agile methods.  Responsib
ilities are 
pushed down the management chain in agile projects,
 so traditional managers may feel a loss of control
, and some 
developers may resist taking on the extra responsib
ilities associated with agile development.  It was 
not apparent that 
ABC was prepared for this aspect of the transition,
 and that lack of preparedness contributed to their
 lack of success in 
transitioning to agile methods.   
 Finally, one must recognize that ABC attempted to m
ake this transition by embedding agile development 
within 
traditional plan-driven teams, and also within dist
ributed development teams.  This is certainly not a
 unique approach, 
but is arguably one of the more difficult developme
nt environments available, and is direct contrast t
o the sage advice 
of starting on small, in-house, ‚simple™ projects w
hen first attempting agile development (Diefenbach,
 2007).  There is 
no guarantee that following that advice would have 
made ABC successful in this effort, but not followi
ng it made their 
task significantly more difficult. 
 
Figure 2 summarizes these findings: 
Lessons Learned from  ABC™s Lack of Success 
Lack of Leadership Commitment can be fatal 
No clearly defined and on-site customer creates iss
ues 
Need to provide additional benefits to the customer
 Do not neglect change management aspects of the tra
nsition 
Start small Œ grow from there 
Figure 2:  
Lessons Learned from ABC™s Lack of Success
   Karekar, et al  
 Agile Development at ABC Œ What Went Wrong? 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 8 
 
Limitations 

This case study has some limitations.  It was condu
cted at a single site and involved interviews with 
only a small number of 
agile team members.  That small sample size may lim
it generalizability, and may also introduce bias in
to the results.  Persons 
interviewed were also directly involved in the atte
mpt at agile software development at ABC, so they l
ikely have their own 
internal biases, exacerbating the potential bias br
ought about by the small sample size. 
Follow-On Research 

It would be interesting to continue this same resea
rch at ABC, perhaps expanding it to get more of a m
anagement 
perspective.  It would also be instructive to condu
ct similar research at other organizations who have
 been less than 
successful at transitioning to agile methods.  Ther
e are many examples of positive outcomes in the lit
erature, but not nearly 
so many with negative outcomes, and it would be int
eresting to see if this is a true representation of
 the state of agile 
development as well as to look for similarities in 
those organizations who were not successful in thei
r transition to agile 
development methods. 

  
 Karekar, et al  
 Agile Development at ABC Œ What Went Wrong? 
Proceedings of the Seventeenth Americas Conference 
on Information Systems, Detroit, Michigan August 4
th
-7
th
 2011 9 
REFERENCES 
1.
 Adkins, M. (2008) Interview. 
 2.
 Beck, K. (2000) eXtreme Programming Explained, Addi
son-Wesley, Boston. 
3.
 Beck, K., M. Beedle, A. van Bennekum, A. Cockburn, 
W. Cunningham, M. Fowler, J. Grenning, J. Highsmith
, A. Hunt, R. 
Jeffries, J. Kern, B. Marick, R.C. Martin, S. Mello
r, K. Schwaber, J. Sutherland, and D. Thomas (2001)
 Manifesto for Agile 
Software Development, Snowbird, UT: Agile Alliance.
 Available on-line at www.agilemanifesto.org (retri
eved October 2005). 
4.
 Boehm, B. (2002) Get Ready for Agile Methods with C
are, 
IEEE Computer,
 35(1), 64-69. 
5.
 Bradbury, D. (2007) Scrum Down to Get a Project Mov
ing, 
Computer Weekly
, 00104787, September 4. 
6.
 Cao, L. and B. Ramesh, Agile Requirements Engineeri
ng Practices: An Empirical Study, 
Software IEEE
, 25(1), 60-67.  
7.
 Diefenbach, T (2007) The Managerialistic Ideology o
f Organizational Change Management, 
Journal of Organizational Change 
Management
, 20:1, 126-144. 
8.
 Fruhling, A. and D. Zhang (2007) An Empirical Study
 Examining the Usage and Perceived Importance of XP
 Practices, 
Proceedings of the Americas Conference on Informati
on Systems
. 
9.
 Fruhling, A. and A. Tarrell (2008) Best Practices f
or Implementing Agile Methods: A Guide for DoD Soft
ware Developers, IBM 
Center for the Business of Government, Washington, 
DC. 
10.
 Highsmith J., and A. Cockburn (2001) Agile Software
 Development: the Business of Innovation, 
Computer
,  34(9), 120-122. 
11.
 Iivari, J., R. Hirschheim, and H.K. Klein (2001) A 
Dynamic Framework for Classifying Information Syste
ms Development 
Methodologies and Approaches, 
Journal of Management Information Systems
, 17(3), 179-218. 
12.
 Leffingwell, D. (2007) Scaling Software Agility: Be
st Practices for Large Enterprises, Addison-Wesley,
 Boston. 
13.
 McMahon, J. (2003) Five Lessons from Transitioning 
to eXtreme Programming, 
Control Engineering
, 50(3), 59-65. 
14.
 Mohammadi, S., B. Nikkhahan and S. Sohrabi (2008) A
n Analytical Survey of On-Site Customer Practice in
 Extreme 
Programming, 
International Symposium on Computer Science and its
 Applications
, 1-6. 
15.
 Schatz, B. and I. Abdelshafi (2005) Primavera Gets 
Agile: A Successful Transition to Agile, 
IEEE Software
, 22(3), 26-42. 
16.
 Standish Group (2005) The CHAOS Report into Project
 Failure, West Yarmouth, Massachusetts: The Standis
h Group 
International Inc. Available on-line at http://stan
dishgroup.com/visitor/PDFpages/chaos1994.pdf, (retr
ieved November 2005). 
17.
 Sutherland, J. (2005) Future of Scrum: Parallel Pip
elining of Sprints in Complex Projects, 
Proceedings of the Agile 2005 
Conference
, Denver Colorado. 
18.
 VersionOne (2008) Annual Survey on The State of Agi
le Development, www.versionone.com. 
19.
 Watson, R.T., G.G. Kelly, R.D. Galliers, and J.C. B
rancheau (1997) Key Issues in Information Systems M
anagement: an 
International Perspective, 
Journal of Management Information Systems
, 13(4),  91-115.
  
 
 