 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Kutztown University of PennsylvaniaRutgers UniversityRutgers UniversityAMCIS 2009 Proceedings. Kong, Kendall, and Kendall 
 The Challenge of Improving Software Quality 
 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 1 
The Challenge of Improving Software Quality:  
Developers™ Beliefs about the Contribution  
of Agile Practices  
 Sue Kong 
Kutztown University 
kongsue@gmail.com 
Julie E. Kendall 
Rutgers University 
julie@thekendalls.org 
 Kenneth E. Kendall 
Rutgers University 
ken@thekendalls.org 
 
 
ABSTRACT 

We observe that systems developers who have had exp
erience with agile development projects often expre
ss their opinion 
that agile methodologies are superior to plan-drive
n methodologies. In order to collect empirical evid
ence to support or 
discount this belief, we conducted a survey among s
oftware developers about software quality and devel
opment practices. 
Our study identified eight quality goals from the s
oftware quality literature. We then asked the parti
cipants to identify which 
of eight practices contributes the most towards tha
t quality goal. Half of the practices were agile pr
actices; half were plan-
driven practices. We found that, for each and every
 quality goal, the participants as a whole chose on
e of the agile practices 
as a best practice enabling them to reach each qual
ity goal. While this study does not conclude that a
gile methods are always 
the best approach, it does reveal that agile practi
ces are being noticed and appreciated by many syste
m developers. 
Keywords: Agile Software Development, Agile Practic
es, Software Quality, Software Design Quality, Soft
ware Coding 
Quality, Survey of Software Developers. 

 
INTRODUCTION 

Plan-driven methodologists, systems analysts and de
velopers using plan-based methodologies such as the
 SDLC have argued 
that agile methodology leads to software quality de
gradation because its constant adaptation introduce
s errors and defects 
(Paulk, 2001, 2002). Examining software quality by 
two separate dimensions, that is, coding quality (c
oding conforms to 
software design) and design quality (software desig
n confirms to customer requirements), we are able t
o provide a different 
point of view. Even though the constant adaptation 
of agile methodology does introduce coding defects,
 these defects can be 
eliminated effectively by intensive code review and
 frequent testing. On the other side, the iterative
 development cycles of 
the agile methodology highly encourage customer fee
dback, thus locating and eliminating design defects
 and ensuring better 
design quality.  

Our analysis of agile methodology™s strengths in im
proving software quality is supported by a variety 
of theoretical and 
survey studies. Some software practitioners have ma
de claims that agile methodology has positive impac
ts on software 
quality. In addition, they argued that agile practi
ces, such as pair-programming, test-driven programm
ing, and continuous 
integration, have integrated quality control and as
surance functionality and will improve software qua
lity effectively 
(Armitage, 2004; Huo, Verner, Zhu, & Babar, 2004; O
pperthauser, 2003).  We also have found three surve
ys conducted 
recently that contain questions concerning the perc
eived impacts of agile methodology on software qual
ity. We compare the 
details of these three surveys in Table 1. 
 Kong, Kendall, and Kendall 
 The Challenge of Improving Software Quality 
 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 2 
  Focus of the Survey Target Population and Number 
of Responses  
Related Findings 
To determine how agile processes 

are being implemented;  

(Agile Alliance and VersionOne) 
VersionOne™s customer base and 

newsletter list; Agile Alliance 

members; readers of the 
Agile 
Journal
 and some other 
technology sites;  

N=722 
74% of respondents reported enhanced software 

quality as one of their development values.  

86% of respondents reported that software defects 

were reduced by more than 10%.  
To investigate how many people 

are using  agile development, what 

they are doing, and whether they 

are actually benefits from it;  

(Scott Ambler) 
Mailing lists from Dr. Dobb™s 

Journal and Software 

Development;  

N=4232 
66% of respondents reported higher quality when 

using agile development.  

58% of respondents reported improved satisfaction 

when using the agile approach.  
To assess the state of agile 

adoption as well as to identify the 

drivers and barriers towards agile 

adoption. 

 
(Digital Focus) 
Agile 2005 conference 

participants; Agile websites 

readers;  

N=136 
45% of IT professionals perceive agile 

development as the solution to scope management. 
 47% of IT professionals perceive agile 

development as the solution to addressing unclear 

business requirements.  

17% of IT professionals perceived the agile 

methodology as the solution to improve code 

quality.  
 Table 1 Three Surveys on Agile Software Development
 (Agile Alliance and VerisionOne, 2006;  
Scott Ambler, 2006; Digital Focus, 2005.)  
Analyzing and comparing the results of these studie
s, we found that these instruments did not differen
tiate design quality 
from coding quality. Additionally, they were lackin
g specifics on linking particular practices to achi
eving particular quality 
goals. Since software quality has multiple layers o
f meanings and aspects, we believe it will yield mo
re insights and meaning 
if we examine software quality using different dime
nsions.  
We therefore designed a questionnaire that measures
 the perceptions of effectiveness of different soft
ware practices in 
achieving various quality goals. The software pract
ices we investigated include both agile practices a
nd plan-based software 
practices. The software quality dimensions under in
vestigation include coding quality, design quality,
 as well as customer 
satisfaction. We conducted a survey study among sof
tware developers to find out what agile practices a
re the most effective 
in improving different aspects of software quality.
 We provided a list of software practices, includin
g both agile practices and 
plan-driven software practices, to survey responden
ts and ask them to identify what they perceived as 
the most effective 
practices in achieving various quality goals. We di
stributed 85 questionnaires and collected 57 usable
 responses. In an 
upcoming section we discuss the results, analysis, 
and findings of our survey.  
AGILE PRACTICES 

The most well known agile method is extreme program
ming (XP) proposed by Beck (1999). Other agile meth
ods include 
Scrum (Schwaber & Beedle, 2001), Open Source Develo
pment (Sharma, Sugumaran, & Rajagopalan, 2002), Fea
ture Driven 
Development (Coad, Lefebvre, & De Luca, 1999), Crys
tal family (Cockburn, 2002), and many other less we
ll-known 
approaches. Many consider the plan-driven methodolo
gies and the agile methodology to be opposites, sug
gesting that the 
former adds control and formality, while the latter
 causes liberation and revitalization.  
The common features of these so-called ﬁlightweight
 methodsﬂ include emphasis on adaptability when fac
ing change or 
uncertainty, the utilization of competent people in
stead of rigorous processes to achieve flexibility 
and quality, the institution 
of fast delivery and less formality, and brief docu
mentation. The commonalities inherent in these ligh
tweight methods 
prompted their originators and practitioners to for
m an organization called the ﬁAgile Allianceﬂ to pr
omote their common 
values, principles, and key practices. They also re
ached a consensus and generally categorized their m
ethods as ﬁAgile 
Software Development Methodologyﬂ (ASDM) as describ
ed in Beck, et al. (2001). 
 Kong, Kendall, and Kendall 
 The Challenge of Improving Software Quality 
 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 3 
As such, agile software development methodology is 
a set of software development methods whose adheren
ts share common 
values and principles. According to Beck et al. (20
01), the agile methodology deals with environmental
 uncertainty and 
change by espousing the following values:  

1. People and interaction, instead of processes and
 tools, are the most important factors for project 
success. 
2. Working software, instead of documentation, shou
ld be the focus of the development effort and the o
nly measure of 
progress. 
3. Customer collaboration, instead of contract nego
tiation, is more effective for achieving project su
ccess. 
4. Responding to change is more important than foll
owing a plan in turbulent environments. 
These values reveal the theoretical divide between 
agile methodology and plan-driven methodologies. In
 contrast to plan-
driven Systems Development Life Cycle (SDLC) or wat
erfall approaches, agile methodology, based on the 
belief that human 
error is the main reason for any project failure, p
uts people ahead of process. They argue that the mo
st important contribution 
to the delivery of quality software within time and
 budget is the effective collaboration among indivi
dual stakeholders 
(Cockburn & Highsmith, 2001). In the agile software
 development methodology, the sequential importance
 of the software 
development processes is no longer emphasized. Agil
e software development methodology uses an iterativ
e approach to 
support requirement changes and enable a project te
am to incorporate customer feedback into the design
. Even if some agile 
software development methods do have process and a 
set of practices, they are often adaptable because 
the agile 
methodology is inherently self-adaptive.  

Agile practices are a set of software practices gui
ded by the agile values and principles. We use the 
XP practices that have 
been referred to as a typical set of agile practice
s as devised by Beck (1999. Agile practices undersc
ore the importance of 
increased communication among people as well as the
 value of flexibility, quickness, and nimbleness. S
ome typical agile 
practices are listed in Table 2. 

Which agile practices do systems developers believe
 are the most effective in improving software quali
ty? In order to answer 
this question, we first examine what software quali
ty means as well as how it is measured.  
SOFTWARE QUALITY DEFINITIONS 

 Quality definitions originated from the manufactur
ing industry. Definitions of ﬁqualityﬂ include ﬁfit
ness for useﬂ and 
ﬁcustomer satisfactionﬂ (Juran, 1992; Juran & Godfr
y, 1999; Gryna & Juran, 2001). Similarly, the Insti
tute of Electrical and 
Electronics Engineers (1987) defines ﬁsoftware qual
ityﬂ as ﬁthe totality of features and characteristi
cs of a software product 
that bear on its ability to satisfy given needs.ﬂ  

In the beginning of quality control and later quali
ty assurance, especially in manufacturing, the stan
dard was zero-defects. 
Note that this was a post-production measurement. I
n the modern software industry, software quality is
 no longer limited to 
zero-bugs. For example, Ray, a software project man
ager, whom we interviewed for an earlier case study
, said:  
For application, by doing short iteration, it makes
 sure that it does what the customer wants. If you 
produce a zero 
defect product that does not do what the customer w
ants, then it is no good. There are multiple aspect
s to consider 
there. And I do not think agile will compromise qua
lity if you do things correctly. In fact, it could 
be better because 
you are testing things more often. 
Inspired by these comments, we noticed the followin
g critical aspects of software quality: the design 
quality (systems design 
conforms to user requirements) and the coding quali
ty (coding conforms to systems design). Traditional
 research on software 
quality has been highly focused on the coding quali
ty, while ignoring the design quality. This way of 
equating non-bug 
software to high quality software has been so influ
ential that many people still use the term software
 quality to refer to coding 
quality even now. It is important to separate these
 two aspects of software quality because they pose 
different challenges.  
In addition, different types of software pose diffe
rent requirements for coding and design quality. Hi
ghly critical software 
(software facilitating space missions or other life
-threatening tasks where coding defect or design de
fects can cause 
significant losses) possesses a high standard for b
oth coding and design quality; while innovative sof
tware with low 
criticality (software aiming to give the user a com
petitive edge by design; if it crashes, it can be r
estarted with little loss) has 
a high standard for design quality only.  
 Kong, Kendall, and Kendall 
 The Challenge of Improving Software Quality 
 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 4 
 Agile Practices 
Definition 
Onsite Customer Have an actual user on the team ful
l-time to answer questions. The 
customer, developers, and management work together 
to decide project 
scope, quality priority, and schedule, based on the
 business requirements 
and technical possibilities. 
Short Releases Deliver working version as often as 
possible. Incrementally add more 
features or improve quality according to feedback. 
 Minimal Documentation Document only essential desig
n and change. Most communication is 
done verbally in order to speed up the process. 
Design Simplicity  Solve problems with minimal effo
rt. Prioritize simple and easy to 
understand ideas.  
Pair Programming Carry out all development tasks by
 a pair of developers simultaneously. 
Often one developer comes up with ideas, while the 
other developer 
checks for defects and conformance to design guidel
ines.  
Test Driven Programming Intensively test the functi
onalities and design quality at the end of each 
iteration. Customers and testers need to provide va
luable feedback to the 
development team in a timely manner so that the dev
elopment team can 
incorporate the feedback into the objectives of the
 next iteration.  
40-hour Week Encourage members of the development t
eam to work within their 
cognitive and physical limits. Do not overwork the 
team because people 
tend to work more, not better, under pressure.  
Continuous Integration Integrate the finished codes
 continuously into a compliable version of the 
systems to see if it fits. The integration may happ
en every day. Unit and 
acceptance tests are conducted at the integration t
o ensure that the current 
build of the systems is capable of passing all pre-
specified tests in current 
form. 
Collective Ownership Allow everyone on the team to 
change the codes if needed. 
Refactoring  Allow the team members to periodically
 work together to improve the 
systems design. 
Table 2 Typical Agile Practices (based on Beck, 199
9) 
Once these two different quality aspects are separa
ted, it is easy to see that the agile methodology h
as great strengths in 
detecting and eliminating design defects to ensure 
the systems design conforms to the user requirement
s. Onsite customer and 
short releases are considered very effective in cap
turing requirements and incorporating customer feed
back into the design, 
leading to software of high value to customer. In a
ddition, pair programming and continuous integratio
n have been 
recognized as the best practices for eliminating co
ding errors. The plan-driven systems development me
thodologies lack 
similar mechanisms for detecting nonconformance to 
the user requirements, leading at times to software
 of high coding 
quality but low design quality.  

In addition, software product quality is under the 
direct influence of process quality. From requireme
nts gathering, systems 
design, systems development, to final release, the 
quality of each step is critical to the resultant s
oftware quality. For instance, 
if customer requirements are not captured properly,
 or the systems design does not address customer re
quirements, or the 
codes do not conform to the systems design, or chan
ges in requirements are not captured and responded 
to, the resultant 
software will not possess good quality.  

After reviewing software quality literature, we bel
ieve it is beneficial to measure the effectiveness 
of the agile practices in 
achieving the following software quality goals:  

1. The effectiveness of agile practices in capturin
g customer requirements;  
2. The effectiveness of agile practices in assuring
 that the systems design meets customer needs;  
 Kong, Kendall, and Kendall 
 The Challenge of Improving Software Quality 
 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 5 
3. The effectiveness of agile practices in eliminat
ing coding errors;  
4. The effectiveness of agile practices in eliminat
ing design defects;  
5. The effectiveness of agile practices in improvin
g responsiveness to customers™ changing needs;  
6. The effectiveness of agile practices in assuring
 that the systems design meets customer needs;  
7. The effectiveness of agile practices in assuring
 that the resultant systems product provides values
 to end users;  
8. The effectiveness of agile practices in satisfyi
ng customers.  
As suggested in the work of Armitage (2004), Beck a
nd Andres (2004), Huo et al. (2004) and Opperthause
r (2003), agile 
practices such as the 40-hour week, customer involv
ement, pair programming, design simplicity, onsite 
customers, 
continuous integration, short releases, pair progra
mming, collective ownership, and refactoring, all h
ave integrated quality 
control functionalities to reduce coding errors and
 design defects. Hence, we included these practices
 in the questionnaire. 
Agile practices which we do not believe are directl
y related to quality management were not included. 
For example, no 
literature has suggested that minimal documentation
 leads to better quality performance. Therefore, mi
nimal documentation 
practice was not considered in this study. Other om
issions are developer productivity and fast deliver
y, which are not directly 
related to the quality effects.  

We designed a questionnaire to capture all the meas
ures we previously introduced and conducted a surve
y among software 
developers to find out what agile practices they pe
rceive to be the most effective in achieving variou
s software quality goals. 
Part II of the questionnaire collected demographic 
information, intended for cluster analysis.  
CONDUCTING THE SURVEY  

As suggested by Straub (1989), Moore and Benbasat (
1991) and Chin, Gopal and Salisbury (1997), our sur
vey study has 
followed the following three stages: content valida
tion, pilot study, and full-scale survey. 
1. Content Validation. After the pilot questionnair
e was created, the items in the questionnaire were 
reviewed by all 
researchers, by five software professionals, and fo
ur academicians involved with managing innovation a
nd software 
development to ascertain content validity through e
xamining whether the items appropriately reflect th
e construct of interest. 
With the help of these experts, ambiguous items wer
e identified and reworded.  
2. Pilot Study. Before conducting the full-scale su
rvey, a pilot study involving 10 software researche
rs and practitioners was 
conducted. The purpose of the pilot study was two-f
oldŠto see how long it took respondents to complete 
the survey and to 
examine construct validity. From the pilot study, w
e learned that the survey took about 15-20 minutes 
to complete.  
In addition, we found that most constructs showed g
ood validity with the exception of several indicato
rs that did not load 
well on their assigned construct. However, we decid
ed not to delete these indicators at this stage bec
ause the sample size of 
the pilot study was 10, too small to yield reliable
 results. In other words, the phenomena we observed
 in the pilot study could 
be extreme cases; these indicators might load on th
eir assigned construct well once the sample size in
creased. Moreover, all 
the indicators and constructs of the survey were re
viewed and approved by experts, including all the r
esearchers, the five 
software professionals, and four academicians invol
ved with managing innovation and software developme
nt.  
3. Full-scale Survey. After the pilot study, we con
ducted a full-scale survey. The survey respondents 
were software 
professionals from two organizations, with which we
 had an established relationship.  
In order to begin the conduction of the survey, we 
first presented the research proposal to the contac
t persons of two study 
organizations labeled as alpha and beta for purpose
s of anonymity. The contact persons of these two or
ganizations then 
forwarded the proposal to related authorities for a
pproval. After the research proposal was approved, 
the contact persons 
provided us with a list of names of internal softwa
re professionals. From this list of names, we rando
mly chose 85 people as 
survey respondents and sent them email invitations 
to complete the survey.  
We received 60 responses. The return rate was about
 70 percent, which is relatively high compared to m
ost surveys in the IS 
field. We think that the high return rate is due to
 the strong support of the company leaders and cont
act persons to this 
research project. Among the 60 responses, three of 
them are missing a significant amount of data. We h
ence excluded these 
three responses from analysis, leaving a sample of 
57 usable responses (N=57). This sample size ensure
s a power level of 
0.82.  
 Kong, Kendall, and Kendall 
 The Challenge of Improving Software Quality 
 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 6 
When we asked the contact persons about unreturned 
surveys, they replied that they believed that the n
on-responders were 
too busy to fill out the survey. Since we do not ha
ve the access to non-responders, we know very littl
e about their 
demographics. This is a caveat of the study related
 to the sample.  
THE SURVEY RESULTS AND FINDINGS  

Demographic Information 

Analyzing the demographic data, we found that 11 pe
rcent of respondents are between the ages 20-29; 67
 percent of 
respondents are between the ages 30-49; 22 percent 
of respondents are older than 50. In addition, we f
ound that 81 percent of 
the respondents are male while 19 percent of them a
re female. We also learned that most respondents ha
ve earned a bachelor 
degree (50%) or a master™s degree (36%), while a sm
all proportion of them have a Ph.D. (4%) or other d
egree (10%).  
Among survey respondents, 18 percent of them have w
orked at their current job for less than a year, 60
 percent of them have 
worked at their current job for 1 to 10 years; and 
22 percent of them have worked at their current job
 for more than 10 years. 
In addition, among them, 70 percent have worked in 
the IT industry for over 10 years, while 30 percent
 of them have worked 
in the IT industry for less than 10 years. Among th
e survey respondents, 4 percent of them have never 
worked on agile 
projects; 75 percent of them have worked on 1 to 10
 agile projects, while 21 percent of them have work
ed on more than 10 
agile projects. Most survey respondents have gained
 their knowledge on agile methodology on the job or
 by reading, while 
few of the respondents have received training.  

From the demographic information, we learned that o
ur survey respondents are from a variety of backgro
unds and have 
different levels of experience with, and knowledge 
of, agile methodology.  
Onsite Customer
Short Releases
Requirements Analysis
before Coding
Continuous Integration
Formal Documentation
Systematic Planning
Using CASE Tools
Pair Programming
Other
60
50
40
30
20
10
0Number of Nominations
The Best Practice for Capturing Customer Requiremen
ts
 Figure 1 Responses to Best Practices for Capturing 
Customer Requirements 
The Best Practices for Software Quality Improvement
 Survey respondents were asked to choose the best pr
actice for various quality improvement purposes in 
Part I of the survey. 
The 10 candidate software practices from which they
 could choose included continuous integration, onsi
te customer, pair 
programming, short releases, 40-hour week, formal d
ocumentation, process control and improvement, requ
irements analysis 
before coding, systematic planning, and using CASE 
tools. Notice that half of these practices are popu
lar agile practices, such 
as continuous integration, onsite customer, pair pr
ogramming, short releases, 40-hour week, while the 
other half are popular 
plan-driven practices, such as formal documentation
, process control and improvement, requirements ana
lysis before coding, 
systematic planning, and using CASE tools. 
 Kong, Kendall, and Kendall 
 The Challenge of Improving Software Quality 
 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 7 
There were seven categories in which respondents we
re asked to express a preference. For capturing cus
tomer requirements, 
the onsite customer practice was chosen as the most
 effective practice, while the short releases pract
ice was chosen as the 
second most preferred practice. These two practices
 are agile practices, showing that these agile tech
niques are considered by 
respondents as more effective for capturing custome
r requirements than the plan-driven practices. Even
 though the 
ﬁrequirements analysis before coding practice,ﬂ a p
lan-driven practice, took the third place, the numb
er of responses it 
received is far fewer than that of the onsite custo
mer practice. Figure 1 shows detailed response pref
erences for development 
practices.
   
For assuring that the systems design meets customer
 needs, survey respondents chose the short releases
 practice as the most 
effective practice, while the onsite customer pract
ice, and the continuous integration practice follow
ed. These three practices 
are agile practices, showing that agile methodology
 is perceived as having better techniques than plan
-driven methodologies 
in assuring that the systems design meets customer™
s expectations. We speculate that the more steps an
d actions a systems 
development methodology involves, the more likely i
t is that it decreases perception of design quality
 and perhaps design 
quality itself, because of the likelihood miscommun
ication among various stakeholders will be amplifie
d. Figure 2 shows the 
distribution of all of the survey responses.  
Short Releases
Onsite Customer
Continuous Integration
Systematic Planning
Using CASE Tools
Formal Documentation
Requirements Analysis
before Coding
Other
Pair Programming
40
30
20
10
0Number of Nominations
The Best Practice for Assuring the Systems Design M
eeting
Customer Needs
 Figure 2 Responses to Best Practice for Assuring th
at Systems Design Meets Customer Needs 
In addition to capturing customer™s requirements an
d designing software that meets customer™s needs, e
liminating design 
defects and coding errors were identified by the su
rvey respondents as important for improving softwar
e quality. Survey 
respondents chose the pair programming practice and
 the continuous integration practice as the most ef
fective practices for 
eliminating coding errors and design defects. Once 
again, these two practices are agile practices, und
erscoring that the survey 
respondents perceive agile methodologies as being m
ore effective ways than the plan-driven methodologi
es in eliminating 
defects. Figure 3 and 4 show detailed response pref
erences for eliminating coding errors and design de
fects.  
 Kong, Kendall, and Kendall 
 The Challenge of Improving Software Quality 
 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 8 
Pair Programming
Continuous Integration
Other
Short Releases
Process Control and
Improvement
Using CASE Tools
Formal Documentation
Requirements Analysis
before Coding
Systematic Planning
40-hour Week
40
30
20
10
0Number of Nominations
The Best Practice for Eliminating Coding Errors
 Figure 3 Responses to Best Practice for Eliminating
 Coding Errors 
Continuous Integration
Pair Programming
Short Releases
Requirements Analysis
before Coding
Using CASE Tools
Systematic Planning
Other
Formal Documentation
Process Control and
Improvement
Onsite Customer
40-hour Week
25
20
15
10
50Number of Nominations
The Best Practice for Eliminating Design Defects
 Figure 4 Response to Best Practice for Eliminating 
Design Defects 
  Kong, Kendall, and Kendall 
 The Challenge of Improving Software Quality 
 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 9 
Among the 10 software practices, survey respondents
 chose the short releases practice as the best prac
tice for responding to 
customers™ changing needs, and onsite customer was 
chosen as the second best practice in this regard. 
Once again, these two 
practices are agile practices. This finding support
s our initial hunch based on an extensive literatur
e review, that found that 
many agile methodologists have suggested that the a
gile methodology is better than the plan-driven met
hodology in 
responding to changes. Figure 5 provides the survey
 responses to the question of best practice for bei
ng responsive to 
customers™ needs..  
Short Releases
Onsite Customer
Continuous Integration
Process Control and
Improvement
Other
Using CASE Tools
Formal Documentation
50
40
30
20
10
0Number of Nominations
The Best Practice for Being Responsive to Customers
™
Changing Needs
 Figure 5 Responses to Best Practice for Being Respo
nsive to Customers™ Changing Needs 
Among the ten candidate practices survey respondent
s identified short releases and onsite customer pra
ctices as the perceived 
best practices for producing highly valuable softwa
re. Again, this confirms our hunches arising from t
he literature, since agile 
practitioners have suggested that agile methodologi
es are better in producing software of high value (
Highsmith, 2002a). 
Figure 6 provides the detailed breakdown of respons
es.  
Survey respondents identified the short release pra
ctice, followed by the onsite customer practice, as
 the perceived best 
practice for achieving customer satisfaction. Since
 these two practices are agile practices, this resu
lt supports the perception 
that agile methodologies have a strong focus on bui
lding a long-term customer relationship. By contras
t, plan-driven 
methodologies are considered by many developers as 
possessing a strong internal focus rather than focu
sing on achieving 
customer satisfaction.  Software practices of the p
lan-driven methodologies were consistently placed a
t the bottom of the 
ranking by survey respondents. For details, please 
refer to Figure 7. 
 Kong, Kendall, and Kendall 
 The Challenge of Improving Software Quality 
 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 10 
Short Releases
Onsite Customer
Continuous Integration
Requirements Analysis
before Coding
40-hour Week
Using CASE Tools
Process Control and
Improvement
Pair Programming
Other
40
30
20
10
0Number of Nominations
The Best Practice for Producing Highly Valuable Sof
tware
 Figure 6 Responses to Best Practice for Producing H
ighly Valuable Software 
Short Releases
Onsite Customer
Other
Requirements Analysis
before Coding
Continuous Integration
40-hour Week
Using CASE Tools
Formal Documentation
Process Control and
Improvement
50
40
30
20
10
0Number of Nominations
The Best Practice for Achieving Customer Satisfacti
on
__
  Figure 7 The Best Practice for Achieving Customer S
atisfaction 
  Kong, Kendall, and Kendall 
 The Challenge of Improving Software Quality 
 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 11 
In summary, data analysis shows that software devel
opers consistently perceived agile practices over p
lan-driven software 
practices as the most effective way of eliminating 
coding errors and design defects as well as achievi
ng customer satisfaction. 
Specifically, we found that onsite customer and sho
rt releases were identified as the most effective s
oftware practices to 
capture customer requirements and achieve customer 
satisfaction; additionally, pair programming and co
ntinuous integration 
are perceived to be the most effective practices fo
r eliminating coding errors and design defects.  
Specifically, we found through our survey that: (1)
 having an onsite customer was identified as the be
st practice for capturing 
customer requirements; (2) short releases were chos
en as the best practice for assuming a design meeti
ng customer™s needs, 
for being responsive to customers™ changing needs, 
for producing highly valuable results, and for achi
eving customer 
satisfaction; (3) pair programming was chosen as th
e best practice for eliminating coding errors; and 
(4) continuous 
integration was chosen as the best practice for eli
minating design defects. We see that the agile prac
tices have been 
consistently identified as the perceived best pract
ices for achieving a variety of quality results. Th
ese findings are highly 
valuable for informing practitioners of the best ag
ile practice for specific quality goals. 
CONTRIBUTIONS AND FUTURE RESEARCH 

Our paper has made important contributions in the f
ollowing ways. By differentiating two critical aspe
cts of software quality, 
the design quality (software design conforms to cus
tomer requirements) and the coding quality (the cod
ing conforms to 
software design), we have achieved an in-depth unde
rstanding and accurate findings about the perceived
 impact of agile 
practices on software quality.  

In addition, in analyzing the perceived impact of a
gile methodology on these two different quality asp
ects, we found that 
agile methodology has significant positive impacts 
on perceptions of design quality and on the resulta
nt software™s coding 
quality. We have found that agile practices such as
 onsite customer and short releases are perceived b
y many developers as 
better practices in achieving customer satisfaction
 than plan-driven practices. In addition, we found 
that agile practices such 
as continuous integration and pair programming are 
perceived by many developers as better practices in
 eliminating coding 
errors and design defects than are plan-driven prac
tices.  
This paper has focused on examining software develo
pers™ perspectives or perceptions of the effectiven
ess of agile practices. 
The developers appear to see agile methodologies as
 beneficial, but they are only half of the picture,
 since the customer and 
users will be left with the resulting system. Thus,
 our future study will examine the customers™ persp
ective and perceptions 
on agile methodology. A survey study targeted to cu
stomers and users will be conducted to complete tha
t part of the study. 
Although this paper only presents the basic descrip
tive statistics (i.e. what software practices are t
he most effective in 
achieving certain quality goals), our next paper wi
ll examine the interaction effects.  
The participants obviously believe that plan-driven
 approaches and agile methods are two distinct meth
odologies. The results 
of our survey clearly shows that this is their beli
ef. We point out, however, that in practice, a syst
ems analyst or systems 
development team often uses every tool and trick th
ey know to complete the project. An analyst using S
LDC might use agile 
methods to complete just part of project (for examp
le build prototypes for system output) in order to 
quickly get reactions 
from the customer. Likewise, an agile developer may
 need to rely on data flow diagrams to sort out the
 differences between 
logical flow and the physical implementation of the
 system. We find that these methodologies tend to o
verlap in practice. 
Finally, even though we found that key agile practi
ces were considered to be best practices, we do not
 advocate that the agile 
approach is the only systems development methodolog
y or even the best methodology to use in every case
. Traditional 
approaches such as the systems development life cyc
le might make more sense in many situations, especi
ally when most of 
the systems have been developed using SDLC in the p
ast. Similarly, object-oriented approaches might be
 more appropriate if 
the project lends itself to the discipline, time, a
nd resources required to complete the project. 
REFERENCES
 1.
 Ambler, S. (2006). Surveys exploring the current st
ate of information technology practices. Retrieved 
2006, 05/01, from 
http://www.ambysoft.com/surveys/
.  
2.
 Armitage, J. (2004). Design: Are agile methods good
 for design? 
Interactions,
 11
(1), January 2004. 
3.
 Beck, K. (1999). 
Extreme programming explained: Embrace change.
 Boston: Addison-Wesley.  
4.
 Beck, K., & Andres, C. (2004). 
Extreme programming explained: Embrace change. 
2nd Edition. Boston: Addison-
Wesley. 
5.
 Beck, K., et al. (2001). 
Manifesto for agile software development.
 Retrieved April 1, 2005, from 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org
.  
 Kong, Kendall, and Kendall 
 The Challenge of Improving Software Quality 
 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 12 
6.
 Cockburn, A. (2002). 
Agile software development
. Boston: Addison-Wesley.  
7.
 Cockburn, A., & Highsmith, J. (2001). Agile softwar
e development, the people factor.
 Computer, 34
(11), 131-133.  
8.
 Cohen, J. (1988). Statistical power analysis for th
e behavioral sciences. NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associa
tes.  
9.
 Digital Focus (2005). 
Agile 2006 Survey: Results and Analysis. 
Retrieved May 1, 2006, from 
http://www.digitalfocus.com/research/research.php
  
10.
 Gryna, F. M., & Juran, J. M. (2001). 
Quality planning and analysis: From product develop
ment through use
 (4th ed.). 
New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.  
11.
 Highsmith, J. (2002a). 
Agile software development ecosystems
. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley Professional.  
12.
 Highsmith, J. (2002b). What is agile software devel
opment? 
CrossTalk, The Journal of Defense Software Engineer
ing, 
Oct. 2002
. Retrieved May 1, 2005, from 
http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/crosstalk/2002/10/highs
mith.html
  
13.
 Highsmith, J., & Cockburn, A. (2001). Agile softwar
e development: The business of innovation.
 Computer, 34
(9), 120-
127.  
14.
 Huo, M., Verner, J., Zhu, L., & Babar, M. A. (2004)
. Software quality and agile methods. 
Proceedings of the 28th 
Annual International Computer Software and Applicat
ions Conference, 
520-525.  
15.
 Juran, J. M. (1992). Juran on quality by design : T
he new steps for planning quality into goods and se
rvices. New York, 
NY: Free Press.  
16.
 Moore, G. C., & Benbasat, I. (1991). Development of
 an instrument to measure the perceived characteris
tics of adopting 
an information technology innovation.
 Information Systems Research, 2
(3), 192-222.  
17.
 Opperthauser, D. (2003). Defect management in an ag
ile development environment. 
CrossTalk, The Journal of Defense 
Software Engineering, Sep. 2003
. Retrieved May 1, 2005, from 
http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/crosstalk/2003/09/0309O
pperthauser.html
  
18.
 Paulk, M. C. (2001). Extreme programming from a CMM
 perspective.
 IEEE Software, 18
(6), 19-26.  
19.
 Paulk, M. C. (2002). Agile methodologies and proces
s discipline. 
CrossTalk, The Journal of Defense Software 
Engineering, Oct. 2002
. Retrieved May 1, 2004, from 
http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/crosstalk/2002/10/paulk
.html
  
20.
 Schwaber, K., & Beedle, M. (2001). 
Agile software development with scrum
. NJ: Prentice Hall.  
21.
 VersionOne & Agile Alliance (2006). 
The "State of Agile Development" Survey Results. 
Retrieved December 1, 2006, 
from 
http://www.versionone.net/surveyresults.asp
.  
