 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)A Framework for Managing Flexibility in theInformation Systems FunctionRam L. KumarAntonis C. Stylianou AA  FFrraammeewwoorrkk  ffoorr  MMaannaaggiinngg  FFlleexxiibbiilliittyy  iinn  TThhee  IInnffoorrmmaattiioonn  SSyysstteemmss  FFuunnccttiioonn!!!!!!!!Ram L. Kumar, Dept. of IOM, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, rlkumar@email.uncc.edu
Antonis C. Stylianou, Dept. of IOM, University of North Carolina at Charlotte, astylian@email.uncc.edu
                                                          ! The authors' names are listed in alphabetical order.  Each author has contributed equally to this research.
Abstract
Competitive pressures are forcing organizations to be
agile and flexible.  Response to changing environmental

conditions is an important factor in determining corporate

performance. Organizational flexibility is in turn closely

related to the management of information systems.

Organizations with flexible IS functions are in a position

to be more responsive and take advantage of changes in

both their internal and external environments.

Conversely, inflexibility in IS can inhibit organizational

growth and put a company in a competitive disadvantage.
This paper argues that IS flexibility is a multi-
dimensional concept.  Grounded theory methodology is

used to empirically derive a taxonomy of several types of

flexibility and flexibility management strategies.
Introduction
Current business environments often require
organizations to be agile and flexible (Kulatilaka and

Marks) in order to be responsive to changing business

requirements.  Flexibility of organizations is often related

to their Information Systems (IS).  For example, the

ability of an organization to rapidly change its product

mix is likely to be influenced by the degree of integration

of manufacturing activities supported by the IS (computer

integrated manufacturing).
Earlier research has argued that flexible organizations
require flexible infrastructures (Lucas and Olson, 1994).

However, describing, measuring and managing flexibility

of the IS architecture is difficult (Kumar, 1999). Past

research on flexibility in the IS domain has dealt with the

concept in a one-dimensional way.  Our proposition is that

IS flexibility is a multi-dimensional concept.   In order to

manage it effectively, we need to understand the various

dimensions, the linkages and tradeoffs between them, and

the possible strategies for proactively managing

flexibility.
This research aims at providing an enhanced
understanding of IS flexibility. The paper attempts to

build a theory for analyzing flexible IS functions.  Several

types of flexibility that are desirable in an IS function are

identified, defined, and illustrated.  The relationships

between different IS activities and different types of

flexibility, as well as strategies for achieving IS flexibility,

are explored.
The following specific research questions are addressed:
(i)
 What does IS flexibility mean?  What are the
different types of IS flexibility?
(ii)
 How can the different types of IS flexibility be
managed?
Theoretical Foundations
The Concept of Flexibility
The OM literature recognizes the fact that
manufacturing flexibility is an important part of

organizational flexibility and performance (Sethi and

Sethi, 1990).  Also, there is considerable emphasis on the

fact that the term flexibility means different things to

different people, and the need to understand the context in

which flexibility is used.  Several types of manufacturing

flexibility have been identified in the literature (Table 1).
Table 1.  Manufacturing Flexibility
Type of
Flexibility
Description
Volume
Ability to vary production volume
Expansion
Ability to vary maximum production volume
(capacity)
Process
Ability of a manufacturing process to produce
different types of parts without major process
changes
Machine
Different operations that can be performed on a
machine without prohibitive effort in switching
from one operation to another
Operational
Ability of a particular part to be produced in one
of many ways
Product
Ability to alter the product mix with existing
equipment and major setup
RoutingAbility to produce a part by alternate routes
through the system
IS enable organizations to adopt flexible strategies
(Clemons and Weber, 1994; Duncan, 1995; Allen and

Boynton, 1991).  One common argument is that present

day IS allow companies to adopt a wider and more finely

tuned (flexible) set of strategies than those suggested by

Porter (1985).  However, the IS literature does not clearly

distinguish between different types of flexibility.
Organizations and IS Flexibility
The nature of organizations and the environment in
which they function can have a major impact on IS.

Changing environmental or market conditions, such as

increased competition or new governmental regulations,
 can result in the need to develop or modify systems and
impact the volume of IS activity by changing project

deadlines and resource requirements.  The nature of the

business and its dependence on information technology

can influence the degree of flexibility required of IS.  For

example, a financial institution that is extremely

dependent on information technology would require a

high degree of flexibility to operate in spite of system

failures.  Corporate strategy can also impact the degree of

flexibility required from IS.  For example, a company that

frequently introduces new products and services would

require a different degree of IS flexibility compared to a

company that uses cost leadership as a strategy but does

not frequently modify its product mix.  It is therefore

desirable to build some degree of flexibility into the IS

function but the importance and nature of flexibility is

organization and function-specific.
Methodology
This research uses grounded theory (Strauss and
Corbin, 1997) to identify different types of IS flexibility,

to relate them to specific IS activities, and to determine

strategies for gaining IS flexibility.  We start with the

taxonomy of manufacturing flexibility in Table 1, and ask

the following question:  ﬁIs this taxonomy valid in the

context of the IS function?ﬂ  We look for empirical

evidence of validity by analyzing secondary data in the

form of published descriptions and case studies from

practitioner and academic literature.  The theory

(taxonomy of flexibility) is refined based on empirical

evidence.  Constant iteration between theory and practice

is undertaken in order to refine the taxonomy of

flexibility.  A match between empirical evidence and

theory reinforces the theory.  At times, empirical evidence

that is not supported by theory results in additions to

theory (e.g., a new type of flexibility, or a modification of

the definition of a type of flexibility).
Data Collection
We have surveyed the literature on manufacturing,
management, organizational, and IS flexibility and

collected a variety of secondary data.  We have developed

a preliminary taxonomy of types of IS flexibility.  We are

currently developing a framework relating these to IS

activities and strategies.  Preliminary results are provided

in the following section.
Analysis & Results
Information Systems Flexibility Taxonomy
The IS function can be actively managed to ensure IS
flexibility.  Such flexibility can benefit the entire

organization.  IS flexibility is a multidimensional concept.

Table 3 identifies different types of IS flexibility based on

our analysis of secondary data so far.
Table 3:  IS Flexibility
Volume
Flexibility
 What
:  Ability to vary the short-term
quantity of products/services
 Why Important:  Deadlines for reports,
special business events, new projects
 Example
:  Ability to assign person-hours
to an unplanned project
Location

Flexibility
 What:  
Ability to vary the location of
execution and delivery of IS services
 Why 
Important:  Globalization; System
malfunction; Mobile workforce
 Example
:  Ability to provide system
access from multiple geographically

dispersed devices
Systems

Development

Flexibility
 What: 
Ability to easily change the
specifications of a systems development

project
 Why 
Important: Changes in business
conditions; Better understanding of

requirements as project progresses
 Example: 
 Using rapid application
development tools to quickly modify

system features
Operating

Flexibility
 What
:  Ability to meet commitments by
varying the mix of IS resources
 Why Important:  Personnel turnover or
absenteeism, hardware or software failure
 Example
:  Using backup systems and
procedures to minimize downtime
Output

Customization

Flexibility
 What: 
Ability to vary the frequency,
content, and distribution of system output
 Why Important
: Multiple system
stakeholders and variability in user

requirements
 Example
:  Web sites that customize
content for different users
Staffing

Flexibility
 What
:  Ability to hire the best people
available or people with specialized skills
 Why Important:  Business location,
Company reputation & size
 Example
:  Use of outsourcing to get
highly skilled programmers to work for

small company at remote location
Framework for Managing IS Flexibility
We will present a framework describing types of IS
flexibility for various IS functional activities, the need for

flexibility, and representative strategies for the

management of flexibility.  This is work in progress and

Table 4 contains illustrative examples based on analysis of

collected data using the Grounded Theory methodology.
 Table 4: IS Activities, Flexibility, and Strategies
IS Activity
Flexibility Type
Causal Conditions / Need for
Flexibility
Flexibility
Strategy
Example/Quote
 DataArchitecture

Planning
 Volume
 Output
Customization
 Need to satisfy users who have
different data requirements at

different points in time.
Broker based
publish and

subscribe data

architecture
 Use of CORBA based
architecture to distribute

data objects selectively.
 Project
Management
 Staffing
 Need to ﬁget smart enough, fast
enough to keep abreast of rapid

change.ﬂ
 Need to adapt to fast-paced
global markets and technology

changes leading to new projects.
 Need to ﬁget aroundﬂ
constraining staffing policies.
Interim (Project)
Hiring
 Firm hires contract project
managers.  ﬁTry-before-

you-buyﬂ tactic.
 Systems
Operation
 Systems
Integration
 Network
Management
 Operating
 Systems
Development
 Need for flexible connectivity to
disparate systems
 Use of
Internet-

based

network with

gateways to

other

systems.
 Emphasize
scalability,

redundancy,

and

reliability in

network

design.
 ﬁOur [Internet-based]
network – allows us to

create gateways with some

of the outdated legacy

protocols still in wide use

in the industry.ﬂ
 ﬁUntil Sabre catches up
with National, the latter

will have to maintain

flexible connectivity so

that Sabre™s problems

don™t frustrate National™s

customers.ﬂ
 Infrastructure
Architecture

Planning
 Location
 Need to accommodate different
users in a variety of settings

(locations)
Wireless
solution using a

radio LAN
 ﬁChoosing the flexibility
of a wireless solution

means the company can

put the kiosks anywhere

within the stores.ﬂ
Future Research
Future research will examine the tradeoffs and
consequences of pursuing various strategies for managing

the different types of IS flexibility?
Selected References Brandt, R.A. and Boynton, A.C. ﬁInformation
Architecture: In Search of Efficient Flexibility,ﬂ

MIS Quarterly, Vol. 15, No. 4, (1991), pp. 435-

445. Clemons, E.K., and Weber, B.W. ﬁSegmentation,
Differentiation, and Flexible Pricing:

Experiences with Information Technology and

Segment-Tailored Strategies,ﬂ 
Journal of
Management Information Systems
, Vol. 11, No.2, (1994), pp. 9-36.
 Duncan, N.B. ﬁCapturing Flexibility of
Information Technology Infrastructure: A Study

of Resource Characteristics and their Measure,ﬂ

Journal of Management Information Systems
,Vol. 12 No. 2, (Fall 1995), pp. 37-57.
 Kulatilaka, N., and Marks, S.E. ﬁThe Strategic
Value of Flexibility: Reducing the Ability to
Compromise,ﬂ 
American Economic Review
, Vol.78, No. 3, 574-580.
 Kumar, R. ﬁUnderstanding the Business Value of
Information Systems: A Flexibility-Based

Approach,ﬂ in M. Mahmood (ed.),

Contemporary Approaches to Measuring the

Business Value of Information Systems
,Harrisburg, PA: IDEA Group Publishing ,

(1999), pp. 320-336.
 Lucas Jr., H.C., and Olson, M. ﬁThe Impact of
Information Technology on Organizational

Flexibility,ﬂ 
Journal of Organizational
Computing
, Vol. 4, No. 2 (1994), pp. 1054-1721.
 Porter, M.E. 
Competitive Advantage,
 New York:
Free Press, (1985).
 Sethi, A.K, and Sethi, S.P. ﬁFlexibility in
Manufacturing: A Survey
,ﬂ International Journal
of Flexible Manufacturing Systems
, 2 (1990), pp.289-328.
 Strauss, A., and Corbin, J. 
Grounded Theory in
Practice, 
Thousand Oaks: Sage Publications
(1997).