 Pieters 
 Agile Systems Analysis and Design Teaching and Lea
rning 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 1 
An Agile Approach to Systems Analysis and Design 
Teaching and Learning  

Liza Pieters 
Midrand Graduate Institute 
lizak@mgi.ac.za 
 
ABSTRACT  
Systems analysis and design (SAD) is a core part of
 systems development and the Information Systems cu
rriculum (Gorgone 
et al, 2002; Bajaj et al, 2004).  SAD is a complex 
process, with many techniques used to understand pr
oblems and design 
solutions.  This paper investigates how an agile so
ftware development approach may be used for the tea
ching and learning of 
SAD.  The research reviews and compares literature 
on agile teaching and learning (ATL) and the challe
nges of SAD 
teaching and learning (T&L).  The ATL approach is u
sed to address the challenges of SAD T&L.  Accordin
gly, the paper 
proposes an agile SAD T&L approach.  The main limit
ation of the study is that the proposed approach ha
s not been tested.  
The most promising concept of the proposed agile SA
D T&L approach is its flexibility and ability to ad
apt and adjust 
according to individual preferences and needs. 

Keywords 

Agile Teaching and Learning (ATL), Systems Analysis
 and Design (SAD), Agile methodology, Teaching and 
Learning 
(T&L). 

INTRODUCTION 

Systems development is a complex process which requ
ires developers to understand the whole development
 life cycle and to 
adapt to planned and unexpected changes, problems a
nd risks (Chun, 2004).  Many different systems anal
ysis and design 
methodologies exist, approaching the systems develo
pment process differently (Wood-Harper and Fitzgera
ld, 1982). In 
reality there is still a high rate of systems devel
opment failure which is often related to the inabil
ity of systems development 
approaches to adapt and cope with changes (Ferreira
 and Cohen, 2008).  In response, the agile systems 
development approach 
emerged.  The agile approach is tailored to cope wi
th and respond to change and accepts that requireme
nts of systems can 
change, and subsequently also the development of th
at system (agilemethodology.org, 2008). 
Systems analysis and design (SAD) is core to system
s development and an established part of Informatio
n Technology (IT) 
courses (Cybulski and Linden, 2000).  ﬁIn an agile 
paradigm, every aspect of development is continuall
y revisited throughout 
the lifecycleﬂ (agilemethodology.org, 2008).  This 
agile approach to systems development directly effe
cts how the systems 
analysis and design phases are executed, but could 
it not also inform its teaching and learning?  Teac
hing is after all quite 
similar to such a systems development approach (Gre
enbaum and Mathiassen, 1990: 526).  ﬁWe never reall
y know what the 
end result is going to be like and how it is going 
to be usedﬂ (Greenbaum and Mathiassen, 1990: 526). 
  
This paper explores SAD teaching and learning (T&L)
 as well as agile teaching and learning (ATL).  The
 aim is to determine 
if an ATL approach can address SAD T&L challenges. 

SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND DESIGN TEACHING AND LEARNING 

In 1978, Spence and Grout suggested that systems an
alysis and design (SAD) become part of the Computer
 Science 
curriculum.  In the IS 2002 Model Curriculum and Gu
idelines for Undergraduate Degree Programs in Infor
mation Systems 
published by the Association for Information System
s, SAD forms a core part of the Information Systems
 (IS) curriculum.  
ﬁThe struggle to teach the concepts of SAD to stude
nts who find it difficult to internalize either the
 concepts or the processes 
has been the subject of extensive scholarship spann
ing the information eraﬂ (Suscheck and Huff, 2007).
  Teaching students to 
understand the problem (analysis) and subsequently 
to come up with the best possible solution (design)
 (Albayrak, 2000) is 
challenging, especially if they have no systems dev
elopment background (Suscheck and Huff, 2007).   
Teaching SAD in the traditional lecturing way, plac
e students in a passive receptive role, which resul
ts in students absorbing 
only about 30% of what the lecturer is explaining (
Cybulski and Linden, 2000).  A realistic approach t
o teaching SAD has 
 Pieters 
 Agile Systems Analysis and Design Teaching and Lea
rning 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 2 
been proposed (Archer, 1985), and innovative approa
ches have been researched (Olfman and Bolstron, 199
2). More common 
approaches to teaching SAD include using case studi
es, real life examples, simulations, tutors, close 
to real life projects, and 
teamwork (Cybulski and Linden, 2000).  The common t
heme to these teaching approaches is to provide the
 students with 
opportunity to learn through application and experi
ence, instead of the teacher being the main source 
of information.  The 
aim in mind is to help students to make ﬁthe transi
tion from textbook understanding of information sys
tems to actual real 
world experienceﬂ (Wallace, 2005). Hands-on experie
nce is in effect how practising system analysts imp
rove their skills and 
application knowledge (Suscheck and Huff, 2007).  T
he challenge is that good SAD requires in-depth pro
ject or case study 
understanding (Suscheck and Huff, 2007), fine techn
ical skills and even a sound knowledge of business 
and management 
(Cybulski and Linden, 2000).   

One of the biggest challenges however with using ca
se studies and simulations or exercises based on re
al life systems, is that 
there is not one best way to arrive at the ultimate
 solution (Cybulski and Linden, 2000). In SAD there
 are different 
techniques, such as structured and object oriented 
modelling, that can be used to arrive at various so
lutions.  According to 
(Gorgone et al, 2002) both structured and object or
iented methodologies should be included in SAD cour
ses as part of an IS 
curriculum.  SAD is not as ﬁprecise as programming 
and not exact like Mathematicsﬂ (Smit, 2012), but r
ather requires 
creative thinking skills (Olfman and Bolstron, 1992
).  Therefore SAD is more difficult to teach (Cybul
ski and Linden, 2000) 
and equally difficult to learn (Smit, 2012).  The s
tudents need to develop their own cognitive abiliti
es to select a technique 
and judge when a solution could be considered good 
and when it could be improved.  Olfman and Bolstron
 (1992) 
emphasised facilitation skills such as outcome thin
king, group process and communications to improve S
AD T&L. 
As part of the SAD course, traditional and agile sy
stems development methods are introduced, explained
 and contrasted 
(Bajaj et al, 2004).  In 1982, Wood-Harper and Fitz
gerald stated that ﬁthere exists a confusing array 
of approachesﬂ.  They 
also noted that these ﬁapproaches are not just simp
le alternatives, but that they seek to do different
 thingsﬂ (Wood-Harper and 
Fitzgerald, 1982). While the traditional approaches
 emphasise a sequential process, the agile systems 
development approach 
attempts to provide a solution to system developers
 towards developing better systems by accepting and
 reacting to changes, 
adopting an ﬁinspect-and-adaptﬂ approach (
agilemethodology.org
, 2008).  These are attractive qualities that could
 be used for 
SAD T&L. 

AGILE TEACHING AND LEARNING 

ATL is a relatively new approach being explored for
 its application potential in higher education.  Th
e agile systems 
development methodology is a ﬁcreative process that
 anticipates the need for flexibility and applies a
 level of pragmatism 
into the delivery of the finished productﬂ (Rouse, 
2007).  The agility of the approach is attractive a
nd holds many advantages 
for the education setting (Davey and Parker, 2010).
 The need for an agile approach to T&L comes from a 
general need for education to respond to what is go
ing on in the 
classroom as well as around and beyond it (Berry, 2
012).  Generally educators root all their planning 
in solid curriculum, but 
ﬁthe outcome is only successful in the way students
 apply the concepts and approaches within the realm
 of their experiencesﬂ 
(Greenbaum and Mathiassen, 1990).  This requires ed
ucation to accept that students are not just passiv
e recipients of our 
teaching; they should rather be looked upon as cont
ributing partners in the T&L experience (Berry, 201
2).  The T&L should 
therefore be learner-centred and flexible, where th
e individuals are taught rather than the planned ou
t lessons (Berry, 2012).   
ATL adopts the principles defined in the Agile Mani
festo: The principles state that the focus should b
e on individuals and 
interactions, rather than processes and tools; on w
orking software over documentation; on customer col
laboration, not 
contract negotiation, and on response to change ove
r following a plan (
Agilemanifesto.org
).   
Based on these principles, Andy Chun (2004) develop
ed the Agile Teaching/Learning Methodology (ATLM) a
pproach that 
ﬁvalues students/teachers and their interactions ra
ther than a particular approach to teaching/learnin
g, working knowledge 
rather than rote-learning, communication rather tha
n negotiation, and responding to changes rather tha
n just following a 
scheduleﬂ.  ATLM is an iterative methodology that a
llows self-adaptive variations to be applied to ite
rations (Chun, 2004).  
These iterations involve the Teaching cycle and the
 Learning cycle.  The Teaching cycle includes lectu
ring the standard 
lecture, monitoring the student progress and the fe
edback received from students, and then adapting by
 making the needed 
adjustments to the lesson in terms of schedule, con
tent or coursework (Chun, 2004).  While the Teachin
g cycle reiterates, the 
Learning cycle runs in parallel (Chun, 2004).  The 
Learning cycle includes students practicing coursew
ork through 
assignments or activities, promoting independent st
udy to encourage lifelong learning, and then sharin
g their newly acquired 
knowledge (Chun, 2004).   
 Pieters 
 Agile Systems Analysis and Design Teaching and Lea
rning 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 3 
This approach agrees with the claim that ATL is abo
ut starting at the beginning and not the end by ﬁma
king use of what 
learners know already and building on thatﬂ (Berry,
 2012).  Berry (2012) suggests that the teacher sho
uld have immediate 
objectives that are immediately useful, instead of 
having a pre-planned sequence to a pre-determined d
estination.   
RESEARCH APPROACH 

This research is based on the analysis of qualitati
ve data collected from existing literature.  Qualit
ative data analysis is 
executed to determine if and how ATL can inform SAD
 T&L.  The researcher believes that subjective real
ities influence 
systems development and therefore SAD T&L.  There i
s no one right way to develop systems, but each sys
tem should rather 
be developed in its own changing context.  The agil
e approach addresses these challenges by accepting 
change and adapting 
and adjusting development as needed.  To apply a si
milar view to SAD T&L, the ATL approach is explored
 in terms of how 
it can address the challenges of SAD T&L.   

The subjective interpretations, views and realities
 found in existing literature, combined with the ex
perience of the researcher 
as an IS lecturer, are then used to propose a fresh
 approach to SAD T&L.  The research aims to contrib
ute to SAD T&L by 
providing qualitative data that could be used as a 
starting point for future qualitative and quantitat
ive studies.  On account of 
this research, the approach suggested is being test
ed by the researcher through practical application 
for further research.   
CONNECTING ATL WITH SAD TEACHING AND LEARNING 

In order to understand how to connect the dots betw
een SAD and ATL, the similarities or connecting att
ributes are identified.  
It is important to revisit the fact that both tradi
tional and agile methodologies form part of the SAD
 curriculum (Bajaj et al, 
2004).  While the agile methodology forms part of t
he SAD curriculum, it was also used to develop an A
TL approach (Chun, 
2004).  Starting with Figure 1, the research attemp
ts to determine if and how ATL can be applied to SA
D T&L.   
  Figure 1 merging the two concepts 
To explore what can happen in the area where the tw
o concepts overlap or merge, each concept is firstl
y reviewed with 
regards to the literature discussed in the previous
 sections of this article.   
SAD T&L Reviewed 

SAD forms an integral part of systems development (
Gorgone et al, 2002; Bajaj et al, 2004).  Students 
need to understand a 
problem and subsequently design a solution (Albayra
k, 2000).  To accomplish this, the students need th
orough SAD 
knowledge and skills, but also technical, business 
and management knowledge (Cybulski and Linden, 2000
).  Students do not 
necessarily have any systems development background
 (Suscheck and Huff, 2007).   
There are various techniques, structured and object
 oriented (Gorgone et al, 2002), that can be used t
o come up with an 
undefined answer, but there does not exist a define
d process to arrive at the best solution (Cybulski 
and Linden, 2000).  
Moreover, there is no single right answer or soluti
on.  It is therefore difficult to teach (Cybulski a
nd Linden, 2000) and to 
learn (Smit, 2012).  Students must be able to inter
nalise concepts and processes, and develop their ow
n thinking abilities.  
Students should be equipped with creative thinking 
skills, while outcome thinking, group process and c
ommunications are 
emphasised (Olfman and Bolstron, 1992).  SAD is app
lied in changing environments with changing require
ments.  SAD is 
therefore best learnt through application and exper
ience seeing that this is how practising systems an
alysts improve their 
skills (Suscheck and Huff, 2007). 

Common teaching methods currently used include case
 studies, simulations, real life examples, projects
, and teamwork 
(Cybulski and Linden, 2000).  However, the challeng
e with case studies is often that the students need
 in-depth 
understanding of the case or environment of applica
tion (Suscheck and Huff, 2007).  
 Pieters 
 Agile Systems Analysis and Design Teaching and Lea
rning 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 4 
ATL Reviewed 

ATL draws on the agile systems development methodol
ogy.  The ATL approach responds to what is happenin
g in, around 
and beyond the classroom (Berry, 2012).  It encoura
ges T&L that reacts to change by way of adaptation,
 rather than adhering 
to a predetermined plan (Berry, 2012). ATL encourag
es independent study with a view to lifelong learni
ng, and makes use of 
iterations with variations (Chun, 2004).  It propos
es using immediate objectives, rather than a pre-pl
anned sequence to a pre-
determined destination (Berry, 2012).  The value of
 feedback is emphasised, and opportunity is provide
d for students to share 
their newly acquired knowledge (Chun, 2004).  ATL a
djusts and adapts in response to feedback and resul
ts obtained from 
monitoring the students.  While it is important to 
provide students with frequent feedback, it is also
 important to create 
opportunities for receiving feedback from students 
(Chun, 2004). 
ATL values working knowledge and suggests that oppo
rtunities for students to practice coursework is im
portant.  It involves 
constantly monitoring the progress of smaller units
 of work and encourages learner-centred and flexibl
e teaching.  The focus 
should be on the teachers, learners, and their inte
ractions, rather than the teaching approach (Chun, 
2004).  ATL emphasises 
communication and collaboration, and proposes that 
students™ current knowledge can be used as a starti
ng point for T&L 
(Berry, 2012).  

Agile SAD Teaching and Learning 

This section attempts to understand how ATL can be 
conducive to SAD T&L.  The main connecting idea of 
the two concepts 
is the agile methodology that is taught as part of 
the SAD curriculum (Bajaj et al, 2004).  ATL draws 
on the advantages that 
the agile methodology holds for the education setti
ng (Davey and Parker, 2010).  This paper attempts t
o apply the attractive 
qualities of the agile methodology to the challenge
s of teaching and learning SAD.  
One of the challenges of SAD is the fact that knowl
edge from other fields is required (Cybulski and Li
nden, 2000) to 
understand a problem, in order to design a suitable
 solution (Albayrak, 2009).  ATL provides a possibl
e solution in that it 
encourages independent study to produce lifelong le
arners.  Independent study can be encouraged by pro
viding further 
reading and study opportunities to improve the stud
ents™ knowledge about SAD and other knowledge areas
.  The students 
should experience the benefits of their independent
 learning by applying it to a SAD case study. 
Various methodologies, agile and traditional (Bajaj
 et al, 2004), and techniques, structured as well a
s object oriented 
(Gorgone et al, 2002), can be used to perform SAD, 
which adds to the complexity of SAD T&L.  When both
 methodologies 
are taught, the comparative advantages must be expl
ained, as well as the fact that the two methodologi
es do not always 
contradict one another.  The same applies to teachi
ng both structured and object oriented techniques. 
 Using iterations with 
variations of ATL could possibly address this chall
enge.  The principle of iteration can also be used 
by applying the same 
methodology/technique repetitively to various probl
ems.  Likewise different methodologies/techniques c
an be applied to a 
similar case study through iterations to illustrate
 the comparative advantages.  ATL values working kn
owledge (Chun, 2004), 
which readily agrees with the fact that SAD is best
 learned through application and experience (Susche
ck & Huff, 2007).  
Using iterations with variation may provide more op
portunities for students to apply their newly acqui
red knowledge to 
various cases. 

ATL also encourages T&L that responds to changes an
d adapts when necessary (Chun, 2004; Berry, 2012). 
 This principle 
can be applied to SAD T&L by accepting the undefine
d process of SAD and responding to the different wa
ys students may 
apply the techniques/methodologies to arrive at var
ious solutions.  The marking of the solutions shoul
d then also be flexible 
and respond accordingly to different sets of studen
ts and their solutions. 
Accepting that there is not one ultimate solution c
omplicates SAD T&L.  ATL recommend using immediate 
objectives, 
rather than a pre-planned sequence of steps to reac
h a predetermined plan (Berry, 2012).  Instead of f
ocusing on the 
undefined destination/solution or how to reach it, 
more immediate objectives could be used to define t
he process (Berry, 
2012).  An immediate objective for SAD T&L could be
 to create a case study purely for the sake of appl
ying the new SAD 
technique/methodology, rather than creating great s
olutions.  Only when the student feels more confide
nt to apply the 
technique/methodology, create a case study to evalu
ate the actual solution.  Repeated application of a
 technique/methodology 
should eventually improve the students™ solutions. 

To increase the focus on communication (Olfman and 
Bolstron, 1992) rather than negotiation (Chun, 2004
), offer students 
the opportunity to share their solutions with the r
est of the class.  Not only does this afford them t
he chance to participate in 
the teaching of SAD, but it also exposes them to th
e different possible solutions.  SAD is not exact a
nd precise (Smit, 2012), 
but ATL lets students share their newly acquired kn
owledge (Chun, 2004).  Combined, this can potential
ly be a great way to 
confirm that there are various correct solutions to
 a problem while realising some benefits of peer in
struction.  It also 
provides an opportunity for monitoring student prog
ress, and providing and receiving feedback.   
 Pieters 
 Agile Systems Analysis and Design Teaching and Lea
rning 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 5 
Such sharing sessions could become crucial to SAD T
&L, as it is critical for students to understand wh
en to use which 
technique/methodology.  When the students share the
ir solutions, they can critique each other™s soluti
ons as well as evaluate 
their own solutions against the others presented.  
Through this kind of feedback students can learn ho
w other students have 
arrived at solutions, and they can share the challe
nges they have encountered.   
ATL focuses on the teachers, learners, and their in
teractions with each other, rather than the teachin
g approach (Chun, 2004).  
SAD students must learn to internalise concepts and
 processes (Suscheck and Huff, 2007).  Students' sh
aring solutions and 
their learning experiences are learner-centred acti
vities which encourage students to develop their ow
n creative thinking 
abilities, which is an important skill for analysts
 and designers (Olfman and Bolstron, 1992). 
The agile methodology accepts and reacts to changes
, and takes an ﬁinspect-and
-adaptﬂ approach (agilemethodology.org, 
2008).  SAD courses need to teach students to deal 
with changing systems requirements in changing envi
ronments.  ATL 
uses frequent monitoring of smaller work packages t
o establish how and when to change and adapt one™s 
teaching (Chun, 
2004).  Through monitoring smaller units of work an
d giving as well as receiving frequent feedback, SA
D teachers can 
determine the progress of their students, and direc
t or redirect their learning when necessary.  In th
is manner you create a 
learning environment where the teaching can change 
as required.  It provides the opportunity for stude
nts to become aware 
of, and accustomed and responsive to change.  For a
 more direct approach, one could also change the re
quirements of a case 
study, thereby forcing students to adjust or redesi
gn their solutions. 
Case studies and projects, combined with teamwork, 
are common approaches employed to teach SAD (Cybuls
ki and Linden, 
2000).  While the case studies and projects are use
d for students to apply and practice the techniques
 in SAD, the teamwork 
emphasises the importance of communication and coll
aboration, which are valued by ATL (Chun, 2004).  A
 challenge of 
using case studies in SAD T&L is that students usua
lly require an in-depth understanding of the case (
Suscheck and Huff, 
2007). ATL suggests that the students™ current know
ledge can be used as a starting point (Berry, 2012)
.  The students™ 
current knowledge could therefore be used to as a p
oint of departure for a lesson or case study.  When
 the case study is based 
on the students™ current knowledge, it at least par
tially attempts to address the challenge of the stu
dents not having an in-
depth knowledge of the case.   

From this discussion, one can construe that ATL can
 be conducive to the challenges of SAD T&L.  What r
emains though is 
to explain practically how this can be achieved. 

THE PROPOSED AGILE SAD TEACHING AND LEARNING APPROA
CH 
To further understand what the practical implicatio
ns are of adopting the ATL approach for SAD T&L, th
e research attempts 
to develop an agile SAD T&L approach.  This is done
 by refining the discussion in the previous section
 into practical T&L 
processes with activities.  The flow of the process
 is based on the ATLM developed by Chun (2004) with
 its iterative 
Teaching and Learning cycles. The process described
 below should similarly be reiterated with the nece
ssary variations. 
The approach starts off with establishing what stud
ents already know by asking about their demographic
s, previous 
education, work experience or systems development e
xperience and knowledge.  By using the students™ cu
rrent knowledge as 
a basis, create a lesson to explain new concepts of
 a SAD technique/methodology.  Provide the students
 with some additional 
reading about the technique/methodology or the appl
ication thereof, to encourage independent study.  F
ollow up with a class 
discussion or assessment to retrieve feedback from 
the students.  Use the feedback gathered to determi
ne if the students 
understand the new concepts of the technique/method
ology and how the reading aided their understanding
.  
To establish the new concepts, develop an exercise 
or opportunity for students to practice the newly a
cquired concepts of the 
technique.  Again use students™ current knowledge a
nd previous experience, but this time to set up a c
ase study.  The case 
study should follow on the lesson and the extra rea
ding.  If the students are involved in creating the
 case study, then they 
have at least some understanding of the case.  Keep
 in mind that you should set up the exercise to mee
t an immediate 
objective, and that this single exercise will not d
etermine whether your students can become good syst
em analysts and 
designers.  When the SAD technique/methodology is u
sed for the first time, then the objective of the c
ase study is to provide 
the students with an application exercise to test t
heir understanding of the technique/methodology.  O
nly when the 
technique/methodology has been applied before, can 
the objective of the case study be to evaluate the 
solutions. 
For the first application of a technique/methodolog
y, basic steps or guidelines for application can be
 provided, but not with 
too many specific details.  When the technique/meth
odology has been applied before, provide guidelines
 based on the 
feedback or results from the previous iteration.  T
he students should have some space to develop their
 own way of applying 
the technique/methodology to the case.  This will p
romote internalising the process and concepts of SA
D.   
 Pieters 
 Agile Systems Analysis and Design Teaching and Lea
rning 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 6 
These exercises can be done individually as long as
 it is followed up with a team effort.  This encour
ages collaboration and 
communication amongst the students and also facilit
ates some peer instruction.  The solutions to the c
ase study can then be 
shared in class.  Again this creates an opportunity
 for communication and interaction amongst the stud
ents and with the 
teacher.  The teacher should guide discussions and 
debates around the suggested solutions.  Through th
is the students will 
learn that there are various ways to analyse a prob
lem and to design a solution.  The discussions shou
ld focus on critically 
evaluating the application of the technique/methodo
logy or the solutions.  This depends on the objecti
ve of the case study.  
The discussion should be guided towards establishin
g an understanding of how one decides when a soluti
on can be 
considered good or not.  Provide an opportunity for
 students to reflect on their own work and adjust t
heir thinking 
accordingly, either by writing a lessons learned re
port, or having a discussion about the challenges t
hey incurred, and how 
they could have handled it differently.  Encourage 
creative thinking. 
To monitor the progress of the students in terms of
 their ability to evaluate how good a solution is, 
the students should be 
allowed to give feedback by for example voting for 
the best solution.  The teacher should then conside
r the progress of the 
students and change and adapt the teaching or learn
ing experience as deemed necessary. 
The essence of the T&L processes described is shown
 in the diagram below. 
 Figure 2: The Agile SAD T&L Approach 
  Pieters 
 Agile Systems Analysis and Design Teaching and Lea
rning 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 7 
The T&L processes happen simultaneously and are ins
eparable.  The whole process should be reiterated a
s many times as 
considered necessary, with variations.  Variations 
could include solving the same or a similar case wi
th a new 
technique/methodology or applying the same techniqu
e/methodology to more than one case study.  The req
uirements in the 
case study could also be changed during the process
 to teach students to adapt.  Another option is cha
nging the team 
members to encourage more interaction amongst stude
nts and increase exposure to different ways of thin
king and doing.  
Instead of voting, the students can mark each other
™s work, or the teacher can explain how the solutio
n is evaluated.  Of 
course any other variation a teacher deems necessar
y to improve the teaching or learning of SAD can be
 incorporated, since 
the approach is meant to be agile. 

CONCLUSION 

The agile SAD T&L proposed in this paper uses the a
ttractive qualities of ATL to provide possible solu
tions to the challenges 
of SAD T&L.  The approach suggests using iterations
 with variation to address the challenge of teachin
g various 
techniques/methodologies in a SAD course.  ATL focu
ses on people and their interactions, therefore agi
le SAD T&L 
proposes that the teaching should respond to the st
udents™ needs.  Frequent feedback sessions provide 
the opportunity for 
students to share their newly acquired knowledge an
d learn from each other.  Using independent study i
s recommended to 
address the challenge of students needing technical
, business and other knowledge.  Another suggestion
 is tapping into the 
students™ current knowledge to ensure they have som
e knowledge of the case studies used.  Instead of d
epending on 
predetermined steps to reach predetermined destinat
ions with predetermined lessons, ATL encourages fle
xible, adaptable 
teaching with immediate objectives, responding to t
he feedback of the students, and making necessary c
hanges.   
The basic principle of the agile SAD T&L approach i
s to be flexible and adaptable.  The approach shoul
d thus adjust to the 
T&L styles, and not the other way around.  Agile SA
D T&L does not expect teachers and students to adap
t to the new 
approach, but rather to apply the approach as it su
its them best. 
The suggested approach seems promising, but is pure
ly based on the literature reviewed, and has not be
en fully tested.  
Further research calls for testing the approach, re
iterating the approach with variations, monitoring 
the progress and adapting 
the approach as needed to confirm its legitimacy.  
This is currently done by the researcher as a SAD t
eacher within the typical 
time constraints of a course.  The researcher hopes
 to inspire other researchers to conduct further re
search in this area and 
thereby mature and contribute to agile SAD T&L. 

REFERENCES 

1.
 Albayrak, O. (2009) Solutions to Challenges of Teac
hing Systems Analysis and Design for Undergraduate 
Software 
Engineers, 
IGI Global
, pp. 68-69. 
2.
 Archer, C. B. (1985). A realistic approach to teach
ing systems analysis at the small or medium-sized c
ollege, ACM 
SIGCSE Bulletin, 
Proceedings of the sixteenth SIGCSE technical sympo
sium on Computer science education SIGCSE 
1985, 17, 1, 105-108. 
3.
 Bajaj, A., Batra, D., Hevner, A., Parsons, J., and 
Siau, K. (2004) Systems Analysis and Design: Should
 We Be 
Researching What We Teach? Communications of the 
AIS
. 
4.
 Berry, M. (2012) The case for agile pedagogy, The G
uardian, 
http://www.guardian.co.uk/teacher-network/teacher-
blog/2012/may/16/agile-pedagogy-computer-programmin
g-learning
, updated 16 May 2012, accessed January 2013. 
5.
 Chun, A.H.W. (2004) The Agile Teaching/Learning Met
hodology and its e-Learning Platform, 
Proceedings of the Third 
International Conference on Advances in Web-Based L
earning
, August 8 Œ 11, China, Beijing, 11-18. 
6.
 Cybulski, J.L. and Linden, T. (2000) Teaching Syste
ms Analysis and Design Using Multimedia and Pattern
s, 
Proceedings of the Thirteenth Conference on Softwar
e Engineering Education and Training
, IEEE Computer Society. 
7.
 Davey, B. and Parker, K.R. (2010) Technology in Edu
cation: An Agile Systems Approach, 
Proceedings of Informing 
Science and IT Education Conference
 (InSITE), 297-306.
 8.
 Ferreira, C. and Cohen, J. (2008) Agile systems dev
elopment and stakeholder satisfaction: a South Afri
can empirical 
study, 
Proceedings of the South African Institute of Compu
ter Scientists and Information Technologists Confer
ence on 
Riding the wave of Technology
, October 06 - 08, South Africa, Garden Route, 48-5
5.
 9.
 Gorgone, J.T., Davis, G.B., Vlacich, J.S., Topi, H.
, Feinstein, D.L., and Longenecker, H.E. Jr. (2002)
 IS 2002 Model 
Curriculum and Guidelines for Undergraduate Degree 
Programs in Information Systems, 
Association for Information 
Systems
, 11, 1, 1. 
 Pieters 
 Agile Systems Analysis and Design Teaching and Lea
rning 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 8 
10.
 Greenbaum, J. and Mathiassen, L. (1990) Zen and the
 Art of Teaching Systems Development, Computers and
 Society, 
ACM
, 20, 1,  523-533. 
11.
 Manifesto for Agile Software Development, 
http://Agilemanifesto.org
, accessed 14 February 2013. 
12.
 Olfman, L. and Bolstron, R.P. (1992) Innovative tea
ching materials and methods for systems analysis an
d design, 
ACM 
SIGMIS
 Database, 23, 2, 7-12. 
13.
 Rouse, M. (2007) ﬁAgile Software Developmentﬂ, 
http://searchsoftwarequality.techtarget.com/definit
ion/agile-software-
development
, Updated February 2007, accessed 14 February 2013.
 14.
 Smit, I. (2012) Innovative Teaching in Systems Anal
ysis and Design Œ an Action Research Project, World
 Academy of 
Science, 
Engineering and Technology
, 64. 
15.
 Spence, J. W., and Grout, J. C. (1978) Systems anal
ysis and design in a computer science curriculum, 
ACM SIGCSE 
Bulletin
, 10, 4, 24-27. 
16.
 Suscheck, C.A. and Huff, R.A. (2007) Teaching Syste
ms Analysis and Design Using the Process Game, 
Proceedings of 
the IRMA International Conference on Managing World
wide Operations & Communication with Information 
Technology
, May 19 Œ 23, Canada, Vancouver, 515-517. 
17.
 Understanding Agile Methodology (2008), 
http://agilemethodology.org
, accessed14 February 2013. 
18.
 Wallace, C. (2005) Teaching Information Systems Dev
elopment with SMS, 
Information Systems School, 
University of 
West England. 
19.
 Wood-Harper, A.T. and Fitzgerald, G. (1982) A Taxon
omy of Current Approaches to Systems Analysis, 
The Computer 
Journal
, 25, 1, 12-16. 
 