 Russo et al. 
 Agile Method Adoption and Use 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 1 
Exploring Adoption and Use of Agile Methods:   
A Comparative Case Study 
 Nancy L. Russo 
Northern Illinois University 
nrusso@niu.edu 
Siamak Shams 
Infoglow for Agile Transformation 
shams@infoglow.com 
 Guy Fitzgerald 
Loughborough University 
g.fitzgerald@lboro.ac.uk  
 
 ABSTRACT  

In this paper we describe the adoption of agile met
hods in two organizations. A participant observatio
n method was used to 
gather in-depth data on the introduction and initia
l use of agile methods at a bank and a global law f
irm.  An agile usage 
model, built on theories of innovation diffusion, i
nformation systems development, and agile methods, 
is used to explain 
post-adoption use of the agile methods in the two o
rganizations.  Both organizations had identified pr
oblems in meeting 
business needs with existing waterfall-type methods
, and the agile practices and tools introduced at t
he organizations were 
similar.  Yet the organizations achieved very diffe
rent results.  Compatibility, sociological factors,
 and top
 management 
support were associated with greater agile method u
se and more positive outcomes. 
 
Keywords   

Agile usage, method adoption, success factors. 

INTRODUCTION 

The traditional approach to information systems (or
 software) development has frequently been supersed
ed in organizations 
by what is termed the agile development approach. A
gile is an umbrella term for iterative and incremen
tal software 
development that seeks to deliver working software 
in relatively rapid timescales. Such approaches inc
lude methodologies, 
such as Extreme Programming (XP), Scrum, Crystal, D
ynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM), Lean Deve
lopment, 
and Feature-Driven Development (FDD).  Where tradit
ional IS development methods focused on documentati
on, planning, 
and control of the development process, agile devel
opment processes put the focus on the incremental d
elivery of working, 
tested software created through collaboration betwe
en stakeholders, with short iteration cycles. The a
doption of agile is often 
in response to the perceived failure of the traditi
onal approach, usually in relation to the quality o
f software developed using 
the traditional approach, its slow speed of deliver
y, its difficulty in handling changing circumstance
s and requirements, and 
its ineffective engagement of business stakeholders
. These issues coupled with today's increasingly fa
st moving and 
competitive business environment have encouraged ma
ny organizations to turn to agile approaches for th
eir software 
development needs.  

 
This paper reports on a study of two cases of agile
 adoption in organizations. These two cases relate 
to significantly different 
companies, with different backgrounds, cultures, an
d approaches and they exhibited significantly diffe
rent outcomes 
regarding their agile adoption, including its longe
r term sustainability. They were chosen for their d
istinctiveness, with the 
research objective of ascertaining whether, and wha
t aspects of agile methods, are dependent on organi
zational, cultural and 
historical factors of the organization, and whether
 success and sustainability of the agile approach a
lso exhibits such 
dependencies. A theoretical model, proposed by Sena
pathi and Srinivasan (2012), is used to analyze the
se cases. The model 
was chosen because of its basis in innovation theor
y and its encapsulation of social, organizational a
nd cultural factors as 
well as technical. The study is exploratory rather 
than confirmatory and intended to to help develop o
ur knowledge of agile 
adoption in the context of the organization
.  Russo et al. 
 Agile Method Adoption and Use 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 2 
BACKGROUND 

According to Dyba and Dingsoyr (2009) agile has had
 "a huge impact on how software is developed worldw
ide", and as a 
result is the focus of intense interest from both p
ractitioners and researchers. Early papers tended t
o focus on agile concepts 
and adoption issues (e.g. Cockburn and Highsmith, 2
001; Boehm, 2002; Highsmith, 2002; Boehm and Turner
, 2004; Beck 
and Andres 2005). Since then there have been a vari
ety of more focused studies, for example on agile i
n distributed 
environments (e.g. Ramesh, Cao, Mohan, and Xu, 2006
),  post-adoption issues (e.g. Cao, Mohan, Peng, an
d Ramesh, 2009, 
and Mangalaraj, Mahapatra, and Nerur, 2009), team c
haracteristics and dynamics (e.g. Paivarinta, Sein,
 and Peltola, 2010, 
Moe, Dingsoyr and Dyba, 2008; Lee and Xia, 2010), a
nd cultural issues (e.g. Chan and Thong, 2008; Misr
a, Kumar and 
Kumar, 2009; Cram, 2012). Whereas the literature id
entifies many benefits of the agile approach some a
lso recognize a 
number of drawbacks and limitations, including that
 it may not be suitable for all application areas a
nd contexts (e.g. Turk, 
France, and Rumpe, 2002).   

 
Dingsøyr, Nerur, Balijepally, and Moe
 (2012) identified a dearth of theoretically based c
ontributions and urge agile 
researchers to embrace a more theory-based approach
 to their research in the future. Lee and Xia (2010
) additionally 
conclude that there is relatively little empirical 
research on agility constructs such as the dimensio
ns, determinants, and their 
effects upon performance, and "as a result, there i
s a lack of understanding about how organizations c
an effectively 
implement an agile development approach". In the li
ght of these calls this research focuses on the the
oretical factors 
underpinning agile and their contribution to perfor
mance and adopts the Agile Usage Model, proposed by
 Senapathi and 
Srinivasan (2012), as its analytical framework. The
 model™s underlying concepts are derived from diffu
sion of innovation 
theory (Rogers, 2003), the Extreme Programming eval
uation framework (Williams, Layman, and Krebs, 2004
), and the wider 
research on information systems methods and impleme
ntation.  The Agile Usage Model proposes that facto
rs related to the 
agile method itself (innovation factors), character
istics of the teams that are expected to use the me
thod (sociological factors), 
the particular agile practices and tools (technolog
ical factors), and organizational factors will impa
ct the acceptance and use 
of agile methods.  The amount and intensity of use 
are expected to affect (and be affected by) observe
d improvements in the 
development process in terms of productivity, quali
ty, and customer satisfaction. Senapathi and Sriniv
asan (2012) 
acknowledge that the model does not include an exha
ustive set of factors that contribute to successful
 agile method use but 
nevertheless it attempts to provide a theoretically
 based approach to the study of use in different ag
ile contexts and thus has 
been adopted in this paper.   

 
The constructs and components of the Agile Usage Mo
del will be discussed in more detail in the followi
ng section together 
with the research model and approach utilized.  The
 case study organizations will then be described ac
cording to the model 
dimensions, followed by a discussion. Finally, conc
lusions and reflections on the study and some limit
ations will be discused. 
RESEARCH MODEL 

The Agile Usage Model (Senapathi and Srinivasan, 20
12), shown in Figure 1, asserts that certain factor
s (innovation, 
sociological, technical, and organizational) contri
bute to agile method use.  Relative advantage and c
ompatibility, from the 
diffusion of innovation model (Rogers, 2003), are u
sed to represent the innovation factors.  Relative 
advantage refers to the 
degree to which the adopted agile method is perceiv
ed as better than the development method used previ
ously. Compatability 
refers to the fit between the agile method and the 
existing context, including work practices, past ex
periences, and the 
expectations of the organization. When an agile met
hod is compatible with the organizational context a
nd development 
environment and is perceived to have an advantage o
ver the previous method, it is more likely to be us
ed. The sociological 
factors in the model include experience, technical 
competence, and attitude regarding the consequences
 of continuing to use 
the agile method and regarding innovation in genera
l. Both the particular agile practices in use and t
he availability of tools to 
support these practices are relevant to the success
ful adoption and use of agile methods.  The key rol
e of top management 
support in the successful implementation of informa
tion systems development methods is supported by th
e model, as well as 
the importance of method champions for adoption suc
cess (Conboy, Pikkarainen, and Wang, 2007). 
In this model the successful adoption of agile meth
ods is measured in terms of organizational assimila
tion and demonstrated 
by the degree of use.  The breadth, or horizontal u
sage, is measured by the number of projects or team
s using the method.  
The depth of usage refers to whether project teams 
are applying all of the defined practices that make
 up the method.  Agile 
effectiveness is defined by Senapathi and Srinivasa
n (2012) as ﬁany specific improvements in the overa
ll systems 
development process as a result of continued usage 
of agile practices as perceived by the organization
ﬂ (p. 1260). Successful 
organizational outcomes such as improved productivi
ty and quality of software development are expected
 to be positively 
correlated with use of the method.  In addition, su
ccessful outcomes are likely to lead to even higher
 levels of method use, 
 Russo et al. 
 Agile Method Adoption and Use 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 3 
either through application of the methods to more p
rojects or adoption of additional agile practices, 
represented by the bi-
directional arrow in the model.   

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1.  Agile Usage Research Model (Senapathi & 
Srinivasan, 2012) 
 
RESEARCH METHOD 

A case study-based research approach using particip
ant observation (Jorgensen, 1989) was chosen for th
is study. Various 
studies of software development, including agile me
thods, have adopted this approach (e.g. Moe, et al.
, 2008; Boden, Nett, 
and Wulf, 2007™ Sharp and Robinson, 2004). McAvoy a
nd Butler (2007) suggest that ﬁTo investigate the t
ypes of issues 
found in software development teams requires an app
roach where a team is examined in context and over 
an extended 
periodﬂ (p. 557). In this study one of the research
ers was a participant in the introduction of the ag
ile method and was able to 
observe the results of the changes introduced in tw
o organizations. The researcher was a leader, in bo
th cases, of a team in the 
introduction of agile and not only participated in 
team activities, meetings, formal and informal disc
ussions, etc. but also 
worked with people at all levels of the organizatio
n, including senior technical and business managers
. 
Data collection consisted of participant observer l
ogs, interviews with individuals in a variety of ro
les in the agile adoption 
process, review of organizational documentation, an
d data from secondary sources which reported on the
 agile adoption and 
use processes.  From this, detailed histories of th
e agile method selection, introduction, and use wer
e created.  For the 
purpose of this analysis, the detailed histories we
re examined by all three researchers in order to id
entify the relevant 
information related to each of the model constructs
.  Because the Agile Usage Model was not used as an
 
a priori
 framework 
in conducting the case studies, there were not nece
ssarily identical measures obtained from the two or
ganizations.  Based on 
the data available, however, some information regar
ding all of the factors in each organization was fo
und.   
Innovation factors 

 Relative Advantage 
 Compatibility 
Technological factors 

 Agile Practices 
 Tool Support 
Organizational factors 

     
Top Management Support
      
Methodology Champion 
Sociological factors 

     
Experience 
     Attitude 

     Technological Competence 

          Business domain 

          Technical domain 
Agile usage 

     
Horizontal Usage
      
Vertical Usage 
Agile effectiveness 

     
Productivity
      
Quality 
     Customer Satisfaction 
 Russo et al. 
 Agile Method Adoption and Use 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 4 
Our analysis of the two case studies is presented i
n the following section.  For each case study organ
ization a brief 
introduction is provided before discussing the inno
vation, sociological, technological, and organizati
onal factors, the use of 
agile methods, and the outcomes.   

ANALYSIS OF THE CASE STUDY ORGANIZATIONS 

The two case study organizations were selected for 
this analysis due to their different contexts and e
xperiences with the 
deployment of agile methods. Each organization™s ex
periences are described according to the framework 
provided by the 
Agile Usage Model that is illustrated in Figure 1. 
  
Case Study Organization #1:  Egg Bank 

Egg Bank, the UK™s first purely on-line bank, was i
nitially established in 1998 as the telephone-banki
ng service of Prudential 
Insurance.  The bank™s long term strategy was to be
come a market leader by offering a number of unique
 products and 
services.  In less than two years, the bank had man
aged to establish itself in the credit card and sav
ings market sectors by 
reacting to changes in market conditions and being 
responsive to customers™ requirements.  However, th
e success of the bank 
in meeting its primary goals was marred by a growin
g number of failed and late projects, in addition t
o increased competition 
from other well established banks which had begun t
o deliver competitive products and services. A gap 
between business and 
IT sectors was identified, and Egg IT practices, pa
rticularly lengthy cycles for software delivery, we
re deemed to be 
inhibitors to achieving business success. According
 to Richard Duvall, founder of Egg Bank, ﬁAgility i
s essential to survivalﬂ 
(Business Management, 2006).   The new agile develo
pment approach at Egg was first used on a project t
o facilitate 
promotions of new services to existing customers.  
Another early project was to modify the on-line cre
dit card application 
process to support the use of electronic signatures
.     
Innovation Factors: Relative Advantage and Compatib
ility 
During interviews with project and release managers
 it was suggested that prior to introduction of agi
le methods, the delivery 
of projects was more important than methodical appr
oaches to software development.  Many software proj
ects had been 
mothballed or abandoned, mainly as a result of diff
iculties with software production and support. Some
 of the reasons given 
for this were over- complicated architecture, lack 
of progress monitoring, lack of reuse, and growing 
operational distance 
between the software development and business teams
. One manager said: ﬁwe have not had one accurate e
stimate in 
producing software –.ﬂ Some software development and
 support managers also attributed the difficulty wi
th software 
provision to the lack of a cohesive approach and me
thod for software development and support. The fina
ncial losses that 
occurred due to problems with delivery and support 
of the software were reported by a senior manager t
o run into millions in 
the 3-year period. Furthermore, unlike most of Egg 
bank™s competitors who possessed multiple channels 
of interaction, 
online software products were Egg™s only interactio
n channel with its customers. 
The shortcomings associated with existing practices
 were described by Darren Martin, the then director
 of technology, as: 
ﬁWe had an old ‚waterfall™ style of development her
e, with requirements and specifications going throu
gh to technical design 
and development in a linear manner. It was a pretty
 long process, considering that we have a relativel
y small amount of 
people serving a significant number of customersﬂ (
Watson 2003).  Egg bank as a business was entirely 
reliant on IT, but in 
terms of their reaction to events, there remained a
 chasm between the business and IT approaches. The 
gap, which was 
behavioral as well as one of proximity, would have 
to be bridged by bringing the two sides closer to e
ach other.  Egg IT was 
made up of dispersed and specialized teams with str
ict protocols and ceremonies for communication and 
cooperation. These 
barriers would have to be removed to enable all sta
ff to operate as one team.   
Sociological Factors: Attitude, Experience, and Tec
hnological Competence 
According to Richard Duvall, founder, Egg bank had 
been practicing ﬁbusiness agilityﬂ since its beginn
ing, ﬁ–rapidly 
creating new products and services to meet the need
s of customers, and interacting with customers in w
ays that suit and 
adapts to themﬂ (Business Management, 2006).   

Egg bank executives decided to align IT with existi
ng business agility endeavors through the introduct
ion of agile software 
development for all new projects.  Egg initially de
cided to employ .NET technologies on low risk proje
cts due to their 
inexperience with new technologies and shortage of 
in-house skills on .NET and agile methods.  Egg™s I
T staff had unique 
experience with their ecommerce infrastructure, but
 limited experience with the agile approach. 
 Russo et al. 
 Agile Method Adoption and Use 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 5 
Technological Factors: Agile Practices and Tool Sup
port 
Agile Egg Framework (AEF) is a hybrid method based 
on XP, while combining many of the best practices f
rom methods 
such as Scrum, DSDM and others. At the heart of AEF
 were three phases; Pre-Project, Development Iterat
ion to Release, and 
Post-Project Activities.  Pre-Project Activities in
clude priority definition; high level solution, arc
hitecture, and risk 
definitions; user stories; business value assessmen
t; and release planning.  Development Iteration and
 Release Activities 
include the management and implementation of user s
tories brought forward from the previous phase, des
ign storming, test 
driven development, spikes, pair programming, re-fa
ctoring, stand-up meetings, collective code ownersh
ip, and 
retrospectives.  Post-Project Activities include tr
ansition to live activities and project retrospecti
ves.   
 Egg used what were at the time state of the art te
chnologies for internet development such as Microso
ft .NET and automated 
web application testing tools. Egg IT produced a pr
oduct named Story Studio to capture user stories an
d activities relating to 
the stories. Story Studio is also used as a reporti
ng and monitoring tool for product development iter
ations. Some of the other 
tools used by these projects include the following:
  NUnit to create test fixtures and write unit test
s, NDoc to create API 
documentation, CruiseControl.NET for Continuous Int
egration and build process reporting, FxCop to auto
mate the process of 
analyzing code for coding standards, Visual Source 
Safe for source control and open source Wiki for or
ganizing published 
documents and reports relating to projects.  Compar
ing the legacy development tools and platforms with
 the newly 
introduced tools, a frequent comment by Egg develop
ers was that the success of agile methods was heavi
ly dependent on 
these tools.  

Organizational Factors: Top Management Support and 
Method Champion  
Egg Bank™s business units and the highest levels of
 executives championed the introduction of agile me
thods to business, and 
subsequently, to IT functions.  The change program 
cost over £12m and encompassed all aspects of the c
ompany at all levels. 
The change program, which was led by the technology
 director, ranged from the refurbishment of a new b
uilding to the 
introduction of new software development methodolog
ies.  Members of Egg™s board of directors were dire
ctly involved in 
championing the move to agile, even to the point of
 relocating to be closer to the new building during
 the transition.  The 
Technology Director, CTO, and CIO championed the mo
ve to agile at the organizational level, while ever
y agile team was 
led by a team leader who received coaching and trai
ning.  An agile coach was available to teams for 6 
months.   
Usage: Horizontal and Vertical Use 

 ﬁThe initial project –
 was deliberately small-scale to test the technolog
y's capability, according to Ken Woghiren, head of 
architecture at Eggﬂ (Glick 2003).  Use grew from t
his project, to five projects, and ultimately all n
ew projects were agile.  
All aspects of AEF were adopted.  Therefore it can 
be said that use was both broad (across projects) a
nd deep (all defined 
agile practices used.) 

Impact: Productivity, Quality, and Customer Satisfa
ction 
In terms of the impact of the proposed change, the 
director of technology stated that: ﬁIf we kept on 
growing at the speed 
we've been growing before, we'd have to have a 500-
strong technology organization. Instead, we've kept
 the actual number to 
around 100 people, which means we can keep them ver
y focused and passionate, as well as keeping our de
velopment costs 
lowﬂ (Watson, 2003).  The introduction of agile met
hods had, according to Darren Martin, had a positiv
e impact on 
development cost, which had dropped by 13%, equival
ent to £3 million for the first year. 
Carol Moseley, the technical change manager at the 
bank, gave the example of increased productivity th
at resulted from the 
use of agile for the Egg Card site which had been b
uilt by three developers in just three months. This
 task would have taken 
many more months, had the legacy technologies been 
used. "It's noticeable that we're able to develop t
hings more quickly," 
she remarked (Glick, 2003).  The pilot team deliver
ed products with zero defect reports, attributed to
 higher level of attention 
to User Acceptance Testing and Unit Testing. 

Case Study Organization #2:  Global Law Firm 

Global Law Firm (GLF) came into being as a result o
f number of mergers and acquisitions which brought 
together law 
practices from UK, Germany and other parts of Europ
e, making GLF one of the largest law firms in the w
orld, providing 
legal advice to businesses and governments througho
ut Europe, the Middle East, Asia and the United Sta
tes.  Client data and 
case information were held predominantly in proprie
tary databases of commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) a
pplications.  COTS 
packages are were also used for billing and busines
s intelligence purposes.  GLF™s approach to softwar
e development had 
traditionally been to customize and extend the acqu
ired COTS products.  GLF faced an ever-growing numb
er of COTS 
applications, complexity of operations, and issues 
with data integrity. In 2004, GLF embarked on a pro
gram of unification of 
 Russo et al. 
 Agile Method Adoption and Use 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 6 
clients™ and case data storage and the production o
f an ﬁIntegration Platformﬂ application suite to in
tegrate and if necessary 
replace the multitude of COTS databases with a sing
le data repository and common access and distributi
on mechanisms. 
Two years after the initial sanctioning of this pro
ject, the team in charge of the delivery of the app
lication could not 
demonstrate sufficient progress, causing a change i
n key personnel. In March 2006, the researcher was 
employed to help 
select, introduce and implement agile methods for p
roduction of the Integration Platform suite of soft
ware. The researcher 
was tasked to salvage the work of the preceding two
 years and lay the foundations for future work. The
 project was also 
intended to spearhead agile methods for use in othe
r projects. 
Innovation Factors: Relative Advantage and Compatib
ility 
GLF faced ever escalating costs for the purchase an
d maintenance of existing COTS packages. Other prob
lems were the 
proliferation of data sources leading to an accumul
ation of inaccurate, redundant and contradictory da
ta, and the absence of a 
consistent approach for the provision of software s
olutions.  Each group followed their own unique app
roach to software 
provisioning defined as a variation of the Waterfal
l method.  A typical project life cycle included le
ngthy requirements 
gathering.  Key components of all applications had 
to be verified by product sponsors who met once a q
uarter.  Furthermore, 
the life cycle activities were conducted in isolati
on with little or no contact between stakeholders. 
  The lack of a systematic 
approach to software had become a bottleneck for th
e firm™s IT which prevented timely responses to cha
nging business 
needs.  An increasing number of software project fa
ilures to deliver appropriate solutions on time Œ i
ncluding the Integration 
Platform project which had not delivered a solution
 after two years Œ were seen as a justification for
 the introduction of 
software solutions in an iterative and incremental 
fashion.    
Sociological Factors:  Experience, Attitude, and Te
chnical Competence 
At the time the case study was conducted, all devel
opers and testers at GLF were on short-term contrac
ts.  GLF is located in 
London with access to a large pool of software deve
lopers skilled in the latest technologies.  Whereas
 the ability to hire in 
experience had its benefits, it also led to a lack 
of continuity, lack of domain knowledge, lack of ow
nership, risk avoidance 
by developers and a tendency to follow plans withou
t due consideration to consequences.   
While some managers believed that agile methods wou
ld provide a systematic approach to software develo
pment previously 
lacking in the organization, others indicated that 
the system already in place was adequate and change
 was only required to 
enable and ensure the more efficient use of availab
le resources.  
Technology Factors:  Agile Practices and Tool Suppo
rt 
The agile method introduced at GLF was based on Scr
um.  Practices included the provisioning of a const
ant stream of 
prioritized backlog of work, prioritization and gro
uping of backlogs into product releases, project co
ntrol artifacts, and XP 
processes for coding, testing and refactoring.   

It was concluded that appropriate tools were requir
ed to deliver agile practices at GLF.  The tools, s
ome of which were 
already in place, included Version for requirements
 capturing and prioritization, task specification, 
and monitoring progress, 
NUnit for all unit and integration testing tasks, N
Doc for document creation, Cruise Control continuou
s integration builds of 
the software,  FxCop to automate the process of ana
lyzing code for coding standards, Visual Source Saf
e for source control, 
and a Wiki for organizing the published project met
adata, documents and reports relating to projects a
nd development 
standards.  
 Organizational Factors:  Top Management Support and
 Method Champion 
Software development teams did not have executive l
evel representation within the firm.  The lack of i
nfluence and 
sponsorship of IT at the highest level was reflecte
d in the absence of a unified approach and overall 
vision for IT software 
development and provisioning.  Management™s support
 for agile was tacit at best.  Within the agile tea
m there were self-
educated ﬁenthusiastsﬂ who attended conferences and
 developer forums; however, the team leaders promot
ing agile had no 
experience deploying it.   

Agile Usage:  Horizontal and Vertical Use 

At GLF there was limited use of agile methods verti
cally and no horizontal spread of use beyond the fi
rst project. The 
management team decided not to adopt some of the ke
y agile practices such as a 40-hour working week, p
air programming, 
and test-driven development.  The agile method was 
used only for the Integration Platform Project, and
 was faced with 
challenges and obstacles from the start.  Only thre
e months into the project GLF™s management decided 
to remove the 
 Russo et al. 
 Agile Method Adoption and Use 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 7 
business analyst (the customer representative) and 
tester from the Integration Platform team on the gr
ounds of the excessive 
cost of maintaining the team as it was.  This proje
ct was the first and only agile project at GLF. 
Impact: Productivity, Quality, and Customer Satisfa
ction 
The new agile project, offered a much reduced cycle
 of software delivery time, each cycle including a 
portion of the overall 
analysis, design development, testing and release. 
Owing to the rapid delivery of the working software
, the users and 
sponsors of the product were able to reduce the par
ts of the requirements which were deemed irrelevant
.   
According to interviews with IT management and team
 members, the successful delivery of software itera
tions in 4-6 weeks 
(instead of cycle time of 18 months) on the Integra
tion Project was primarily due to the team composit
ion and its ability to 
resolve issues internally without calling on extern
al resources. 
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS 

The analysis of these two cases contributes to our 
understanding of agile adoption and sustainability 
in two distinct 
organizations. Both appeared to have strong incenti
ves for improving their approach to software develo
pment, with the 
limitations of their traditional approaches exposed
. The other main similarity was that both organizat
ions had an effective 
range of tools available to support their use of ag
ile methods, although GLF relatively less so.  Howe
ver, Egg Bank™s focus 
on business agility, innovation and strong top mana
gement support led to higher levels of adoption.  T
hese factors are 
classified as innovation (compatibility), sociologi
cal (attitude) and organizational (management suppo
rt) factors in the model. 
The high level of horizontal and vertical use of ag
ile practices resulted in positive outcomes in term
s of cost of developing 
software, productivity, quality, and customer satis
faction.  Whereas, at GLF, the full use of agile pr
actices was not sustained 
over the course of the Integration Platform project
 at least partly due to a lack of senior business m
anagement support and 
understanding, together with a number of organizati
onal cultural factors. Another area of difference w
as the absence of 
methodology champions in GLF, whereas their presenc
e in Egg Bank was seen to be significant.  
Of course broad generalizations cannot be made, but
 a second contribution is that the analysis confirm
s the utility of the 
Agile Usage Model (Senapathi and Srinivasan, 2012) 
and the importance of the social and organizational
 (often called 
cultural) factors as highly relevant to agile metho
d adoption and use.  Further, in reflecting upon th
e Agile Usage Model, 
whilst it proved useful and provided insights, ther
e were some factors identified in the case studies 
that it did not highlight, 
such as the relationship between usage and effectiv
eness. Further, it did not specifically draw out th
e role of decision making 
practices in the organizations, the management styl
e, including recognition and reward structures, hie
rarchy and bureaucracy, 
organization size, and overall enterprise governanc
e. Also, in comparing the factors with others highl
ighted in the literature, 
there is an absence of consideration of team autono
my and dynamics, and distributed teams. Thus, altho
ugh the model has 
demonstrated some utility, there are a number of ad
ditional factors that are likely to be of importanc
e and future research will 
attempt to enhance the model and the analysis. 
  
REFERENCES 

 1.
 Beck, K., & Andres, C. (2005). 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change.
 Boston, MA: Addison-Welsey. 
2.
 Boden, A., Nett, B., & Wulf, V. (2007). Coordinatio
n practices in distributed software development of 
small 
enterprises. 
Second IEEE International Conference on Global Soft
ware Engineering 2007
. IEEE, 235-246. 
3.
 Boehm, B. (2002). Get ready for agile methods with 
care. 
IEEE Computer, 
35, 64-69. 
4.
 Boehm, B., & Turner, R. (2004). 
Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide to the Pe
rplexed.
 Boston, MA: 
Addison-Wesley. 
5.
 Business Management. (2006). Creating an agile busi
ness [Accessed online]. 
http://www.busmanagement.com/pastissue/article.asp?
art=26108&issue=156.  
6.
 Cao, L., Mohan, K., Peng, X., & Ramesh, B. (2009). 
A framework for adapting agile development methodol
ogies. 
European Journal of Information Systems
, 18, 4, 332-343. 
7.
 Chan, F., & Thong, J. (2009). Acceptance of agile m
ethodologies: A critical review and conceptual fram
ework. 
Decision Support Systems
 , 
46, 803-814. 
8.
 Cockburn, A. and Highsmith, J. (2001) Agile Softwar
e Development: The People Factor. 
Computer, 
34, 11, 131-
133.  
 Russo et al. 
 Agile Method Adoption and Use 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 8 
9.
 Conboy, K., Pikkarainen, M., & Wang, X. (2007). Agi
le practices in use form an innovation assimilation
 
perspective: A multiple case study. 
Twenty-eighth International Conference on Informati
on Systems.
 Montreal. 
10.
 Cram, W. A. (2012). Aligning organizational values 
in systems development projects. 
Management Research 
Review
 , 
35, 8, 709-726. 
11.
 Dingsoyr, T., Nerur, S., Balijepally, V., & Moe, N.
B. (2012). A decade of agile methodologies: Towards
 explaining 
agile software development.  
The Journal of Systems and Software
, 85, 1213-1221. 
12.
 Dyba, T., & Dingsoyr, T. (2009). What do we know ab
out agile software development? 
Software
 , 
26, 5, 6-9. 
13.
 Glick, B. (2003, February 20). Microsoft cracks Egg
. 
Computing.co.uk
 . 
14.
 Highsmith, J. (2002). 
Agile Software Development Ecosystems.
 Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley Professional. 
15.
 Jorgensen, D. L. (1989). 
Participant Observation: A Methodology for Human St
udies.
 Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications. 
16.
 Lee, G., & Xia, W. (2010). Toward agile: An integra
ted analysis of quantiative and qualitative field d
ata on software 
development agility. 
MIS Quarterly
 , 
34, 1, 87-114. 
17.
 Mangalaraj, G., Mahapatra, R., & Nerur, S. (2009). 
Acceptance of software process innovations -- the c
ase of 
Extreme Programming. 
Empirical Software Engineering
 , 
18, 344-354. 
18.
 McAvoy, J., & Butler, T. (2007).  The impact of the
 Abilene Paradox on double-loop learning in an agil
e team.  
Information and Software Technology
, 49, 552Œ563. 
19.
 Misra, S., Kumar, V., & Kumar, U. (2009). Indentify
ing some important success factors in adopting agil
e software 
development practices. 
The Journal of Systems and Software
 , 
82, 1869-1890. 
20.
 Moe, N., Dingsoyr, T., & Dyba, T. (2008). Undertand
ing self-organizing teams in agile development. 
ASWEC 2008, 
19th Australian Conference on Software Engineering
. IEEE, 76-85. 
21.
 Paivarinta, T., Sein, M.K., & Peltola, T. (2010). F
rom ideals towards practice: paradigmatic mismatche
s and drifts in 
method deployment.  
Information Systems Journal,
 20, 481Œ516.  
22.
 Ramesh, B., Cao, L., Mohan, K., & Xu, P. (2006). Ca
n distributed software development be agile? 
Communications 
of the ACM
 , 
49, 10, 41-46. 
23.
 Rogers, E. M. (2003). 
Diffusion of Innovations
 (5th ed.). New York: Free Press. 
24.
 Senapathi, M., & Srinivasan, A. (2012). Understandi
ng post-adoptive agile usage: An exploratory cross-
case 
analysis. 
The Journal of Systems and Software, 85
, 1255-1268. 
25.
 Sharp, H., & Robinson, H. (2004). An ethnographic s
tudy of XP practice. 
Empirical Software Engineering
 , 
9, 4, 
353-375. 
26.
 Turk, D., France, R., & Rumpe, B. (2002). Limitatio
ns of agile software proceses. 
Third International Conference 
on eXtreme Programming and Agile Processes in Softw
are Engineering (XP 2002)
.  
27.
 Watson, J. (2003, November 12). Egg shells out £12m
 in development restyle. 
Computing
 . 
28.
 Williams, L., Layman, L., & Krebs, W. (2004). 
Extreme Programming Evaluation Framework for Object
-Oriented 
Languages Version 1.4
. NCSU Technical Report. 
