 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)University of GroningenUniversidad de ChileUniversidad de ChileAMCIS 2010 Proceedings. Seo et al. 
 IS in Organizational Agility 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru, August 12-15, 201
0. 1 
Role of Information Systems in Organizational Agilit
y: The 
case of eClasSkeduler at Universidad de Chile 
 DongBack Seo 
University of Groningen 
d.seo@rug.nl 
Jaime Miranda 
Universidad de Chile 
jmirandap@fen.uchile.cl 
 Ariel La Paz 
Universidad de Chile 
lapaz@fen.uchile.cl 
   ABSTRACT 

Organizations need to exhibit characteristics of ag
ility in order to stay ahead of their competitors, 
and to even survive in 
dynamic environments. One major concern for organiz
ations is how to develop and implement Information 
Systems (IS) for 
their agility. However, IS are mostly regarded as a
 black-box related to organizational functions and 
structures. For this 
reason, organizations tend to overly spend their re
sources to change whole IS instead of one component
 that causes problems, 
or even making a good diagnosis. In this paper, we 
provide a way to open the IS black-box with a case 
study. The case is 
about how the department of Management Control and 
Information Systems at Universidad de Chile improve
s its 
organizational agility with a course scheduling sys
tem, eClasSkeduler. The case analysis illustrates n
ot only how the 
organization improves its agility through eClasSked
uler but also how this information system is relate
d to organizational 
functions in agility. 

Keywords 

Organizational agility, IS black-box, effect of IS 
in organizational agility, and agility framework. 
INTRODUCTION 

Organizations are made up of resources (assets) and
 processes (capabilities) (Leonard-Barton, 1992; Te
ece, Pisano and 
Shuen, 1997) that need to be adjusted endlessly and
 as fast as possible to survive in hyper-competitiv
e environments 
(Volberda, 1996). The challenge is to have the righ
t resources and processes dynamically tuned for pre
sent and future market 
conditions (Tushman and O™Reilly-III, 1996, 1997). 
Having the right resources for competition is a nec
essary condition, but 
insufficient by itself for organizational success i
n terms of surviving in dynamic environments (Reich
, Konda, Subrahmanian, 
Cunningham, Dutoit, Patrick, Thomas, Westerberg and
 Grup, 1999). Moreover, organizations not only need
 to be agile in 
acquiring and keeping their resources up-to-date, b
ut also have nimble operating structures and proces
ses that allow them to 
react to changes. An organization must be effective
 and efficient to adapt in a timely manner, with sp
eed and vigor, especially 
when faced with rapid and unexpected changes. The a
bilities to anticipate change, to marshal resources
, and to react 
successfully to the unanticipated are how an agile 
organization will differentiate itself in the marke
tplace and build up 
competitive advantages (Ashrafi, Xu, Sathasivan, Ku
ilboer, Heimann and Waage, 2005).  
Information Systems (IS) have been identified as an
 important factor that shapes organizational abilit
ies, including agility, by 
speeding up the communications and especially proce
ssing and analyzing data (Boudreau and Robey, 1996;
 Robey, Ross and 
Boudreau, 2002). Orlikowski and Iacono (2001) empha
size that Information Systems (IS) have been treate
d as a black-box 
affecting organizational form and capability. IS Bl
ack-box means that IS are assumed as ﬁa stable, set
tled artifact that can be 
passed from hand to hand and used as is, by anyone,
 anytime, and anywhereﬂ without observing what or h
ow each element is 
used for (Orlikowski and Iacono, 2001), which is si
gnificant to analyze and explain how IS can enable 
or disable 
organizational capabilities.  

We see IS as one of the pillars supporting the orga
nization and generating competitive advantages, ins
tead of an independent 
and reactive object. As a human-being has many tang
ible and intangible components such as nervous, dig
estive and 
 Seo et al. 
 IS in Organizational Agility 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru, August 12-15, 201
0. 2 
circulatory systems, memory, and intelligence, an o
rganization consists of many elements that depend o
n the performance of 
each other, and on the capabilities that arrange th
e elements; IS are one element that affects tangibl
e and intangible parts of 
the organization (Latour, 1987). As one unhealthy o
rgan affects the overall performance of a person, i
nappropriate IS impact 
the overall organization. For this reason, we take 
a holistic view to study IS to analyze organization
al agility. 
Continuing with the analogy of the human being, a p
hysician can diagnose a patient by listening to sym
ptoms, examining the 
patient, analyzing samples, and using his/her knowl
edge to discover the exact organ that causes a prob
lem. If we took IS as a 
black-box, the diagnosis for a rigid organization m
ight be such as ﬁyou have a problem with ISﬂ, but i
f we consider the 
components of IS, and evaluate the impact of each c
omponent on the overall agility, we may be able to 
provide more precise 
diagnosis. 

In financial and operational perspectives, it costs
 a lot to change the whole IS whenever there is a p
roblem. As a major 
surgery is not necessary for all illnesses, the rep
lacement of whole IS is not necessary for all probl
ems. If an organization can 
open up IS black-box and diagnose an exact problem,
 agility can be improved with minimum effort, cost,
 and risk 
(Verstraete, 2004). Organizations can use this conc
ept not only for problem solving, but also for prev
ention. Beyond 
embracing changes, agility is about aggressively cr
eating changes Œ creating new markets, new business
 processes, and new 
organization structures (Goldman and Nagel, 1995). 
As Truex, Baskerville and Kelin (1999) point out th
at the continuous 
improvement of IS is significant for organizational
 capability, organizations should examine their IS 
continuously to find 
weaknesses and improve organizational agility. Then
, the question is how to open up the IS black-box i
n the context of 
organizational agility?  

This paper provides a way to open up the IS black-b
ox to enhance organizational agility through analyz
ing how the 
Department of Management Control and Information Sy
stems (DMCIS) at Universidad de Chile developed and
 implemented 
eClasSkeduler, a course scheduling application (Mir
anda, 2010). First, we adopt the several components
 of the organizational 
agility framework proposed by Seo and La Paz (2008)
. Second, we will apply this framework to analyze t
he case and to 
illustrate how DMCIS improves its organizational ag
ility. Our analysis will explain how the software i
mpacted each 
component that influences the overall organizationa
l agility. Organizations can use the framework to d
iagnose their 
organizational agility problems and to predict how 
the implementation of a system like eClasSkeduler c
an help in their 
agility. 

THEORETICAL BACKGROUND 

Before diving into the case analysis, we will defin
e organizational agility and identify how informati
on systems are related to
 organizational agility. Researchers have defined or
ganizational agility as below: 
-Amos (1998) defines agility as ﬁthe nimbleness of 
a company to quickly assemble its technology, emplo
yee, and
 management via a communication and information infr
astructure in a deliberate, effective, and coordina
ted response to
 changing customer demands in a market environment o
f continuous and unanticipated changeﬂ in the manuf
acturing 
context. 

-Meyer (2001) stresses that organization should ﬁma
ke decisions fast, change direction nimbly, and fig
ure out when to 
enter and exit markets.ﬂ 

-Ashrafi et al. (2005) mention, ﬁoperational agilit
y is a catalyst to enforce quality, cost effectiven
ess, and delivery, 
thereby meeting organizational objectives.ﬂ 
Haeckel™s adaptive enterprise framework (Haeckel, 1
995, 1999) brings an interesting point, even though
 he does not say 
‚agility™ explicitly. He emphasizes the Sense-Inter
pret-Decide-Act (SIDA) model rather than make-and-s
ell model for 
organizations to be an adaptive enterprise in dynam
ic environments. The SIDA model based on John Boyd™
s Observe-Orient- 
Decide-Act (OODA) model provides a way to analyze o
rganizational behaviors to be agile through underst
anding their 
capabilities and resources from sensing the surroun
dings to interpret and decides to act.  
The field that lethally requires agility is a warzo
ne as John Boyd studied for the U.S. air force. Acc
ording to him, a pilot
 should observe her/his surroundings, orient in a ri
ght direction, and decide accordingly to act quickl
y. This process is 
cyclical. Once s(he) makes a mistake in one part or
 delays this process, (s)he possibly confronts an i
rrevocable situation. 
Extending this idea for Information Systems (IS) re
lated to organizational agility, and considering th
e definitions of agility
 provided in the literature, we think that major way
s of IS to help organizations in achieving agility 
are: 1) to perceive 
surroundings through collecting data, 2) to
 process the data into information or knowledge so t
hat they can be used for 
organizations, and 3) to respond properly. In
 addition, IS should assist organizations 4) to (re)
align their resources in a timely 
manner if necessary. To operate this process
 cyclically and continuously, organizations need fun
damental capability 
 Seo et al. 
 IS in Organizational Agility 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru, August 12-15, 201
0. 3 
including learning to support four above activities
 (Seo and La Paz, 2008). Using these components of I
S as a starting point 
to assess agility, we will analyze the impact of
 eClasSkeduler in the organizational agility of Exec
utive Education Unit 
(EEU). 

The first four components are operational parts for
 organizational agility (Seo and La Paz, 2008). It 
means that organizations 
daily use these components to operate their busines
s. As Haeckel (1995, 1999) emphasize, the process f
rom perception to 
responsiveness supported by aligning component is c
yclically continuous. However, for successful estab
lishment of 
organizational agility, a fundamental capability in
cluding learning has been added to the framework, b
ecause organizations 
have different abilities to run their business proc
esses, and they permanently learn while performing 
the four operational 
components. It is important to recognize that 1) pe
rception, 2) processing, and 3) response are execut
ed sequentially, while 4) 
(re)alignment can influence all of three components
. These four operational components go through orga
nizational 
fundamental capability including learning before it
 feeds back to them. Although the fundamental compo
nent (including 
learning) is not directly involved in the daily ope
ration, it is a necessary condition for organizatio
ns to be agile.  
With the described framework for organizational agi
lity, we assess and analyze the case of a course sc
heduling system, the 
eClasSkeduler in the DMCIS at Universidad de Chile.
 We will explain how the eClasSkeduler system direc
tly impacts the 
agility of daily operations in the Executive Educat
ion Unit, and indirectly influences others such as 
financial costs and 
university reputations. By applying the framework t
o the case, and being open to find new components a
nd key factors of 
agility, we will provide a way to open up the IS bl
ack-box. 
METHOD 

The method adopted for this research is the mixture
 of case study with a still ongoing action research
. This study is not 
confirmatory, but inductively corroborates the feas
ibility of the framework that provides a way to ope
n the IS black-box 
through a case analysis. A case study is an in-dept
h and longitudinal investigation of an event (Yin, 
1994). To understand 
how the existing manual course scheduling system (F
oulds and Jonhson, 2000; Hinkin and Thompson, 2002)
 became a 
barrier for the organization to be agile, a longitu
dinal observation with an in-depth analysis is nece
ssary. Action research goes 
beyond the analysis of observation. It is an interv
entional process to solve a problem (Azhar, Ahmad a
nd Sein, 2010). In this 
research, the authors were actively involved in the
 organizational problem of being rigid, partly by t
he use of a manual 
scheduling system. Through this involvement, the au
thors are able not only to observe the existing and
 changing systems and 
interact with users and administrative staff, but a
lso to control the project to analyze how newly dev
eloped eClasSkeduler is 
actually related to organizational agility.  

CASE ANALYSIS   

Management Control and Information Systems was foun
ded in 1991 as one of departments in the Faculty of
 Business and 
Economics at Universidad de Chile. This is a public
 university, the oldest (founded in 1842), and one 
of the most prestigious 
in the country. The university™s operations are fin
anced by the state in about 14% and each faculty is
 responsible to finance 
the remaining 86% through first- and second-mission
 activities (research and teaching). However, these
 traditional activities 
may not suffice. Additional incomes can be generate
d by third-mission activities (executive education,
 consulting, sponsored 
research, and services for private and public insti
tutions) and this stream of incomes allows the depa
rtments to subsidize 
teaching and research and provide an opportunity to
 contact practitioners.  
Until 2002, the DMCIS obtained funds from the Facul
ty of Business and Economics about M$180, and neede
d to raise 
M$120 by itself to cover its operational expenses. 
In the period between 2003 and 2008, the DMCIS had 
increased the funds 
twenty five times along with the increase of studen
t enrollments from 200 to 2,700 every year in the E
xecutive Education 
programs.  

The principal mission of the EEU is to develop teac
hing materials related to economics, information te
chnologies, business, 
and management control and educate managers and pro
fessionals from industry, government, and commerce 
in Chile. Those 
managers and professionals were eager to find this 
kind of educational opportunities in Chile, because
 not many of the 
prestigious universities and educational institutes
 used to offer this type of programs. By offering a
 wide array of executive 
programs, DMCIS started to contribute to transfer k
nowledge to the community, and particularly, to pro
fessionals, executives 
and companies that are interested in the developmen
t and update of their employees™ skills.  
EEU has become an important unit for DMCIS for two 
principal reasons. The first is that it generates a
 large amount of 
financial resources, representing about 70% of the 
total income of DMCIS to finance a variety of basic
 and applied research 
projects including creating new research centers an
d subsidizing graduate research assistant to study 
abroad. The second is 
that it provides opportunities for researchers and 
students to build a significant network with indust
ry, which is a valuable 
asset for potential applied research and the visibi
lity of DMCIS in terms of its research and educatio
n activities. In addition, 
 Seo et al. 
 IS in Organizational Agility 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru, August 12-15, 201
0. 4 
with the resources, DMCIS has been able to build ne
w computer labs, acquire specialized software appli
cations, and cover 
other operational expenditures such as books purcha
se, subscriptions of scientific journals, and trave
l costs for researchers to 
attend international conferences.  

Every year, EEU offers more than 50 courses. The nu
mber of students and courses has increased signific
antly since 2003 (see 
Figure 1). This sudden environmental change increas
ed the pressure on DMCIS to organize the schedule b
etter in terms of 
the efficient use of facilities and the effective a
llocation of instructors, because a person manually
 planned the scheduling. 
This manual system eventually made Universidad de C
hile a rigid organization in managing information, 
resources, and 
facilities for the EEU programs. 
Years
200320042005200620072008
0100
500
1000
1500
2000
Number of courses
Number of enrollments
 Figure 1: Annual growth in enrollments and number o
f courses. 
 
It is important to mention that EEU has offered ﬁcl
osedﬂ courses for companies since 2005. The ﬁclosed
ﬂ courses are 
exclusive programs designed and customized for part
icular organizations upon their requests. Offering 
closed courses has 
brought great opportunities for DMCIS not only to g
enerate financial resources but also to strengthen 
ties with the major 
industries in Chile. Through the first hand interac
tions with practitioners in classes, the department
 also gains knowledge 
about the market needs that can be used for the uni
versity to develop curricula and research plans mor
e pragmatic. 
Companies can require these closed courses anytime,
 which affect the initial schedule of the given aca
demic year and forces 
DMCIS to reschedule facilities and instructors seve
ral times during a year according to incoming reque
sts. Table 1 shows the 
number of closed courses with the number of enrolle
d students from year 2005 to 2008. 
 
 Year 
Number of closed courses 
Number of students 
2008 
25 
600 
2007 
15 
280 
2006 
17 
250 
2005 
2 
50 
 Table 1: Number of closed courses and enrolled stud
ents between 2005 and 2008 
 Seo et al. 
 IS in Organizational Agility 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru, August 12-15, 201
0. 5 
LOSING ORGANIZATIONAL AGILITY DUE TO THE ENVIRONMEN
TAL CHANGE 
Until the early 2000s, there were small number of c
ourses and students in executive education programs
, so the manual 
scheduling of instructors and facilities worked pro
perly. However, as the programs prospered so quickl
y, DMCIS faced a 
complex and challenging situation triggered by seve
ral complaints from students and instructors about 
inefficient service 
since 2008. They perceived the service quality extr
emely low, because of the frequent changes and prob
lems related to the 
scheduling and timetabling of ongoing courses and c
lassrooms. Common problems reported were assigning 
a classroom with 
smaller capacity than the actual number of students
 or too large and expensive classrooms for courses 
with small number of 
students, assigning an instructor for two courses a
t the same time, changing classrooms frequently wit
hout proper notices, 
and assigning computer labs to wrong classes. Those
 problems were not systematically detected or fores
een. The ad-hoc 
solutions for the problems were either unfeasible o
r extremely expensive. For example, to solve the co
nflict of two courses 
assigned to the same classroom at the same time, DM
CIS had to re-schedule one course, implying that DM
CIS must 
compensate students who could not attend the re-sch
eduled class. Another solution was leasing a classr
oom outside the 
university facilities such as conference rooms in n
earby hotels. In this case, DMCIS was changing the 
location of a classroom 
without re-scheduling time, incurring in costs as h
igh as 200% of the usual fare. In addition, leasing
 external classrooms 
caused other situations to be solved. First, there 
was an issue with logistics and transportation to m
ove instructors and 
students to the new location. Second, if the course
 required a computer lab, the external classroom ha
d to meet the course 
requirements, and therefore, EEU had to install lic
enses and software applications. These were all ext
ra costs for DMCIS. 
Beyond financial cost, the worst damage for the uni
versity was that this situation deteriorated the or
ganizational image as an 
extremely rigid organization that could not cope wi
th this simple environmental change (the increase o
f enrollment and 
number of courses) caused by its successful develop
ment and implementation of executive education prog
rams.  
In order to face these problems, DMCIS realized tha
t it had to be agile to deal with the situation. Fi
rst, DMCIS assessed its 
organizational agility with the proposed framework.
 In the last quarter of 2008, DMCIS assessed the EE
U business unit in the 
five areas of agility, namely, perception, processi
ng, responding, (re)aligning, and fundamental capab
ility (including 
learning) and concluded as below. 

 
1. 
Perception:
 A person in the EEU business unit manually collect
ed data about number of courses to be offered, numb
er of 
students for each course, time slots and instructor
s availability through e-mail, phone calls, and int
ernal memorandums. Such 
procedure took on average one week, was unstructure
d and caused data inconsistencies. 
2. 
Processing:
 The same person who collected, processed all the d
ata for scheduling courses. This person built and u
sed a 
large matrix to describe courses in size, time slot
s, and availability of instructors and facilities. 
The resulting match usually 
maximized the feasibility of logistics, which is, h
aving a classroom available for each course to be o
ffered. However, the 
objectives of cost minimization or the avoidance of
 using classrooms outside the faculty facilities we
re not included at all. If 
a problem (e.g. assigning the same classroom for tw
o courses at the same time) was detected or a chang
e was required, the 
matrix had to be adjusted with new data. This proce
dure took about seven to ten days; and this action 
was repeated every 
time at change was required.  

3. 
Responding:
 The responding function presented several difficul
ties due to the manual processing. The major proble
m was 
matching among time slots, classrooms, the number o
f enrolled students, and instructors. To respond th
is problem, DMCIS 
leased conference rooms from nearby hotels with hig
her financial costs that brought other issues about
 transporting students 
and instructors. This type of response was ad-hoc a
nd pressured to improve on its (re)aligning capabil
ity. 
4. 
(Re)aligning:
 Due to the fact that DMCIS responded the issues in
 ad-hoc manner, the re-alignment of resources resul
ted 
ad-hoc as well with a short term vision. The repeti
tion of these situations (e.g. the cancellation of 
a class and the unmatched 
capacities between a classroom and the number of en
rolled students) would keep requiring the inefficie
nt (re)aligning of 
organizational resources. 

This kind of operational routines did not help DMCI
S to develop its fundamental capability to build or
ganizational agility 
either. The history of solving problems (learning) 
had resided in the person producing the scheduling 
matrix. However, the 
experience was not systematically accumulated, neit
her analyzed by the person, because this person was
 also responsible for 
many other tasks during the entire academic year. C
onsequently, DMCIS as an organization did not have 
any agility 
capability to cope with the changing environment in
 terms of scheduling courses. In fact, it did not s
trategically plan and 
optimize the use of facilities that could generate 
the competency to provide a great quality service i
n coordination of courses 
with minimal costs. 

After the assessment, DMCIS recognized that it did 
not have enough capabilities for all components in 
the dynamic 
environment, particularly, responding to changes in
 the number of students enrollment (e.g. the alloca
tions of classrooms, 
instructors, etc.). It would be great if DMCIS coul
d gain capabilities in all components at once, so D
MCIS evaluated the 
 Seo et al. 
 IS in Organizational Agility 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru, August 12-15, 201
0. 6 
possibility to purchase software applications to ha
ndle the data and react accordingly, however, there
 was no software 
application found to solve the particular business 
problem that executive education had at a reasonabl
e price. Therefore, 
DMCIS decided to develop its own information system
s to handle the situation. To gain its organization
al agility, it 
researched and defined necessary operational steps.
 In defining operational steps, DMCIS prioritized t
he processing 
component as the first part it should gain capabili
ty, because the processing component directly impac
ted the allocation of 
classrooms and instructors. Although better percept
ion tended to lead an enhancement in processing, it
 was more urgent for 
DMCIS to improve its processing capability even wit
h the given perception so that it could respond qui
ckly and properly to 
frequent changing needs. Thus, it started to develo
p and implement an automated computational system, 
eClasSkeduler, to 
gain more effective and efficient processing and re
sponding capabilities in scheduling courses. 
GAINING ORGANIZATIONAL AGILITY WITH ECLASSKEDULER 

The eClasSkeduler system is a decision support syst
em based on mathematical models and has four module
s that follow the 
classification provided by Liang, Lee and Turban (2
008). This implies that eClasSkeduler tries to find
 an optimal solution 
within a series of constraints and objectives. Ther
efore, eClasSkeduler allows optimization in schedul
ing according to the 
constraints (e.g. numbers of classrooms, instructor
s, courses, enrolled students, etc.) and the most r
elevant objectives pursued 
by EEU such as minimizing classrooms leasing costs,
 minimizing unused classroom capacity (difference b
etween the 
nominal capacity of a classroom and the number of s
tudents enrolled in a course), and avoiding courses
 clash in the same 
classroom. Given the constraints as initial variabl
es and the objectives as economic variables and as 
parts of a total cost, 
eClasSkeduler system tries to find a minimum cost a
s an optimal solution. 
Before the implementation of eClasSkeduler, it took
 on average two weeks to process data for schedulin
g. DMCIS took 
sequential steps to generate a timetable as below: 
1) the collection of data such as the courses offer
ed, the availability of 
classrooms, and the number of enrolled students too
k about a week; 2) the construction of a scheduling
 matrix and reports 
took two weeks; 3) the validation and adjustment of
 the proposed schedule with academic directors adde
d another week. 
After implementing eClasSkeduler, the second stage 
Œ the construction of a scheduling matrix and repor
ts Œ takes only 30 
minutes, which is a drastic decrease. Reducing the 
data process time is extremely important, because i
t makes possible to 
process data multiple times when DMCIS confronts un
foreseen requirements (e.g. sudden requests from co
mpanies about 
closed courses) before the schedule is released. It
 is worth to mention that real demands (number of e
nrollments and number 
of closed courses) are unknown until a couple of we
eks before the start of the course. The processing 
improvement also 
decreases the time for the validation and adjustmen
t, because DMCIS can run eClasSkeduler many times a
 day upon 
directors™ requests. The eClasSkeduler allows not o
nly generate a solution quickly, but also analyze m
ultiple scenarios and 
compare them while differently weighting the constr
aints and objectives. It means that the improvement
 of processing 
component by the eClasSkeduler system helps DMCIS t
o respond faster and more flexibly even though the 
perception 
component has not improved yet, because the eClasSk
eduler allows DMCIS to reprocess data whenever it p
erceives new 
data. 

The improvement of the processing component also re
duces the total operating cost of EEU. Especially, 
it reduces the cost of 
leasing classrooms outside the university. It illus
trates that the improvement of the processing compo
nent enhances the 
(re)aligning function through increasing the effici
ency in matching classrooms, courses, and instructo
rs without clashing 
them, which again leads to cost reduction. EEU has 
become the most important income source for the dep
artment. Although 
the university is a non-for-profit organization, it
 is important to secure the necessary financial inc
ome. With this income, 
DMCIS assures its operations in teaching and partic
ularly in basic and applied research. 
The cascade effect of the processing improvement on
 responding and (re)aligning components is validate
d with below visible 
evidences. In 2008, 
Ł the 45% reduction of unused capacity in classroom
s  Œ with the processing improvement, DMCIS is able
 to 
properly allocate enough sized and rightly equipped
 classrooms to courses; 
Ł over 60% reduction of clashing courses Œ it also 
leads the efficiency in (re)aligning, because it al
lows DMCIS to 
avoid cancelling courses and to minimize costs in h
iring external instructors. Consequently, it makes 
possible for students to 
select courses more flexibly and increases its corp
orate image as an agile organization that appropria
tely responds and 
(re)aligns its resource in a timely manner; and 
Ł reductions of leasing conference rooms for classr
ooms (from 18 to 3 rooms) and computer labs (from 8
 to 1) Œ also 
leads to decrease the cost of the logistics and tra
nsportation caused by leasing external places.  
Although DMCIS could not develop IS that increase c
apabilities for all organizational agility componen
ts at once, it selected 
the most urgent component to gain attainable agile 
capabilities. With the framework, DMCIS was able to
 analyze its situation 
 Seo et al. 
 IS in Organizational Agility 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru, August 12-15, 201
0. 7 
more precisely and chose the most urgent component 
to improve. The eClasSkeduler has improved the proc
essing capability 
of DMCIS radically and accordingly, it has impacted
 the responding and (re)aligning capabilities as sh
own above. All these 
effects have influenced in improving the organizati
onal agility of DMCIS. The organizational agility f
ramework is used not 
only to prioritize components to improve at the beg
inning, but also to evaluate the consequences of im
plementing 
eClasSkeduler. DMCIS is again assessing its new sit
uation with the framework and find the next compone
nt to improve. 
The perception component is the next enabler of agi
lity to improve. DMCIS still manually collects data
 for its perception that 
takes about a week. It means that DMCIS spends abou
t one week and 30 minutes to generate an initial sc
heduling even with 
eClasSkeduler. If DMCIS develops on-line registrati
on for students and companies and links eClasSkedul
er with databases 
describing courses and requirements (e.g. available
 instructors and classrooms), DMCIS will increase e
fficiency in collecting 
data that eventually increases its perception capab
ility. 
As the implementation is recent and still ﬁin progr
essﬂ, it will require time to develop other informa
tion systems and to train 
people to adequately use the system, interpret sche
duling reports, and compare them. One of DMCIS™ pla
ns is storing all data 
that go through eClasSkeduler to build knowledge ma
nagement system. From this system, DMCIS could mine
 data and 
develop simulation tools to forecast future demands
 so that it can reformulate its curricula and train
 employees including 
instructors. All these activities will become parts
 of its learning capability, because in this way, t
he knowledge will not be 
drained away, but captured, formalized, and accumul
ated. As a result, DMCIS will be able to build its 
agility further and 
make itself sitting on a virtuous cyclical procedur
e for building agility. 
DESCRIBING ECLASSKEDULER 

The computational application allows a final user t
o manipulate all the information necessary to gener
ate the scheduling 
through friendly menu navigation. Specifically, the
 user can feed the system with information describi
ng the courses, 
instructors, and classrooms, as well as modify the 
data loaded. At the same time, the user can change 
all the parameters 
associated to the solution of the mathematical mode
l optimizing the scheduling. The eClasSkeduler arch
itecture consists of 
four main modules, which are represented in Figure 
2. 
 
  Figure 2: Modular description of eClasSkeduler. 
  Seo et al. 
 IS in Organizational Agility 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru, August 12-15, 201
0. 8 
The user interface module is used as control mechan
ism of the system. From this module, the informatio
n entered to the 
system is transformed according to the requirements
 and format used by the mathematical optimization m
odel. Through this 
interface, a user can define and incorporate the we
ights that represent the importance of achieving ea
ch objective pursued by 
EEU. 

The input information module is composed by a datab
ase storing all the information characterizing the 
availabilities of 
courses, classrooms, and instructors. Each course i
s defined by its duration in weeks, the earliest an
d latest feasible weeks, 
and the estimated number of students to be enrolled
. The number of students to be enrolled is forecast
ed using historical data 
adjusted by the current registration at the time of
 the optimization. Figure 3 shows one view of the i
nterface to edit the 
courses information in the database. 

  Figure 3: Courses edition interface  
 
The optimization module is a central processing par
t that incorporates a folder storing the equations 
and solution instances. It 
run all input variables (constraints) to provide th
e most effective and efficient solution to achieve 
the objectives. 
Finally, the reports generation module receives dat
a from the optimization module and summarizes and o
rganizes them in 
several types of reports. The generated reports inc
lude courses scheduling, classrooms assignment, num
ber of weeks, start 
date, and time pattern assigned to each course (see
 Figure 4). Additionally, the reports have performa
nce indicators to 
manage and control resources assignment, for exampl
e, the unused capacity for each term, the number of
 computer labs 
required, and the number of clashing courses.  

  Seo et al. 
 IS in Organizational Agility 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru, August 12-15, 201
0. 9 
NameCodeWeeksBeginRoomMONTUEWEDTHUFRISAT
1Curso Control de Gestión EstratégicoCCGE10RM1A918/
06/2010504
2Curso IFRS  y sus Impactos en el ManagementCIFRS10
RM1A1114/06/2010T2005
3Auditoría a Mesas de DineroDAMD10RM1A2611/06/2010H
301
4Auditoría de Sistemas y Tic´s V1DAST10RM1A1905/04/
2010P205
5Contabilidad y Análisis FinancieroDCAF10RM1A2203/0
5/20101903
6Nuevo Marco de Capital para la Banca, Basilea IIDC
BB10RM1A2120/09/2010T2001
7Control de Gestión FinancieroDCGF10RM1A2422/06/201
0T2005
8Control de Gestión Gerencial V1DCGG10RM1A3416/04/2
010606
9Control de Gestión Gerencial V2DCGG10RM2A3406/08/2
010401
10Control de Gestión para Profesionales V1DCGP10RM1
A2423/03/2010T2002
11Control de Gestión para Profesionales V2DCGP10RM2
A2414/06/2010404
12Comercio y Negociación InternacionalDCNI10RM1A341
6/08/2010504
13Estrategia e Implementación CRMDCRM10RM1A2110/08/
2010606
14Educación para el Emprendimiento e InnovaciónDEEI
10RM1A2410/09/2010T2005
17Tributación Nacional V1DETN10RM1A3404/05/2010T200
1
18Tributación Nacional V2DETN10RM2A3422/09/2010504

19Business Intelligence V1DGBI10RM1A2427/04/2010402

20Business Intelligence V2DGBI10RM2A2413/07/2010H30
1
21Gestión del ConocimientoDGCI10RM1A2417/08/2010T20
02
22Control y Gestión Estratégica de CostosDGEC10RM1A
2426/07/2010403
23Gestión de Negocios con TI para ProfesionalesDGEP
10RM1A2421/09/2010403
24Gestión de Inocuidad AlimentariaDGIA10RM1A2103/08
/2010406
25Gestión Integrada de Calidad V1DGIC10RM1A2709/04/
2010T2005
26Gestión Integrada de Calidad V2DGIC10RM2A2716/07/
2010402
27Gestión de Proyectos Informáticos V1DGPI10RM1A272
9/03/2010T2001
28Gestión de Proyectos Informáticos V2DGPI10RM2A271
4/06/2010T2002
29Gestión de Procesos de Negocios V1DGPN10RM1A2410/
05/2010401
30Gestión de Procesos de Negocios V2DGPN10RM2A2413/
07/2010404
31Gestión y Planificación Tributaria V1DGPT10RM1A34
04/07/2010T2001
32Gestión y Planificación Tributaria V2DGPT10RM2A34
23/07/2010403
33Gestión Integral de Riesgos de NegociosDGRN10RM1A
2418/05/2010401
Timetables  and Classroom Assignments f
 Figure 4: Report sample from eClasSkeduler. 
 
CONCLUSIONS, LIMITATIONS, AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

The decision of DMCIS to improve its processing cap
ability through the eClasSkeduler system has brough
t multiple benefits. 
There are immediate and visible gains as listed in 
the previous sections, and others are not so visibl
e but embedded in 
building its organizational agility such as efficie
ncies in processing, responding, (re)aligning, and 
organizational fundamental 
capabilities. 

The eClasSkeduler system, even as a recently implem
ented application, allows important improvements in
 organizational 
agility, mainly in some operational components desc
ribed in the organizational agility framework Œ pro
cessing, responding, 
and (re) alignment. As mentioned, the assessment af
ter the eClasSkeduler implementation reveals areas 
that need further 
improvement like perception and learning to gain mo
re organizational agility. However, choosing to dev
elop the 
eClasSkeduler application worked as a ‚quick win™ i
n the sense that it greatly impacted on organizatio
nal response-time, 
operational efficiency, and service quality. The su
ccessful development and implementation of this ini
tial project, according 
to the assessment using the 
agility framework
, lead to other projects. The following projects ar
e about constructing new 
software modules to be connected with eClasSkeduler
 so that the integrated systems can improve percept
ion and learning 
competencies as well. The last two components of or
ganizational agility are considered more challengin
g to improve, 
because several human actors should be involved in 
these processes. For example, people eventually hav
e to learn, make a 
decision, and develop business strategies even thou
gh the systems help them to collect and analyze dat
a and information. The 
success of eClasSkeduler in improving the agility o
f DMCIS implies significant meanings. First, in the
 research perspective, 
it illustrates how the 
agility framework
 can be applicable in assessing and planning for or
ganizational agility. Second, in the 
practical perspective, DMCIS achieve great socioeco
nomic benefits using the 
agility framework
 in identifying the most 
urgent component to improve its organizational agil
ity.  
The in-house development of the application results
 positively and conveys great potentials; however, 
it discloses some 
challenges too. The positive results include enhanc
ing quality service, customer satisfaction, costs e
fficiency, decision 
support, organizational learning, and agility. The 
remaining challenges are further understanding and 
analyzing the business 
model of EEU to detect manually running areas that 
IS can help in an aligned fashion. In an operationa
l perspective, there is 
still a shortfall in the number of users trained to
 load data, run the application routinely, and inte
rpret the reports. Having only 
one trained user will soon meet problems, for examp
le, it may delay responding and (re)aligning resour
ces. There are also 
technical challenges in developing more software mo
dules and smoothly linking them together. It is eas
ier to operate one 
independent system than orchestrating multiple syst
ems as one. Therefore, the development and implemen
tation procedures 
 Seo et al. 
 IS in Organizational Agility 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru, August 12-15, 201
0. 10 
demand well planned schedules, tests, and governanc
es. Another issue in the future can be about people
™s technology 
dependence. If systems are developed and implemente
d so well, people tend to depend on the systems too
 much and lose 
their creativity such as abilities to face and solv
e problems. To avoid this situation, DMCIS can use 
the 
agility framework
 to 
constantly evaluate its agility with changing envir
onments. 
REFERENCES 

1.
 Amos, J. (1998) Transformation to agility: manufact
uring in the marketplace of unanticipated change, G
arland, New 
York. 
2.
 Ashrafi, N., Xu, P., Sathasivan, M., Kuilboer, J.-P
., Koelher, W., Heimann, D. and Waage, F. (2005) A 
framework for 
implementing business agility through knowledge man
agement systems, 
Proceedings of the Seventh IEEE International 
Conference on E-Commerce Technology Workshops
, July 19, IEEE Computer Society, 116- 121. 
3.
 Azhar, S., Ahmad, I. and Sein, M.K. (2010) Action r
esearch as a proactive research method for construc
tion engineering 
and management. 
Journal of Construction Engineering and Management
, 136, 1, 87-98.  
4.
 Boudreau, M.-C. and Robey, D. (1996) Coping with co
ntradictions in business process re-engineering, 
Information 
Technology & People
, 9: 40-57. 
5.
 Foulds, L. and Jonhson, D. (2000) SlotManager: A mi
crocomputer-based decision support system for unive
rsity 
timetabling, 
Decision Support Systems
 27, 4, 367Œ381. 
6.
 Goldman, S. L. and Nagel, R. N. (1995) Agile compet
itors and virtual organizations: strategies for enr
iching the 
customer, New York, Van Nostrand Reinhold. 
7.
 Haeckel, S. H. (1995) Adaptive enterprise design: T
he sense-and-respond model, 
Planning Review
, 23, 3, 6-14.  
8.
 Haeckel, S. H. (1999) Adaptive enterprise: Creating
 and leading sense-and-respond organization, Harvar
d Business 
School Press, Boston. MA. 
9.
 Hinkin, T. and Thompson, G. (2002) SchedulExpert: S
cheduling courses in the Cornell University school 
of hotel 
administration, 
Interfaces
, 32, 6, 45Œ57. 
10.
 Latour, B. (1987) Science in action: How to follow 
scientist and engineers through society, Harvard Un
iversity Press, 
Cambridge, MA. 
11.
 Leonard-Barton, D. (1992) Core capabilities and cor
e rigidities: A paradox in managing new product dev
elopment, 
Strategic Management Journal
, 13, 111-125. 
12.
 Liang, T.P., Lee, C.C. and Turban E. (2008) Model m
anagement and solvers for decision support, Handboo
k on decision 
Support Systems, vol. 1. Springer-Verlag, 231-258. 
13.
 Meyer, C. (2001) The second generation of speed, 
Harvard Business Review
, 79, 4, 24-26. 
14.
 Miranda J. (2010) eClasSkeduler: A course schedulin
g system for the executive education unit at the Un
iversidad de 
Chile, 
Interfaces
. DOI:10.1287/inte.1090.4085. 
15.
 Orlikowski, W. J. and Iacono, C. S. (2001) Research
 commentary: Desperately seeking the 'IT' in IT res
earch - A call to 
theorizing the IT artifact, 
Information Systems Research
, 12, 2, 121-134. 
16.
 Reich, Y., Konda, S., Subrahmanian, E., Cunningham,
 D., Dutoit, A., Patrick, R., Thomas, M., Westerber
g, A. W. and 
Group, n.-d. (1999) Building agility for developing
 agile design information systems, 
Research in Engineering Design
, 
11,2, 67-83. 
17.
 Robey, D., Ross, J. W. and Boudreau, M.-C. (2002) L
earning to implement enterprise systems: An explora
tory study of 
the dialectics of change, 
Journal of Management Information Systems
, 19, 1, 17-46. 
18.
 Seo, D., and La Paz, A. (2008) Exploring the dark s
ide of IS in achieving organizational agility, 
Communications of the 
ACM
, 51, 11, 136-139. 
19.
 Teece, D. J., Pisano, G. and Shuen, A. (1997) Dynam
ic capabilities and strategic management, 
Strategic Management 
Journal
, 18: 509-533. 
20.
 Truex, D. P., Baskerville, R. and Kelin, H. (1999) 
Growing systems in emergent organizations, 
Communications of the 
ACM
, 42, 8, 117-123. 
21.
 Tushman, M. and O'Reilly-III, C. A. (1996) The ambi
dextrous organization: Managing evolutionary and re
volutionary 
change, 
California Management Review
, 38, 4, 8-30. 
 Seo et al. 
 IS in Organizational Agility 
Proceedings of the Sixteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, Lima, Peru, August 12-15, 201
0. 11 
22.
 Tushman, M. and O'Reilly-III, C. A. (1997) Winning 
through innovation: A practical guide to leading or
ganizational 
change and renewal, Harvard Business School Press, 
Boston, Mass. 
23.
 Verstraete, C. (2004) Planning for the unexpected, 
IEE Manufacturing Engineer
, 83, 3, 18-21.  
24.
 Volberda, H. W. (1996) Toward the flexible form: Ho
w to remain vital in hypercompetitive environments,
 
Organization 
Science
, 7, 4, 359-374. 
