 Sun and Schmidt 
 Software Professionals™ Job Perceptions 

Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15
-17, 2013. 1
Do Software Professionals™ Job Perceptions 
Differ in Organizations Adopting Different 
Software Process Models?  
A Survey from the Industry 
 
Wenying Sun 
Computer Information Sciences  
Washburn University 
nan.sun@washburn.edu 
Cecil Schmidt 
Computer Information Sciences 
Washburn University 
Cecil.schmidt@washburn.edu 
ABSTRACT
  
This study assesses software professionals™ job per
ceptions in organizations adopting different softwa
re process models.  We 
developed hypotheses grounded in the formal control
 and the informal control theories. We plan to cond
uct a survey of 
software professionals in organizations utilizing d
ifferent process models. Theoretical and practical 
implications of this 
research are discussed. 

 
Keywords 

 
Software process models, agile, plan-driven, job pe
rceptions 
 
INTRODUCTION 

 
Developing software to meet the highly dynamic requ
irements of the twenty-first century remains a diff
icult task.  Rapid 
changes in technology, business models, and custome
r needs continue to press for quick releases of new
 software products.  
It's a given that these products meet the necessary
 quality constraints.  Software products range from
 very small stand-alone 
systems, e.g. a simple cell-phone application, to h
ighly integrated software such as ERP systems.  Cus
tomer sets vary 
accordingly.  Software development teams are not al
l the same either.  The demands of the product deve
loped require 
different team characteristics with a range of tech
nical ability, software method understanding, and i
ndividual empowerment.  
Understanding the entirety of these constraints, so
ftware development organizations are confronted wit
h the decision on how 
best to manage the software development process.  T
here are currently two schools of thought: use trad
itional plan-driven 
processes or use agility-based agile processes.  

 
Making the software process choice may be guided by
 five critical project factors (Boehm, 2004): size,
 criticality, dynamism, 
personnel, and culture.  All five factors challenge
 our decision.  Of these, perhaps the most difficul
t ones to consider are the 
factors that are addressed by an organization's per
sonnel and culture.  Selecting an agile process req
uires an organization that 
empowers people to move in and out of different rol
es in order to solve problems quickly and efficient
ly whereas if a plan-
driven process is selected, roles are typically wel
l defined with a high degree of structure.  
 
Having a high degree of freedom might not work well
 for some personnel.  Role ambiguity and conflict m
ight arise more 
easily in one software development process than ano
ther.  Some developers may take on work that is bey
ond what they can 
accomplish for what they perceive to be moving the 
project forward.  This could lead to work overload 
and exhaustion.  
Cynicism may creep in when developers are relegated
 to strict roles.  Too much or too little individua
l or team autonomy 
may also affect the project.  Finally, the process 
choice may influence one's perceived effectiveness 
and accomplishments as 
well as overall job satisfaction.  It is these ques
tions that our research intends to address.    
 
The following research question is posed: ﬁDo softw
are professional™s job perceptions differ in organi
zations adopting 
different software process models? In particular, i
s using an agile software development process model
 related to more 
favorable job perceptions?ﬂ 
 Sun and Schmidt 
 Software Professionals™ Job Perceptions 

Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15
-17, 2013. 2
 
In order to investigate this question, we leverage 
a theoretical framework based on control theory. Th
e results of the study are 
critical from both theoretical and practical standp
oints. From a theoretical viewpoint, the proposed s
tudy extends the current 
knowledge base with respect to job perceptions in p
lan-driven vs. agile software process environments.
 Practically, a better 
understanding of the various dimensions and how the
y differ will allow organizations to design mechani
sms to improve 
employees™ job perceptions.  

 
The paper is organized as follows. The next section
 describes different software development process m
odels.  We then 
present the theoretical framework and propose the h
ypotheses. We discuss the data collection and analy
sis method. The 
theoretical and practical implications of this stud
y are presented as well. 

SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT PROCESS MODELS: PLAN-DRIVEN VE
RSUS AGILE
  
Frederick Brooks (Brooks, 1987) published a seminal
 paper regarding the challenges of software enginee
ring.  He identified 
four inherent properties of modern software systems
, i.e. complexity, conformity, changeability, and i
nvisibility that drive 
these challenges.  Requirements refinement and incr
emental development was suggested, among others, as
 one of the 
potential breakthroughs in software engineering.   
  
 
Parnas and Clements (1986) provided a description o
f a rational design process, also referred to as th
e waterfall model, for 
software development.  The rational design process 
included seven sub-processes, or stages: (a) requir
ements definition, (b) 
module design, (c) interface design, (d) hierarchy 
design, (e) internal design, (f) program implementa
tion, and (g) 
maintenance.  For each phase a set of deliverables 
are defined and the people who would perform the ta
sks are identified.  
Before moving on to the next phase, the deliverable
s must be accepted by the customer.  Parnas and Cle
ments' rational design 
process characterizes a plan-driven approach to sof
tware development.   Since the publication of their
 paper, numerous 
modifications and adaptations of their design proce
ss have come of age.   However those that adhere cl
osely to this type of 
design process are typically characterized as proce
ss focused, driven by documentation and customer co
ntracts, and plan-
driven, all of which are the reasons why those who 
back the agile manifesto (2001) might choose not to
 use a rational-design 
process. 

 
The agile manifesto (2001) provides an official def
inition of Agile Software Development reading as fo
llows:  Individuals 
and interactions over processes and tools, Working 
software over comprehensive documentation, Customer
 collaboration 
over contract negotiation, and Responding to change
 over following a plan. Twelve principles are liste
d that reflect a 
development methodology that must be highly adaptab
le and nimble for it to succeed.  Dingsøyr et al. (
2012) provide a 
summary overview of the historical research on agil
e software development.  Although organizations mig
ht wish to move 
towards an agile methodology, changing methodologie
s, especially ones that require a drastic change in
 philosophy, is no 
simple matter.  Chan and Young (2009) describe the 
barriers to acceptance of software development meth
odologies.  They 
provide a conceptual framework that might be used t
o better understand the acceptance of agile methods
.  Nerur, RadhaKanta, 
and Mangalaraj (2005) describe key issues in the mi
gration to an agile methodology categorizing them a
s management and 
organizational, people, process, and technology.  A
n argument for the method of choice might best be d
etermined by the risk 
associated with the use of the particular methodolo
gy.   
Boehm (2002) advocates for a synthesis of agile and
 plan driven development.  The idea of bringing bes
t practices to the 
table is not a new idea.  Humphrey's (1988) softwar
e process maturity framework incorporates the use o
f best practices.  
Boehm lists several project characteristics includi
ng developers that influence the choice of a develo
pment methodology. 
Generally the research suggests that there is no on
e methodology that works for all software developme
nt projects.  
Organizations that incorporate the best of plan-dri
ven and agile methods based on risk and opportunity
 will typically win the 
software development challenge.    

THEORETICAL FOUNDATION: CONTROL THEORY  

 
Control is defined as management™s ﬁattempts to ens
ure that individuals working on organizational proj
ects act according to 
an agreed-upon strategy to achieve desired objectiv
esﬂ (Kirsch, 1996 p.1).  Control theory was first c
onceptualized by Ouchi 
(1979).  Ouchi describes three control mechanisms: 
markets, bureaucracies, and clans.  In market contr
ol, controllers rely on 
market prices to exercise control on the controlees
.  Ouchi used an example of a purchasing department
 to illustrate the point 
Œ purchasing agents send out a description of the i
tem desired and ask each manufacturer to quote a pr
ice for it; after the 
prices are in, the purchaser makes a decision based
 on quotes and past performance of the manufacturer
s.  Ouchi argues since 
 Sun and Schmidt 
 Software Professionals™ Job Perceptions 

Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15
-17, 2013. 3
prices convey all of the information necessary for 
efficient decision-making, market control is a very
 efficient mechanism.  
Bureaucratic mechanisms, on the other hand, involve
 personal surveillance and supervisory directions t
o the subordinates.  
Therefore, it requires rules and legitimate authori
ty to be functional.  Ouchi states that even though
 it is not as efficient as the 
market control, the bureaucratic form is preferred 
when prices are not available or infeasible to meas
ure.  Ouchi takes a 
warehouse example to support his viewpoints.  In a 
warehouse, the foreman sees workers follow rules to
 fill, pack, and ship 
the order.  Ouchi describes a clan as different org
anizations of professions but with similar values, 
brought together by 
socialization processes.  Clan control relies on in
formal social structure, shared values, and beliefs
.  Ouchi cites the general 
hospital as a clan example.  

Eisenhardt (1985) extended Ouchi™s control theory b
y incorporating agency theory.  She described organ
izational control 
theory and agency approaches as complementary where
 organizational control emphasizes task characteris
tics, e.g. task 
programmability, to the choice of control strategy,
 and the existence of social control as an alternat
ive while agency theory 
adds to the organizational approach explicit emphas
es on information systems, business uncertainty, co
sts, and rewards (p.7).  
She hypothesized linkages of task characteristics, 
information systems (measurability of behavior and 
outcome) and business 
uncertainty to behavior and outcome control strateg
ies.  She studied 54 retail stores.  She found beha
vior based control is 
more likely when task programmability increases, be
havior measurement increases, cost of outcome measu
rement increases, 
and business uncertainty increases.  Among all the 
variables, task programming is the single most impo
rtant predictor. 
Control theory has been applied to investigate soft
ware development phenomena (e.g. Henderson and Lee,
 1992; Kirsch, 
1996, 1997; Choudhury and Sabherwal, 2003; Harris, 
Collins, and Hevner, 2009; Maruping, Venkatesh, and
 Agarwal, 2009; 
Ply, Moore, Williams, and Thatcher, 2012).  These s
tudies generally categorize controls into formal an
d informal controls, 
with formal controls initiated by management, and i
nformal controls by employees (Jaworski et al., 199
3).  Formal controls 
are defined as using formal documentation associate
d with performance evaluation and rewards to influe
nce the personnel™s 
behavior to support organizational objectives (Chou
dhury and Sabherwal, 2003; Kirsch, 1996; Ply et al.
, 2012).  Formal 
controls include behavioral and outcome.  Behaviora
l controls rely on rules and procedures that lead t
o desired outcomes, and 
the ability to observe the associated behaviors (Pl
y et al., 2012).  Outcome controls focus on the spe
cification of desired 
outputs and rewards for their achievement (Kirsch 1
996, 1997).  The two types of informal controls are
 clan control and self 
control.  Clan control leverages socialization proc
esses, shared values, and beliefs to influence the 
behavior of individuals, 
(Kirsch, 1996, 1997).  With self control, individua
ls control their own actions: they set goals, monit
or work, and reward or 
sanction another (Kirsch, 1997).  
 Among the control theory based information systems 
studies, two examined areas are directly relevant t
o our research: one 
investigated the interactions between control modes
, agile methodology use, and requirements change (M
aruping et al., 2009), 
and the other examined IS employee attitudes and pe
rceptions related to software process maturity leve
ls (Ply et al., 2012). 
Maruping et al. (2009) concluded control mechanisms
 moderate the relationship between agile methodolog
y use and project 
quality.  In particular, agile methodology use lead
s to higher quality when outcome control is high an
d self control is low.  
Ply et al. (2012) found employees at CMM level 3 wh
ere behavioral controls are dominant have lower pro
fessional efficacy 
and lower job satisfaction than in organizations at
 Level 1 which is relatively free of formal control
s, and when behavioral 
controls are supplemented by substantial outcome co
ntrols, in cases of CMM Levels 4/5, employees repor
ted higher job 
satisfaction than their counterparts in organizatio
ns at CMM Level 3.   
Relating control theory to agile and plan-driven so
ftware process environments, we argue both software
 processes apply 
outcome control due to the nature of software busin
ess.  Any software, when delivered, needs to meet m
inimum user 
expectations, meaning it needs to provide the requi
red features and to perform reasonably.  This outco
me can be observed 
when developers test the software and the users use
 the software.  We also argue in agile the outcome 
measures utilized for 
evaluation are less blurry than in plan-driven.  In
 agile software development, the focus of the outco
me is ﬁworking softwareﬂ 
and the outcome measure is negotiated and made know
n to all parties ahead of time.  In plan-driven sof
tware development, 
measures such as process improvement, design qualit
ies, and documentations are applied along with work
ing software. Some 
measures are for developers only and others are for
 both developers and users.  They are not necessari
ly consistent all the 
time. 

Besides outcome control, based on the unique charac
teristics of the two software processes, we argue a
gile leans towards clan 
control while plan-driven adopts behavioral control
.  In agile the manager is a facilitator, in plan-d
riven the manager is a 
controller; agile encourages collaboration and comm
unication, plan-driven manages through control and 
direction; agile takes 
a flexible approach adapted with collective underst
anding , plan-driven adopts a universal approach; a
gile relies on self-
organizing teams and face-to-face communication, pl
an-driven controls at the organizational level and 
depends on document-
based communication (Dyba and Dingsøyr, 2009; Salo 
and Abrahamsson, 2007).  Clan control in agile is d
emonstrated 
 Sun and Schmidt 
 Software Professionals™ Job Perceptions 

Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15
-17, 2013. 4
through flexible management style, collective decis
ion making, team-oriented communication and working
 environment.  
Behavioral control in plan-driven is illustrated by
 top-down management style, individualized task ass
ignments, and focuses 
on processes and documentations.  

HYPOTHESES 

 
In this section, we develop hypotheses on construct
s that are related to job perceptions salient to so
ftware development 
professionals.  The constructs are role ambiguity, 
role conflict, work overload, work exhaustion, cyni
cism, autonomy, 
professional efficacy, and job satisfaction.  Previ
ous studies suggest these constructs are important 
for studying job attitudes 
and job perceptions of software development profess
ionals (e.g. Ply et al., 2012). 
Role ambiguity 

Role ambiguity occurs when an individual does not h
ave access to role-related information that defines
 their job behavior 
expectations (Kahn, Wolfe, Quinn, Snoek, and Rosent
hal, 1964, p. 22).  Role-related information may be
 communicated in 
various ways, formally, or informally. Bauer and Si
mon (2000) provide a review of the generally accept
ed definitions of role 
ambiguity and provide four widely accepted dimensio
ns including expectation, process, priority, and be
havior.  Boehm (2004) 
contrasts the cultural differences between agile an
d plan-driven development. In particular, a team me
mber in an agile culture 
acts as a craftsman with no formal roles, taking on
 any task that moves a project forward. In a plan-d
riven culture, roles and 
tasks are well defined.  However, one must also con
sider that the personnel typically involved across 
the two software 
process models are different.  Agile process models
 work best when there is a critical mass of highly 
talented people (Boehm, 
2004, p. 54; Nerur, Mahpatra, and Mangalaraj, 2005)
.        
In a plan-driven model, a work breakdown structure 
is developed; each task has a specific duration, ta
sk dependencies, and 
resource requirements.  Resource requirements are t
ypically human; where role specifics are outlined a
nd individuals are 
identified to fit into these roles.  These constrai
nts are placed into a project planning application 
that may be used to optimize 
the critical path for the completion of the project
.  Agile methods would spend less time in the proce
ss of developing an 
entire schedule, with focus on the next product com
ponent to be released.  Continuous planning occurs 
in various degrees, 
built into release schedules that may be daily, wee
kly, or monthly.  Human resources are more dynamic;
 teams are self-
organizing filling in the roles of systems analyst,
 developer, tester, and documentation specialist wi
th members of the team as 
they fit best.  From one release cycle to the next,
 team members may take on completely different role
s.  It is this fluidity of 
role responsibility that is much different than wha
t occurs in a plan-driven model, and may cause unce
rtainty in work 
behavior for an individual.  

We hypothesize: 
H1: 
IS professionals in agile software process environm
ents will report higher role ambiguity than those i
n plan-
driven software process environments. 
Role conflict 

Role conflict is the perception of inconsistent or 
incompatible job expectations (Nelson and Quick, 20
03).  We suspect role 
conflict will be higher for IS professionals in agi
le than for IS professionals in plan-driven.   
 
In plan-driven software development, the developer 
generally plays a distinct role.   The developer kn
ows exactly what he or 
she needs to do, primarily interacting with his/her
 supervisor.  The supervisor assigns tasks, knows d
eadlines for the tasks, 
and does performance evaluation on the developer.  
Keeping the supervisor in the loop is sufficient fo
r the developer.   
 
In agile software development, developers work in a
 team environment.  The work assignment can come fr
om their 
supervisors, from the users directly, or could come
 from co-workers who may need the developer's help 
on some programing 
task.  The supervisor does the performance evaluati
on on the developer, but maybe the person who knows
 how the developer 
performed best is one of the end users or the proje
ct manager.  The developer is pulled from different
 directions: the 
supervisor, the project manager, the user, and co-w
orkers. Each of these groups may have inconsistent 
or incompatible 
expectations of the developer. Keeping the supervis
or in the loop is far from sufficient.     
 
Because of the above reasons, we hypothesize: 

  Sun and Schmidt 
 Software Professionals™ Job Perceptions 

Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15
-17, 2013. 5
H2
: IS professionals in agile software process enviro
nments will report higher role conflict than those 
in plan-
driven software process environments. 
Work overload 

Work overload is a situation in which someone has t
oo much work to do (Cambridge, 2012).  Work overloa
d can be caused 
by a variety of factors.  Examples are unrealistic 
deadlines and increasingly heightened expectations 
(Shimazu and Kosugi, 
2003).  Gryna (2004) describes common symptoms of w
ork overload being long work days, unwanted overtim
e, difficulty in 
taking vacation time, taking work home, and frequen
t ﬁfirefightingﬂ.  
 
In plan-driven software development, crunch time (p
eriods of extreme work overload occurring usually c
loser to deadlines) is 
a common and recurring theme.  The image of profess
ional developers is a one with sleeping bags in the
 office who burns 
midnight oil.  Meeting user expectations and delive
ring projects on time has become challenging as use
rs demand more 
reduced delivery times and more trustworthy softwar
e (Sommerville, 2011). 
 
Adopting the agile principles is supposed to addres
s the above problems.  Cooke (2010) describes three
 (along with others) 
agile principles.  First is the communication betwe
en developers and end users.  Constant communicatio
n helps all parties 
involved understand what needs to be done and when 
it will be done. It minimizes unexpected demands on
 the tasks.  Second 
is the empowerment of agile teams to determine the 
volume of work that they are capable of delivering.
  The teams are given 
a sense of responsibility for completing the assign
ment within the timeframe they have set themselves.
 Third is the use of 
iterative development which avoids the risks involv
ed in all-at-once delivery.  Agile promotes sustain
able development and 
the practice of the 40 hour work week. 

 
We hypothesize: 

 H3
: IS professionals in agile software process enviro
nments will report lower work overload than those i
n plan-
driven software process environments. 
Work exhaustion 

Pines et al. (1981) defines work exhaustion as the 
result of constant or repeated emotional pressure a
ssociated with an intense 
involvement with people over long periods of time. 
 Maslach and Jackson (1981, 1986) operationalize wo
rk exhaustion as a 
three-component model: psychological syndrome of em
otional exhaustion, depersonalization, and diminish
ed personal 
accomplishment.  In our paper, we focus on the firs
t component Œ emotional exhaustion.   
 
Several factors contribute to emotional exhaustion:
 intense concentration on a task without appropriat
e breaks, disordered 
multitasking, interruptions during work, and chaos 
in the workplace (Zohar, 1999).
  
One of the principles behind the Agile Manifesto is
 ﬁBusiness people and developers must work together
 daily throughout the 
projectﬂ (Agile Principles, 2013).  Communications 
between developers and business people bring many b
enefits 
undoubtedly, but at the same time could be challeng
ing due to several reasons.  First, developers and 
business people are 
trained in different fields, each with its own dist
inct sets of vocabularies that are hard to convey t
o outsiders.  Secondly, 
technically trained professionals are typically goo
d at logic and hands-on tasks, some of them may not
 be comfortable with 
constant face-to-face verbal communications.  Third
ly, the devotion and the patience of the business p
eople on the technical 
component of the software project might be limited 
since they have their own jobs to be concerned abou
t.  All these could 
lead to emotional exhaustion.  

 
The work space for agile teams is typically an open
 area with desks, chairs, and computers.  Users are
 encouraged to come by 
to communicate with the developers.  The developers
 are encouraged to interrupt each other with questi
ons and discussions.  
Compared to plan-driven environments where develope
rs work in their own cubicles and offices, an envir
onment usually 
exclusive from the users, the agile work environmen
t has more noises and interruptions.  Furthermore, 
the daily planning in 
agile suggests developers may need to switch betwee
n tasks frequently.  
Pair programming is one of the agile practices.  In
 pair programming, two programmers sit in front of 
one computer and work 
on the same programming task together.  One person 
is the driver, and the other is the navigator.  The
 driver controls the 
keyboard, and the navigator examines what is being 
typed in and think of other strategies to accomplis
h the task.  The two 
change roles periodically.  Previous research show 
pair programming could lead to fatigue.  A pairing 
session of no more 
than two to three hours is recommended, because aft
er that, fatigue can set in (agilesherpa, 2013). 
 Sun and Schmidt 
 Software Professionals™ Job Perceptions 

Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15
-17, 2013. 6
We hypothesize: 

 H4
: IS professionals in agile software process enviro
nments will report higher work exhaustion than thos
e in plan-
driven software process environments. 
Cynicism
  
Cynicism reflects doubt, disbelief, and distrust.  
Kanter and Mirvis (1989) draw on their national sur
vey of American 
employees and reveal the causes of cynicism at work
.  The causes are: a lack of meaningful and challen
ging work, limited 
opportunity for advancement, and negative manageria
l style.  They stated building a sense of community
 was crucial and 
could be accomplished through communication strateg
ies, evaluation procedures, and other innovations. 
 Our discussions 
below focus on meaningful work, managerial style, a
nd a sense of community assuming similar challengin
g levels of work 
and opportunity for advancement are present in both
 agile and plan-driven environments.   
 
In plan-driven software development, communications
 generally happen through written documentations in
stead of verbal 
conversations.  Except for the few lines on the req
uest form, developers don™t have to hear from the u
sers regarding why they 
need the system and how the system is going to help
 with their work.  The meaning of work is greatly r
educed because of this 
communication style.  In addition, since most reque
sts are handled through the request tracking system
, there are fewer 
chances for users and developers to interact, there
fore hard to develop a sense of community.  Regardi
ng managerial style, 
plan-driven organizations typically adopt behavior 
control.  Managers focus on the processes the devel
opers follow, and rely 
on intermediate reports to assess its progress.  A 
certain degree of outcome control might be used, bu
t in plan-driven, since 
users and developers have limited communications, t
he outcome can be harder to measure.  Different ang
les the users and the 
developers take can easily lead to different measur
es of the outcome, and it is difficult to determine
 which one should be used 
and which one is more important. 

 
Agile software development encourages collaboration
s.  Users and developers meet on a regular basis.  
In some agile 
practices, e.g. Scrum, the team holds a stand-up me
eting every day.  Everyone knows what he/she needs 
to work on, the 
reason for the task, and when it needs to be done. 
 Team members are encouraged to ask questions and t
o seek for 
clarifications.  If there are issues and questions 
during the day, users can come in freely, and devel
opers are free to interrupt 
each other, so questions are answered, issues are a
ddressed, and there is increased personal contact b
etween everyone 
involved in the project.  The information the users
 share with the developers brings meaning to their 
request, and the constant 
communications between users and developers and amo
ng developers bring a strong sense of community.  I
n addition, agile 
adopts incremental development and constant feedbac
k, which suggests even when outcome control is appl
ied, the 
developers and users tend to agree on the measures.
  Agile also adopts clan control - team-monitoring,
 which leads to a better 
sense of community,  

 
Therefore, we hypothesize: 

 H5
: IS professionals in agile software process enviro
nments will report lower cynicism than those in pla
n-driven 
software process environments. 
Autonomy  

Autonomy means independence and self-governing.  In
 software development, autonomy refers to the degre
e of discretion 
and independence granted to individuals or teams in
 scheduling the work, determining the procedure and
 methods to be used, 
selecting and deploying resources, and carrying out
 tasks (e.g. Lee and Xia, 2010).   
 
In plan-driven software development, a request is e
ntered into a system, the request is processed, and
 based on the priorities, 
is assigned to a developer.  Even though the user s
pecifies on the request form when he/she needs the 
request to be completed, 
in general it is the developer who works on the tas
k that determines the methods he/she needs to adopt
, the resources and the 
time he/she will need to accomplish the task.  On t
he other hand, agile development encourages collabo
ration and is people-
centric.  One individual usually doesn™t make a dec
ision.  Decisions are made as a team.  For example,
 when the team has the 
daily stand-up meetings, decisions are negotiated a
nd finalized during the meetings regarding who will
 work on what, what 
resources are needed for a given task, and when tas
k will be completed. 
 
While autonomy is a key principle in agile developm
ent, empirical research has been limited.  Lee and 
Xia (2010) examined 
team autonomy and found a negative relationship bet
ween autonomy and team response extensiveness and a
 positive 
relationship between autonomy and team response eff
iciency. Moe et al. (2008) researched on barriers o
f introducing self-
 Sun and Schmidt 
 Software Professionals™ Job Perceptions 

Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15
-17, 2013. 7
organizing teams in agile and found that highly spe
cialized skills of the developers, the correspondin
g division of work, lack 
of system for team support, and reduced external au
tonomy were important barriers. 
 
We hypothesize: 

 H6
: IS professionals in agile software process enviro
nments will report higher team autonomy but lower i
ndividual 
autonomy than ones in plan-driven software process 
environments. 
Professional efficacy 

Professional efficacy is an individual™s perceived 
effectiveness and accomplishment at work (Schaufeli
 et al., 1995). 
  Research on IS employees™ professional efficacy is 
rather limited.  The only one we identified is Ply 
et al. (2012).  The 
authors examined professional efficacy in organizat
ions at different CMM levels.  They found IS worker
s reported 
significantly lower professional efficacy in organi
zations at CMM Level 3 than in organizations at Lev
el 1 because of formal 
controls in CMM Level 3 organizations.   

 
In the context of agile and plan-driven development
, one could argue employees in agile organizations 
will report higher 
professional efficacy than employees in plan-driven
 development based on the underlying differences be
tween agile and 
plan-driven.  In plan-driven development, behaviora
l control is the primary control mechanism.  The su
pervisor assigns the 
work and provides direct supervision to the employe
es.  Formal documentations are the primary communic
ation tools.  
Feedback from the users is rather limited.  A forma
l request tracking system is usually in place and s
erves as the 
communication channel for developers and users. In 
agile development, the control style is primarily c
lan control Œ the team 
makes the decision.  Constant and immediate feedbac
k from users improves the sense of effectiveness an
d accomplishment.  
With iterative development, even if there are issue
s, they can be identified quickly, and corrections 
can be applied without 
hurting the sense of effectiveness and accomplishme
nt.   
 
We hypothesize: 

 H7
: IS professionals in agile software process enviro
nments will report higher professional efficacy tha
n those in 
plan-driven software process environments. 
Job satisfaction 

Locke defines job satisfaction as ﬁa pleasurable or
 positive emotional state resulting from the apprai
sal of one™s job or job 
experienceﬂ (1976 p. 1300).  Spector (1997) defines
 job satisfaction as the degree to which people lik
e their jobs.  Smith et al. 
(1969) states that job satisfaction is the feeling 
that a worker has about his or her job and it has f
ive dimensions: a) 
satisfaction with the work itself, b) satisfaction 
with pay, c) satisfaction with promotion prospects,
 d) satisfaction with 
supervision, e) satisfaction with co-workers.   

 
Ouchi and Johnson (1978) collected data from two id
eal-type representations of organizational control 
(behavior vs. clan) and 
found clan control was positively related to the em
otional well-being of the employees.   
 
Prior research reported conflicting findings on how
 new processes impact the job satisfaction of IS pr
ofessionals.  For 
example, Orlikowski (1993) reported with the introd
uction of the CASE tools IS professionals in one or
ganization expressed 
higher job satisfaction while in another organizati
on IS professionals expressed lower job satisfactio
n.  Finlay and Mitchell 
(1994) reported developers, especially the less exp
erienced ones, viewed the CASE tools as making thei
r job more interesting 
and more effective. 

 
Specific to our examination of the agile and the pl
an-driven software development 
processes, prior studies were generally in 
favor of agile.  For example, Melnik and Maurer (20
06) identified a positive correlation between the l
evel of experience with
agile methods and the overall job satisfaction. The
y found twice as many members of agile teams were 
satisfied with their 
jobs 
compared to members of non-
agile teams. They noted the ability to influence de
cisions, the opportunity to work on 
interesting projects, and the relationships with us
ers were significant factors.  Tessem and Maurer (2
007) reported 
agile 
practices such as feedback, autonomy, and variety l
ed to high job satisfaction in agile teams. Salo an
d Abrahamsson (2007)
shared similar findings - iterative process and imm
ediate feedback on results led to high job satisfac
tion.  
Pedrycz et al. 
(2011) stated a continuous share of the daily worki
ng life influenced the programmers' job satisfactio
n.  
Their research 
investigated the relationship between job satisfact
ion and pair programming, an agile practice 
that pushes job sharing to the 
 Sun and Schmidt 
 Software Professionals™ Job Perceptions 

Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, Chicago, Illinois, August 15
-17, 2013. 8
extreme. The results suggest pair programming is po
sitively related to job satisfaction. 
Based on these empirical evidences and our understa
nding of the key practices associated with agile an
d plan-driven software 
development, we expect job satisfaction to be highe
r for IS professionals in agile software process en
vironments than those in 
plan-driven software process environments.  We exte
nd the following hypothesis: 
  H8
: IS professionals in agile software process enviro
nments will report higher job satisfaction than tho
se in plan-
driven software process environments.  
 
METHOD AND EXPECTED CONTRIBUTIONS 

 
We plan to conduct two studies.  Study 1 is a quant
itative study.  It is a survey of software professi
onals in organizations that 
adopt different software process models.  All scale
 items will be drawn from existent literature (e.g.
 Rutner et al., 2008). We 
will target our data collection on the software pro
fessionals in organizations in the Midwest region. 
 We would like  to have 
at least 200 data points. 

 
Study 2 is a qualitative study.  It includes a foll
ow-up study where we hold interviews and focus grou
p meetings.  We will 
also conduct content analysis on the comments the r
espondents provide in their survey responses.   
 
We believe this study can provide several theoretic
al and practical implications for researchers as we
ll as practitioners. From 
a theoretical perspective, this study is expected t
o be one of the first to take control theory as the
 theoretical lens to examine 
IS professionals™ job perceptions in agile and plan
-driven software process environments.  From the pr
actical perspective, a 
better understanding of the various dimensions and 
how they differ will allow organizations to design 
mechanisms to 
improve employees™ job perceptions.  

 
REFERENCES (PARTIAL LISTING) 

 
1.
 Boehm, B. (2002) Get ready for agile methods, with 
care, 
Computer, 
35, 1, 64-69. 
2.
 Brooks, F. P. (1987) No silver bullet: Essence and 
accidents of software engineering, 
IEEE computer, 
20
, 
4, 10-19. 
3.
 Chan, F. K. Y. and Thong, J. Y. L. (2009) Acceptanc
e of agile methodologies: A critical review and con
ceptual 
framework, 
Decision Support Systems, 
46
, 
4, 803-814. 
4.
 Dingsøyr, T., Nerur, S., Balijepally, V. G. and Moe
, N. B. (2012) A decade of agile methodologies: Tow
ards explaining 
agile software development. 
The Journal of Systems and Software
, 85, 1213-1221 
5.
 Humphrey, W. S. (1988) Characterizing the software 
process: a maturity framework, 
IEEE Software, 
5, 
2, 73-79. 
6.
 Lee, G. and Xia, W. (2010) Toward agile: An integra
ted analysis of quantitative and qualitative field 
data on software 
development agility, 
MIS Quarterly
, 34, 1, 87-114. 
7.
 Nelson, D. L. and Quick, J. C. (1999) 
Organizational behavior: Foundations, realities, an
d challenges
: South-Western 
Educational Publishing. 
8.
 Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R. K. and Mangalaraj, G. (200
5) Challenges of migrating to agile methodologies. 
Communications 
of the ACM, 
48, 5, 72-78. 
9.
 Parnas, D. L. and Clements, P. C. (1986) A rational
 design process: How and why to fake it, 
IEEE Transactions on 
Software Engineering, 
2, 251-257. 
10.
 Shimazu, A. and Kosugi, S. (2003) Job stressors, co
ping, and psychological distress among Japanese emp
loyees: interplay 
between active and non-active coping, Work & Stress
, 17, 1, 38-51. 
