 Wagner et al.   
 The structuring of freedom in agile development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 
The structuring of freedom in agile development 
Completed Research Paper 
 Erica Wagner 
Ahlbrandt Professor of Management 
School of Business Administration 
Portland State University 
elwagner@pdx.edu
 Sue Newell 
Professor, Information and Process Management 
Bentley University, MA 
Warwick Business School, Warwick University, UK 
snewell@bentley.edu
 Neil Ramiller 
Professor of Management 
School of Business Administration 
Portland State University 
neilr@pdx.edu
  ABSTRACT 

Management literature on agile software development
 has largely focused on the relationship between ag
ile methods and 
behavioral control, particularly the role that cont
rol plays in fostering flexibility. Although the fo
cus on control has helpfully 
illuminated the constraints necessary in agile proj
ects, it has provided only a half-finished portrait
 of the importance of 
structure in this approach to software development.
 This paper deconstructs the customary oppositions 
between structure and 
flexibility, control and freedom, by examining the 
socially-governed and technologically-mediated prac
tices that produce and 
sustain agility in an organization that is an exemp
lary practitioner of the agile approach. We find th
at an imbrication of social 
convention and material agency provides the kind of
 structure that nurtures those markers of ‚freedom™
 Œ flexibility, 
creativity, improvisation, and adaptability Œ for w
hich agile is touted. 
Keywords 

Agile development, materiality, sociomateriality, q
ualitative. 
 
INTRODUCTION 

In recent years systems development has shifted awa
y from structured, sequential and time-bound strate
gies for creating 
software (often referred to as the Waterfall method
) toward iterative approaches that focus on frequen
t turn-around of 
software code and design features. This shift in pr
actice has been attributed to the inability of sequ
entially planned 
approaches to ‚handle rapidly changing environments
™ (Highsmith 2002), a condition that increasingly c
haracterizes modern 
organizations. Among approaches falling into the ca
tegory of iterative development are methods commonl
y referred to as 
‚agile™, which focus on collaborative development w
here requirements and solutions evolve over time. T
he methods are 
predicated on multi-participant teams that rapidly 
develop and deploy tested code. The team is able to
 quickly ‚pivot™ the 
code itself, along with the direction of developmen
t, when change is necessary. Such teams commonly in
clude the customer 
for whom software is being developed. The customer 
sees the work on a frequent (even daily) basis, yie
lding a short 
feedback cycle that readily accommodates evolving p
riorities, as both the customer and developers lear
n more about the 
application. This keeps the cost of change low by p
reventing unnecessary work.  Also, it allows for ne
w insights to be gained 
from the work already completed, and for those insi
ghts to be incorporated into the new code.  In shor
t, while the developers 
do not make promises about deadlines and functional
ity, they do spend time intensively with the custom
er in matching 
software capabilities to the real-world requirement
s.   
Scholarship on the process of agile development has
 to date emphasized the way that control measures s
hape the approach.  
This research has helpfully illuminated the constra
ints necessary in agile projects, but it has provid
ed a half-finished portrait 
of the importance of structure in creating the desi
red qualities of flexibility, creativity, and adapt
ability. This paper attempts a 
more complete analysis by deconstructing the custom
ary oppositions between structure and flexibility, 
control and freedom. 
We examine the socially-governed and technologicall
y-mediated practices that produce and sustain agili
ty in an organization 
 Wagner et al.   
 The structuring of freedom in agile development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 
that is an exemplary practitioner of the agile appr
oach. We find that an imbrication of social convent
ion and material agency 
provides the kind of structure that nurtures the ‚f
reedom™ for which agile is touted.  
LITERATURE TO DATE 

Although agile methods are of recent advent, their 
adoption is increasingly prevalent (Laanti, Outi an
d Abrahamsson, 2011) 
and a Forrester Research (2010) report states that 
agile is now the primary software development appro
ach used within 
organizations. On the other hand, IS scholarship on
 agile methods remains sparse (see the review by Dy
ba and Dingsoyr, 
2008), provoking calls for further research (Cao an
d Ramesh, 2007), especially rigorous studies that s
eek to develop and 
extend theory about the management of agile project
s (Agerfalk, Fitzgerald and Slaughter, 2009).  
To this end, Conboy (2009) has created a theory tha
t links agile software development to agility in ot
her fields. Others have 
developed a theoretical model of coordination and s
hown how dynamic agile software development project
s organize 
(Strode, Huff, Hope, and Link, 2012). Sarker & Sark
er (2009) analyze agility in information systems de
velopment by 
presenting a multi-faceted concept that includes re
source agility, process agility and linkage agility
. They later assess the 
relative importance of these facets in the success 
of a distributed systems development project, and s
how that people, 
technology, work transition, temporal and methodolo
gical factors support various aspects of agility (S
arker et al., 2009). 
Meanwhile, empirical studies have begun to lay a fo
undation for understanding the practice of agile de
velopment in use, 
including consideration of the culture and communit
y of agile development (Sharp and Robinson, 2004), 
the effectiveness of 
alternative modes of control (Maruping, Venkatesh a
nd Argarwal, 2009), and the relationship of control
 to flexibility (Harris, 
Collins, and Hevner, 2009).  Meanwhile, other studi
es have focused on the tools and techniques that ar
e instrumental for 
agile project work, and have documented organizatio
ns™ adaptation of methods to fit specific circumsta
nces (Fruhling & de 
Vreede, 2006; Fitzgerald, Hartnett, & Conboy, 2006)
. 
In short, theoretical treatments have so far unpack
ed the concept of agility and identified in broad t
erms how human and non-
human components of a project support agility. Simu
ltaneously, empirical studies have begun to identif
y specific cultural 
elements, control regimes, tools, and techniques th
at can contribute to the operationalization of an a
gile program. However, a 
major task that still remains is to explain more fu
lly how 
in practice
 the material and social facets of a development 
environment can provide the ‚format and furniture™ 
(Pollock and D'Adderio, 2012) that foster the freed
om and creativity for 
which agile is known.   

CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK  

Our discipline™s historical preoccupation with cont
rol is natural, considering how in so many IS proje
cts control has been 
lost, yielding outcomes like spiraling costs, overr
un time lines, and scope creep. On the other hand, 
agile development, given 
its values and ambitions, invites us to take a fres
h look at the conditions of software development. T
racing the freedom and 
creativity attributed to agile methods calls for at
tention to the 
affordances
 of agile practice as well as the constraints. Look
ing 
at agile development from a practice perspective (S
chatzki, Knorr Cetina and von Savigny, 2000) leads 
us to consider how 
material and social arrangements work in concert to
 create 
the power
 for practitioners to act. In adopting a practice l
ens we 
are focused on how individuals never act alone but 
are rather ‚propped up and aided™ by all kinds of m
aterial artifacts as well 
as by social norms and conventions (Pollock and D'A
dderio, 2012). Indeed, the very substance and meani
ng of individual 
action is relational (Orlikowski, 2007), and depend
s on structured interactions with space, materials,
 tools, and people to give 
it shape and direction. Both the individual™s power
 to act and the range of options are therefore imma
nent in an environment 
comprised of sociomaterial affordances.  

The aim of our research, accordingly, is to examine
 how the social and material features of agile soft
ware teams afford, in 
practice, the kinds of freedom and creativity that 
are sought through the agile methodology.  (We inte
nd to sidestep, here, the 
current debate about the ontology of sociomateriali
ty (Leonardi and Barley, 2010) but will, for practi
cal discursive reasons, 
speak for the most part separately about social con
ventions and material affordances).  In examining t
his question, we need to 
begin with the kinds of flexibility agile methods a
re seeking. For this we turn to 
The Manifesto for Agile Software 
Development
, a seminal document that was written in 2001 by se
venteen software developers gathered together to de
fine less 
rigid and sequential approaches to development (www
.agilemanifesto.org). The Manifesto identifies a se
t of four values:  
individuals and interactions over processes and too
ls; working software over comprehensive documentati
on; customer 
collaboration over contract negotiation; responding
 to change over following a plan.
 The point of these values is that they 
favor freedom and creative accomplishment over eval
uative measures and documentation. Our aim, then, i
s to examine how 
social conventions and material affordances allow e
ach of these values to be enacted in the agile soft
ware development 
projects that we have studied. 
 Wagner et al.   
 The structuring of freedom in agile development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 
METHODOLOGY 

Our inquiry aspired to develop an understanding of 
agile software development as a constellation of so
cially governed and 
technologically mediated practices aimed at produci
ng the specific kinds of flexibility entailed in th
e Manifesto™s values. As 
such, our field research was designed to access the
 material and social agencies that enable the work 
practices of agile 
developers. Empirical observations were based on an
 on-the-ground exploratory study of one company ren
owned for agile 
software development. This ethnographic approach to
 understanding work practice is recognized as an ef
fective approach to 
investigating research issues in context (Schultze 
2000).  
 Research Site 

Pivotal Labs (PL), founded in 1989, is known as an 
exemplar of agile-based software development. It bo
asts sophisticated 
technical consulting experience in consumer web and
 mobile application development and enterprise auto
mation. Customers 
have included Twitter, Groupon, Best Buy, Salesforc
e.com, and Citysearch.  PL also created and maintai
ns a web-based agile 
project management software called Pivotal Tracker.
  Headquartered in San Francisco, PL has regional o
ffices in New York, 
Boulder, and Singapore. Recently PL was purchased b
y EMC Corporation to help position PL for larger, e
nterprise-wide 
agile projects. The case organization was chosen fo
r several reasons.  First, it is recognized by the 
software development 
industry as a leader in agile development.  Second,
 the organization is exclusively an ‚agile shop™ an
d has the luxury because 
of its reputation of only working with customers wh
o understand what this means in terms of developmen
t. Third, the 
organization was receptive to the research and prov
ided access to its customers, employees, and execut
ives at multiple 
locations.  

Data Collection and Analysis 

Direct observation and interviewing occurred in May
 and September 2012. The first author made two visi
ts of four days each 
to PL offices to observe particular work practices.
 Direct observation formed the bulk of this field r
esearch, including 
observation of multiple pairs of programmers workin
g together and tours of multiple offices.  Video wa
s taken and notes 
were made on the use of artifacts (whiteboards, not
e cards, computer screens, and so on); entrances, e
xits, and movement in 
relation to work-spaces; and non-verbal cues.  Semi
-structured interviews were also conducted with emp
loyees and 
customers. All of the interviews were tape recorded
 and transcribed.  
After the fieldwork was complete, a systematic and 
careful reading of the transcripts facilitated anal
ysis of the 
interrelationships between everyday practices, orga
nizational structures, and agility outcomes. We con
sidered data reflecting 
behavioral norms governing how, when, and where to 
use particular technologies. We identified evidence
 of programmers 
and customer representatives reproducing agile prac
tices on an on-going basis, and reflected on the ro
le in this 
accomplishment of technology and other material art
ifacts. In our analysis we framed this role using t
he vocabulary of 
affordances and constraints 
(Gibson, 1979; Hutchby, 2001), where we identified 
properties of things and the boundaries of 
their use (Hutchby, 2001, p. 9), as well as how peo
ple used them under particular conditions of the lo
cal context (Pollock and 
D™Adderio, 2012).   

CASE FINDINGS  

In reporting our findings, we begin by identifying 
the different social conventions and material affor
dances Œ the 
format and 
furniture
 (Pollock and D™Adderio, 2012) Œ that support the w
ork.  Then we link these conventions and affordance
s to the 
central values of agile development. Given space li
mitations, we describe just one area of activity he
re Œ the 
pair 
programming
 process. Programming in pairs, although not adopte
d in all agile regimes, is central in PL™s agile pr
actice and 
serves to illustrate the manner in which the appare
nt constraints of structure generate the freedom th
at empowers an agile 
strategy.   

Social Conventions 

The practice of pair programming involves two devel
opers working as a team on coding.  One ‚drives™ by
 doing the actual 
coding and testing and the other watches and talks.
  They trade command of the keyboard back and forth
 for 7-7.5 hours of 
the workday. Despite the appearance that this invol
ves doubling of resources for each programming task
, pair programming 
helps to provide focus, foster learning, and ensure
 high quality code: 
 ﬁArguing on solutions, we do that always.  That™s h
ealthy.  We need to do it.  Because if we don™t do 
it, then we™re just 
going to blindly accept someone™s solution without 
even questioning like whether it is a good solution
 or not.  You don™t 
do a great product doing that.ﬂ [Pivot#1, Boulder] 

  Wagner et al.   
 The structuring of freedom in agile development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 
Pivots (as PL employees are known) talk about how p
air programming increases the number of people on t
he team who need 
to be run over by a bus in order for the project to
 fail or incur a serious cost or delay.  Pairs typi
cally rotate on a daily basis, 
which removes constraints (and hence builds freedom
) at the project level both because the individuals
 with knowledge of the 
code are more numerous and because team members dev
elop a holistic view of both the code and the proje
ct goals: 
 
ﬁ– On our current project we started with a new tec
hnology that only two people in the project had had
 experience with 
out of six developers–The two people worked togethe
r for a little while on it, built a base and now I 
think everybody is 
on the exact same plane with working with this tool
 and technology because you™re pairing every day an
d you have to 
share knowledge. – Because we rotate pairs and beca
use we™re constantly talking through problems and s
olving them 
together, even if someone is like the expert at thi
s technology that we adopted in the beginning, by t
he end, there™s no 
expert.ﬂ [Pivot#2, Boulder]   

 Many Pivots spoke about the intensity of coding in 
a pair for 95% of the work-day and expressed the ex
haustion they felt the 
first few weeks after being hired.  They also expre
ssed the benefits of that cultural norm: 
 ﬁSo another important part of Agile is try to keep 
it to ideally a 40-hour week schedule and not Œ I m
ean every project 
goes in times where you have to do a little bit mor
e but–most of the time we come in whenever our stan
d-up time is 
and–nine hours later, we leave–We also kind of advoc
ate an hour out for lunch and a lot of that is not 
just so we™re 
here longer, it™s just that when you™re pairing, it
™s a little bit more intense.  So that break to kin
d of 
clear out the thought
 really helps the quality of the afternoons.ﬂ [Pivot
#3, Denver] 
 
Another informant, reflecting on that intensity, cu
riously likened the team dynamics to being under mi
litary discipline: 
 
It™s better to be part of a team. And this goes bac
k to like the military and why a lot of veterans ca
n™t adjust to normal 
life anymore after being part of a tightly knit tea
m in Afghanistan, in Iraq–That™s part of what peopl
e get at Pivotal, is 
like they become part of a pack and those packs for
m very quickly through pairing and some of the othe
r kind of 
communication pieces that we have in place, where t
he feeling of being in a pack and having success an
d facing and 
meeting challenges as a team, getting through them 
and then succeeding, that™s actually much better Œ 
that™s more 
rewarding than that feeling of ‚I™m an individual w
ith specialized skills and people need me™. It™s mo
re powerful than 
that. [Pivot#4, Denver] 

 The practice of pair programming also helps the cus
tomers learn their own code base. Many times the cu
stomer 
representative, who is on-site 40 hours a week (whi
ch is a contract requirement), is an IT professiona
l who pairs with the 
Pivots and is seen as just another member of the te
am. In addition, the ﬁproduct ownerﬂ is employed by
 the customer and has 
the ultimate authority and responsibility for the p
roject™s direction.     
Material Affordances 

The PL offices are open plan and quite modern. One 
is likely to see Pivots organized on the office flo
or in small groups 
staring intently at computer monitors and talking. 
Pivots do not have their own machines and instead s
elect from any open 
machine on the development floor. Project teams loc
ate in an open space large enough to accommodate al
l members and to 
facilitate frequent rotation of programming pairs a
nd regular communication across team members. Durin
g the day you will 
see team members get up for short breaks. One or tw
o will be wheeling around on scooters as a way to m
ove through the 
office, or taking a few minutes for a game of Pivot
 Pong. Having scooters and ping pong tables allows 
developers to blow off 
steam and then return to coding with fresh eyes. So
, too, does the fully stocked kitchen. Pivots are g
iven everything they need 
in-house to support their work environment and ther
eby remove impediments to productivity. For their o
wn part, Pivots see 
these material affordances as supporting their work
. 
 
The pair-programming stations include one 27-24ﬂ fl
at iMac and 2 keyboards. These desktops all have th
e same 
configuration and are reimaged after each project e
nds. There are no laptops allowed on the floor. The
re is no email at the 
pairing stations; email kiosks are available around
 the floor, but are elevated off the ground, so req
uiring standing. When 
Pivots need to make a private call or have a meetin
g, they do so away from the main workspace in a sep
arate room.   
 When a pair sits down to begin programming, their f
irst step is to open Pivotal Tracker, a project man
agement tool developed 
in house. It is within this application that the 
stories
 that identify customer requirements are housed. Th
e stories are ranked in 
priority order by the customer and Pivots, and each
 story is ‚pointed™ from 1 to 3 where the number of
 points corresponds to 
the amount of time it is expected to take the team 
to create the corresponding code. The programming p
airs will view the 
 Wagner et al.   
 The structuring of freedom in agile development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 
story ‚backlog™ and select a story to work on by cl
icking ‚start.™ After a week or so, the team has a 
reliable ‚velocity™ showing 
how many stories they are averaging a week. The vel
ocity is a computer-based algorithm that allows Piv
ots to educate 
customers on ﬁthe Pivotal wayﬂ: 

   
ﬁTracker points out that this is our expectation of
 the next iteration. So it really forces the Produc
t Owner to make 
decisions about what™s most important to the busine
ss. It™s not an exact science but if the Product Ow
ner sees a three 
point story in a current iteration and says ‚well, 
that™s nice but we have this big conference in two 
weeks. So I want to 
move up this other story that does our marketing pa
ges and I can know the effect and I can constantly 
look at the 
projection and I can make decisions on what™s the f
ocus of this 40-hour week and how does that predict
 the future™, 
instead of saying ‚oh, we have to get all of this d
one™ ﬂ [Pivot#4, Denver] 
And so the Pivots™ and customers™ ability to influe
nce the timelines that are produced by Pivotal Trac
ker imparts a sense of 
freedom through the very control that it provides. 
 Moreover, the visibility that the tool provides ov
er the work gives a feeling 
of empowerment, because the tasks completed are val
idated as being relevant and important work: 
ﬁSo keeping track [and having] a simple mechanism -
 some number that goes up when you do more work or 
you do 
better work - the number goes up. The velocity repr
esents a lot of these things that make us feel prou
d, feel 
accomplished, feel good. That element makes teams f
ocus Œ it makes them know what to focus on because 
they have the 
shared to-do list. Then the whole velocity thing an
d that kind of accept/reject feedback mechanism, be
yond just like 
eliminating miscommunication like ‚oh, I meant the 
button should be on the left.™ There™s that, but th
ere™s also like 
there™s some 
validation
, like ‚my story got accepted! I™m happy.™ People r
eact well to that e-mail that they get, ‚your 
story™s been accepted™. Just a simple thing but lik
e it makes you want to do more. So it empowers and 
it also encourages 
people to do focused work and focused on that which
 is most important.ﬂ [Pivot#3, Denver] 
 That visibility is built into the testing of the co
de that pairs produce. Agile development follows a 
test driven development 
(TDD) process. Test cases are developed based on th
e stories, the narrative versions of what needs to 
be coded. For a given 
piece of code, the Pivots will write an automated t
est that takes into account all possible inputs, er
rors, and outputs. Each time 
a test is created and run the developers also do re
gression testing to ensure that the current test do
esn™t introduce a problem 
into the pre-existing code. Pairs then write code t
hat will pass the test Œ and here is where the visi
bility comes in Œ and this is 
indicated by the code turning the green color of a 
cucumber in the test environment.  
 
This approach works for all levels of testing and e
nables the customer to view the feature and provide
 necessary feedback 
before the code is officially checked into the code
 repository. This occurs through a specific technol
ogy-reliant process: 
 ﬁI push my changes up to GitHub, click Finish on my
 story in Pivotal Tracker, wait for the build to go
 green, deploy to 
staging. Then, click Deliver on all the stories tha
t have just been deployed. Other stories were most 
likely ready to be 
delivered as well, so I™ll check that they were act
ually included in the deployment, and then Deliver 
them in Tracker.ﬂ 
[Pivot#5, Boulder] 
It is then time for the customer to go into Tracker
 and accept or reject stories awaiting their review
 on the staging server. In 
aggregate, the visibility is a matter of public rec
ord: The status of the build is clearly visible thr
oughout the office with large 
ﬁbuild monitorsﬂ mounted from the ceiling. 

DISCUSSION: STRUCTURING FREEDOM IN AGILE DEVELOPMEN
T 
Table 1 identifies some of the social conventions a
nd material affordances that we have identified in 
the PL environment.  
This collection represents a super-set of those tha
t relate to pair-programming (and therefore anticip
ates an expanded 
successor to this conference paper). Notwithstandin
g the casual style of the work environment, the sco
oters and ping pong, or 
the role that pair choice plays in the selection an
d conduct of the programming work, the tabled eleme
nts point to the high 
degree of sociomaterial structuring in producing an
d reproducing the PL way of doing work. The method 
relies for its 
effectiveness on everyone adhering to social practi
ces and using artifacts in very specific ways. Phys
ical-spatial design and 
norms both reinforce behavior. Distractions such as
 email and personal software applications are desig
ned out of the pair-
programming stations. Phone calls are made away fro
m the programming area. Even time itself is tightly
 bounded, with 
office and team ﬁstand-upsﬂ to start the day™s work
, pairing to help enforce indefinitely a constant p
ace (see Principle #2, 
above), and norms that proscribe no work on weekend
s, evenings, or beyond forty hours per week. Meanwh
ile, one™s work is 
subject to public illumination through devices (e.g
., cucumber code and ceiling monitors) that constit
ute a kind of collective 
panopticon (Foucault, 1995).  
 Wagner et al.   
 The structuring of freedom in agile development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 
From a traditional project control perspective, the
se social and material arrangements could be interp
reted as limiting the 
individual developer™s freedom, for example by disa
llowing flexible working schedules based on persona
l temporal rhythms 
(the late night coder, the crunch time sprinter). A
nd yet what might otherwise appear as constraint, o
ur informants widely 
experience as liberating. We might suppose that the
re is some requisite balance of structure vs. freed
om that provides enough 
of the latter to make the former palatable to those
 who work under this regime. On the contrary, howev
er, we will propose 
that 
balance
 is the wrong way to think about it.  
What is experienced by individual programmers as fr
eedom, and what helps instantiate in agile process,
 more broadly, the 
adaptability that molds the code to client needs, i
s made from
 the very structure that control-based perspectives
 commonly 
misread as constraint. In this sense, the programme
r, the task, and the sociomaterial work environment
 co-constitute one 
another on an on-going basis. As we suggested earli
er, the substance and meaning of individual action 
is fundamentally 
relational, and if materials, tools, other people, 
and the very architecture of space and time give af
fordance to the agile 
programmer, then the programmer herself gives affor
dance in turn to this structure. In this way, the s
ociomaterial work 
environment does not so much constrain practice but
 rather enables actors to get things done in ways t
hat meet the needs of 
clients. Power is thus a productive rather than an 
inhibitive force. 
FUTURE RESEARCH 

In considering possible future directions for resea
rch, there is an obvious opportunity, within the cu
rrent case, to extend our 
analysis into other domains of activity, such as pr
oject management. Also, the imbrications of the soc
ial and material need to 
be explored more fully, noting especially how socia
l conventions (such as proscriptions on email acces
s) are influential in 
making material affordances consequential in practi
ce.   
Our research is subject to the customary limits tha
t go with the study of a single case. It would be i
nteresting to compare, 
then, how different social conventions and material
 affordances might be brought to bear in constituti
ng agile practices that 
conform equally well to the Manifesto™s values. 

We note also that the elements of any agile environ
ment are not there by accident. Instead, social con
ventions and material 
affordances are subject to design, careful selectio
n, and evolutionary modification. This fact points 
toward research into the 
genesis of these arrangements and the role of manag
ement in bringing them about. 
Finally, the co-constitution we have remarked upon 
should not be regarded as unproblematic. Human and 
non-human 
participants both can decline enrolment in the soci
omaterial network that makes up an agile developmen
t program.  Much as 
we ought to explore design, then, we should also st
udy the response of the designees.  
ﬁAgile Values–
 Social Conventions (SC) and Material Affordances (
MA) 
Individuals and 

interactions over 

processes and tools 
 Email Kiosk stations (MA) 
 40 hour work week (SC)  
 Velocity calculation in Pivotal Tracker (MA)  
 Open plan office space 
 Kitchen stocked with food, catered meals (MA) 
 ﬁStandupﬂ 5 minute meetings and associated white bo
ard (SC & MA) 
Working 

software over 

comprehensive 

documentation 
 Test driven development and Cucumber software (MA) 
 Build monitors (MA) 
 Story creation and ranking, accept/reject (MA) 
 Ranking in inception with chocolate (MA) 
Customer 

collaboration over 

contract negotiation 
 Co-location of customer with Pivots at Pivotal Labs
 office (SC) 
 Iteration Planning Meeting (IPM); Retrospective mee
tings (SC) 
 Inception meeting Œ white boards, note cards, colla
borative ranking (SC & MA) 
Responding to 

change over 

following a plan 
 Retrospective meetings (SC) 
 Re-ranking of stories, movement from Icebox, backlo
g (MC) 
Table 1:  Agile Manifesto Values and Their Enactmen
t in PL 
   Wagner et al.   
 The structuring of freedom in agile development 
Proceedings of the Nineteenth Americas Conference o
n Information Systems, 
Chicago, Illinois, August 15-17, 2013
. 
REFERENCES 

 1.
 Agerfalk, P. J., Fitzgerald, B. and Slaughter, S. A
. (2009) Flexible and distributed information syste
ms development: 
state of the art and research challenges, 
Information Systems Research
, 20, 3, 317-328.  
2.
 Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A
., Cunningham, W., Fowler, M., et al. (2001) Manife
sto for 
agile software development, retrieved 17 February, 
2003, from 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org
.  
3.
 Cao, L. and Ramesh, B. (2008) Agile requirements en
gineering practices: An empirical study, 
Software, IEEE
, 25, 
1, 60-67. 
4.
 Conboy, K. (2009). Agility from first principles: r
econstructing the concept of agility in information
 systems 
development, 
Information Systems Research
, 20, 3, 329-354.  
5.
 Conboy, K., Fitzgerald, B. and Golden, W. (2005) Ag
ility in information systems development: A three-t
iered 
framework, in R. Baskerville, L. Mathiassen, J. Pri
es-Heje & J. DeGross (Eds.), 
Business agility and information 
technology diffusion
, IFIP TC8 WG 8.6 International Working Conference 
May 8-11, 2005, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 
Springer, New York, 36-49. 
6.
 Dybå, T. and Dingsøyr, T. (2008) Empirical studies 
of agile software development: A systematic review,
 
Information and Software Technology
, 50, 9-10, 833Œ859.  
7.
 Fitzgerald, B., Hartnett, G. and Conboy, K. (2006) 
Customising agile methods to software practices at 
Intel 
Shannon, 
European Journal of Information Systems
, 15, 200-213.  
8.
 Foucault, M. (1995) 
Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison
, 2
nd
 edition, Vintage Books, New York.  
9.
 Fruhling, A. and de Vreede, G.-J. (2006) Field expe
riences with eXtreme programming: Developing an eme
rgency 
response system, 
Journal of Management Information Systems
, 22, 4, 39-68.  
10.
 Harris, M. L., Collins, R. W. and Hevner, A. R. (20
09) Control of flexible software development under 
uncertainty, 
Information Systems Research
, 20, 3, 400-419.  
11.
 Highsmith, J. (2002) 
Agile Software Development Ecosystems
, Addison-Wesley, Boston. 
12.
 Hutchby, I. (2001) Technologies, Texts and Affordan
ces, 
Sociology
, 35, 2, 441-456.  
13.
 Laanti, M., Outi, S. and Abrahamsson, P. (2011) Agi
le methods rapidly replacing traditional methods at
 Nokia: A 
survey of opinions of agile transformation, 
Information and Software Technology
, 53, 3, 276-286. 
14.
 Maruping, L. M., Venkatesh, V. and Agarwal, R. (200
9) A control theory perspective on agile methodolog
y use and 
changing user requirements, 
Information Systems Research
, 20, 3, 277-399.  
15.
 Pollock, N. and D™Adderio, L. (2012) Give Me a Two-
by-two Matrix and I Will Create the Market: Ranking
s, 
Graphic Visualisations, and Sociomateriality, 
Accounting, Organizations and Society
, 37, 8, 565-584. 
16.
 Sarker, S., Munson, C. L., Sarker, S. and Chakrabor
ty, S. (2009) Assessing the relative contribution o
f the facets of 
agility to distributed systems development success:
 An analytic hierarchy process approach, 
European Journal of 
Information Systems
, 18, 1, 285-299.  
17.
 Sarker, S. and Sarker, S. (2009) Exploring agility 
in distributed information systems development team
s: An 
interpretive study in and offshoring context, 
Information Systems Research
, 20, 3, 440-461.  
18.
 Schatzki, T. R., K. Knorr Cetina and E. von Savigny
, Eds. (2000) 
The Practice Turn in Contemporary Theory.
 Routledge, London and New York. 
19.
 Shultze, U. (2000) A Confessional Account of an Eth
nography about Knowledge Work, 
MIS Quarterly
, 24, 1 3-41. 
Published by: Management Information Systems Resear
ch Center, University of Minnesota 
Stable URL: http://www.jstor.org/stable/3250978. Ac
cessed: 27/09/2012 23:25 
20.
 Sharp, H. and Robinson, H. (2004) An ethnographic s
tudy of XP practice, Empirical Software Engineering
, 9, 4, 
353-375.  
21.
 Strode, D. E., Huff, S. Hope, B., and Link, S. (201
2) Coordination in co-located agile software develo
pment 
projects, 
The Journal of Systems and Software
, 85, 1222-1238. 
 
 
 
 