 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Victoria University of WellingtonVictoria University of WellingtonVictoria University of WellingtonAMCIS 2009 Proceedings.   Leadership Perceptions in Agile and Traditional So
ftware Projects 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 1 
Leadership in Software Development: 
Comparing Perceptions of Agile and Traditional Proj
ect 
Managers 
 Haibo Yang 
Victoria University of Wellington 
sodatea@gmail.com 
Sid Huff 
Victoria University of Wellington 
Sid.huff@vuw.ac.nz 
 Diane Strode 
Victoria University of Wellington 
Diane.strode@vuw.ac.nz 
 
ABSTRACT 

Information systems development has always been a f
ocal point of IS research. The most widely understo
od traditional 
methods for developing information systems are base
d on the ﬁwaterfallﬂ life cycle model. Recently, ag
ile methods have 
drawn increasing attention from IS practitioners an
d researchers worldwide, as a response to the short
comings of the 
traditional methods. However, the impact of agile m
ethods on project management is still not fully und
erstood as empirical 
studies are scarce. This study uses a full range le
adership model as a theoretical lens to analyze pro
ject managers™ perceptions 
of appropriate leadership styles when leading agile
 vs. traditional software development projects. The
 findings show that 
project managers perceive a need for more transform
ational leadership to achieve success in agile proj
ects as compared to 
traditional projects.  

Keywords 

Agile methods, software development, leadership, pr
oject management. 
 
INTRODUCTION 

Management of information systems (IS) projects is 
a critical challenge to IS practitioners as well as
 a focal point of IS 
research.  High IS project failure rates have been 
reported continuously for decades (Standish Group, 
2001)  Recent high-
profile project failures such as the FBI Trilogy Pr
ogram (McGroddy and Herbert, 2004) and the US
 IRS system update 
(Varon, 2004) remind us that IS project problems ar
e increasingly in the public eye, and failures can 
cost tens, if not hundreds 
of millions of dollars.  Improving outcomes from IS
 projects is a critical challenge to both practitio
ners and researchers. 
In the quest to improve IS project outcomes, altern
ative approaches to organizing and conducting IS de
velopment have 
arisen.  Prominent among the new approaches is a cl
ass of system development methodologies commonly re
ferred to as 
agile
 methods (Beck et al., 2001).  Agile methods adopt a
 more flexible and responsive approach to system de
velopment which, 
proponents suggest, is more appropriate for fast ch
anging business environments (Highsmith, 2003).  Ag
ile methods stand in 
contrast to well-established ﬁtraditionalﬂ methods 
which are plan-driven and based around the sequenti
al waterfall 
development concept (Boehm and Turner, 2005). 

To be successful, agile methods require a different
 project management style and approach than do trad
itional methods.  The 
command-and-control, plan-driven project management
 approach that characterizes management of traditio
nal development 
projects should, proponents argue, give way to a mo
re facilitative and collaborative management approa
ch when agile 
methods are adopted (Nerur et al., 2005). 

There is little doubt that project leadership is an
 important factor in project success (Thite, 2000).
  A meta-analysis by 
Hauschildt et al. (2000) showed that human issues i
ncluding project leadership and top management supp
ort mattered far 
more for project success than did technical issues.
  Furthermore, in their study of 24 project manager
s, Leban and Zulauf 
(2004) reported that project managers™ leadership h
as a strong impact on project members™ performance.
    Leadership Perceptions in Agile and Traditional So
ftware Projects 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 2 
Surprisingly, there has been little empirical resea
rch analyzing project management leadership needs o
f agile projects and 
how they differ from those of traditional projects.
  The objective of this paper, then, is to empirica
lly explore the differences 
in appropriate leadership behaviors, if any, betwee
n agile and traditional project management, 
as perceived by project 
managers
, and to uncover the underlying reasons. 
 
LITERATURE REVIEW 

A brief literature review of traditional and agile 
system development methods, project management, and
 leadership is 
provided below. 

 
Traditional and Agile Development Methods 

Traditional system development methods, also known 
as plan-driven, or ﬁheavyweightﬂ methods have domin
ated the system 
development field for decades (Boehm and Turner, 20
05). 
The key principles of traditional methods have emer
ged from engineering practice.  These methods view 
the system 
development process as a one-way ﬁwaterfallﬂ beginn
ing with an overall development plan, followed by r
equirement analysis 
through system design, system building, to the end 
product (Boehm and Turner, 2003).  Specific methodo
logy packages are 
typified by Structured Systems Analysis and Design 
Methodology (Duncan et al., 1995). 
Traditional methods assume relatively static system
 requirements which are negotiated with customers a
nd documented in 
contracts at the beginning of a project. These meth
ods rely on thorough up-front planning and requirem
ents analysis for 
predicting the foreseeable pitfalls and controlling
 the development process (Boehm and Turner, 2003). 
 Traditional methods 
also require comprehensive documentation, thoroughl
y recording all the details of each step, to mainta
in stability and control 
(Boehm, 2002). 

The underlying assumption of relatively static syst
em requirements implicit in traditional development
 methods rarely applies 
in today™s rapidly changing business environment.  
Attempting to capture the system™s requirements in 
advance in such 
environments is effectively impossible; by the time
 the system has been developed according to the ori
ginal requirements, the 
organization™s processes have changed sufficiently 
that the emergent information system fails to match
 the current 
requirements (MacCormack et. al. 2001).  Project fa
ilure in such situations is common (Gibbs, 1994). 
Agile methods have emerged in response to the misma
tch noted above (Fitzgerald, 2006).  In contrast to
 traditional methods, 
agile methods are characterized by short iterative 
and incremental development processes and high leve
ls of collaboration. 
They are designed to be effective in high change en
vironments using techniques that support feedback a
nd learning; they 
emphasize the production of preliminary working sof
tware early in the development cycle (Beck et al., 
2001). 
Agile methods are based around four core values (Be
ck et al., 2001): 
 Individuals and interactions 
over
 processes and tools; 
 Working software 
over
 comprehensive documentation; 
 Customer collaboration 
over 
contract negotiation; 
 Responding to change 
over
 following a plan. 
Since their inception, agile methods have attracted
 much attention and interest from IS practitioners 
and researchers (Ambler, 
2007; Dyba and Dingosyr, 2008) in their search for 
ways to speed up the delivery and improve the suita
bility of their final 
systems. Examples of popular agile development meth
odologies include Extreme Programming (XP) (Beck, 1
999) and 
Scrum (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002). 

Agile methods accept that business requirements are
 inevitably changing, so they aim to conduct ﬁjust 
enoughﬂ requirements 
analysis (Highsmith, 2003) to start system developm
ent as soon as possible.  Requirements analysis wit
hin agile methods 
emphasizes adaptive learning rather than a conventi
onal planning process, relying on ﬁplanning with th
e understanding that 
everything is uncertainﬂ (Nerur et al., 2005, p.77)
.  Also, in order to minimize the likelihood of sys
tem misfit, agile methods 
use short and flexible development cycles and deliv
er working software to customers frequently for val
idation (Nerur et al., 
2005).  Initially agile methods were considered to 
be suitable in small, collocated, greenfield, busin
ess projects with high user 
interface needs, and less suitable in projects that
 involve large teams, complex systems, contractors,
 geographically 
distributed teams, safety  critical systems,  syste
ms with extensive legacy components, or those lacki
ng a user interface 
   Leadership Perceptions in Agile and Traditional So
ftware Projects 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 3 
(Beck, 2000; Schwaber & Beedle, 2002). However ther
e is some research indicating that, with adaptation
, these methods can 
be used under some of these conditions (Agerfalk & 
Fitzgerald, 2006).
  
Agile versus Traditional Project Management
 The academic literature examining project managemen
t in an agile method environment is limited and mos
tly non-empirical 
(i.e., normative, opinion-based).  For example, Tab
le 1 compares project management practice in agile 
versus traditional 
environments along three dimensions (Vinekar et al.
, 2006). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Adapted from Vinekar et al. (2006) 
 Highsmith (2003) has argued that ﬁwhen using agile 
methods, the traditional role of a project manager 
as planner, organizer 
and controller disappears, to be replaced by the ro
le of a facilitator who effectively manages the col
laboration of team 
members without stifling their creativity.ﬂ  Some o
bservers have suggested that an agile project manag
er should be a mentor 
or coach (Coram and Bohner, 2005), a coordinator (N
erur et al., 2005), or a ﬁprotectorﬂ (Boehm and Tur
ner, 2005) to 
guarantee the effective collaboration of the projec
t team. These interpretations imply that, in contra
st with the process-centric 
style of the traditional approach, agile project ma
nagers should work in a more people-centric way (Ne
rur et al., 2005). 
Table 1 suggests that, in contrast to a ﬁcommand an
d controlﬂ management style commonly used in tradit
ional projects, agile 
project managers rely on ﬁleadership and collaborat
ionﬂ (Cockburn and Highsmith, 2001; Coram and Bohne
r, 2005).  
However, there is no empirical research to date exa
mining the validity of this presumption. 
 
Project Leadership and Leadership Theory
 A number of academic studies have shown that projec
t leadership is an important factor in project succ
ess (Thite, 2000; 
Barber and Warn, 2005).  A Member Needs Assessment 
Survey, conducted by the Project Management Institu
te (PMI, 
2001a) in 2000, showed that the three capabilities 
found to be most important to professional project 
managers are leadership 
skills (vision and motivating others), people skill
s (getting along with others), and management skill
s (directing and 
managing others).  Project managers™ leadership is 
unquestionably an important determinant of project 
success. 
Studies about leadership in projects mainly focus o
n the impact of leadership rather than specific lea
dership behaviors. 
However, the theory underlying those studies is bas
ed on 
full range leadership theory
 (Avolio and Bass, 1991). This theory 
has been widely recognized and adopted into leaders
hip studies for over a decade (Lievens et al., 1997
; Boerner et al., 2007).  
Full range leadership theory provides the theoretic
al basis of the present investigation. 
Earlier studies of leadership emphasized traits
 (Weber, 1905), contingencies (Fiedler, 1967), and e
motion and intelligence 
(Goleman et al., 2002). However previous leadership
 models have been criticized for failing to explain
 the full range of 
existing leadership styles and behaviors (Avolio an
d Bass, 1991; Bass, 1998).  In response to such cri
ticism, the concepts of 
transactional and transformational leadership have 
emerged. First proposed by Burns (1978)
, 
the concepts were later
 refined 
by Avolio and Bass (1991), who also added 
Laissez-faire leadership,
 resulting in the 
full range leadership model. 
 
 
    Leadership Perceptions in Agile and Traditional So
ftware Projects 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 4 
 
 
 
 
  Figure 1. Full Range Leadership Continuum   (Adapte
d from Bass, 1998) 
 The full range leadership model has received a grea
t deal of attention and interest from both academic
 and practitioner 
communities. It has become a focal point for a larg
e body of leadership research. Each leadership styl
e in the model is 
discussed in detail below. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
Adapted from Bass and Riggo (2006) 
 Transformational leadership is concerned with devel
oping followers to their fullest potential.  Kuhner
t and Lewis (1987) 
describe transformational leadership as deriving fr
om the personal values and beliefs of leaders, not 
in an exchange of 
commodities between leader and followers. A transfo
rmational leader is ﬁone who articulates a vision o
f the future that can 
be shared with peers and subordinates, intellectual
ly stimulates subordinates, pays attention to indiv
idual differences among 
people, is likely to use personal resources includi
ng time, knowledge and experience and serves as a c
oach teacher and 
mentorﬂ (Shivers-Blackwell, 2004, p.43). 

Transformational leadership consists of four dimens
ions: First, 
idealized influence
 describes leaders who act as strong role 
models for followers to emulate (Bass, 1998). These
 leaders usually have very high standards of moral 
and ethical conduct 
and can be counted on to do the right thing. 
Inspirational motivation
 describes leaders who communicate high expectation
s to 
followers, inspire them, and motivate them to commi
t themselves to the team (Northouse, 1997; Bass, 19
98). Thirdly, 
intellectual stimulation
 includes leadership that stimulates followers to b
e creative and innovative, and to challenge their o
wn 
beliefs and values as well as those of the leader a
nd the team (Northouse, 1997; Bass, 1998). Last, 
individualized 
consideration
 refers to leadership that provides a supportive cl
imate in which the leader listens carefully to the 
individual 
needs of followers (Northouse, 1997). Leaders act a
s coaches and advisors while assisting members to a
chieve and grow.  
Bass (1998) contends that transformational leadersh
ip is likely to emerge in an unstable, uncertain en
vironment. 
Transactional leadership is identified as largely ﬁ
contingent reward
ﬂ based: leader-follower relationships are based on
 a 
series of exchanges of reward to the followers for 
efforts and performance. The leader clarifies the s
tandards for compliance. 
Also the leader specifies what constitutes ineffect
ive performance and may punish followers for failin
g to meet those 
standards (Bass, 1998). 

Transactional leadership embodies two key aspects. 
 First, 
contingent reward 
refers to an exchange process between leaders 
and followers in which effort by followers is excha
nged for specified rewards (Northouse, 1997). The l
eader tries to obtain 
agreement from followers on what needs to be done, 
and what the payoffs will be for doing it.
 Secondly, 
management-by-
exception 
refers to leadership that involves corrective criti
cism, and negative feedback (Bass, 1998).   Transac
tional leaders 
   Leadership Perceptions in Agile and Traditional So
ftware Projects 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 5 
can be effective to the extent that they clarify ex
pectations and goals, but they generally neglect to
 focus on developing the 
long-term potential of followers (Lievens et al., 1
997). 
In contrast with transactional leadership, laissez-
faire leadership comprises non-transactional behavi
ors. Laissez-faire 
leadership is effectively the avoidance of leadersh
ip. Necessary decisions are not made. Actions are d
elayed. Responsibilities 
of leadership are ignored. This ﬁhands offﬂ leaders
hip has been reported as having a strongly negative
 effect on team effort 
and performance (Skogstad et al., 2007). 

 
Research Questions
 Despite the rapidly growing popularity of agile met
hods in commercial practice, the implications of th
is for project 
management Œ and particularly project leadership Œ 
are still not well understood.  In addition, most i
nsights and suggestions 
provided by previous researchers have been based on
 judgment and personal experience, as opposed to em
pirical 
investigation. 

The objective of the present study is to explore th
e leadership differences, if any, between agile and
 traditional project 
management, and attempt to understand the underlyin
g reasons for any differences. The following two re
search questions are 
posed:
 1. What leadership behaviors do traditional softwar
e project managers think are most appropriate for t
raditional 
projects? Why? 

2. What leadership behaviors do agile software proj
ect managers think are most appropriate for agile p
rojects? 
Why? 
The full range leadership model provides our theore
tical lens, and the model™s seven leadership aspect
s comprise the 
leadership behaviors we investigated.  Details of o
ur research approach and methodology are described 
next, followed by our 
findings and conclusions from the study. 

 
RESEARCH METHOD 

This study utilized both quantitative and qualitati
ve methods, in part to provide a degree of triangul
ation.  Quantitative data 
were gathered using a questionnaire developed for t
he present study, and based on the Multifactor Lead
ership Questionnaire 
(MLQ) (Bass and Avolio, 1992). The MLQ was tailored
 to fit the context of a software development proje
ct. The tailored 
version included some demographic questions, togeth
er with 21 questions to assess transformational, tr
ansactional and 
laissez-faire leadership. Each question was answere
d on a five point Likert scale, from ﬁStrongly disa
greeﬂ (0) to ﬁStrongly 
agreeﬂ (4).  The MLQ has been thoroughly validated 
and is widely recognized in leadership research lit
erature (Lievens et al., 
1997; Boerner et al., 2007). 

Qualitative data were gathered from a series of sem
i-structured interviews with project managers. As t
his study sought 
explanations and personal insights from the partici
pants, semi-structured interviews allowed them to e
xplain situations in 
more detail and expand on specific topics if necess
ary (Creswell, 2003). The semi-structured interview
s were also based on 
the MLQ. Each interview was structured around seven
 sets of questions, derived from the seven leadersh
ip dimensions. 
Study participants were recruited from the local co
mmunity of system development project managers in W
ellington New 
Zealand.  Upon initial contact (via telephone or em
ail), the purpose of the study was described, and c
ertain demographic data 
were requested from the potential participant. Base
d on the information provided, a final set of parti
cipants was selected 
according to pre-determined criteria. 

First, the participants selected had to have the jo
b titles of ﬁproject managerﬂ and be working in the
 software development 
sector; second they had to have been using either a
gile, or traditional, development methods for the p
ast three years. We also 
sought participants from different organizations, o
f varying sizes (as measured by number of employees
).  Selecting 
participants from diverse organizational settings h
elped to mitigate the possibility of a common opini
on formed because of 
the same organizational culture influences rather t
han the influence of the SDM used. 
Eight software project managers from seven differen
t organizations agreed to participate in this study
.  Four were managing 
agile development projects, and four were managing 
traditional projects. 
Each participant was emailed a copy of the survey i
nstrument (along with other information describing 
the purpose of the 
study, human ethics sign-off, etc.), and asked to c
omplete it and return it to the researchers.  The i
ndividual interviews lasted 
between 30 and 50 minutes, and were conducted at th
e participants™ work locations. The participants we
re assured of 
   Leadership Perceptions in Agile and Traditional So
ftware Projects 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 6 
anonymity and confidentiality in order to encourage
 open opinions and views. With participants™ signed
 consent, all eight 
interviews were digitally recorded. The recording w
as transcribed soon after the interview. The transc
ripts were then returned 
to the participants for validation. 

Interview data were analyzed following the approach
 described by Creswell (2003).  The transcripts wer
e studied in depth, 
and topics identified, labelled, and grouped into t
he seven pre-defined full range leadership categori
es.  A two-layer coding 
scheme was developed. The first layer consisted of 
the seven aspects of leadership. The second layer w
as determined from 
the topics identified in the interview transcripts.
  The next step was to refine the coding scheme ite
ratively generating 
interpretation and themes. From that, a narrative w
as written to convey the findings, and an interpret
ation of the narrative was 
conducted.  As a final step, the interview findings
 were compared with earlier findings from agile lit
erature and leadership 
theory. 

Internal validity was addressed principally through
 the use of the well-validated MLQ instrument. Also
, care was taken in 
having the interview transcripts reviewed and verif
ied by the participants.  Strong claims for externa
l validity cannot be made 
here; a larger, random sample could be employed in 
future research to improve external validity.  Reli
ability was 
strengthened through the mixed qualitative and quan
titative data gathering employed, and via a pre-tes
ting of both the 
questionnaire and the interview protocol with two e
xperienced project managers. 
 
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

The eight participants, all based in Wellington, we
re from seven different countries on five continent
s Œ i.e., they presented a 
diverse set of backgrounds.  There were four men an
d four women; their ages ranged from 30 to 50; and 
all eight had at least 
6 years™ PM experience.  Project team size ranged f
rom 5 to over 50 people.  Other demographic details
 are given in Table 3. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Questionnaire Results 

Three individual questions were used to measure eac
h of the seven leadership dimensions. Summative sca
les were used to 
determine a score for the corresponding leadership 
dimension, for each respondent. Following Bass and 
Avoilo (1992), a 
score from 9-12 is considered as ﬁhigh,ﬂ i.e., the 
respondent considered that this aspect is important
 to his or her project™s 
success; a score in the range 5-8 means the respond
ent considered the aspect to be of moderate importa
nce to the success of 
the project; while a 0-4 score means that the respo
ndent considered this aspect as unimportant to the 
project™s success. The 
   Leadership Perceptions in Agile and Traditional So
ftware Projects 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 7 
012345678910
11
12
Idealized
Influence
Inspirational
Motivation 
Intellectual
Stimulation 
Individualized

Consideration
Contingent
Reward 
Management-
by-exception 
Laissez-faire
Leadership 
Score
PA
PB
PC
PD
TransformationalTransactionalLaissez-faire
responses to the questionnaire were first divided i
nto two groups, agile and traditional, and the fina
l scores of each group 
were calculated separately. To determine whether th
ere was a common opinion on a given aspect, consens
us was deemed to 
have occurred when the distance between the highest
 score and the lowest score was no larger than 3 po
ints. 
 
Distributions for the Agile Project Managers 

Figure 3 provides the score distribution of the fou
r agile project managers across all seven leadershi
p factors. Each color 
represents an individual participant (PA--PD). 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 Figure 3 Œ Score distributions for the agile PMs 
 
All four aspects of transformational leadership wer
e rated 9 or higher by every participant (with one 
exception: one 
participant rated one dimension an 8). Some scores 
on idealized influence and inspirational motivation
 reached the maximum 
12. This indicates that all four agile project mana
gers felt that all of the transformational leadersh
ip dimensions were very 
important in managing agile projects. Furthermore, 
none of the individuals differed by more than 3 poi
nts on any of the four 
importance ratings, thereby demonstrating a high le
vel of consensus among agile project managers that 
all four 
transformational leadership behaviors are seen as i
mportant to their project success. 
For the dimensions reflecting transactional leaders
hip, the scores were lower, and  did not show as mu
ch convergence.
 Contingent reward
 received scores varying from 3 to 9 points, wherea
s 
management-by-exception
 scores ranged from 5 to 10 
points. This dispersed score distribution suggests 
that there is less consensus among agile project ma
nagers as to  importance 
of these two dimensions with regard to project succ
ess. 
Finally, for the dimensions reflecting 
laissez-faire 
leadership, the scores were very low. No participan
t rated this dimension 
higher than 4. Laissez-faire leadership was commonl
y perceived by agile project managers as unimportan
t to their project 
success. 

 
Distributions for the Traditional Project Managers 

Figure 4 provides the score distribution of the fou
r traditional project managers. As with Figure 3, e
ach participant is 
represented by a single color (PE--PH). 
   Leadership Perceptions in Agile and Traditional So
ftware Projects 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 8 
012345678910
11
12
Idealized
Influence
Inspirational
Motivation 
Intellectual
Stimulation 
Individualized

Consideration
Contingent
Reward 
Management-
by-exception 
Laissez-faire
Leadership 
Score
PE
PF
PG
PH
TransformationalTransactionalLaissez-faire
For the dimensions reflecting transformational lead
ership, only 
individualized consideration
 was rated by the participants 
consistently around 9 points (i.e., ﬁhighﬂ). This l
eadership behavior tended to be commonly perceived 
by traditional project 
managers as important to their project success. 
Inspirational motivation
 was rated relatively consistently, although in the
 
ﬁmoderately importantﬂ range. The other two factors
 were scored diversely; no common opinion can be id
entified from the 
data. The means, however, were again in the ﬁmodera
teﬂ range. 
For the aspects reflecting transactional leadership
, 
contingent reward
 was scored lower and was more widely dispersed 
therefore no common opinion could be seen, while 
management-by-exception
 was rated relatively consistently, in the upper 
end of the moderate range. 

Finally, as with the agile managers, 
laissez-faire
 scored consistently under 4. It tended to be consi
dered by traditional project 
managers as unimportant to their project success. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 4 - Score distributions for the traditional 
PMs 
 
Comparison Across Groups 

Table 4 provides a comparison of the quantitative d
ata between agile and traditional groups. The major
 differences between 
these two groups occurred on the transformational l
eadership aspects. For the agile group, the four as
pects associated with 
transformational leadership all fall into the high 
interval, while for the traditional group, only one
 of these four dimensions 
scored 9.25 on average; the other three were rated 
much lower, from 6.75 to 7.5, which put them in the
 middle interval. 
For the aspects reflecting transactional leadership
, both groups tended to have similar scores. Both g
roups™ scores placed both 
aspects of transactional leadership in the middle i
nterval. 
Laissez-faire leadership behavior for both the agil
e group and the traditional group was rated in the 
low interval.   
In summary, all four transformational leadership as
pects were consistently and highly rated by the agi
le project managers, 
whereas three of the four were rated ﬁmediumﬂ by th
e traditional project managers (only 
individualized consideration
 was 
rated highly by the traditional PMs).  The traditio
nal PMs also evidenced more dispersion in their rat
ings of transformational 
leadership aspects.  Transactional leadership was r
ated in a similar way by both groups, and the ratin
g scores were quite 
dispersed. Laissez-faire leadership was consistentl
y rated lowest by both groups. 
While the sample size in this study is too small to
 allow us to make statistically significant conclus
ions, nonetheless the data 
are suggestive and intriguing: Agile PMs would appe
ar to need to focus strongly on their transformatio
nal leadership 
   Leadership Perceptions in Agile and Traditional So
ftware Projects 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 9 
capabilities, whereas these are generally less impo
rtant for traditional PMs.  Transactional leadershi
p capabilities are of only 
moderate importance regardless of the development a
pproach being taken. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The question remains, however, why do the PMs perce
ive these differences?  In order to uncover some an
swers to the ﬁwhyﬂ 
question, we completed the second part of the study
, face-to-face semi-structured interviews with each
 PM. The interviews 
themselves were structured around the same seven as
pects of leadership that guided the survey stage.  
Analysis of the 
transcript data unveiled a variety of underlying pe
rceived driving forces.  Space limitations prevent 
us from providing 
extensive detail regarding the interview findings (
these are available from the authors).  The key fin
dings are contained in 
Table 5. 

Laissez-faire leadership was consistently viewed ne
gatively by the interview subjects, so has been omi
tted from the table. 
As shown in Table 5, the rows labeled ﬁopinionsﬂ su
mmarize the opinions of the participants on each le
adership dimension. 
The ﬁmajor reasons unveiledﬂ row in Table 5 represe
nts the major reasons underlying those opinions, de
termined from the 
interview data. 

The agile group consider
 idealized influence
, as shown in Table 5, to be important to project s
uccess because it contributes to 
the trust building between  the agile team and the 
project manager. Such trust is critical because mos
t activities in an agile 
project are not pre-structured. 
Inspirational motivation
 is believed to be important because it contributes
 to project agility and 
project adaptability, allowing the team to take ini
tiative in embracing changes.  
Intellectual stimulation 
is suggested to be 
important because it contributes to agile project p
lanning.  Frequent, short planning sessions require
 a constant stream of 
innovation and creativity. 
Individualized consideration
 is highly emphasized by agile project managers, as
 it contributes 
directly to team satisfaction and indirectly to tea
m collaboration and knowledge sharing, and produces
 better internal 
relationships among team members. The four agile PM
s held varying views of the role and relevance of t
ransactional 
leadership, with no consistent pattern emerging (th
is is also reflected in the survey data). 
In contrast, traditional PMs shared little or no co
mmon views on three of the four transactional leade
rship aspects. They were, 
however, strongly consistent in their perception th
at 
individual consideration
 contributes to team satisfaction which may lead 
to a better project performance. The traditional PM
s also share a common view on 
contingent reward
, and 
management-by-
exception
. They generally believed that 
contingent reward
 is an appropriate incentive mechanism only when th
e team 
members are sensitive to monetary rewards, but is u
nlikely to be important to project success; while t
hey viewed 
   Leadership Perceptions in Agile and Traditional So
ftware Projects 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 10 
management-by-exception
 as the usual way of working, as a standard organiz
ational procedure. This finding seems to support 
the proposition of Bass (1998) that when the enviro
nment is relatively stable (which traditional proje
cts imply), transactional 
management-by-exception 
may be adequate. Consequently, these data suggest t
hat 
management-by-exception
 is an 
appropriate leadership dimension for traditional pr
oject management whereas contingency reward may not
 be. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
CONCLUSIONS 

This study is subject to a number of limitations.  
The sample size is too small to allow us to make st
atistical conclusions.  
There is a possibility of self-report bias by the p
articipants.  Many of the respondents worked in a c
ommon industry 
(computers/telecommunications), presenting another 
possible source of bias. Nevertheless, this study s
uggests that there are 
important differences in PM leadership style to be 
considered when managing traditional vs. agile deve
lopment projects. 
While an increasing number of organizations are ado
pting agile development, at least for some projects
, the leadership 
implications associated with such adoption are stil
l not fully understood.  Among other things, there 
is an evident risk in a 
mis-match between project methodology and leadershi
p style of the PM. The present study is a first ste
p towards a better 
understanding of an appropriate leadership style fo
r agile projects and how this differs from that of 
traditional projects. 
 
 
REFERENCES 

1.
 Ambler, S. (2007). Agile Adoption Rate Survey 2007.
  Retrieved 19/Feb, 2009, From  
http://www.ambysoft.com/surveys/agileMarch2007.html
 2.
 Avolio, B. J., and Bass, B. M. (1991). 
The full range of leadership development
. Binghamton, NY: Bass, Avolio and 
Associates. 

3.
 Barber, E., and Warn, J. (2005). Leadership in proj
ect management: from fire-fighter to firelighter. 
Management 
Decision, 43
(7/8), 1032-1039. 
4.
 Bass, B. M., and Avolio, B. (1992). 
Manual for the Multifactor Leadership Questionnaire
 - Short Form 6S.
    Leadership Perceptions in Agile and Traditional So
ftware Projects 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 11 
Binghamton, NY: Center of Leadership Studies. 

5.
 Bass, B. M. (1998). 
Transformational leadership: industrial, military a
nd educational impact
. New Jersey: Lawrence 
Erlbaum Associates. 

6.
 Beck, K. (1999). Embracing change with Extreme Prog
ramming. 
Computer, 32
(10), 70-77. 
7.
 Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A
., Cunningham, W., Fowler, M., Grenning, J., Highsm
ith, J., 
Hunt, A., Jeffries, R., Kern, J., Marick, B., Marti
n, R.C., Mellor, S., Schwaber, K., Sutherland, J., 
and Thomas, D. (2001). 
Manifesto for Agile Software Development
.   Retrieved 17 February, 2009, from http://www.ag
ilemanifesto.org 
8.
 Boehm, B., and Turner, R. (2004). 
Balancing Agility and Discipline
, Boston: Addison-Wesley. 
9.
 Boehm, B., and Turner, R. (2005). Management challe
nges to implementing agile processes in traditional
 development 
organizations. 
IEEE software, 22
(5), 30-39. 
10.
 Boehm, B. (2002). Get ready for agile methods, with
 care 
IEEE Computer, 35
(1), 64-69. 
11.
 Boerner, S., Eisenbeiss, S. A., and Griesser, D. (2
007). Follower behavior and organizational performa
nce: the impact of 
transformational leaders. 
Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 1
3
(3), 15-26. 
12.
 Burns, J. M. (1978). 
Leadership
 N.Y.: Harper and Row. 
13.
 Cockburn, A., and Highsmith, J. (2001). Agile softw
are development: The people factor. 
IEEE Computer, 34
(11), 131-
133. 

14.
 Coram, M., and Bohner, S. (2005). 
The impact of agile methods on software project man
agement 
Paper presented at the 
12th IEEE International Conference and Workshops on
 the Engineering of Computer-Based Systems, Greenbe
lt, MD USA 
15.
 Creswell, J. W. (2003). Research design: Qualitativ
e, quantitative, and mixed methods approaches. (2nd
 ed.). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 

16.
 Duncan, J., Rackley, L., and Walker, A. (1995).  
SSADM in Practice
, Hampshire UK: Palgrave-Macmillan. 
17.
  Dyba, T., and Dingsoyr, T. (2008). Empirical studi
es of agile software development: A systematic revi
ew. 
Information 
and Software Technology, 50
(9-10), 833-859. 
 18.
 Ebert, C. (2007).  ﬁThe impacts of software product
 management,ﬂ Journal of Systems & Software, Vol. 8
0, No.6, pp. 
850-861  
19.
 Fiedler, F. E. (1967). 
A theory of leadership effectiveness.
 New York: McGraw-Hill. 
20.
 Fitzgerald, B., Hartnett, G., and Conboy, K. (2006)
. Customising agile methods to software practices a
t Intel Shannon. 
European Journal of Information Systems, 15
(2), 200-213. 
21.
 Gibbs, W. W. (September. 1994). Software's chronic 
crisis. 
Scientific American, 271
(3), 86-96. 
22.
 Goleman, D., Boyatzi, R., and McKee, A. (2002). 
Primal Leadership
. Boston: Harvard Business School Press,. 
23.
 Hauschildt, J., Gesche, K., and Medcof, J. (2000). 
Realistic criteria for project managers. 
Selection and Development, 
31
(3), 23-32. 
24.
 Highsmith, J. (2003). Agile project management: Pri
nciples and tools. 
Agile project management. Cutter Consortium, 
4(2). 
25.
 Kuhnert, K. W., and Lewis, P. (1987). Transactional
 and Transformational Leadership: A Constructive/De
velopmental 
Analysis. 
Academy of Management Review,  12
(4), 648-657.  
26.
 Leban, W., and Zulauf, C. (2004). Linking emotional
 intelligence abilities and transformational leader
ship styles. 
Leadership and Organization Development Journal, 24
(7/8), 554-564.    
27.
 Lee, G. and Xia, W. (2007). "Relationships between 
Software Team Flexibility, Autonomy, 
28.
 Diversity, and Project Performance," The Academy of
 Management, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania. 
29.
 Lievens, F., Geit, P. V., and Coetsier, P. (1997). 
Identification of Transformational Leadership Quali
ties: An 
examination of Potential Biases. 
European Journal of Work and Organizational Psychol
ogy, 6
(4), 415-430. 
   Leadership Perceptions in Agile and Traditional So
ftware Projects 
Proceedings of the Fifteenth Americas Conference on
 Information Systems, San Francisco, California Aug
ust 6
th
-9
th
 2009 12 
 
30.  McGroddy, J. C., and Herbert, S. L. (2004). 
A Review of the FBI's Trilogy Information Technolog
y Modernization 
Program.
 Committee on the FBI's Trilogy Information Technol
ogy Modernization Program, National Research Counci
l: 
National Academies Press.   

 
31.  Nelson, R. R. (2007). 
IT project management: Infamous failures, classic m
istakes and best practices,
 MIS Quarterly 
Executive, Vol, 6, No.2, June, pp. 67-78. 

30.
 Nerur, S., Mahapatra, R., and Mangalaraj, G. (2005)
. Challenges of migrating to agile methodologies. 
 Communications 
of the ACM, 48
(5), 72-78. 
31.
 Northouse, P. G. (1997). 
Leadership: Theory and practice
: Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications 
PMI. (2001a, June). Survey reveals members' key nee
ds. 
PMI Today
, iii.    
 
32.
 Sauer, C. & Reich, B.H. (2009).  ﬁRethinking IT pro
ject management: evidence of a new mindset and its 
 implications,ﬂ 
International Journal of Project Management, vol. 2
7, No.2, February. 
33.
 Schwaber, K., and Beedle, M. (2002). 
Agile software development with Scrum
. Upper Saddle River, New Jersey: 
Prentice Hall. 

34.
 Shivers-Blackwell, S. L. (2004). Using Role Theory 
to Examine Determinants of Transformational and Tra
nsactional 
Leader Behavior. 
Journal of Leadership and Organizational Studies, 1
0
(3),41-50 
35.
 Skogstad, A., Einarsen, S., Torsheim, T., Aasland, 
M. S., and Hetland, H. (2007). The destructiveness 
of Laissez-Faire 
Leadership Behavior. 
Journal of Occupational Health Psychology, 12
(1), 80-92. 
36.
 Standish Group (2001). ﬁExtreme Chaos,ﬂ retrieved S
eptember 2008 from 
http://www.standishgroup.com/-
sample_research/showfile.php?filename=extreme_chaos
.pdf
.. 
37.
 Thite, M. (2000). Leadership styles in information 
technology projects. 
International Journal of Project Management, 
18
(4), 235-241. 
38.
 Varon, E. (1 April 2004). For the IRS There's No EZ
 Fix. 
CIO, 17
(12), 1. 
39.
 Vinekar, V., Slinkman, C. W. and Nerur, S. (2006). 
Can agile and traditional systems development appro
aches coexist? 
An ambidextrous view. 
Information Systems Management, 23
(3), 31-42. 
 
40.
 Wang, E. T. G., Ju, P., Jiang, J. J. and Klein, G. 
(2008). "The effects of change control and manageme
nt review on 
software flexibility and project performance," Info
rmation & Management, Vol. 45, No.7, pp. 438-443. 
41.
 Weber, M. (1905). The Protestant Ethic and the Spir
it of Capitalism: and Other Writings New York: Peng
uin Group. 
 