 An Iterative and Agile Process Model for Teaching Software 
Engineering 
Maria Isabel Alfonso and Antonio Botía 
Dept. of Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence. University of Alicante (Spain) 
eli@dccia.ua.es, abotia@dccia.ua.es
Abstract 
This paper describes the use of an iterative and agile process model in a software 
engineering undergraduate course. The proposed model serves both as an educational 

technique (for teachers) and as a subject of learning (for students). Details are given of the 
procedures and methods used and related management aspects are also addressed. The 
results obtained are discussed and compared with a previous experience using a weighted 

process model. This particular approach has been found a valuable and high satisfactory 
experience for both students and teachers. 
1. Introduction 
The software process model may be defined as a simplified description of a software 
process, presented from a particular perspective. Process models play a very important role in 
the development of large software engineering projects. Choosing the adequate model is an 
important managerial decision for the success of the project. The process model determines 
the sequence of tasks required to accomplish the project.  
Similarly, in an educational context, the pedagogical methods used are one of the more 
important concerns for a teacher to fulfill the main objective: teaching. The pedagogical 

methods used describe the sequence of tasks for teaching the topics of any discipline. To a 
certain extent, we can establish an analogy between software manager-model processes, and 
teacher-teaching methods. 
This analogy threw up two questions: (1) Can we use a software process model as a 
pedagogical tool to teach some of the main topics in software engineering? (2) What are the 
benefits of doing this? This paper tries to answer these questions. In answer to the first 
question, we propose the use of a mixed iterative and agile process model in a software 
engineering undergraduate course. In this paper, we discuss the proposed method from the 
teacher’s standpoint, exposing the procedures and methods used, as well as related managerial 
aspects. In answer to the second question, we discuss the benefits of using the proposed 
method, mainly from the student standpoint, addressing the effective learning of the topics of 
the course. In education, the discipline of Software Engineering is distinct from education in other 
disciplines, where designs and related products are not normally produced. Software 
Engineering learning is action-oriented: students must actively design and engineer software 

to be successful [1]. Accordingly, our approach subscribes to this idea and adds the following: 
"...and the teacher can act as a project manager in order to plan, monitor and control the 
learning process effectively". 
The rest of paper is organized as follows: firstly, we present the Software Engi
neering 
course we have developed at the University of Alicante (Spain). 
Secondly, we explain the proposed process model, we justify the reasons for this 
choice, and present the defined programme schedule, milestones and deliverables. 
Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Software Engineering Education & Training (CSEET’05) 
1093-0175/05 $ 20.00 
IEEE Thirdly, we analyse some of the organizational questions related to the proposed 
model, such as size, composition, organization, and student group cohesion. 
We then discuss some of the pedagogical and managerial aspects of the proposed 
model, including the evaluation method used. 
Next, we present an example project that we have been using during the 2003-04 
academic year in order to illustrate the practical application of the model, and suggest 
other alternatives. 
We show and analyse the results obtained comparing it with a previous experience 
using a weighted process model, and we finish by explaining some of the conclusions 
we have reached from our work. 
2. Software Engineering at University of Alicante (Spain) 
At the University of Alicante (http://www.ua.es), students can obtain a five-year 
graduate degree in computer science called 
Computer Engineering
. The body of 
Software Engineering knowledge is mainly obtained from three 60-hour courses. In the 
first course, students learn about requirement specifications, and different methods used 

to analyse software engineering projects. The second is mainly focused on the study of 
software project design and the application of several design methods. The third and 
last course is the one dealt with in this paper. In this course, the aim is to complete 
students’ knowledge of Software Engineering and practice group working. 
We divide the course into 30 hours of theory and 30 hours of practice. In the theory 
classes, we summarize the main concepts of the following topics: process models, 

planning activities, testing process and configuration management process. In the 
practical classes, we apply the theoretical concepts explained by developing a project in 
working groups following the process model proposed in this paper. 
The course is taught over four hours per week: two theory hours and two practical 
hours, spread over 15 weeks. 
The course website can be visited at: http://dccia.ua.es/dccia/inf/asignaturas/IS2. The 
site contains the slides used in the theory room (adapted from Sommerville book [6]), 
and all information related with the work to be carried out in laboratory hours to 
accomplish the project. 
3. The proposed iterative and agile process model  
Iterative process models are primarily concerned with the idea of building software 
through the sequential development of several mini-projects known as 
iterations
. An example 
of the iterative process is the so-called 
Unified Process
 (UP) or the variation, referred to as 
RUP (Rational Unified Process) [7] based in UML (Unified Model Language) [8]. More 
specifically, RUP is a project framework that describes a class of processes that are iterative 
and incremental. RUP-compliant process deliver functionality in small increments, each 
building on the previous, and each being driven by use cases rather than being the 

construction of a subsystem. Iterative process models pre-date agile process models. 
Agile processes are low-overhead processes that accept that software is difficult to control 
(they are adaptative rather than predictive). They minimize risk by ensuring that software 

engineers focus on smaller units of work (the
y practice iterative development). They are 
distinguished from "heavier" processes thanks to their emphasis on values and principles 
rather than of processes (they are people-oriented rather than process-oriented) [9]. Examples 
of agile processes are XP and Scrum. XP (Extreme Programming) [10] is characterized 
mainly by continuous automated unit testing, pair programming, refactoring, shared code 
Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Software Engineering Education & Training (CSEET’05) 
1093-0175/05 $ 20.00 
IEEE ownership, simplicity and feedback. Scrum is characterized mainly by the development of 
named 
sprints (similar to iterations), and the use of a list of tasks named 
backlog
, which 
drives team activity [11]. 
In as much as RUP is a project framework, it can accommodate a wide variety of 
processes. As a result it can be used in a very traditional waterfall style (heavyweigth manner) 
or in an agile manner. Craig Larman is a strong proponent of using RUP in an agile manner 
[12]. We have decided to adopt a particular instance of agile RUP, as we adopt certain XP 

features (such as pair programming, shared code ownership, simplicity and feedbak), and 
certain Scrum-based ideas, as we explain later. The main reasons for this decision are: (a) 
iterative process model are a good choice for carrying out successful large software projects, 

and RUP is the most widely used iterative process model; (b) RUP can be used in an agile 
manner to illustrate the practice of these modern and widely used methods; and (c) we have 
found several pedagogical advantages in the use of this for teachers, as we discuss in sections 

5 and 7. 
Figure 1 resumes the programme schedule that applies the proposed process model. It 
shows the milestones set and the deliverables generated. As in RUP, the iterations are 
grouped into four phases called 
inception
,elaboration
,construction
 and 
transition
. Each 
phase is formed by one or several iterations of a fixed duration of two weeks (which 
corresponds to four laboratory hours, except for last iteration, which lasts three weeeks). At 

the end of the iterations (which corresponds to set milestones) a partially complete system 
that is stable, integrated and tested is delivered, along with other artifacts
1.There are four major milestones defined at the end of each phase: M1...M4, in which the 
teacher scores the work carried out by the team. Three minor milestones are also defined: 
m1.1, m1.2, and m2.1, in wich individual work is scored. 
During the inception phase teams are formed, well-defined roles are assigned, the 
infraestructure is put in place and the communications channels are established. A high level 

plan is defined by students, in which main use cases and other tasks are identified and 

assigned to the iterations of the project (we have called this artifact 
log-case table
). At the end 
of this phase, the first major milestone is reached and the team members have a clear vision of 
the project, the available resources, and the customer’s (teacher’s) expectations.  
During the elaboration phase, the architectural
 foundation of the software is established 
and high risks are eliminated. During the construction phase, we expect the use case 
descriptions to stabilize to a certain extent. Finally, during transition phase, the team is mainly 

taken up with deployment activities. 
                                                          
1 RUP defines the term 
artifact
 to denote a discrete and cohesive collection of information generated 
during the development process. 
1234Phases Iterations 
TimeLi
ne 
2 weeks 
2 weeks 
2 weeks 
2 weeks 
2 weeks 
2 weeks 
3 weeks 
Milestones 
Artifacts 
-log-case and 
log-artifact
 table, release 1 and team report 
- three 
log tables, release 2 and individual report 
- three 
log tables, release 3 and individual report 
- three 
log tables, release 4 and team report 
- three 
log tables, release 5 and individual report 
- three 
log tables, release 6 and team report 
- three 
log tables, final release and team report 
M1M2M3M4Figure 1. Schedule of process model proposed 
m1.1
m1.2
m2.1
Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Software Engineering Education & Training (CSEET’05) 
1093-0175/05 $ 20.00 
IEEE During the elaboration phase and subsequent phases, teams work on the use cases and 
tasks planned in the 
log-case table
. The items of this table are detailed and refined during 
iterations, and are modified if necessary. The log-case table drives team activity, in a similar 
way to the aforementioned 
backlog
 in Scrum.  
The artifacts produced in each iteration are recorded in a 
log-artifact table
. The artifacts produced are uml diagrams (use case, scenarios, classes and deployment), source code, 
executable code, ant files, test-case tables, and JUnit files, and they are delivered as part of 

each release in a directory named 
repository
.And we also use a so-called 
log-trace table
 to record the state of each use case (an entry of 
the log-case table) during each iteration, this 
state can be: C (completed), N (not initiated), or 
P (partially completed). This table constitutes a trace of the work carried out by each team 
during the course. 
Finally, each team generates two report types: an individual report (at the end of each 
iteration); and a team report (at the end of each phase). The individual report contains the 
following information: (a) use cases worked on and current state of said use cases; (b) 
artifacts produced; (c) role played (see section 4); and (d) responsibility of the pair (see 
section 4). The team report is prepared by the same pair that is responsible for the repository. 
This is a brief document with three items: (a) report on the work carried out by the team 
during the phase; (b) comparison of objectives planned at the beginning of the phase, with 

objectives achieved at the end of the phase; and (c) report on the reasons for the success or 
failure in achieving the objectives, indicating the problems that occurred and how (and if) 
they were solved. The team report is also explained verbally to the teacher by the 
corresponding pair during a maximum time of five minutes. 
4. Organizational aspects  
Each team is made up of six students. The students form the teams themselves, except in 
particular cases, e.g. when there are students that like to join a team with already has six 
members. In this case, the teacher moves these students into other groups. As a result, there 

will be groups with students that may have incompatible personalities and this will probably 
lead to team communication and coordination problems.  
Each team is organized into three pairs, called A, B and C (see Figure 2). The A, B, and C 
pairs are responsible for log-case, log-artifact, and log-trace tables, respectively. Each 
member of a pair plays one of two roles: programmer or tester. The programmer generates the 
source code and the class and deployment diagrams. The tester generates the use cases and 
scenarios, and the test cases, and controls the quality of the source code. The three pairs A, B, 
C, rotate between team members every two iterations. Moreover, in each phase, one of the 
pairs is responsible for the repository and team report. The communication is horizontal 

between the pairs, and between the members of a pair. The teacher communicates with all 
log-trace table 
Pair A Pair B Pair C 
log-case table 
log-artifact table 
Figure 2. Organizational model proposed
communication 
responsible for 
rotate every two iterations 
repository, rotate every phase 
programmer 
tester 
Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Software Engineering Education & Training (CSEET’05) 
1093-0175/05 $ 20.00 
IEEE members of the group. 
Each team assigns the work freely to each pair, with the condition that the workload of 
each pair must be approximately the same. This is supervised by the teacher in each iteration, 
where the work to be assigned is driven by the log-case table and the log-trace table from the 

previous iteration.  
Each laboratory work session is organized into three periods: (a) put together (half an 
hour); (b) pair work (an hour); and (c) inspection (half an hour). During the first period each 

pair must combine their work with the others and update both the 
repository
 and the three 
log
tables. During the second period, each pair works in tasks corresponding to the current 
iteration. During the third period, the work corresponding to periods (a) and (b) are inspected 

by the teacher as is explained in the following section. 
5. Pedagogical and managerial issues 
Our approach is group working centered and software project-based. This is not new: other 
approaches use group work to teach software engineering, such as [2], [3], [4], [5]. In our 
case, we propose a particular software process model that guides the work of the groups and 

and emphasizes the pedagogical aspects (issues). Consequently, the proposed process model 
has been designed with both the teacher (pedagogical aspects) and the student (active learning 
of modern software engineering techniques) in mind. 
The teacher acts as a manager for each team (somewhat similar to Scrum master), as he/she 
guides, monitors and controls the work carried out by the students.  
To guide the work carried out by students effectively, the teacher provides them with: (a) a 
document explaining the model process to be applied, organizational issues, the project to be 
carried out, the tools to be used, and the monitoring and control processes; (b) a complete set 
of templates for all the artifacts to be delivered, including log-tables, individual and team 

reports and test-case tables. (in order to reduce the overhead of documenting the project, all 
templates are simple calc sheets designed to contain useful information; students can 
complete their calc sheets in a short period of time); and (c) an initial release project, (the so-
called zero release), which contains an initial repository suggesting a proposed architecture 
and some of the code details to reduce programming effort required of the teams. 
To monitor the work carried out by the students effectively, the teacher inspects and scores 
the deliveries at each defined milestone. This inspection takes place during the third period of 
the corresponding laboratory session. In order to reduce the inspection time, the teacher has a 
template (also in the form of a simple calc sheet) for collecting the teams’ scores. The scores 
on the template reflect both the individual work and team work, together with other related 
items such as team coordination, communication and cohesion. Each individual has two 
scores: one obtained from their individual work, and one obtained from the team. The final 

individual score is the mean value of the scores obtained at each milestone. 
To control the work carried out by the students effectively, the teacher informs the teams 
of the score obtained, enabling feedback with students regarding the errors made. This 

favours student learning in that they can correct their errors in subsequent iterations. Each 
iteration is developed by a task sequence called 
disciplines
. The disciplines are executed 
concurrently thoughout the lifetime of the project. As the project matures, the emphasis on 

certain disciplines increases or decreases, e.g. 
little code is written early in the inception 
phase, and little design work is carried out in the transition phase. However, disciplines can 
be executed, and indeed are executed, at any time during the project. 
The management tasks of guiding, monitoring and controlling the development of the 
project outlined above corresponds to the pedagogical knowledge-providing tasks, the 
evaluation of the knowledge acquired, and the driving of the learning process. 
Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Software Engineering Education & Training (CSEET’05) 
1093-0175/05 $ 20.00 
IEEE The student benefits from the proposed model are as follows: (1) the tasks carried out by 
the teacher serve as a practical example of how to manage a software team project; (2) they 
gradually learn the difficult task of group working as a consequence of model phases, where 
the inception phase requires more communication with the teacher (who also acts as the 

customer), and the subsequent phases gradually require less communication with the teacher 
and more with team members, so, the tasks move from building consensus with the teacher to 
building consensus within the team; (3) students learn by the use of repetitive tasks during 

iterations; and (4) the model proposed is an example of the application of modern process 
models. 
Finally, students benefit from the tools used to develop the project. We use Eclipse 3.0 
(http://www.eclipse.com) with th
e Omondo plug-in (http://www.omondo.com). These are 
modern tools that generate and synchronize design (UML diagrams) and programming (java 
languaje), automatically generate code for testing (using JUnit), build the project effectively 

(using Ant), and effectively manage the configuration elements generated (using CVS).  
6. Example project 
The project proposed during the academic year 2003-04 consists of developing a tool to 
automatically monitor the schedule of a set of tasks (which we named 
workflow
). The project 
can be divided into three modules (ecah one can be assigned to one pair in a team): (1) the 

client module, (2) the server module, and (3) the monitor module.  
The client module includes a layer presentation in which a super-user can define the 
workflows, the human resources assigned to the tasks, the duration of the tasks, and the start 

date of the workflows. The human resources assigned to a workflow act as normal system 
users and communicate the completion of the assigned tasks to the server module. Normal 
users can also consult workflow data, e.g. tasks completed or pending. 
The server module stores the data validated in the client module into a database (we have 
used MySql) to be monitored by the monitor module. The server module communicates with 
the monitor module to activate workflow monitoring. 
The monitor module processes several workflows simultaneously. Once a workflow is 
activated, the monitor module regularly checks the completion of the corresponding tasks and 
sends a mail to the assigned users if the tasks are not completed in time.  
A more detailed description of the project is delivered to students as part of the course 
material. This material is currently in Spanish only, and is to be translated into English in the 
future. 
We have chosen this project because it helps students learn and practice other software 
engineering issues, such as project scheduling, by having to generate the activity chart 
associated with the workflow. Accordingly, we think that this type of project is a good choice, 

as it reinforces students’ knowledge of software enginering. Other project examples we have 
used in past courses include a tool that derives tests cases, a tool that generates model process 
templates, a tool that implements COCOMO estimation method, and a tool that generates 
project schedules.  
7. Discussion of results 
During the academic year 2003-04, the number of students has been 153. They are divided 
into 22 groups of six, and 3 groups of seven. In one laboratory session (two hours per week) 
there are a maximum of three or four teams. We are five teachers, and we have worked in 

team software development since 1995. In past years, we have have proposed several process 
models for the effective learning of software engineering [13], [14]. More specifically, in [14] 
Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Software Engineering Education & Training (CSEET’05) 
1093-0175/05 $ 20.00 
IEEE we used a weighted UP-based process model driven by functional services instead of use 
cases, and worked with groups of five students. The new approach we propose emphasizes 
the role of the process model as a pedagogical tool for the teacher. As result, we have 
obtained a greater level of satisfaction in both teachers and students.  
Table 1 shows a comparison of the results of the year 2003-04 with some of the results 
presented in [14] (obtained during the last two years).  
  Students Teachers 
Course Team  Success Extra time Scoring effort Activity lab 
2001-02 22 of 28 
2002-03 
526 of 28 
2h2h 65% 
2003-04 
623 of 25 
1h1h 
85%Table 1. Some of the results obtained 
This year, 23 groups from a total of 25 have developed a successful project; this means that 
only two groups have not completed the project. We see that a similar result was obtained in 
2002-03. The improvement of 2002-03 result in comparison with 2001-02 is basically the 
result of the teachers’ greater experience, in that they also learn from the difficulties 
encountered by students and can consequently guide the students’ work more 

effectively. We also expect this percentage to increase for 2004-05. 
As for the time spent by students on the proposed project, the groups needed to work 
at home for a maximum of two extra hours per week in order to complete the project 

during 2001-03. In 2003-04, the time spent by students was reduced by 50%. This is a 
consequence of the agile character of the new proposed process model, which reduces 
the overload of documenting the project. We have reduced the volume of documents to 
be delivered to a set of simple, standard calc sheets, and a set of automatically 
generated UML diagrams. This means that students can document the project 
effectively in a short time with all the information required for the future maintenance 

of the system produced. 
Teachers also benefit from the proposed process model thanks to a 50% reduction in 
the efforts for scoring students. This effort is reduced in several ways: (a) we have 

standarized and simplified the set of artifacts and the repository students have to deliver 
in each iteration, providing the corresponding templates in such a way that the teacher 
knows that all the documents (including the code) will have the same structure and 

format, and the same items of information; (b) the teacher reviews the deliveries with 
the students during laboratory hours and receives a verbal report at each phase with 
three points that summarise the work carried out by the groups. This verbal report is 

very important and improves students’ capacity for expression, concision and clarity in 
that they have a time limited to a maximum of five minutes to summarise several 
weeks’ group work; and (c) the teacher can execute the partially implemented system at 

each iteration (every two weeks), and can compare the code with the documents 
delivered with ease. 
Finally, teachers benefit from short iterations, development that is driven by use 
cases, and the development of high-risk use cases in early iterations. These risks are 
addressed up front and the teacher can help solve problems actively during laboratory 
hours. This increases the teacher’s work in laboratory hours and reduces his/her total 

work in answering students’ questions. During the academic year 2003-04 the activity 
carried out by teachers during laboratory hours represents 85% of the total time spent, 
reducing the extra hours of the total time spent during 2001-03 by 20%. 
Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Software Engineering Education & Training (CSEET’05) 
1093-0175/05 $ 20.00 
IEEE 8. Concluding remarks 
In this paper, we have presented a particular iterative and agile process model that serves 
both as a pedagogical tool for the teacher, and as a subject matter for students. We have been 

motivated by our idea of benefiting the subject under study (
what
 we are learning) as a 
method for teaching it (
how
 we are learning).  
We have analyzed the proposed model from the teacher’s standpoint and discussed the 
main advantages of this approach: (1) it provides knowledge efficiently, (2) it evaluates the 
knowledge acquired gradually, and (3) it drives the learning process effectively. From the 
students’ standpoint, we also demonstrate the main benefits: (1) learning managerial 
development issues from the teaching methods used, (2) learning development issues 
concerning widely used modern process models, and (3) learning group working 
gradually.  
The results we present have been compared with a previous experience using another 
weighted approach. We have used the data corresponding to three academic years. The 
preliminary data obtained reflects a more satisfactory experience for both teachers and 

students. We intend to apply and improve this process model in the future. 
   
10. References 
[1] M. Murphy, R. Halstead-Nussloch, “Learning and Instructional Issues in Software Engineering”, Workshop: 
Beg, Borrow or Steal: Using Multi-disciplinary Approaches in Empirical Software Engineering Research 

(ICSE'2000), Limerick, Ireland, June 4-11th, 2000. 
[2] A. J. Cowling , “The Crossover Project as an Introduction to Software Engineering”, Proceedings of the 
17th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET'04). IEEE CS Press, Norfolk, Virginia, 
March 01-03, 2004, pp. 12-17. 
[3] A. Seffah, P. Grogono, “Learner-Centered Software Engineering Education: From Resources to Skills and 
Pedagogical Patterns”, Proceedings of the 15th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training 
(CSEET'02). IEEE CS Press, Covington, Kentucky, February 25 - 27, 2002, pp. 14-23. 
[4] D. P. Groth, E. L. Robertson, “It's All about Process: Project Oriented Teaching of Software Engineering”, 
Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET'01). IEEE CS 
Press, Charlotte, North Carolina, February 19 - 21, 2001, pp. 7-17. 
[5] B. Boehm, D. Port, D. Klappholz, Workshop on Tailoring a Successful Project-Based Course, 
Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET'03), Madrid, Spain, Mars 20-22, 2003. 
[6] I. Sommerville, “Software Engineering”, 6th ed
ition, Addison Wesley, 2002. 
[7] I. Jacobson, G. Booch, J. Rumbaugh, “The Unified Software Development Process”, Addison-Wesley, 
1999. 
[8] Object Management Group, “OMG Unified Modeling Language Specification”, 1998. 
http://www.omg.org. 
[9] M. Fowler, “The New Methodology”, April, 2003, http://www.martinfowler.com/articles/ 
newMethodology.html 
[10] K. Beck, “Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change”, Addison-Wesley, 1999. 
[11] M. Beedle et al., “SCRUM: An extension Pattern Language for Hyperproductive Software 
Development", Pattern Languages of Program Design 4, Addison-Wesley, 2000, pp. 637-651.  
[12] C. Larman, “Applying UML and Patterns: An introduction to Object-Oriented analysis and design and 
the Unified Process”, 2nd edition, Prentice Hall. 2002. 
[13] M.I. Alfonso, F. Mora, F. Martínez, “La programación en grupos de trabajo”, JENUI'98, Andorra, 
July 9-10, 1998, pp. 181-185. 
[14] M.I. Alfonso, F. Mora, “Learning Software Engineering with Group Work”, 
Proceedings of the 16th 
Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET'03). IEEE CS Press, Madrid, Spain, Mars 
20-22, 2003, pp. 309-316. 
Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Software Engineering Education & Training (CSEET’05) 
1093-0175/05 $ 20.00 
IEEE