 Agile Software Factory for Student Service Learning 
 
 
Dr. Joseph Chao
Department of Computer Science
Bowling Green State University
 
jchao@bgsu.edu 
 
Mark Randles
Department of Computer Science 
Bowling Green State University 
marklr@bgsu.edu 
 
Abstract 
Service-learning is a teaching and learning strategy that integrates meaningful community 
service with instruction and reflection to enrich the learning experience, teach civic 
responsibility, and strengthen communities. By incorporating service-learning in Software 
Engineering classes, the student experience can be enhanced. Our approach was to create the 
Agile Software Factory within the departme
nt of Computer Science to handle the 
administrative tasks associated with a quality classroom service-learning experience. This 
paper describes the mission and the objectives of the Factory. 
  
 
1. Introduction 
It has been well-documented and understood that students learn the craft of software 
development better by working on real-world projects with real customers. For at least twenty 
years, our software development courses in the department of Computer Science (CS) have 
occasionally provided services to real-world clients. The department has also frequently 
received software requests from community members who have needs but cannot afford the 
high cost of software development.  However, it was only occasional that the department could 
act on these requests as there was no central authority that could manage the requests and route 
them to channels in which the software need could be filled. 
 The Agile Software Factory (Factory) was created to fulfill the need in the department to 
have a community project clearinghouse, to manage relationships with existing community 
partners while soliciting new community partners and projects, and to provide facilities and 
knowledge to promote service-learning for st
udents who are pursuing a Computer Science 
degree.  As defined in the 
Faculty Toolkit for Service-Learning in Higher Education 
[1], 
service-learning is a teaching and learning 
strategy that integrates meaningful community 
service with instruction and reflection to enrich the learning experience, teach civic 
responsibility, and strengthen communities. 
By using a service-learning approach students 
are not only able to learn important software 
engineering skills in a structured classroom and laboratory environment but they are also able 
to provide high-quality software to organizations that would be otherwise unable to meet their 
software requirements.  Students are also exposed to the real-world problems associated with 
software engineering and gain valuable experiences
 in situations that they will be required to 
face in industry. 
Already there are a number of other computer science departments using a similar 
service-learning approach teaching software engineering through service-learning [3, 4, 
5, 6, 7].  The Agile Software Factory was patterned after these other programs, drawing 
from their experiences and combining it with our own unique history and academic 
culture. 
22nd Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training978-0-7695-3539-5/09 $25.00 © 2009 IEEEDOI 10.1109/CSEET.2009.2634 Two challenges come up in a service-learning approach to software development 
courses. One was that it takes a significant amount of time to find suitable software 
projects for the course. An ideal project s
hould contain enough complexity for student 
learning, and its size should be reasonable so that student teams are capable of producing 
a quality system in a restricted timeframe. 
The other challenge encountered was the poten
tial software maintenance issues after 
the semester ended. Students are not responsible for maintaining the software systems 
after the end of the semester, but the systems are in production use and like all production 
software need periodic maintenance. Other faculty members in the CS department have 
also encountered the similar challenges when supervising student projects, group or 
individual, that involve real customers. The Factory solves the challenges it faces by (1) 
creating a repository for software requests from community partners, and (2) providing 
ongoing software services through various student service-learning arrangements. 
The Factory is also involved with avocation of Agile methodologies both in the classroom 
and in the greater industry. When working on real-world projects with real customers, 
producing quality working systems play a major role in customer satisfaction. Agile 
methodologies promote iterative and incremental development, which makes producing a 
quality working system within a short period of tim
e, such as a semester, highly probable.  In 
this avocation role, the Factory acts as a store of knowledge for the student community, 
providing opportunities for students to learn about Agile methods both in and outside of the 
classroom.  The Agile Software Factory also pursues research into both methods of education 
about Agile methodologies and ways to evaluate these methods. 
The idea of a software factory to facilitate software engineering education is nothing new.  
Siqueira, Barbaran and Becerra [2] applied the concept of software factory to a software 
engineering laboratory to create a software development environment that is close to the real 
world. Their approach emphasized on well-defined processes in a controlled environment. 
Chase, Oakes and Ramsey [8] created a small project support center to ease the challenges of 
using live projects for student service learning. The listed challenges of using live projects, in 
addition to pedagogical demands on the instructor, include maintenance concern, project scope, 
student skill specialization, data confidentiality, project solicitation and consistency of the 
projects. While the idea of software factory or support center is not new, the literature in this 
area is surprisingly scarce.  
 
2. Factory mission & overview 
The Agile Software Factory was developed out a need for a persistent managerial structure 
to exist within the department of Computer Science to facilitate student service-learning.  To 
achieve this goal, the Factory was tasked with the following mission: 1) to develop community 
partners and relationships as both a source of support and student projects and 2) to espouse 
software engineering research particularly in Agile methodology.  The Agile Software Factory, 
in relation to it is primary mission, is also responsible for supporting the larger needs of the 
department by showcasing both the work the de
partment does in software engineering and 
through evaluation and publication of bo
th Factory programs and student work. 
According to a recent internal analysis of 
two alumni surveys by our department, the 
majority of CS graduates who enter the software engineering field develop software for private 
companies. The report stated that ﬁBy a wide margin, they choose careers in private industry in 
programming and software engineering careers.ﬂ Also in the same report, a survey of incoming 
35 freshmen found that ﬁin general, incoming freshmen are seeking career paths that match those 
taken by our alumni, which is in private industry
 with an interest in programming.ﬂ Including 
real-world projects in the curriculum will increase student marketability, create 
scholarship engagement opportunities, and support student retention and recruitment. The 
Factory will further the university mission 
not only by providing a premier learning 
environment for students, but also by engaging the community in a meaningful and 
scholarly fashion. 
The Agile Software Factory is tasked then, wi
th assisting the department in providing a 
valuable, real-world service-learning experience to students.  The Factory will achieve it is task 
by acting as manager and clearing-house for studen
t service-learning projects and will pursue 
and develop strong relationships with community partners in a mutually beneficial manner.  
The Agile Software Factory will also research into and provide information about Agile 
methods of software engineering. 
The Factory will also strive to become self-s
ufficient financially in order to further the 
mission of agile software research and development. To achieve this goal, it will: (1) solicit 
corporate sponsorships and/or memberships, (2) ap
ply for internal and external grants, and (3) 
commercialize potential software systems to generate revenues. 
 
3. Projects 
To facilitate a good service-learning experience for students, it is important to find and have 
good projects available for students to work on.  Because the objective of service-learning, it is 
important that these projects come from the community at large.  Projects must also have some 
academic merit, since it will be used within a classroom setting. The ideal project should be 
large and complex enough that students find them challenge, and at the same time, flexible and 
scalable so that a quality product can be developed by a team of students. 
Before creation of the Agile Software Factory, it was necessarily for an instructor who 
wished to do a service-learning project to solicit a project from the wider community.  Because 
no central clearing-house of projects existed to connect professors with needy community 
partners, it became an extra burden on the professor to develop the community resources to 
solicit and develop projects for students to work on.  Because of the extra work-load many 
professors chose not to use the service-learning approach in their classes, even when it may be 
the most effective means of teaching the subjec
t. With the Agile Software Factory acts as a 
central clearing-house of projects, a significant burden is lifted from anyone who wishes to use 
a service-learning approach in their classroom. This increases the usefulness of the service-
learning approach since much of the management 
required to create the proper service-learning 
environment for the student is handled by a third-party, the Factory.  It is anticipated that this 
will enable more service-learning within the department curriculum. 
The Agile Software Factory solicits projects throughout the year from needy community 
partners and works with the project partners to get as much detail as possible about the project 
so instructors who wish to use a project in thei
r class can make informed decisions about what 
projects would be best.  The Factory also works with community partners to identify possible 
projects within the partner™s organization as a way to increase the number of potential project 
candidates and to assist willing community partners to further develop and improve their 
business processes.  The full project lifecycle is illustrated in Figure 1. 
After students are finished with their service-learning experience, whether for a class or as 
an independed project, they submit their work 
back to the Agile Software Factory.  When 
36 projects are submitted back to the Factory, they are evaluated to determine the quality and 
future of the project.  The quality of our projects is of the utmost concern to the Factory.  
Because much of our strategy is built on main
taining good relationships with our community 
partners, we strive to ensure that we provide them with the best software possible.   
The future of most projects that are handled throght the Agile Software Factory is 
determined by the community partner who initiated the project.  However, in rare instances, a 
project may have some commercial appeals and the Factory evaluates completed projects to 
determine if this is so.  If a project could have future commercial use, it will be held in reserve 
and further developed by the Factory into a commercial project for the market at large. 
As community partners deploy and use applications that students have developed in service-
learning experiences, the community partner my want or need additional features or wish to 
futher develop their project into a more useful tool.  It may be inapproiate to use these project 
continuuations in a classroom, so the Factory may employ students of various skill levels to do 
further work on projects providing futher service-learning experiences for interested students 
and enhancing our support of the community. This offers the opportunities for student 
employment which furthers the Factory™s missi
on of providing student service-learning. 
At the time of writing this paper, the Factory has eight concurrent software development 
projects with eight community partners. Six of the projects are being used as software 
engineering service-learning course projects, one is under development by a graduate student as 
a graduation project, and the other project is being worked by a student employed by the 
Factory. The Factory has recently received a 
sponsorship from Agile Alliance [9], which will 
allow hiring more students to work on more projects in the near future. 
 
Community 
partner submits 
project 
Factory 
periodically 
reviews 
applications 
Projects are 
accepted into 
pool of future 
p
ro
j
ects
Project is used 
to facilitate 
student service-
learning 
Project is 
evaluated for 
completeness 
and quality 
Project requires 
further 
development 
Project is 
currently in use 
by community 
partner. 
Fi
g
ure 1. Factor
y
 Pro
j
ect Flow
37 4. Student service-learning 
There are two approaches the Factory provide service-learning opportunities to students: 1) 
through service-learning courses and 2) th
rough direct hiring of student employees. 
Our approach to service-learning courses is like many other service-learning software 
engineering courses at other universities. We provide the service-learning experience through a 
controlled classroom and laboratory environment with instruction about the various software 
engineering tools and methodologies that are common-place in industry.  These courses are 
typically taken by juniors, seniors as well as first-year graduate students who are interested in a 
career in software engineering. Students who de
sire to do service-learning in their Computer 
Science curriculum are enabled because of the Agile Software Factory.  These opportunities 
generally take the form of a Software Engineering course offered within the department, but 
other options do exist both inside and outside of the classroom. 
The Software Engineering course is structured within the department curriculum, with 
lectures, homework, and tests.  However, a significant portion of class is devoted to the 
service-learning projects.  The course content may vary among instructors but all major topics 
in software engineering are covered. When necessary, class time may be given for project team 
meetings and other project business as well as, to ease the scheduling burden on the students.  
Also there are lectures on typical software engineering tools like source-control and UML 
modeling software.  The rest of the time is devoted to lectures on relevant topics to software 
engineering.  Instructors of the Software Engineering class usually are mainly involved with 
the classroom work and are generally not involved with project details past the first few weeks.  
Instructor usually focuses on the initial planning stages and to make sure the project goes 
smoothly for the students, and give students the total control while monitoring the progress.  
Furthermore, instructors often participate in the 
first customer meetings to make sure that the 
students and community partners are on the right track. 
Students working on the service-learning projects are provided with facilities in which to 
work on their project.  They also usually are not
 required to setup or configure any technology 
they may be required to use in their project.  The setup of technology is the responsibility of the 
Factory and is done in the lead-up to the start of a project. 
Another approach to service-learning prov
ided by the Factory is through part-time 
employment of students. Depending on the funding situation, a small handful of students may 
elect to work directly with the Factory on projec
ts that the Factory needs or wants to further 
develop.  These may be projects that were not 
worked on in the Software Engineering class due 
to time or resource constraints, they may be past projects that are in need of further 
development by community partners, or it may be 
commercialization of past projects.  Students 
who chose this path are usually committed to the project for a fixed number of hours a week 
and generally get financial assistance through the department or a relevant community partner, 
as an assistantship or other graduate student stipend. The Factory is also actively applying for 
funding in order to provide part-time student employees. 
The results and responses given by students who complete a service-learning experience are 
similar to those responses from other universities.  Students were both pleased with the 
experience provided and were glad to have participated in the project.  The students are also 
happy to get hands-on experience learning about what software engineering is and what a 
possible career will be like when the graduate. 
 
38 5. Community involvement and interaction 
Community involvement is an integral part of the Agile Software Factory.  There are two 
ways for community partners to be involved with
 the Factory.  Most of our community partners 
are sources of projects.  Primarily they tend to 
be non-profit organizations that want or need 
software but don't have the budgets for professionally developed systems.  In many cases, there 
is no commercial, off-the-shelf software available that meets the organization needs.  The 
Factory helps these organizations develop the software they need, at a professional level of 
quality, for no cost.  The other way for community partners to be involved with the Factory is 
through donations of time, money, and expertise.  Without this type of support the scope of the 
Factory would be greatly limited. 
Community partners that are actively working on projects with the Agile Software Factory 
are also working directly with the students.  Since the Factory primarily focuses on the 
education of Agile methodologies, it is important that community partners also participate in 
the project development closely. Generally community partners can participate by providing 
customer information to student project groups on a real-time basis.  By having the community 
partners directly in contact with the students, the student experience is enhanced with real-
world, hands-on customer experience.  One thing st
udents learn in their service-learning project 
that their don™t usually learn in other courses is the teamwork and communication skills. The 
direct contact also allows increase the student™s ability to provide quality software through fast 
software debugging and validation testing ensuring the quality of the software products created 
by the students. 
 
6. Long-term vision and future work 
Flexibility is a key to the long-term health of the Agile Software Factory.  Like a software 
development project, it is important for the Factory to quickly adapt to changes in the 
requirements responding to customer needs and complaints in an efficient manner.  By 
changing with the needs of the department of
 Computer Science and our community partners 
the Agile Software Factory can best provide the quality service-learning experience that 
students and faculty desire. 
For future improvement of the Factory, assessments are important and necessary. The 
Factory will perform assessment regularly to en
sure the success of all Factory activities. 
Possible measurements may include:  
•
 
number of inquiries and software requests from community 
•
 
number of projects in-progress and completed 
•
 
number of systems in-use by the community partners 
•
 
customer satisfaction. 
The Factory will also prepare instruments for measuring the outcome of student service-
learning. The assessment activities may include: 
•
 
Observe student project meetings and customer meetings 
•
 
Prepare surveys for both students and their clients  
•
 
Interview students and customers  
•
 
Analyze project artifacts and software products 
In the future, the Factory wishes to expand both the service-learning program, applying it to 
a wider range of software engineering classes in
 the department of CS.  The Factory will also 
39 expand its ability for long-term software maintenance of its projects that are currently deployed 
by community partners.  Currently this is limited by available manpower and funds, but 
through the judicious use of grant funding it may be possible for the Factory to provide both 
long-term software support services to our community partners and an independent student-
learning experience to interested students. 
Other work that the Agile Software Factory wi
ll undertake is a program to further expand 
exposure of Agile methodologies to students and the wider community.  We are deeply 
invested Agile methods, and believe they are both applicable and useful in the greater 
community.  Not only will the Factory provide information and lectures on methods, but it will 
also perform research into methods of teac
hing the Agile methodology in the classroom 
including evaluation of the effectiveness of courses and students. 
Over time we hope that the Agile Software Fact
ory becomes an integral part of a student™s 
software engineering education and a valued community partner which is a source of high-
quality software.  By developing good relationships with the community we provide a valuable 
service-learning experience that is used to give students a hands-on education in software 
engineering.  By giving students a hands-on software engineering education we provide them 
with the tools and knowledge that they wi
ll need when they move on to industry. 
 
7. Acknowledgements 
The authors would like to thank the faculty of the Department of Computer Science, and the 
university Information Technology Services for their strong support. Without them the Agile 
Software Factory would not exist. We also thank the Agile Alliance for their generous 
sponsorship. Their sponsorship allows us to be more agile and moving closer to our goals. 
 
8. References 
[1] Seifer, S.D. and Conners, K. 2007. Eds. Community Campus Partnerships for Health., Faculty Toolkit 
for Service-Learning in Higher Education. Scotts Va
lley, CA: National Service-Learning Clearing House, 
2007. 
[2] Siqueira, F.L.; Barbarán, G.M.C.; Becerra, J.L.R.; ﬁA Software Factory for Education in Software 
Engineeringﬂ, Proceeding of the 21
st
 Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training 
(CSEET™08), Charleston, SC, April 14-17, 2008, pp 215-222. 
[3] Linos, P.K., Herman. S.; Lally, Julie; ﬁA Service-Learning Program for Computer Science and Software 
Engineeringﬂ.  ITiCSE™03. June 30-July 2, 2003, Thessaloniki, Greece, pp 30-34 
[4] Sanderson, P. and Vollmar, K. ﬁA Primer for Applying Service Learning to Computer Scienceﬂ, 
SIGCSE 2000, Austin, TX, March, 2000, pp 222-226 
[5] Liu, C. ﬁEnriching software engineering course with service-learning projects and the open-source 
approach.ﬂ Proceedings of the 27
th
 International Conference on Software Engineering. Pp 613-614  
[6] Ferguson, R., Liu, C., Last, M., and Mertz, J. ﬁService-learning projects: opportunities and challengesﬂ. 
SIGCSE Bulletin 38, Houston, TX, March 1-5, 2006, pp 127Š128 
[7] Webster, L.D., Mirielli, E.J. ﬁStudent reflections on an academic service learning experience in a 
computer science classroom.ﬂ  SIGITE™07, Destin, FL, October 18-20, 2007, pp. 207-211 
[8] Chase, J. D., Oakes, E., Ramsey, S. Using live proj
ects without pain: the development of the small project 
support center at Radford University. In Proceedings of the 38th SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer 
Science Education Conference. SIGCSE™07, Covington, Kentucky, USA. 
[9] Agile Alliance, http://www.agilealliance.org 
40