 Evolving a Project-based Software Engineering Course:  
A Case Study 
 
David Delgado
1
, Alejandro Velasco
1
 
1
Computer Systems and Industrial Engineering 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia 
Bogotá, Colombia 
dcdelgadoa@unal.edu.co; savelascod@unal.edu.co 
Jairo Aponte
1
, Andrian Marcus
2
 
2
Department of Computer Science 
The University of Texas at Dallas 
Richardson, TX, USA 
jhapontem@unal.edu.co; amarcus@utdallas.edu
 
 
Abstract
ŠThis paper presents the evolution of a project-based 
course in Software Engineering for undergraduate students at 
the Universidad Nacional de Colombia. We describe and 
explain the changes we have done over six semesters. In 
addition, we investigate the effects of the changes on the 
students™ grades and their project activities, by analyzing the 
software project repositories and the student feedback. Most of 
the changes had positive and expected results, while some had 
unexpected consequences. We distill a set of lessons regarding 
the class evolution, which will guide the future improvement of 
the course and which could be useful for other educators 
developing a similar course. 
Keywords-project-based learning, capstone project, agile 
methods, software engineering education 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
SWEBOK
1
 and the ACM/IEEE Curricula Guidelines
23
 
recommend including team-based projects into the software 
engineering and computer science curriculum. One of the 
most common ways implemented by educators across the 
globe is via a project-based course (
a.k.a.
, capstone or senior 
project). In some cases, such courses are intimately 
connected with existing software engineering courses. For 
example, students start projects in the software engineering 
class and they finish them in the capstone course. In many 
other cases, the capstone courses have a software 
engineering course as pre-requisite and function in 
complementary fashion.  
Regardless of their place in the curriculum, capstone 
courses face shared challenges, such as, selecting the process 
to be followed by the teams, selecting relevant application 
domains, including state of the art tools and techniques for 
process and team management, etc. For example, many 
capstone courses focus these days on integrating agile 
development processes. The application domain often 
depends on how the projects are defined. Some projects are 
student-defined, others are instructor-defined, while many 
more are defined by industry partners. Choosing an 
application domain that is exciting for students and at the 
same time relevant for industry is not always easy. For 
example, web-based and mobile applications are extremely 
                                                           
1
 https://www.computer.org/web/swebok 
2
 https://www.acm.org/education/se2014.pdf
 
3
 http://www.acm.org/education/CS2013-final-report.pdf
 
popular with students and industry alike today, but that may 
change tomorrow. Technical choices are equally important 
and challenging. Some courses leave choices, such as, 
programming language, frameworks, and IDE up to the 
students, while requiring the use of specific repository 
hosting systems, such as, GitHub. When some of these 
technologies and practices are not covered by previous 
courses, then the capstone course must include them as well. 
This paper presents the evolution of a software 
engineering capstone course (
i.e.
, Software Engineering II) 
underpinned by project-based learning [1], taught at the 
Universidad Nacional de Colombia (UNAL), sede Bogotá, 
within the Computer Systems Engineering curriculum. We 
investigate the evolution of the course over six semesters 
through the analysis of team projects, student surveys, and 
instructor notes. Our experience allowed us to distil a set of 
lessons learned, some of which are echoed in related 
literature. We expect that they will help further refine the 
course and, hopefully, will serve as guidance for those trying 
to include a similar cour
se in their curriculum. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II 
describes the course in details, with emphasis on the changes 
done in the past six semesters. Section III provides an 
analysis of the effects of the changes, using student 
evaluation data, student grades, and commit data from the 
repositories. Section IV presents the lessons learned from our 
course evolution experience. Section V presents the related 
work, while Section VI shows our conclusions and future 
work. 
II.
 
C
OURSE 
D
ESCRIPTION AND 
E
VOLUTION
 
The Software Engineering II (SEII) course described in 
this paper is required for all undergraduate majors in the 
Computer Systems Engineering (CSE) program at UNAL. 
As prerequisite, the students must take the previous software 
engineering course (Software Engineering I), which 
introduces software engineering topics, ranging from 
requirements to testing. They also must have completed 
traditional programming courses, such as, Introduction to 
Programming, Object-Oriented Programming, and Data 
Structures. The course meets formally twice a week and each 
session lasts two hours. The semester has 16 weeks of 
classes with a one-week break after the eighth week of 
classes
. Upon completing the SEII course, the CSE students 
also participate in an 
Interdisciplinary Project
 course, 
The 30th IEEE Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training2377-570X/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEEDOI 10.1109/CSEET.2017.2277The 30th IEEE Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training2377-570X/17 $31.00 © 2017 IEEEDOI 10.1109/CSEET.2017.2277 required for all engineering students, where they team up 
with students from other engineering majors (
e.g.
, electrical 
engineering, mechanical engineering, etc.) and work on 
interdisciplinary projects.  
The main purpose of the course is to teach students how 
to carry out a small software development project, while 
following agile process models and using appropriate tool 
support for effective teamwork. 
We discuss in this Section the evolution of the SEII 
course over six semesters (between 2014 and 2016). The 
academic year at UNAL is split into two semesters: Semester 
I from February to June and Semester II from August to 
December. For simplicity, we refer to Semester I in 2014 as 
2014-I. So, our course evolution narrative spans the 
following semesters: 2014-I, 2014-II, 2015-I, 2015-II, 2016-
I, and 2016-II. During these six semesters, several aspects of 
the course have changed, such as, process followed by 
students, technology choices, grading policies, etc. As we 
discuss these changes, we use visual aids to express how an 
aspect of the course changed over the six semesters. We use 
a six-bar icon 
 representing the six semesters in 
chronological order: the left most bar corresponds to 2014-I, 
whereas the right-most bar corresponds to 2016-II. The 
empty (white) bars indicates that the described aspect of the 
course was not covered in its corresponding semester, 
whereas a filled (blue/gray) bar indicates that the course 
aspect was covered in its corresponding semester. For 
example, SEMAT
4
 
 indicates that SEMAT was used 
during the 2014-I, 2014-II, 2015-I, and 2015-II semesters 
and discontinued after that. Also, Ruby 
 indicates that 
Ruby has been used during the 2016-II semester and it was 
not used before. 
A.
 
Topics Covered 
The lecture part of the course covers seven main topics. 
The extent of each topic has changed slightly over the past 
semesters, to support other changes in the course. This 
section describes each topic and its evolution. The 
approximate length of each one is in brackets. 
Agile processes
 [2-3 weeks]. The instructor covers the 
principles and core values promoted by the agile movement 
. Details of the most popular agile processes are then 
covered 
, such as XP, Kanban, Scrum, etc. Recently, only 
Scrum
5
 
 is covered in details and it is the mandatory 
process for the teams.
 
Project set up
 [1-2 weeks]. During this part of the class, 
we perform
 an overview and tutorials of the main tools that 
the students need to use on their projects. The content varies 
from semester to semester, based on the main technology 
choices, as described later in this Section. 
Version control
 [2-3 weeks]. This part of the course 
reviews the fundamental concepts of version control ranging 
from setting up a repository to using branches and managing 
merge conflicts. The goal is to ensure that each student can 
setup a repository, contribute to it, resolve conflicts, etc. As 
                                                           
4
 http://semat.org/
 
5
 http://www.scrumguides.org/ 
version control system, we have used Mercurial
6
 
 and 
Git
7
. For hosting each repository, students used Google 
Code 
, Bitbucket
8
 
, and GitHub
9
 
. 
Development frameworks
 [3 weeks]. In the early 
editions of the course, the teams were free to work on any 
type of project 
, including video games, kinect apps, 
mobile applications, and even desktop applications. Starting 
2014-II, the projects had to be web applications 
, as the 
instructor and TA could not effectively provide support for 
all possible technologies and application types. 
We have used full-stack MVC frameworks 
 
because 
they have all the components pre-integrated into the 
framework, which significantly simplifies the configuration 
process, and additionally, they implement the MVC 
architecture pattern. In this part of the course students learn 
how the framework operates and how to build the 
fundamental components involved in web development. 
Grails
10
 
 was the MVC framework used in the class. 
Grails is based on the Groovy
11
 
 progamming language 
and while it is quite similar to Java, which is part of the 
students™ background, a number of assignments were give to 
ensure their proficiency with Groovy. Students consistently 
expressed complaints about the quality and availability
 
of the 
Grails documentation and support, so it was
 
replaced with 
Ruby on Rails
12
 
. As Ruby is new to the students, it is 
covered in class. Feedback from the students enrolled in the 
last recorded semester (2016-II) indicates that the switch was 
successful; Further analysis during the next semesters will 
reveal any problems with the switch.
 
The testing framework
 [1-2 weeks]. While we used 
Grails 
, students were required to use the JUnit
13
 
 
and 
Spock
14
 
 testing frameworks
. With the introduction of 
Ruby on Rails, we started using
 the built-in mechanisms in 
Rails 
 for testing applications at unit, functional, and 
integration levels. 
Object-oriented design
 [2-3 weeks]. We covered basic 
properties of object-oriented design (
e.g.
, high cohesion and 
low coupling), essential design principles (
e.g.
, the 
open/close principle), and object-oriented design patterns.  
Software quality
 [2 weeks]. Students learn basic 
concepts of internal software quality and how to use tools 
like SonarQube
15
 
, a software quality management 
platform, enabling them to assess various quality attributes 
of their products, ranging from minor styling details to 
critical design errors. As the main development framework 
for the projects changed from Grails 
 to Rails 
, 
SonarQube was no longer suitable and was removed from 
the tools used in this section of the course.
 
                                                           
6
 https://www.mercurial-scm.org/ 
7
 https://git-scm.com/ 
8
 https://bitbucket.org/product 
9
 https://pages.github.com/
 
10
 https://grails.org/ 
11
 http://www.groovy-lang.org/ 
12
 http://rubyonrails.org/ 
13
 http://junit.org/junit4/ 
14
 http://spockframework.org/ 
15
 http://www.sonarqube.org/
 
7878 B.
 
Team and Project Definition 
Within the first two weeks of classes, the students self-
organize in teams of 4 to 6 members. Sometimes members of 
a team have worked together in previous courses, while 
others meet for the first time in this course. As soon as the 
teams are formed, they are encouraged to discuss and make 
decisions about managerial aspects, such as, deciding who 
the team leader is, the frequency and type of meetings they 
will have, and establishing the set of agile values, principles, 
and practices they will adopt for their project. At the same 
time, the teams hold brainstorming sessions in which they 
explore possible projects. The proposed project by a team is 
often a system in which its members are interested, and 
therefore, the motivation is usually high along the entire 
project lifecycle. Sometimes the selected project addresses 
real needs of a private company or a public institution. 
In any 
case, by the third week of classes every group must have an 
approved project to work on
.  
C.
 
Project Management 
Each team was responsible for determining the length of 
each iteration and establish their own release schedule 
. 
We observed that long iterations (
i.e.
, three or more weeks) 
led to students contributing unequally through the iteration. 
At the same time, short iterations (
i.e.
, one week or less) 
posed significant challenges to the instructor and TAs to 
keep track of each team in a timely fashion. Starting 2015-II, 
iterations are fixed to two weeks 
 for all teams, starting 
the fifth week of the semester. All teams have identical 
release schedules 
. 
The teams can plan and execute each iteration as they see 
fit, but they had to register and update the progress of each 
iteration using an appropriate tool. We used Murally
16
 
 
and Trello
17
 
, general purpose tools, to perform this 
iteration control. In the last analyzed semester, we used 
Taiga
18
 
, an open source project management system for 
agile projects, which offers Scrum templates and manages 
backlogs of user stories. 
The applications are deploy
ed in a PaaS system 
. 
OpenShift
19
 
, Heroku
20
 
 and IBM Bluemix
21
 (
) are 
PaaS services that provide web hosting and allow users to 
deploy web applications developed in several languages like 
Java, PHP, Python, and frameworks like Gra
ils, Rails, 
Django etc. The teams deploy their application to test it in a 
production environment, with some architectural limitations. 
Teams have the liberty of choosing their favorite 
communication tool support, in addition to the 
communication mechanisms offered by the version control 
system, issue tracker, and project management tools. The 
TAs and the instructor are involved in the communication 
channels. Skype, Teamspeak
22
, and Slack
23
 are the most 
popular among students. 
                                                           
16
 https://mural.co/ 
17
 https://trello.com/ 
18
 https://taiga.io/ 
19
 https://hub.openshift.com/ 
20
 https://www.heroku.com/ 
21
 https://www.ibm.com/cloud-computing/bluemix/
 
22
 http://www.teamspeak.com/ 
Likewise, the teams have the freedom to choose their 
favorite IDE. Eclipse
24
 
, GGTS
25
 
, and IntelliJ IDEA
26
 
 
are the most commonly chosen. 
In addition, teams are allowed to exchange information 
between the teams regarding their experience and technical 
choices. For example, if a team successfully uses a particular 
library in their project, they are encouraged to share their 
experience with the other teams, such that they can also use 
it. 
Each project has a product owner 
, who meets with 
the team once a week, and as such, influences the order in 
which the project requirements are met, and eventually, 
creates, modifies or removes requirements from the project 
backlog. This role is played by one of the two TAs, when the 
project does not have an external client.
 
D.
 
Deliverables and Grading 
Initially, the grade for the project accounted for 55% 
 
of the final grade. The course included assignments, quizzes, 
exams, lectures, and lab practices, which accounted for the 
remainder of the grade. With the shift on project-based 
learning, the weight of the project in the final grade 
increased gradually to 60% 
, 70% 
, and 80% 
. In the 
last semesters 
, the final course grade was computed as 
follows: 
•
 
Assignments    20% 
•
 
Project (80%) 
o
 
First project evaluation (week 11) 10% 
o
 
Final project evaluation (week 16) 30% 
o
 
Individual contributions  40%  
 
The assignments are based on the course topics (
e.g.
, 
creating and managing repositories, etc.) and are performed 
in class or at home. The assignments related to the MVC 
frameworks have evolved the most during the six semesters. 
During 2014-I and 2014-II, each team had to study several 
aspects of the framework (
i.e.
, Grails) and then make a 
presentation in the class 
. During 2015-I and 2015-II these 
assignments and presentations were replaced by a set of 
lectures given by the instructor and TAs and a large 
assignment 
 aimed 
to learn how to use Grails in a 
practical way. The assignment took several weeks to be 
finished, which impacted the teams™ ability to focus on the 
project definitions. Starting 2016-I, the large assignments 
were replaced by a set of smaller assignment 
, which were 
finished in the class by the students - with few exceptions, 
when they finished before the next class. 
After the teams have been created and projects chose, 
each team must deliver a project definition document (PDD). 
Figure 1
 shows the structure of the PDD, which follows the 
organization of the SEMA
T (
) a
lphas. The PDD is 
reviewed and approved by the instructor and the TAs. With 
the adoption of Scrum 
, as the unique process to be 
followed by the teams, user stories 
 have been introduced 
                                                                                                  
23
 https://slack.com/
 
24
 http://www.eclipse.org/ 
25
 https://spring.io/tools/ggts 
26
 https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/
 
7979 to describe the Requirements alpha, as SEMAT 
(
)
 was 
phased out due to immature tool support.
 
At the end of each iteration, each team member receives 
a grade for their individual work 
, per the tasks assigned 
to her in the iteration plan and her contributions to the 
project repository (
i.e.
, commits). This is a laborious activity 
for the graders, which inspect every commit. The 
introduction of two TAs in 2016-I greatly facilitated this 
practice and allowed the transition to the 80% 
 
grade 
weight for the project. 
Each team makes two formal presentations of their 
project, during week 11 and week 16, respectively. Each 
team has about 25 minutes to show the work performed so 
far. One way of doing that is showing the plan and outcomes 
of each of the iterations performed and describing the 
produced software artifacts. Each presentation ends with a 
demo of the latest stable version of the system to show the 
implemented functionality. 
In addition, at the end of the semester all groups 
participate in an open exhibition where they present their 
projects to the public and the School community. This 
presentation is not graded.
 
III.
 
P
ROJECTS AND 
S
TUDENT 
F
EEDBACK 
A
NALYSIS
 
The Computer Systems Engineering program at UNAL is 
not accredited by any independent accreditation board, such 
as, ABET
27
. The Department collects student evaluations 
every semester, geared primarily to support faculty and TA 
evaluations. There is no formal, department-level, course 
improvement process. As such, individual faculty who teach 
classes over a longer period, often undertake ad-hoc 
processes to improve the courses, based on student feedback, 
personal observations, and less frequently based on 
measurements of student outcomes. This case study is an 
example of opportunistic course evolution, with positive 
results.  
Many of the changes from the last six semesters, reported 
in Section II, are motivated by observations of the instructor 
and the TAs and student feedback. The main goal of the 
                                                           
27
 http://www.abet.org/ 
changes is to focus the course more on project-based 
learning than in its earlier incarnations. An important sub-
goal was to improve the ability of the instructor and TA to 
get involved more in each project and provide better and 
more frequent feedback. As such, many of the changes 
resulted in restricting student choices. 
We investigate in this Section data about the student 
projects and their work, as well as formal student surveys we 
conducted. 
A.
 
Project Data 
Analysis  
While many of the course changes were implemented 
starting 2014-I, we have detailed project and effort data 
available for three semesters: 2015-I, 2015-II, and 2016-I. 
We will focus our analysis on the data collected during these 
semesters from 19 teams, totaling 88 students. In the last 
analyzed semester (2016-II), six more teams participated in 
the course (30 students). We omit the data from the last 
semester (2016-II) because we made two major changes in 
that semester (
i.e.
, the web framework and the language) and 
we need data from more semesters before we can properly 
analyze that change. 
1)
 
Student grades 
An important goal throughout the course evolution was 
to make sure the students™ success rate in the class improves, 
especially as the weight of the project increased from 
semester to semester. Figure 2 shows box plots of the 
students™ grades over three semesters, when the project grade 
weight increased from 60% 
 to 70% 
 and then to 80% 
. 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2. 
Grades per semester. The 2015-I semester does not have the 
individual contribution 
component in the project grade. 
1.
 

: The set of circumstances that makes it 
appropriate to develop or change a software system 
2.
 

 The people, groups, or organizations that 
affect or are affected by a software system.  
3.
 

 A preliminary list of functionalities the 
system must offer to address the opportunity and satisfy 
the stakeholders 
4.
 

 A high level description of the system 
architecture 
5.
 

 The tailored set of practices and tools 
used by a team to guide and support their work 
6.
 

 Optionally, the team could describe a plan for the 
first iteration of the project 
7.
 

 brief descriptions of the group of people engaged in 
the development of the proposed software system 
 
Figure 1. The structure of the PDD document. 
 
8080  
We analyze the grades in more details. Figure 2 reveals 
that the introduction of the 
individual contribution
 grade 
 
in 2015-II had a negative effect on the grades of the students. 
Many of the changes in the course (
e.g.
, uniform use of 
GitHub 
 and iterations 
) were introduced primarily to 
allow us to account for individual project contributions. 
Historically, every semester several students complained that 
some of their team members contribute less than others. The 
grades in 2015-II reflect that fact. The change in grading 
policy spread quickly from word to mouth among the UNAL 
students (a common phenomenon) and the next semester saw 
an increased effort from the students, as highlighted by the 
individual contribution grade in 2016-I. Collected data from 
the last analyzed semester (
i.e.
, 2016-II) confirms that the 
students continue to improve their individual contributions. 
Another interesting fact is the sharp increase in the 
First 
project presentation
 grade. We attribute this change to the 
fact that we replaced the large Grails assignment 
, which 
students worked on at home, with the smaller assignments 
 that they typically finished in class, giving them more 
time at home to work on the project proposal and early 
iterations. We attribute the increase in the assignment grade 
to the same change. We also think that the change in the 
assignment structure and how the MVC framework material 
was covered led to a better understanding of the technology 
by most students and, consequently, in better projects, as 
reflected by the grades and the complexity we discuss in the 
following subsection. 
2)
 
Project complexity and deployment  
Starting 2014-II the students were asked to define 
projects that were web applications only 
. The material 
covered in class on the relevant frameworks and the 
corresponding assignments changed 
 
and we noticed a 
much better use of the frameworks by the students. In 
consequence, the size of their code, in terms of SLOC 
(Source Lines of Code) Œ measured with CLOC
28
, decreased 
over time. 
Figure 3
 reflects the trend. 
The data also indicates that the amount of coding effort 
in the projects is significant. More importantly, the instructor 
and TAs note that the projects involved more complex 
features from semester to semester and that the final version 
of each project was more mature from semester to semester. 
We believe that this trend is in part due to the focus of the 
class on a reduced number of technologies and more time 
dedicate mastering them by the students. We did not track 
the time the students spend on the assignment outside the 
project, but we plan to track it in the future.  
Table 1
 indicates that more demonstrable projects were 
deployed in the last two semesters than before, in fact 
achieving 100% deployment rate in 2016-I. Furthermore, 
during the last semester (
i.e.
, 2016-II Œ not included), all 
teams deployed on Heroku by the 11
th
 week of classes, 
which confirms that the trend continues. 
 
T
ABLE 
1.
 
N
UMBER OF DEPLOYED PROJECTS
 
Semester 
Heroku 
Openshift 
Groups 
Deployment 
Percentage 
2015-I 2 1 6 50.0% 
2015-II 4 0 7 57.1% 
2016-I 6 0 6 100.0% 
Total 13 3 31 51.6% 
 
3)
 
Commit data 
We analyze the commit activities of the students to 
determine if the changes related to the length of the iteration 
affected significantly the commit behavior. We focus the 
analysis on the time of the commits and investigate fine 
grained time intervals, such as, time of the day (see 
Figure 
5
), and day of the week (see 
Figure 4
). We also analyze 
commits per iteration (see 
Figure 7
) and per week of iteration 
(see 
Figure 6
 and 
Figure 8
). 
                                                           
28
 http://cloc.sourceforge.net/ 
 
 
Figure 3. Average 
project size in SLOC
 
 
 
Figure 4. Average commits per day, per project. 
8181 During these three semesters (
i.e.
, 2015-I, 2015-II, and 
2016-I) the classes were held on Tuesdays and Thursdays 
between 2 pm and 4 pm. During 2015-I, the iteration length 

and deadline was not uniform across teams. During 2015-II 

and 2016-I, each iteration was two weeks long, starting on 

Mondays and ending on Sundays. We expected that the days 

prior to the deadlines to see many commits, compared to the 

other days of the weeks. As 
Figure 4
 shows, our expectations 
were not met, the data indicates that the students tend to 

make more commits on Sundays, Saturdays, Mondays, and 

Tuesdays, than on Wednesday, Thursdays, and Fridays. 

Given the data we have we conclude that the recent changes 

did not impact the weekly work habits of students.  
We also analyze the times of the day when the students 
performed the commits (see 
Figure 5
). As the data shows, we 
found that students perform commits at all hours of the day. 
However, the most ‚productive™ hours are from 7 pm until 1 
am. It indicates that the UNAL student population prefers to 

work on such projects in the evenings. With that in mind, we 

plan to have all assignment and iteration deadlines set for 

morning times. 
The more important analysis is focused on the 
introduction of the fixed two-week iteration 
 in 2015-II. 
The rationale, as explained in the previous section, was 

based on the fact that in previous semesters, when the 

iterations were longer, the students had the tendency to 

postpone work to the end of the iteration and/or shift the 

iteration length. Short iterations caused delay in feedback 

from the instructor and the TAs. 
Figure 6
, Figure 7
, and 
Figure 8
 show commit data 
related to the two-week iterations. 
Figure 7
 indicates that the 
number of commits increases with each iteration through the 
semester. 
To assess whether the students still tend to postpone the 
commits to the end of the iteration we compared the commits 
between the two weeks of the iterations. 
Figure 6
 shows that the numbers of commits in the 
second (
i.e.
, the last) week of the iterations is not 
substantially larger (in average) than in the first week of the 

iterations. We analyze in more details the aggregate data 

from 
Figure 6
. Figure 7
 shows the average number of 
commits per project for each week of every iteration, during 

the two semesters. The detailed analysis shows that the 

number of commits are sometimes higher in the first week of 

the iterations, whereas in other iterations the students commit 

more in the second week. All in all, we conclude that the two 
 Figure 5. Average commits per hour, per project. 
  Figure 6. Average number of commits per week of iterations, per 
project. Iterations are set to two weeks in these semesters. 
  Figure 7. Average number of commits per iterations, per project. 
Iterations are fixed to two weeks in these semesters. 
8282 week iteration length allows students to distribute the work 
evenly between iterations
, and in that way, keep a 
sustainable pace throughout the entire project span
. Figure 7
 and 
Figure 8
 also show that in 2016-I, the 
students made more commits in the first few iterations than 

in 2015-II. We attribute this change to the weekly meetings 

held between the team and the product owner 
, in which 
the participants review the planned tasks™ advance and the 

team and technical difficulties that may have appeared.
 4) Software quality 
SonarQube 
, was used by the teams for several 
semesters to evaluate the quality of their Groovy code. It was 

mostly used to assess the quality of the final releases of the 

projects, and to address the most critical issues reported by 

this tool. As more and more of the code produced by the 

teams was no longer in Java or Groovy, we stopped using 

SonarQube in 2016-II. We also used SonarQube to analyze 

the final projects from the last semesters (see 
Figure 9
). The 
high number of minor issues is not entirely surprising. Minor 

issues are defined as ﬁ
quality flaws which can slightly 

impact the developer productivityﬂ, such as, lines should not 

be too long, 
switch
 statements should have at least three 
cases, etc. As a rule, students were less inclined to fix these 

types of issues, especially at the end of the semester.  
Unexpected was the sharp increase of the major issues.  
Major issues are defined as ﬁquality flaws which can highly 
impact the developer productivityﬂ, such as, uncovered piece 
of code, duplicated blocks, unused parameters, etc. Despite 

the SonarQube terminology, many of the major issues do not 

have a major impact on the developer productivity; hence, 

they are often perfect candidates for technical debt 

generation. Note that these issues do not correlate with 

external quality attributes. In fact, we observed that the 

projects in the later semesters had fewer functional errors 

and the feature sets were more complete (see also the 

deployment analysis discussed before). We believe that the 

use of SonarQube through the semester lead to less technical 

debt. Conversely, less time spent on removing technical debt 

issues, meant potentially more times spent on adding new 

features or fixing bugs. As the focus of the projects was on 

producing complete applications,
 we accepted the internal 
quality price (as revealed by SonarQube). It is hard to 

balance both aspects, given all the constraints. We need to 

consider a better trade-off between external and internal 

quality in the future.
 B. Students™ Feedback 
At the end of each of the last three Grails-based semesters 
(i.e.
, 2015-I, 2015-II, and 2016-I), the students were asked to 
participate in a survey to assess their perception of the agile 

practices they used through the semester. The participation 

was optional and 62 of the 90 students responded.  
As mentioned before, in the early semesters, XP+SEMAT 
 was the dominant process used by the teams, whereas 
later, Scrum 
 was used by all teams. In all cases, the 
teams did not follow the processes strictly, but rather they 
chose the principles and rules they prefer to follow. The 
rationale is that some of the principles cannot be monitored 

or enforced, such as, daily scrum meeting, customer on site, 

etc.  
The survey has 13 questions aimed to capture the 
students™ opinion on the agile practices. For each practice, 

the students could indicate whether they used that practice 

during the semester or not. In case they have used it, they 

were asked to assess on a 5-point Likert scale whether the 

practice had a positive or negative impact on their work: 

strongly negative impact, negative impact, no impact, 

positive impact, strongly positive impact. Table 2 
summarizes the answer of the students. 
The highlighted cells (green) indicate that more than a half 
of students reported a (strongly) positive impact in using the 
corresponding practices in their project: incremental and 

iterative development, collective ownership, fixed length 

iterations, continuous delivery, continuous integration and 

periodic meetings, simple design, and pair programming. 

The least common practices turned out to be: planning game, 

unit testing, and code refactoring. The most polarizing 

practices proved to be: pair programming and periodic 

meetings. 
Students were also requested to indicate the main 
problems they had to face during the course. The more 
  Figure 8. Average number of commits per iteration week, per project. 
Iterations are fixed to two weeks in these semesters. 
  Figure 9. Average number of issues flagged by SonarQube per project. 
8383 significant problems they reported were associated with the 
task estimation times, work distribution, communication 
between team members, and task planning. 
In the last part of the survey, students were requested to 
list aspects of the course they did not like. The large 
assignments were listed as a major negative aspect of the 
course, as the students felt their time was better spent on the 
main projects. Later changes (as described above) confirmed 
this hypothesis. 
T
ABLE 
2.
 
S
TUDENT ANSWERS TO THE SURVEY ON AGILE PRACTICES
.
 
 
62
 OF 
90
 STUDENTS RESPONDED
. 
Question 
Not 
used 
S. neg. 
Neg. 
Neutr. 
Pos.
S. pos.
Incremental 
Development 
9 0 0 13 
37 
3 
Iterative 
Development 
4 0 0 8 
42 
8 
Collective 
Ownership 
9 0 2 13 
33 
5 
Code Refactoring 20 1 2 14 21 4 
Fixed Length 
Iterations 
10 0 1 13 
29 
9 
Unit Testing 20 0 0 20 19 3 
Continuous 
Delivery 
12 0 1 13 
27 
9 
Continuous 
Integration 
10 1 4 7 
28 
12 
Periodic Meetings 2 2 0 4 
33 
21 
Pair Programming 13 4 2 7 
21 
15 
Simple Design 14 1 0 11 
29 
7 
User Stories 12 0 3 6 
24 
17 
Planning Game 45 0 0 8 8 1 
 
Students also pointed out that currently Ruby on Rails is 
more popular than Groovy and Grails. Their comments were 
the main reason of the switch to Ruby on Rails in 2016-II. 
IV.
 
L
ESSONS 
L
EARNED
 
We distill in this Section a set of lessons we learned from 
our experience. Some of them are supported by the data we 
collected and the analyses presented in the previous Section. 
Others reflect informal observations of the instructor and 
TAs, based on their interactions with the students through the 
semesters. At the same time, some of these lessons may be 
applicable in other similar settings, whereas others may not. 
We do not intend for these lessons to be prescriptive, but 
rather descriptive of our experience.  
1)
 
Use of agile processes 
The academic environment does not allow a strict 
implementation of specific agile processes (
e.g.
, Scrum or 
XP). The instructors, in consultations with the teams, should 
be determining which practices and principles to follow. 
While students prefer some agile practices and principles to 
others, we found the following to be most helpful: 
•
 
Working software is the principal measure of 
progress. Applying this principle in a strict way 
allowed more projects to be deployed, resulting in 
demonstrable applications at the end of the semester. 
In 2014-II only one team implemented enough 
functionality to consider the system as demonstrable 
for the clients. In 2015-II two groups reached that 
status. In 2016-I four projects reached that status. In 
2016-II all projects implemented key functionality 
and user interfaces were good enough to consider the 
systems as usable. However, investigation of student 
code indicates that the pressure to obtain more 
usable applications comes at the expense of lower 
internal code quality. Thus, continuous quality 
assessment practices should be included in the 
software processes followed by the teams. 
•
 
Deliver working software frequently. We found a 
fixed length iteration of two weeks, imposed on all 
teams offers the best balance between student and 
grading effort. The commitment to implement new 
functionality every two weeks and the feedback 
received on each delivery promote a more 
sustainable development effort among the teams, so 
they are prevented from making heroic efforts at the 
end of the semester to try to save the project. The 
behavior of the commits per iteration supports this 
observation, as in the last semester the commits are 
more evenly distributed per iteration than before. 
•
 
The instructor and/or the TAs should play a key role 
in each team (in our case as product owner) and 
participate in weekly meetings. We credit this 
change with the fact that most recent teams managed 
to produce
 
more
 
complete applications by the end of 
the semester. 
 
In earlier work, Zorzo et al. [2] also observed that there is 
a need to use a modified version of Scrum in academic 
settings. Muller and Tichy [3] pointed out that it is unclear 
how to reap the potential benefits of pair programming, 
although pair programming produces high quality code. The 
use of pair programming in our course was polarizing among 
students and its benefits unclear. 
2)
 
Use of management tools 
The use of common project management tools across all 
teams allow for better monitoring and grading, which in term 
improves student activities. We found Trello and GitHub to 
be especially helpful in allowing us to monitor and grade 
individual student effort, which lead to better student 
performance. Problems in teams were detected and corrected 
early. Rajlich [4] also noted in previous work that defining a 
mechanism to provide individual grades in team projects is 
essential to maintain fairness. 
3)
 
Student team size and interactions 
Given the profile of our students (
i.e.
, academic 
background, other courses they enroll in in parallel, etc.), we 
found that groups of five students (no less than four and no 
more than six) help achieve best the goals of the course. 
Teams with fewer than four members are unlikely to 
generate the dynamics and issues that are common on 
collaborative software endeavors. Also, smaller groups were 
unable to complete substantial projects in the allotted time. 
Larger groups faced other kind of problems, such as, 
8484 inability to meet all together and many other coordination 
issues. Two large groups in the past performed poorly, 
whereas another, more recent one, was split earlier in the 
semester and the new smaller groups performed better. 
All teams should have identical timelines and iteration 
schedules. This practice improves monitoring and grading 
and allow the definition of projects of similar complexity. 
From the students' point of view, this practice is positive 
because all teams are better informed about the progress of 
the other projects, which promotes a sense of competence 
throughout the iterations, and encourages the sharing of 
technical knowledge among teams. On the other hand, we 
have noticed that when a team has control over the start, end, 
and duration of the iteration, they tend not to be strict with 
those limits, such that the iteration length often is shifted, 
breaking a fundamental rule of agile management. 
4)
 
Technology choices 
There are many technology choices to be made. We 
advocate dividing them in two categories: mandatory Œ 
students must use these technologies/tools (in our case these 
include now Ruby on Rails, GitHub, Taiga); optional Œ 
students can choose from a list of options (in our case the 
IDEs options include IntelliJ IDEA, Eclipse, and Netbeans; 
and the PaaS alternatives include Heroku, OpenShift, and 
IBM BlueMix). The mandatory technologies should be 
covered in class as early as possible, to allow teams to start 
the project developments as soon as possible. The Instructor 
and TAs should be able to provide support with the optional 
technologies. Students can choose additional technologies at 
their own risk, considering they may not be able to get 
support from the instructor and TAs. 
5)
 
Project topics 
We have learned that is better to allow teams to select 
their own project than giving them a list of possible projects 
or impose a specific one
. 
This lesson is based on our 
observations of the students™ attitude through the semester. 
We have noticed that when the team selects and defines the 
projects, their level of commitment and excitement to the 
project rises as the software system grows. At the end of the 
semester the students have a strong sense of ownership 
towards the project, rather than feeling that they have just 
done one additional assignment. Most of them are proud of 
the software product they built, and in some cases, they 
continue working on the system after they finish the 
semester, or they consider the system as a product that is 
worth putting in their professional portfolios. We noticed 
that, in such situations, the students are more willing to learn 
technical topics on their own and search for specific tools 
and frameworks that may help them to build the software 
system. The obvious side effect of such a strategy is that it 
may be more difficult to ensure that the projects are of 
similar complexity. However, previously mentioned 
practices should allow adjusting more frequently through the 
semester. We need formal surveys with students in the future 
to confirm our informal observations regarding this last 
lesson. 
 
 
6)
 
Course organization 
While our collected data did not allow for a fine-grained 
analysis of the effect of all aspects of the course on student 
performance and satisfaction, we distill some aspects of the 
course organization that were informally appreciated by the 
students and TAs. The project should have the highest 
weight in the final course grade, and part of that grade should 
evaluate the individual contributions of each student. Thus, 
the students must know from the beginning that working on 
the project is the key factor to success in the course.  
The technical topics included in the syllabus should 
support the development of the project directly and be 
covered early in the semester.  
When it is not possible to have an industry client, the role 
of the product owner should be performed by someone 
external to the team, ideally a TA or the course instructor. 
The product owner should meet the team periodically and 
help them to plan the iteration tasks and solve organizational 
problems.  
V.
 
R
ELATED 
W
ORK
 
Educators have proposed different approaches to improve 
the teaching methodology in software engineering courses.  
For example, Francese et al. [5] applied a related 
methodology to the one presented in this paper during the 
evolution of the mobile application development course at 
the University of Salerno. The authors implemented a 
teaching strategy founded on the principles of project-based 
learning, where software projects are developed by students 
organized in teams. Lee et al. [6] adopted a course 
methodology which is supported by using a software design 
studios. In their approach, the practice and hands-on work 
are emphasized over other aspects. 
The use of agile methodologies in software engineering 
course has also been widely adopted. Zorzo et al. [2] suggest 
to use agile methodologies like Scrum in order to teach 
students how to effectively manage software projects, 
keeping a balance between the theory and the industry needs. 
During the course conducted by the authors, students had to 
work in a project applying the Scrum practices that were 
explained by the instructors, following an iterative model of 
eight sprints with three months each. Shukla and Williams 
[7] adopted practices of extreme programming as main 
methodology to teach a software engineering course. In this 
course, the students™ perceptions of each principle of extreme 
programming were evaluated by the authors. During the 
course, the students worked on four projects and were 
organized in teams of four people without supervision. 
Muller and Tichy [3] also adopted extreme programming as 
software development methodology. As in previous work, 
the authors evaluated the student opinions for each principle 
of the methodology. 
Rajlich [4] describes a set of ﬁDeadly sinsﬂ that were 
tried to avoid during the evolution of a software engineering 
course. Razmov [8] emphasizes the relevance of feedback as 
a fundamental part in every software development process. 
The author proposed a teaching model following the process 
of ﬁDoingﬂ, ﬁReflectingﬂ, and ﬁFeedbackﬂ. In a similar way, 
Roach [9] defends the notion retrospective processes 
obtained during the course execution and the project 
8585 development. Jarzabek [10] presents a particular 
methodology based on APIs, which takes advantage of the 
interoperability properties. 
Our paper adds to this body of knowledge, while 
reinforcing some of the conclusions of previous experiences. 
VI.
 
C
ONCLUSIONS AND 
F
UTURE 
W
ORK
 
We have been developing a software engineering project-
based course at the Universidad Nacional de Colombia, over 
the past six semesters. The development process is somewhat 
ad-hoc and opportunistic, in the absence of institutionally 
sanctioned course improvement methodology.  
Over the six semesters, the course underwent many 
changes, with the main goal of making the project the main 
component of the course. Changes ranged from the topics 
covered in class and grading, to the process and technologies 
used by the teams. The most successful changes were those 
that allowed the instructor and TAs to take a more active role 
in each team and better monitor and grade the student 
activities. Specifically, imposing common iterations 
schedules and technology choices on the teams and 
designating the instructor or the TAs as project owners the 
teams. Among the benefits, students improved their grades 
and the functionalities of their applications. Some changes 
led to uneasy trade-offs. For example, allocating more time 
for improving the features of the applications, at the expense 
of close monitoring of internal code quality, resulted in an 
increase in technical debt. 
Our experience allowed us to distil a set of lessons 
learned, some of which are echoed in related literature. We 
expect that at least some of them will be useful for anyone 
implementing a similar course. 
Looking forward, we need to conduct future student 
surveys to confirm some of our lessons that are derived from 
informal observations. In addition, we plan to formalize the 
course improvement process by defining specific student 
outcomes and measurements, akin to courses that are part of 
accredited programs. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1] P. C. Blumenfeld, E. Soloway, R. W. Marx, J. S. Krajcik, M. 
Guzdial, and A. Palincsar, ﬁMotivating Project-Based Learning: 
Sustaining the Doing, Supporting the Learning,ﬂ 
Educ. Psychol.
, 
vol. 26, no. 3Œ4, pp. 369Œ398, Jun. 1991. 
[2] S. D. Zorzo, L. de Ponte and D. Lucrédio, "Using scrum to teach 
software engineering: A case study," 2013 IEEE Frontiers in 
Education Conference (FIE), Oklahoma City, OK, 2013, pp. 455-
461. 
[3] M. M. Müller and W. F. Tichy, ﬁCase Study: Extreme 
Programming in a University Environment,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 
23rd International Conference on Software Engineering
, 
Washington, DC, USA, 2001, pp. 537Œ544. 
[4] V. Rajlich, ﬁTeaching Developer Skills in the First Software 
Engineering Course,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 2013 International 
Conference on Software Engineering
, Piscataway, NJ, USA, 2013, 
pp. 1109Œ1116. 
[5] R. Francese, C. Gravino, M. Risi, G. Scanniello, and G. Tortora, 
ﬁOn the Experience of Using Git-Hub in the Context of an 
Academic Course for the Development of Apps for Smart 
Devices,ﬂ presented at the The 21st International Conference on 
Distributed Multimedia Systems, 2015, pp. 292Œ299. 
[6] J. Lee, G. Kotonya, J. Whittle, and C. Bull, ﬁSoftware Design 
Studio: A Practical Example,ﬂ presented at the Proceedings of the 
37th International Conference on Software Engineering - Volume 2 
Pages 389-397, 2015, pp. 389Œ397. 
[7] A. Shukla and L. Williams, ﬁAdapting extreme programming for a 
core software engineering course,ﬂ presented at the Proceedings of 
the 15th Conference on Software Engineering Education and 
Training (CSEET™02), 2002, pp. 184Œ191. 
[8] V. Razmov, ﬁEffective pedagogical principles and practices in 
teaching software engineering through projects,ﬂ presented at the 
Proc. 37th FIE, 2007, p. S4EŒ21ŒS4EŒ26. 
[9] S. Roach, ﬁRetrospectives in a software engineering project course: 
Getting students to get the most from a project experience,ﬂ 
presented at the 2011 24th IEEE-CS Conference on Software 
Engineering Education and Training (CSEE&T), 2011, pp. 467Œ
471. 
[10] S. Jarzabek, ﬁTeaching advanced software design in team-based 
project course,ﬂ presented at the Software Engineering Education 
and Training (CSEE&T), 2013 IEEE 26th Conference, 2013, pp. 
31Œ40. 
  
 
8686