 Getting Students to Think About 
How Agile Processes Can Be Made More Secure 
 
 
Richard G. Epstein 
Department of Computer Science 
West Chester University of Pennsylvania 
West Chester, PA 19383 
repstein@wcupa.edu
 
Abstract 
 
Agile processes play an important role in the author™s undergraduate course in software 
engineering.   The course is a required course for undergraduate majors in Computer Science.  
Agile processes, like eXtreme Programming (XP), have been criticized for not providing a 
good framework for building secure software.  The course begins by covering what some 
people have called ﬁthe warﬂ between the traditional waterfall process folks and the agile 
process folks.  After students are given an introduction to various processes on both sides of 
ﬁthe warﬂ (with an emphasis on PSP, CMMI and XP) and after students are introduced to 
basic concepts about how to make software systems more secure (drawing heavily on Viega 
and McGraw™s book  Building Secure Software)
, the course turns its attention to how XP (in 
particular) can be made more secure.  This topic generates a lot of enthusiasm among the 
students.  The students seem to enjoy the challenge of creating new ideas to improve the 
manner in which XP addresses security issues.  Students have come up with many creative 
and stimulating  ideas about how eXtreme Programming can be made more secure without 
the necessity for what some have called ﬁbig up front designﬂ.   This paper presents some of 
the creative ideas students have come up with regarding this issue and discusses the team 
projects that give students the opportunity to explore security issues for agile processes in 
some depth.
 
 
1. Introduction 
  
        
Around the turn of the century (2000, not 1900), the author began to include eXtreme 
Programming [1,2] in his undergraduate course in software engineering.  Two basic goals of 
this course were to introduce students to a variety of software processes and to get students to 
think about the strengths and weaknesses of the various processes that are discussed.  
However, within a year or two after he introduced eXtreme Programming into his software 
engineering course, the author realized that many experts have reservations about eXtreme 
Programming in terms of its appropriateness for building secure software. 
       The author came to believe that eXtreme Programming (XP) could be made more secure 
and that getting students to think about how this might be done would make a positive 
contribution to the course content. XP does seem to have some shortfalls in terms of 
producing secure software.  The course attempts to get the students to think about these 
shortfalls and also to think about ways to improve XP so that the shortfalls might be 
overcome.  The author believes that this is an interesting problem and he has seen that it 
generates a lot of interest in our classroom discussion, as we shall see later in this paper. 
   First, this paper gives an overview of the course, in order to provide the context in 
which this discussion takes place.  The paper then turns its attention to how security 
issues are introduced into the course.  The main focus shall be on how the course gets 
21st Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training978-0-7695-3144-1/08 $25.00 © 2008 IEEEDOI 10.1109/CSEET.2008.1351 students to think about how XP might be made more secure.  Specific suggestions that 
arise during our in-class discussion will be presented. 
 
2. Overview of the course 
  
    
The course begins by introducing students to a variety of software processes.  We begin 
with a two-week introduction to PSP from Watts Humphrey at the Software Engineering 
Institute [3].  This is followed by an introduction to agile processes, with an emphasis on XP 
and Scrum.   
     The course relies on an online ﬁcoursepackﬂ which consists of a collection of articles from 
the ACM and IEEE Computer Society digital libraries. Indeed, the digital libraries are an 
invaluable resource for this course.  For example, our introduction to PSP, XP and Scrum 
includes discussions regarding how these processes have been applied in industry as reported 
in several articles from the digital libraries.  Morisio [4] tells us about his company™s attempt 
to incorporate PSP into the work
 environment.  Although most of the developers abandoned 
most of the PSP practices, when given the choice to do so, they were impressed by PSP™s 
quality assurance measures, specifically defect tracking.  Grenning [5] describes how he led a 
project that introduced XP into his company™s software development culture. Grenning makes 
the important point that XP needed to be adapted to the corporate environment.    This is an 
important point because there is more and more flexibility in the XP and agile process 
software development culture.  This makes it easier to modify agile processes in order to 
make them more secure.  Schatz and Abdelshafi [6] discuss how Scrum was successfully 
introduced into their corporate environment with the help of their Scrum mentor, Ken 
Schwaber. 
      Because of time limitations, we discuss TSP only briefly, and then move on to discuss the 
SEI™s CMM (now, the CMMI) framework for evaluating process maturity.  An excellent 
paper by Mark Paulk [7] allows us to integrate the CMM concepts into our earlier discussion 
of XP.  We learn that XP is not inconsistent with the framework provided by CMM.  We 
conclude our discussion of software processes with a brief introduction to Open Source 
software development. 
     After completing our discussion of software processes, we move on to professional issues 
for software engineers.  We discuss well-known software disasters (like the Therac-25 
accidents, discussed by Leveson et al. [8] and why software fails (using the framework 
provided by Charette [9]).  This naturally leads into a discussion of the Software Engineering 
Code of Ethics [10].  Clearly, one of the ethical obligations of a software engineer is to make 
an effort to provide software that is secure (or, perhaps we should say, reasonably secure). 
     The course then moves on to discuss work culture issues in software engineering with an 
emphasis on the ideas of McLendon and Weinberg [11] relating to incongruent work cultures 
and blaming in the software development workplace.  The course then moves on to a 
discussion of quality assurance issues.  An important paper that we use in the quality 
assurance section of the course is Talby et al. [12].  Talby and his co-authors describe how 
XP was scaled up for a large project which had serious security and reliability considerations.   
Although the authors do not focus on security per se, they do make it clear that software 
testing was done in this XP project in a rigorous and intense manner.   
     The article by Talby et al. provides a good segue into a discussion of how security issues 
can be integrated into a software process, which then leads into our discussion of how agile 
processes (XP, in particular) can be made more secure.  However, before moving on to how 
these issues are treated in the course (in Sections 4, 5 and 6), let™s put in a few words about 
ﬁthe Warﬂ.    
 
52  
3. ﬁThe Warﬂ 
 
    The diverse software processes that are discussed in this course are central issues in what 
some software engineers are calling ﬁthe Warﬂ.  The War is the conflict between the hard-
core data collection and documentation folks on one side and the agile process folks on the 
other.  The author™s recollection is that he first heard the phrase ﬁthe warﬂ in a conference 
keynote address given by Ken Schwaber, a key person behind the development of the Scrum 
agile process [13].  Schwaber describes a panel discussion at another conference in which 
there were two tables set up on the stage.  The two tables were set up to reflect the two sides 
in the so-called ﬁWarﬂ.  At one table you had people who were supporting CMM (now called 
CMMI), including Mark Paulk.  On the other side you had people who were supporting agile 
processes, including Ken Schwaber. 
      The CMM folks did not like the agile approach to software development and the agile 
process folks did not like the CMM approach.  That™s the War. This author likes to say that 
the CMM folks accuse the agile folks of producing WMDs (Web-apps of Mass Disruption) 
while the agile folks accuse the CMM folks of producing WMDs (Worthless Massive 
Documents).  Indeed, part of this war is the perception on the CMM side of the argument that 
the agile process folks do not do enough big-up-front design.  There are serious security 
implications, according to the CMM folks, for the lack of big-up-front design among the agile 
process folks.  The agile process folks, on the other hand, emphasize iterative development.  
They claim that the CMM just results in massive documents that no one ever reads. 
     
In Ken Schwaber™s description of this panel discussion, he describes an important 
departure from the expected.  Mark Paulk, sitting at the CMM table, spoke up in defense of 
the agile processes, claiming that there was a lot that the CMM folks could learn from the 
agile process folks.  He criticized many CMM projects for the great burden they placed on 
developers and indicated that workplace dissatisfaction was one of the consequences of the 
need to create massive documents that hardly anyone would ever read.  The arguments and 
counterarguments relating to the ﬁWarﬂ are discussed in several web sites, including [14].  
The war also manifested in a Point-Counterpoint article in IEEE Software
 [15].  The main 
focus in the Point-Counterpoint article is whether you really need big-up front specifications 
in a software project. 
     One aspect of ﬁthe Warﬂ is whether agile processes are appropriate for producing secure 
software.  In their excellent book Building Secure Software
 [16], Viega and McGraw only 
mention eXtreme Programming briefly and only once and this is what they had to say: ﬁIn 
general, the clearer and easier the specification, the better the resulting system.  
Unfortunately, extreme programming (XP) seems to run counter to this old-fashioned view!  
In our opinion, XP will probably have a negative impact on software security [16, p. 35].ﬂ
     
 
4. Introducing security into the course 
 
     
Students are introduced to ﬁthe Warﬂ early on in the course.  As suggested at the end of the 
previous section, an important point of contention in this War is whether agile processes are 
appropriate for building secure software.  Before we can explore this issue in depth, we need 
to look at what various experts have to say about incorporating security concerns into the 
software development process. 
     Viega and McGraw [16] provide important concepts for this portion of the course.  In 
addition, we draw upon a report from the Security Across the Software Development 
Lifecycle Task Force that was organized at the National CyberSecurity Summit in December 
2003.  Members of the Task Force included representatives from industry, academia and the 
United States Department of Homeland Security.  The report, as summarized in Davis et al. 
53 [17], identifies good processes for building secure software.  It is important to note that agile 
processes are not mentioned at all in this paper.  The paper focuses on good processes for 
developing secure software, as opposed to explicitly criticizing processes that they felt were 
not so good.  It is interesting that both Watts Humphrey and Gary McGraw were on this Task 
Force. Among the processes that the committee recommends are TSP-Secure, Correctness-
by-Construction, and Cleanroom Software Engineering.  In addition, they recommend the 
CMMI framework (specifically, SSE-CMM, or Systems Security Engineering-CMM).  An 
important point that the members of the Task Force make in their paper is that there is a 
correlation between low defect densities in the code and good security.  
     Viega and McGraw (in [16]) provide an excellent framework for discussing how security 
issues can be integrated into the software development process.  They discuss the importance 
of developing a security policy early on, in the requirements analysis phase.  They discuss 
how risk assessment needs to be integrated into the requirements analysis phase, so that a 
complete risk assessment is completed before the project can move on to design and 
implementation.  They also discuss trust assumptions, and their importance for secure design, 
and the importance of using appropriate tools to check software for security vulnerabilities.  
They discuss the need to train software developers in secure coding practices. They also 
discuss security testing, and how it differs from normal software testing.  In particular, 
security testing focuses on what the ﬁbad guysﬂ might do to discover vulnerabilities in the 
software.   
     Our class discussion then moves on to a paper that illustrates how the a group of 
researchers integrated security concerns into a software development project very much in the 
style suggested by Viega and McGraw (Apvrille et al. [18]). This project involved developing 
an instant messaging system that the authors called PICO.  They describe how security 
concerns were factored into each phase of the software life cycle, much in the manner that 
Viega and McGraw recommend. 
     Viega and McGraw present goals and principles for secure software and they discuss the 
conflicts that might exist among these goals.  In addition, they discuss how the security goals 
might be in conflict with the software project goals.  For example, the security goal of 
ﬁdefense in depthﬂ can be at odds with the software project goals of timeliness and user-
friendliness.  This discussion of conflicts among the various project goals (whether generic 
project goals or security goals) naturally leads into our next topic: agile processes and 
security. 
 
5. Agile processes and security: the Matrix 
 
     The author does his best to get students to see the issue of agile processes and security as 
an interesting one.  In particular, looking at this issue gives us an opportunity to be creative in 
the sense that we make an effort to describe how an agile process, like eXtreme 
Programming, can be modified so as to make it more appropriate from a security perspective.  
By the time we get to the class that is devoted specifically to this topic, many students do 
seem to be generally interested in this issue and try to contribute creative ideas to our in-class 
discussion. 
     The initial discussion centers around a handout that the author calls ﬁthe Matrixﬂ.  The 
Matrix has nothing to do with the movie by that title.  Rather, it is a table whose rows are 
labeled (on the left) with basic principles for building secure software (drawn from Viega and 
McGraw [16] and Noopur et al. [17]).  The columns are labeled (across the top) with the basic 
practices of eXtreme Programming. Students are asked to focus on the intersections between 
the rows and the columns in this table (or, matrix) and to comment either on the tensions 
54 between the security principles and the XP practices or the ways in which the principles and 
practices might reinforce one another. For example, one of the security principles listed on the 
left is ﬁProvide multi-level securityﬂ.  One of the XP practices listed on the top of the matrix 
is ﬁDo not add functionality the customer does not wantﬂ.  Students are asked to consider 
ways in which the security principle might be in conflict with the XP practice.   
     Here is the complete list of the security principles listed on the left-hand side of the matrix: 
•
 
Prevent vulnerabilities that can lead to exploits. 
•
 
Implement auditing and / or monitoring 
•
 
Ensure confidentiality, integrity, and accessibility 
•
 
Provide multi-level security 
•
 
Provide trustworthy authentication processes 
•
 
Follow the principle of least privilege 
•
 
Fail security 
•
 
Be reluctant to trust 
•
 
Use Community resources 
Here is the complete list of the XP practices that are listed across the top of the matrix: 
•
 
Customer on-side at all times 
•
 
Requirements gathering using user stories 
•
 
Project planning (release planning, iteration planning) 
•
 
No big-up front design 
•
 
Pair programming 
•
 
Unit tests written before actual code 
•
 
Acceptance testing guided by customer 
•
 
Frequent integration of new components into code repository 
•
 
Daily stand-up meetings 
•
 
Do not add functionality the customer does not want 
•
 
No overtime! Forty-hour work week. 
•
 
Redesign code to keep it simple and correct (refactoring) 
     The goal is to get students to see the possible conflicts and tensions between the security 
principles and goals and the XP practices.  In addition, students might see situations in which 
the security principles and XP practices are in synch. The author has found that students 
sometimes have difficulty seeing these relationships.  They seem to get more ﬁturned onﬂ 
when the discussion turns to suggesting ways in which XP can be improved in terms of 
security. 
 
 
 
55 6. Some recommendations for making XP more secure 
 
     The students have come up with some interesting ideas for making XP more secure.  Most 
of these ideas come up during our in-class discussion of XP and security.  Others have found 
their way into the team projects that students submit at the end of the semester and individual 
research papers students submit at the end of the graduate version of the course.  In fact, one 
graduate student wrote a research paper about a process he called XP-Secure.  Although the 
following discussion is not based on the ideas in his paper, we will refer to our secure version 
of XP using his terminology: XP-Secure.  (It should be noted that some of the ideas that 
follow, were in his paper, specifically the idea of security stories.  However, quite a few 
students seem to come up with similar ideas in our undergraduate class discussion of how XP 
can be made more secure.)  The following paragraphs describe some of the ideas that emerge 
during our in-class discussion of how to make XP more secure. 
     One key idea is the need for a security engineer on the development team.  Just as XP 
requires that a customer be on site all the time as part of the development team, the students 
saw the need for a security expert on the XP-Secure development team.  The security 
engineer would play an important role in guiding the team™s effort in the direction or 
producing a secure product.  The security engineer would interact both with the developers 
and with the on-site customer.  One goal of the security engineer would be to educate both the 
developers and the customer about how the project would be impacted by security issues and 
concerns.  This kind of input from the security engineer would occur during all of the phases 
of the project. 
     Another interesting idea that students have suggested is the need for security stories to 
supplement the user stories that XP uses to determine the requirements.  The evolving 
collection of security stories and user stories would become the basic requirements 
framework for the project.  Security stories might come directly from the security engineer or 
they might be developed by the customer as a result of the customer™s interaction with the 
security engineer.  The security engineer could see the implicit security issues involved in the 
functionality that the customer describes and thus the security engineer could develop security 
stories as a way of specifying the project™s security policy.  In other words, security stories 
would play a major role in determining the security policy for the project. 
     A big issue for XP-Secure is how project planning would be conducted. Here is the basic 
framework that emerges from our in-class discussion of project planning for XP-Secure.  First 
of all, user stories and security stories would need to be prioritized, which is the usual practice 
at the release planning meeting.   However, risk assessment must be part of this process of 
prioritizing the user stories and the security stories.  The security stories that are agreed upon, 
during the release planning meeting with the appropriate risk assessment having been 
performed, will constitute the security policy for the project, just as the user stories will 
define the functionality of the project. 
     One important issue that gets raised at this point in the discussion is whether the security 
policy can be decided upon ﬁup frontﬂ at the release planning meeting.  How will this differ 
from a more traditional ﬁbig up front designﬂ process?  Also, will the security policy make 
demands upon the developers that will make the traditional XP design process inappropriate?  
Will larger architectural issues need to be discussed right ﬁup frontﬂ in the XP-Secure 
process, or can these decisions be made later on, as in the usual XP process?   
     Let™s assume that XP-Secure is highly iterative. The release planning meeting gives rise to 
a project plan laid out in terms of tentative iterations.  At the end of each iteration, the project 
must satisfy the basic security goals stipulated by the security stories for that iteration and the 
56 security policy considerations that emerge from those security stories.  A security story that is 
not satisfied at the end of an iteration must be addressed in the subsequent iteration. Any 
software released to the customer must satisfy the security policy that the security engineer 
helped to specify with the original collection of security stories agreed upon at the release 
planning meeting.   
     Here are some of the questions that often come up in discussing the design aspects of XP-
Secure:  Are CRC (Class Responsibility and Collaboration) cards sufficient for designing a 
secure architecture?  One possibility is to bring UMLsec into the project, as described in the 
afore-mentioned paper by Apvrille et al. [18].  Students wonder whether XP allows for 
adequate attention being paid to issues in software architecture that relate to trust assumptions 
and relationships between the software components.  They question whether a highly iterative 
process can handle these problems adequately. 
     In terms of implementation and continuous integration, here are some of the points that 
arise during our discussion of XP-Secure.  First of all, the security engineer must be involved 
in the code review process.  The security engineer should be involved in training the 
developers in terms of secure coding practices so that the quality assurance benefits of pair 
programming will carry over into the realm of writing secure code.  Unit testing must be 
expanded to include static testing tools and also the new dynamic testing tools that are 
coming out into the marketplace.  In other words, testing must be expanded to include 
security testing explicitly.  Security testing must also be integrated into the XP continuous 
integration process.  Developers must be trained explicitly to do security testing and to 
integrate the results of the security tests into the iterative process, including the daily stand-up 
meetings.  Acceptance testing must be guided by the security engineer as well as by the 
customer. 
 Here are some additional points relating to how XP-Secure might differ from XP.  
The daily stand-up meetings must include i
nput from the security engineer, including 
reports on how the security-oriented tests are going.  The security test results (whether 
involving static testing or dynamic testing, 
whether unit tests or integration tests or 
acceptance tests) may have a big impact upon the tasks that are assigned for a particular 
day.  Another point that is made is that all refactored code must be analyzed and tested 
from a security perspective.  Any user story or security story that has not been 
successfully tested from a security perspective cannot be considered complete and 
cannot be included in a product release. 
 
7. Conclusions 
 
     
Agile processes are increasingly important in the world of software development, 
especially in this age of Net-oriented software.  An important issue is how agile processes, 
like eXtreme Programming and Scrum, can be modified to address important security issues.  
This paper looked at how the author gets students in his software engineering class to 
consider these issues and how he encourages them to see ways in which agile processes might 
be made more secure.  
 
 
8. References 
  
[1] Beck, Kent, eXtreme Programming eXplained: Embrace Change
, Addison Wesley, Boston, 2000, 190 pp. 
[2] Williams, Laurie, Kessler, Robert R., Cunningham, Ward, and Jeffries, Ron, ﬁStrengthening the Case for Pair 
Programming,ﬂ IEEE Software
, July/August 2000, pp. 19-25. 
57 [3] Humphrey, Watts S., Introduction to the Personal Software Process
, Addison Wesley, Boston, 1996, 304 pp. 
[4] Morisio, Maurizio, ﬁApplying the PSP in Industry,ﬂ IEEE Software
, November/December 2000, pp. 90-95. 
[5] Grenning, James, ﬁLaunching Extreme Programming at a Process Intensive Company,ﬂ IEEE Software
, 
November/December 2001, pp. 27-33. 
[6] Schatz, Bob and Abdelshafi, Ibrahim, ﬁPrimavera Gets Agile: A Successful Transition to Agile Development.ﬂ 
IEEE Software,
 May/June 2005, pp. 36-41. 
[7] Paulk, Mark C., ﬁExtreme Programming from a CMM Perspectiveﬂ, IEEE Software
, November / December 
2001, pp. 19-26. 
[8] Leveson, Nancy G., and Turner, Clark S., ﬁAn Investigation of the Therac-25 Accidentsﬂ, IEEE Computer
, 
July 1993, pp. 18-41. 
[9] Charette, Robert N., ﬁWhy Software Fails,ﬂ IEEE Spectrum
, September 2005, pp. 42-49. 
[10] Gotterbarn, Don, Miller, Keith and Rogerson, Simon, ﬁSoftware Engineering Code of Ethicsﬂ, 
Communications of the ACM
, November 1997, pp. 110-116. 
[11] McLendon, Jean and Weinberg, Gerald M., ﬁBeyond Blaming: Congruence in Large Systems Development 
Projectsﬂ, IEEE Software
, July 1996, pp. 33-42. 
[12] Talby, David, Keren, Arie, Hazzan, Orit and Dubinsky, Yael, ﬁAgile Software Testing in a Large Scale 
Project,ﬂ IEEE Software
, July/August 2006, pp. 30-37. 
[13] Schwaber, Ken, Agile Project Management with Scrum
, Microsoft Press, Redmond, WA, 2004, 192 pp. 
[14] THE WAR:  https://www.softwaretechnews.com/stn_view.php?stn_id=9&article_id=66#reference 
[15] Anton, Annie I., and Wells, Don, ﬁPoint / Counterpoint,ﬂ IEEE Software
, May/June 2003, pp. 44-47. 
[16] Viega, John and McGraw, Gary, Building Secure Software
, Addison-Wesley, Boston, 2002, 493 pp. 
[17] Davis, Noopur, Humphrey, Watts, Redwine, Samuel T., Zibulski, Gerlinde, and McGraw, Gary, ﬁProcesses 
for Producing Secure Softwareﬂ, IEEE Security and Privacy
, May/June 2004, pp. 18-25. 
[18] Apvrille, Axelle and Pourzandi, Makan, ﬁSecure Software Development by Example,ﬂ I
EEE Security and 
Privacy
, July / August 2005, pp. 10-17 
 
 
 
 
58