  Teaching a Software Development Methodology: 
The Case of Extreme Programming 
  Orit Hazzan
 Department of Edu in Technology and Science 
oritha@tx.technion.ac.il Yael Dubinsky
 Department of Computer Science
 yael@cs.technion.ac.il
 Technion Œ Israel Institute of Technology  Haifa 32000, Israel Abstract This article focuses on the teaching of software development methodologies. It presents ten 
principles of teaching such a topic, while examining each from both a pedagogical and an 
organizational viewpoint. The teaching principles are demonstrated using the methodology of 
Extreme Programming (XP).  
 1. Introduction 
Calls have been made recently to integrate software development skills into the curriculum 
of computer science and software engineering programs ([2], [6]). Parallel to this trend, the 

importance of the product (software) process is being highlighted, and topics such as 
productivity and quality are gaining increasingly more attention, especially as a result of 
recent financial circumstances
1. One way to group the aforementioned topics is under the 
heading of Software Development Methodologies (hereinafter abbreviated as SDM or SDMs). 
This article focuses on teaching SDMs to undergraduate students. The article presents ten 
principles for teaching an SDM and demonstrates them using the teaching of Extreme 

Programming (XP), an SDM that has been receiving increasingly more attention in industrial 
and academic discussions in recent years.  
Section 2 describes the research background from which the teaching principles, described 
in section 3, have been derived. We conclude in Section 4.  

 2. Research background   
The principles presented in Section 3 are based on an analysis of the teaching of XP in a 
course entitled ‚Operating Systems Projects™. This course has been taught for the past six 
years at the Technion™s Department of Computer Science by the second author of this article. 
The Department of Computer Science is considered to be comparable to the ten leading 
Computer Science departments in the US. Approximately 1,300 undergraduate students and 

about 200 graduate students are currently studying at the Department. In addition to its 
general B.Sc. program, the Department offers 4 special undergraduate tracks in Software 
Engineering, Information Systems Engineering, Computer Engineering, and Bioinformatics. 

The Technion in general, and the Department of Computer Science in particular, are one the 
main suppliers of (software) engineers to the Israeli hi-tech industry.   
Each year, approximately eighty students attend the ‚Operating Systems Projects™ course 
offered in the Winter and Spring semesters, and fifty students take the course in the Summer 

semester. As a computer-science project-based course ([8], [10]), the main requirement of the 
course is the development of an operating systems project. Prior to the introduction of XP into 

the course, projects were performed in teams of 2-3 computer/software engineering students. 
The students were required to submit documentation, mid-semester and final presentations 
and to participate in a project fair. The academic staff consisted of two instructors, who 
                                                 1 Look for example at the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) New Release of June 28, 2002 at 
http://www.nist.gov/public_affairs/releases/n02-10.htm. 
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE   coordinated the teaching and administration of the course, and of several supervisors. If 
questions or other issues arose, the students could meet with the supervisors during their 
regular office hours.  
Starting in the 2002 Summer semester, XP has been introduced as the SDM used in the 
‚Operating Systems Projects™ course. XP is one SDM of the family of agile SDMs, which 

includes methodologies such as SCRUM ([7]) and the DSDM (Dynamic System 
Development Method
2). Flower ([3]) explains that ﬁagile methods have some significant 
changes in emphasis from heavyweight methods.ﬂ For example, he mentions that ﬁagile 
methods are people-oriented rather than process-orientedﬂ. XP, in specific, is described by 
Beck ([1]) as being ﬁa lightweight, efficient, low-risk, flexible, predictable, scientific, and fun 

way to develop softwareﬂ (p. XVII).  
In addition to the introduction of XP into the ‚Operating Systems Projects™ course, some 
studio elements were also introduced into the course. The studio is the basic learning method 

used in architecture schools and it has been adopted by some other design disciplines as a 
training environment. In such studios, students develop projects with close guidance of a tutor 
and with on-going reflection, both on what is created and on the creation process. Studio 

descriptions in Software Engineering education can be found in Tomayko ([9]) and in K
uhn ([5]).
 Analysis of how the studio can be implemented into software development 
environments is presented by Hazzan ([4]). Integration of the studio with XP, in the 

‚Operating Systems Projects™ course, creates a conceptual-physical stimulating development 
environment. For reasons of space limitation, we will not elaborate on this here. We hope that 
the spirit of this combination is reflected in our examples presented in Section 3.    
The introduction of XP into the course consisted of two main phases:  In Phase 1, prior to 
the onset of the course, a team of four supervisors was introduced to XP and trained to teach 

it. Table 1 presents the timetable for the supervision team training. The second author, who 

was the instructor in charge of the course, led the supervisor team sessions. All sessions were 
conducted with a teamwork orientation and all decisions were made jointly by the supervision 
team. In Phase 2, XP was implemented in the Summer semester in the form of four studios. 

Each studio worked on a different project, chosen by its supervisor, in teams of 10-12 
students. Attendance of all sessions during the semester was compulsory. In the 2003 Winter 
semester students were required to select one of the following two options: Developing a 

project in the XP studio as part of a team of 10-12 students; or developing a project as part of 
a 2-3 student team, with remote guidance of a supervisor, following a traditional SDM like the 
waterfall model. The option chosen by each student was his or her development framework 

for the entire semester. Obviously, different projects of different scale were developed in these 
two formats. 
Table 1: Schedule for the Supervision Team Training   
Session No. Agenda Œ Supervision Team Training  
1 Introduction to XP 
Personal experience with XP practices  
2 The studio structure 
3 The supervisor™s role in the studio  
Teaching XP practices
 4 Student evaluation policy
 The principles presented in the following section were derived from an analysis of the data 
obtained using the following research tools: Video tapes of the XP sessions in one of the 
studios, observations of students™ work and the social interaction in the studio, students™ 
                                                 2 The DSDM Consortium website is http://www.dsdm.org.
  Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE   weekly reflections, students™ homework assignments, supervisors™ reflections, and our on-
going reflection on the course progress.  
 3. Principles for teaching software development methodologies 
This section presents ten principles for the teaching of SDMs. Some of these principles are 
especially suited to situations in which an SDM is introduced into a Computer Science 
department for the first time. Based on our experience described above, each principle is 
illustrated through the teaching of XP. We believe, however, that the principles can be 
implemented in the teaching of other SDMs as well. 
Principle I addresses the 
course
 structure; Principles II-VI address the actual 
teaching
 of 
the SDMs; Principles VII-IX address the 
people
 involved in the educational environment Œ the 
students and the supervision team; the last principle Œ Principle X - is a 
meta
 principle which 
suggests action over preaching. Before presenting the principles in depth, we present them 
briefly in Table 2. In order to facilitate their remembrance, we have given each of them a one-
word nickname.  
Table 2: ‚Teaching SDM™ Principles in a Glance  
# Category Nickname Single Sentence Description 
I Course  Project-based Course structure: Project-based team-based course 
II Teaching  Cognition Teaching an SDM: What aspect to emphasize?  
III  Adjustment Adjustment of the SDM to a university course framework 
IV  Projection Projection of the SDM™s notions into the project development 
environment 
V  Connectivity  The SDM in the context of the world of software 
development  
VI People Evaluation Reflection of the SDM orientation in students™ evaluation 
policy 
VII  Listening Listening to students™ objections 
VIII  Reflection Students™ reflections and progress diaries 
IX  Feedback Supervisors™ hesitations and feedback 
X Meta Inspiration Inspiring the SDM rather than preaching it 
I. Course structure - Project-based team-based course:
 This principle suggests teaching an 
SDM in a project-based course. In such a course, students develop, within a single-semester 
time frame, software projects that are suited for development using the SDM in question. This 
setting contrasts with the traditional teaching method, in which SDMs (or any other topic) are 

presented in the lecture hall, with students passively listening to the philosophy of the SDMs, 
its process, guidelines and practices. We argue that it is important to teach SDMs in 
environments that imitate real life situations, projects and software development 

environments, as closely as possible. Indeed, gaining such experience can prepare the students 
for their future work in the software industry.  
This principle stems from the importance attributed to providing learners with the 
experimental basis needed for learning complex concepts. This stands in line with the 

constructivist cognitive perspective, the origins of which are rooted in Jean Piaget™s studies. 
The constructivist paradigm examines learners™ mental processes that lead to mental 

constructions of knowledge based upon learners™ knowledge and experience. We believe that 
an SDM is a complex concept, which can be better understood if learners are afforded the 
opportunity to experience it. We do not claim that no frontal teaching should be used at all; 

Some aspects of the SDM can be taught by lecturing. However, we believe that the more 
students experience the SDM and reflect upon it, the more they improve both their 
understanding of the SDM™s essence and orientation and their professional skills. As is 
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE   described in Section 2, this principle is implemented in our experience of teaching XP. 
Further details are provided in the next principles.  
II. Teaching SDM:
 While
 dealing with the teaching of an SDM, a need arises to integrate 
some teaching/learning modules into the course, which address the essence of the SDM being 
taught. Since an SDM is, by nature, a complex topic, several questions must be addressed: 
What aspects of the SDM should be emphasized? Should one teach all of the SDM ideas? 
Perhaps only part of them? Which ones? In order to answer such questions, we suggest 

analyzing and mapping the SDM ideas, in such a way that highlights those aspects of the 
SDM that form its core, and, for each specific SDM idea, reflects the complexity of teaching 
it. One way to do this is illustrated in the following mapping. 
The main ideas of the SDM are mapped along two dimensions: ‚Aspect™ and ‚Cognitive 
Awareness™. Specifically, on one dimension, the SDM ideas are divided into either a 

code/technical aspect or a human/social aspect. The second dimension maps the main ideas of 

the SDM according to the level of cognitive awareness (or cognitive complexity) required to 
implement each of them throughout the development process. We believe that such a mapping 
can be suitable for the mapping of the main ideas of any SDM, and can thus assist lecturers in 

organizing their courses. Clearly, the mapping presented above is not the only mapping 
possible. If other mappings are appropriate, they should, of course, be implemented.   
The case of XP:
 XP consists of 12 practices that form the core of the methodology. Table 3 
presents these practices according to the two-dimensional mapping suggested above. In this 
mapping, we roughly assume that some of the practices are easily understood (e.g., 40-hours a 
week), some are hard to understand (e.g., simple design or metaphor), and others are at an 

intermediate level of cognitive complexity (e.g., coding standards).  
 We believe that when XP is taught, such a mapping enables the instructor to choose which 
aspects to focus on, in such a way that students will not be overwhelmed with too many hard-

to-grasp concepts in too short a period of time.  
Table 3: Mapping of the XP Practices  
                                       Aspect 
Cognitive Awareness 
Code/Technical Perspective Human/Social Perspective 
High 
 Refactoring 
Simple design 
Metaphor 

Collective ownership 
Intermediate 
Coding standards 
Testing 
Pair programming 

Planning game 
Low
 Small releases 
Contentious integration 
Customer on site 

40-hour a week 
III. Adjustment of the SDM into a university course framework:
 As far as the desire to teach 
an SDM in an environment that resembles, as much as possible, real software development 
environments is concerned, the traditional university course frameworks sometimes require 
adjustment of the SDM. This is due mainly to the fact that students take other courses in 
parallel and cannot dedicate the entire week to their work on the course project.
 The case of XP: 
With respect to XP, two of the adjustments made in order to adapt XP to the 
framework of a university course are presented, as follows:  
 The supervision team hypothesized that when playing the planning game (one of the XP 

practices) students might not add product features, knowing that they will then be required to 
implement them. Thus, it was made clear to the students that the rules of the planning game 
were changed slightly for the sake of the course project. Namely, if as a result of the 

planning game it would become evident that the project requirements became too broad to 
be implemented within the time frame of a single semester, a subset of the requirements will 
be chosen and the project™s scope will be defined accordingly. The supervisors undertook to 

keep the scope of the project realistic relative to the given time frame.  
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE    In order to help students stay focused on the project and on track, the supervisor took the 
role of the XP project coach (one of the roles in XP). In order to enable the students to 
experience this role at least partially, it was decided to appoint a coach-apprentice
 to act as 
the actual coach in between the weekly sessions. This approach also ensures that the students 
would feel that they are the responsible entity for the project progress.  
IV. Projection of several SDM™s notions into the project development environment:
 This 
principle suggests that the development environment, in which students are supposed to work, 

should reflect the SDM being taught. For example, if an SDM emphasizes teamwork, the 
learning environment should support teamwork. As in the case of the evaluation policy (see 
Principle VI), this principle supports students™ feelings that they receive a clear and coherent 

message.  
The case of XP: 
Two XP practices, for which this principle was implemented in the case 
described here, are presented:   
 Pair programming: 
In order to promote pair programming, the number of computers in 
each studio is set to be equal to half the number of students in each studio. Thus, students 
naturally begin programming in pairs. Still, more effort should be invested to ensure pair-

exchanging.  
 Continuous integration: 
In university courses, in which students do not perform all of the 
work together, at the same time, a situation can occur by which a student enters the studio in 

between weekly sessions, integrates his or her code,
 causes irreversible damage, and leaves 
the studio (or in the worst case Œ drops the course altogether). One plausible solution, which 

might solve this problem, is to enable integration only during the weekly sessions, which are 

attended by the supervisor. This solution could, however, slow down students™ progress in 
between weekly sessions and may diminish the importance of this XP practice. Thus, it was 
decided to formulate, together with the students, a set of rules according to which all 

students would work and which would be posted near the integration machine. In other 
words, instead of doing away with continuous integration, a solution was found in order to 
emphasize the importance of this practice.   
V. The SDM in the context of the world of software development:
 The world of software has 
witnessed relatively many cases in which new terms have emerged and have shortly turned 

out to be no more than buzzwords. Thus, when teaching a new SDM, it would be preferable to 

connect the SDM to the world of software development in general, and to other SDMs in 
particular. This can be done, for example, by presenting students specific problems faced by 
the software industry, illustrating how the taught SDM may help overcome them. Students 

will then, hopefully, feel that, on the one hand, they are being introduced to an SDM that is 
not detached from the software world and is not just a passing
 fashion, and on the other hand, 
that the SDM in question has emerged as a timely answer to the needs of the software industry 
and that it will be useful to them in their future work as software developers. In this way, the 
message conveyed to the students is that what they are learning is closely related to what they 
have learnt so far and to what they will be doing after they graduate.  
The case of XP:
 In the case of teaching XP, the need for agility in software development was 
first explained and some problems with traditional SDMs were outlined. When students raised 
questions regarding the compatibility of XP with what they have previously learnt, the 

connection was made between XP and topics that were familiar to the students from other 
courses, such as UML and CMM. Such a broad perspective enables students to see XP™s place 
in the software industry and to see that SDMs is a field that is still undergoing development.  
The connection between the taught SDM and the world of software development can also 
be made in ad hoc situations. For example, one of the students had expressed his objection to 

the concept of simplicity (one of the XP values), saying that ﬁIt runs against what we have 

already been taught Œ that is, to pre-design, to define all the data structures in advance, to get a 
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE   global view of the software being developed, before getting into the detailsﬂ. The supervisor™s 
reaction was that the global view is not at all ignored or overlooked. On the contrary, the 
global perspective of the software is inspired by the refactoring practice and it is used for 
redesigning the software in a continuous process. However, it was emphasized that there are 

cases, at certain stages of software development, when a mental global picture cannot be 
conceived, and then simplicity and software development in small releases can be useful tools.  
VI. Reflection of the SDM orientation in student evaluation:
 It is accepted that when a 
university instructor wishes that his or her students follow specific principles that he or she 
deems important, these principles must somehow be incorporated into the evaluation policy of 
the course. This is particularly true when an SDM is used in a project-based course. It is 

reasonable to assume that students naturally devote more effort to what is valued (and 
graded), and eventually improve their understanding of the SDM. 
 The case of XP:
 This principle was applied in the course described here, by assigning a 
course grade that was composed of a personal component (35%) and a team component 

(65%), which was identical for all members of the team. We believe that such an evaluation 
scheme conveys the message that both teamwork and individual contribution count. It is 

assumed that, on the one hand, students will be encouraged to contribute to the teamwork, and 
on the other hand, this method affords those wishing to excel, the opportunity to improve their 
grade through the personal component of the grade.  
Table 4: Grading Policy in the Project-Based XP Course 
Individual Component (35%)
  Team Component (65%)
 45% -  Attendance the 8 Studio meetings 
           Written reflections at the end of each meeting 
           Pair-programming session with the supervisor 

           Homework assignments about XP practices 
           Presentation of a first-test experience 
55%  - Performance of a personal role (release 
presenter, iteration presenter, in charge of 

continuous integration, customer, tracker, 
coach assistant, in charge of testing)  
15%  - Setting up the computerized 
environment of the studio 
25%  - Project documentation 
60%  - For each of the 2 project releases: 
 Implementation of all customer 

stories 
 Complete releases on time 
(according to students' estimations 
in the planning game) 
Table 4 presents the evaluation model formulated by the supervision team and used in the 
four studios in the Summer 2002 semester. As can be observed, most of the XP practices 
appear explicitly in the evaluation model, with special emphasis on the first-test and pair-
programming practices. The first-test practice gets its importance from the supervision team™s 
belief in educating students for production of high quality software products. The student-

supervisor pair-programming session emerged as a solution to the ﬁfree ridersﬂ phenomenon, 
which was evident in previous semesters (when the supervisors did not meet the students on a 
weekly basis and had no way of knowing just how the project was actually progressing).  
VII. Students™ objections:
 If Principle I is applied and if the student-lecturer lecture hall 
interaction is replaced by intensive student-supervisor communication in a studio or in another 
development environment, it is reasonable to assume that the change in the teaching approach 

will affect both students and supervisors. Specifically, since we are dealing with educational 
institutions in which both students and teachers have learning/teaching belief systems, it is 
natural that feelings of discomfort will arise when teaching conditions change. This principle 

addresses the question of how students™ reactions should be addressed when such feelings 
emerge. In Principle IX we address supervisors™ concerns. Based on our experience, we 
propose that instructors and supervisors should try sympathizing with students™ feelings 

towards the new learning environment and be patient with them until students start becoming 
aware of the benefits that can be gained from the new course setting in general, and from the 
introduced SDM in particular.
  Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE   The case of XP: 
As it happens, in the course described here, student objections disappeared in 
part after only one week. Thus, it seems that the sympathizing attitude mentioned above was 
indeed called for. This shift in students™ attitudes can be explained by their newly emerged 
awareness to the advantages of the new approach. First, they were told that if they proceed 

according to the decisions they made in the planning game, they would complete their projects 
by the end of the semester. This situation stands in contrast to other project-based courses, in 
which some students do not complete their project by the end of the semester, dragging it even 

months later. Second, students began to realize that their team might actually support their 
work, and not just hinder it, as they originally suspected it would. 
 In order to illustrate students™ concerns with respect to the new course format, we present 
two issues that were raised by students during the first meeting of the semester: 
 ﬁThe main component of the grade is the team component, and I do not know who my team 
members are. How can I trust them? This is not a real working place
ﬂ. It seems that this 
concern stems from bad experiences students had in other courses, in which they were 

required to develop projects in teams. It seems that, in some cases, students had had to cope 
with ﬁfree ridersﬂ. We believe that XP is taught in such a way that avoids such a situation: 

First, the team works together in the studio and no student would like to be perceived as a 
ﬁparasiteﬂ. Second, each student has a very specific task assignment, which is determined 
during the planning game.  
 ﬁWho is the team leader? Who controls what students do?
ﬂ. The instructor explained that in 
the previous format of the course as well, there was no control over students™ work. 

Furthermore, it was emphasized that the weekly meetings and the coach-apprentice increase 

the control over the project progress.
 VIII. Student reflections and progress diaries:
 In order to learn about the feelings of 
students, their working habits and their social interactions with respect to the project 

development during the course, students should be offered tools and means for self-
expression. The ability to express one™s impressions gives students the feeling that their 
thoughts and feelings are of interest to the course instructors and supervisors. In addition, if 

students wish to complain, this is a good way to encourage them to do so. In this spirit, 
students should be encouraged to express not only positive ideas, but also negative feelings 
and suggestions for improvement.  
Furthermore, we believe that such means of expression enhance students™ reflective skills; 
skills whose importance in software development processes is acknowledged and which are 

encouraged by the studio approach. As it is well known in the software industry, a reflective 

person, who learns both from the successes and failures of previous software projects, is more 
likely to improve his or her own performance in the field.  
The case of XP:
 The following two means of expression were offered to students in the 
present XP course, in order to express their reflections and feelings and to describe project 
progress: A team diary, which is part of the ‚project documentation™ evaluated as part of the 
team grade (cf. Principle VI); and personal web-reflections, which are posted on the web at 

the end of each session and which are to be completed within three hours after the end of each 
session. The web-reflections were short (requiring no more than 15 minutes) and presented 
questions that address students™ impressions from the session they just attended. As it turns 

out, these web-reflections provided the supervisors with quite good feedback. For example, 
the first web-reflection that was posted following the first session, just after the first planning 
game had been played, revealed the following observation. On the one hand, students 

admitted that working in a big team (10-12 students) is a new experience for them and some 
of them were looking forward to working in such teams. On the other hand, this working style 
was also their main concern: They were worried about how the teamwork would be 

coordinated and who would lead the team.   
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE   IX. Supervisors™ hesitations:
 While Principle VII addresses the students™ state of mind at the 
onset of the course, this principle focuses on the supervisors who are to guide students in the 
new software development environment. This principle is suited mainly to situations in which 
a team of supervisors guides the students, and, similar to the students, experiences the 
development environment for the first time. In such cases, not only must the supervisors 
familiarize themselves with the SDM itself, but also they have to adopt a new way of teaching 
and a new supervision conception. For example, supervisors must be physically present, 

alongside the students, during the actual software development stages. This is not something 
previously experienced in the traditional supervision style, in which meetings are held with 
the students in between student programming sessions. In addition, the new evaluation model 

requires the supervisors to evaluate items that were not previously evaluated. Indeed, such a 
change requires a transformation in the supervisors™ conception of teaching and of learning 
processes.  
 The principle suggests repeated emphasizing of the novelty of the introduced SDM and 
legitimizing supervisors™ feelings of insecurity. Furthermore, it is suggested that the 

supervisors state before the students that this experience is new for them as well, and thus 

relate such a situation to real life software development circumstances, in which uncertainty in 
general, and not-knowing-everything in particular, are frequent components (Cf. Principle V). 
In practice, the supervisors™ role in the new development environment and other supervisor-

students-interaction related issues should be discussed during the supervision team sessions 
held prior to the course. In order to overcome the supervisors™ hesitations (and sometimes 
resistance), general decisions about the course should be made jointly by all supervision team 

members, leaving each supervisor the freedom to adjust the particular studio he or she teaches 
to his or her teaching beliefs.  
The case of XP: 
Since the supervision team of the course described in this article was not 
familiar with XP prior to this course (neither in practice nor in theory), it was necessary to 
teach them XP philosophy as well as XP practices. This was accomplished during the 4 
training sessions described in the Introduction. The sessions were based on short presentations 

followed by some activity (such as pair drawing, planning game, reflection). In the course of 
the training process, the supervisors began feeling comfortable with XP. For example, after 
the first planning game, one of them said: ﬁThis way, I believe, less tension will be 

experienced by the students towards the end of the semesterﬂ. Comparing her previous 
supervision experiences with her current knowledge about XP, this supervisor realized that the 
planning game may enable students to complete their projects on time, without the stress that, 

in the traditional course format, characterizes the end-of-the-semester period.  
Most of the decisions, regarding the structure of the course (4 studios), the course schedule 
(2 releases, each consisting of two iterations), and the role of the supervisors in the studio, 

were made jointly by all supervisor team members. As suggested above, in addition to these 
general decisions, each supervisor made specific decisions with respect to the studio he or she 
was intended to teach. For example, each supervisor decided on the software project to be 

developed by the students in his or her studio. In the 2002 Summer semester (the first 
semester in which XP has been introduced in the course), it was decided to offer students 
projects that had already been developed in previous semesters and to adjust the scale of such 

projects to team sizes of 10-12 students. This way the supervisors could focus on the XP 
practices without being distracted by technical issues. In the 2003 Winter semester, the 
supervisors felt more comfortable with XP, and new topics for projects were introduced.   
X. Inspiration of the SDM:
 This is a meta-principle that integrates several of the principles 
described above. It suggests inspiring the SDM, rather than talking about it. In fact, this 
principle is supported by all of the previous principles, such as the experimental basis, the 

projection of some SDM principles into the project development environment, and the 
reflection of the SDM orientation in the students™ evaluation model. 
 Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE   The case of XP: 
We hope that this principle is mirrored in the way we have described the 
course on which our article is based. We have tried to convey the message that, throughout the 
entire course, XP is inspired on all levels: Individual, pair, team, supervisor, and customer.  
 4. Conclusions 
This article addresses the teaching of SDMs. The importance of teaching SDMs in the 
manner introduced here, stems from our belief that students should be introduced to SDMs in 
a learning environment that simulates as much as possible environments they are likely to 
encounter in their future careers.  
The main ideas are demonstrated based on our experience in teaching XP in a project-based 
course. Although this article focuses on the teaching of SDMs in general, we would like to 

present some concluding remarks with respect to our XP teaching experience. First, as was 
anticipated, students™ projects were completed on time. We believe that this fact, by itself, will 

dramatically (and perhaps entirely) reduce students™ resistance in future semesters. Second, 
and maybe more important, we observed a strong commitment to the project development on 
the part of both students and supervisors. Student commitment can easily be explained by the 

evaluation model (Cf. Principle VI) and the planning game: The evaluation model guided 
students to personal and team commitment; the planning game assigned each student with 
specific tasks to be accomplished in a specific estimated time. It is interesting to note the 

commitment to the entire project observed on the part of the supervisors: The supervisors 
cared about the implementation of the XP practices, and were concerned about the on-time 
completion of the projects.  
In our future work, we intend to propose a more detailed description of the teaching of 
SDMs within a single-semester time frame. In addition, we have begun an examination of the 

adoption of the principles presented in this article in the teaching of other topics, such as 

programming paradigms. For example, the suitability of the ten principles is examined in an 
introductory object-oriented course taught in the 2003 Winter semester to 25 graduate 
students, for whom this is their first programming experience. 
  References 
[1] Beck, K., 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change
. Addison-Wesley, 2000. 
[2] P. J. Denning, ﬁEducating a new engineerﬂ, 
Communications of the ACM
 35 (12), 1992, pp. 82-97. 
[3] Fowler, M. ,The New Methodology, published in martinfowler.com, 
http://www.martinfowler.com/articles/newMethodology.html, 2002. 
[4] O. Hazzan, ﬁThe reflective practitioner perspective in software engineering educationﬂ, 
The Journal of Systems and 
Software
 63(3), 2002, pp. 161-171. 
 [5] S. Kuhn, ﬁThe software design studio: An explorationﬂ, 
IEEE software
 15(2), 1998, pp.65-71.  
[6] B. Meyer, ﬁSoftware engineering in the academyﬂ, 
Computer
, May, 2001, pp. 28-35. 
[7] Schwaber, K. and Beedle, M., 
Agile Software Development with Scrum
. Prentice Hall, 2001
. [8] M. J. Sebern, ﬁThe Software Development Laboratory: Incorporating Industrial Practice in an Academic Environmentﬂ, 
Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEE&T)
, 2002, pp. 118-127
. [9] J. E. Tomayko, ﬁCarnegie-Mellon™s Software development Studio: A five-year retrospectiveﬂ, 
SEI Conference on 
Software Engineering Education
, 1996, http://www.contrib/andrew.cmu.edu/usr/emile/studio/coach.htm
. [10] D. Wilson, ﬁTeaching XP: A Case Studyﬂ, 
XP Universe Conference, 
2001. 
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE 