 Designing a First-Year Project Course to Engage Freshman Software 
Engineers: An Experience Report 
Dean Hendrix, David Umphress, and James H. Cross II 
Computer Science and Software Engineering 
Auburn University 
Auburn, AL 36266, USA 
E-mail: hendrtd@auburn.edu
Abstract 
This paper describes a software engineering project course for freshman.  The course has 
been designed to engage and motivate software engineering students at the beginning of their 
matriculation, while at the same time providing solid software engineering content.  Student 

teams use a simple software process based on Extreme Programming to complete a semester-

long project in computer animation.  Course motivation, structure, and implementation are 
described. 
1. Introduction 
Capstone project courses, normally required as part of the senior year plan of study, are 
standard components of most if not all software engineering curricula.  Indeed, the ABET 
accreditation criteria for engineering programs specifies that curricula must culminate in a 
major design experience [1].  These capstone, or “culmination,” courses serve the significant 
purpose of creating a situation in which the student’s prior learning and experience will be 

coalesced and focused on engineering a solution for a real-world problem. 
At Auburn University, our ABET-accredited software engineering program requires not 
only a capstone course during the senior year but also a “cornerstone” course during the 

freshman year.  Requiring a software engineering project of freshmen presents both 
challenges and opportunities.  Many freshmen have little or no background in programming 
or computer science from high school, thus making it difficult to create a meaningful project 

experience without making things too difficult or expecting too much from students who are 

just entering the program.  If implemented well, however, a project-based introduction to 

software engineering course can provide freshmen with an early overview of the field as well 

as an “immersion” experience through participation in a fun, meaningful software engineering 
project. 
2. Motivation and Context 
The design of our freshman project course is motivated by several issues.  Declining 
enrollments and student attrition are major concerns in computing programs throughout 
the United States.  Although obviously related to each other, they are distinct issues.  
Enrollment in computer science programs has declined precipitously for the last five 
years [2, 3], and anecdotal evidence suggests that software engineering programs face a 

similar situation.  Despite software engineering being listed as a top 10 growth job by 

the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics [4], students cite “cold feet” worries with respect to 

outsourcing and the dot-com demise [3].  Factors influencing student attrition are varied 

and include student preparedness in math and computing [5, 6, 7] and the belief that 
students have in themselves regarding their abilities to be successful in computing [8].  
Proceedings of the 19th Conference on Software
 Engineering Education & Training (CSEET™06) 
1093-0175/06 $20.00 © 2006
 IEEE  It is also important to note that the majority of students who leave computer science do 
so by the end of their freshman year [9].   
To address the problem of attrition, we wanted to engage and motivate our software 
engineering students as early as possible.  The literature documents various approaches 

to accomplishing this, including student retreats for personal development [10] and 

“crossover” team projects [11].  Our approach was to design a freshman project course 

(ENGR 1110 Introduction to Software Engineering) in which teams of students develop 

significant software applications in an engaging domain that would normally be out of 

the scope of their abilities.   
Computer animation can be exciting to many students, and our own anecdotal 
evidence suggests that the desire to create video games and digital effects in movies is a 
significant factor in some students’ initial choice to major in computer science or 

software engineering.  Computer graphics and animation require a high level of 

technical skill to create, certainly beyond the skill level of most software engineering 

freshman.  Section 3 describes the use of Alice [12] to allow students with minimal 
knowledge of programming to create reasonably sophisticated computer games and 
movies (see Figure 1). 
Figure 1.  Screenshot from a computer game created with Alice. 
While we wanted to provide a fun, motivating experience, we also wanted to ensure 
that students were exposed to solid software engineering content such as software 
process, software construction, teamwork, and technical communication [13].  Object-
oriented software construction skills are developed with Alice, as discussed in Section 

3.  Students are required to complete some individual assignments, but most of the work 

in ENGR 1110 is 
accomplished in the context of a team.  Students are assigned to teams 
on the basis of declared major (ENGR 1110 is open to all majors, not just software 

engineering), level of prior experience in programming, gender, and race.  Every effort 
is made to make each team multi-disciplinary (major) and diverse (gender and race).  
Although there are published reports suggesting that some of these factors may not have 

a significant impact on student performance [14], our own experiences and anecdotal 

evidence suggests that participating in diverse teams is a beneficial experience for 

students.   
Proceedings of the 19th Conference on Software
 Engineering Education & Training (CSEET™06) 
1093-0175/06 $20.00 © 2006
 IEEE  Introducing software process early can help students establish good software 
practices instead of undisciplined habits, but can introduce many challenges [15, 16].  
Drawing on lessons learned from the literature [17] as well as the adage “too much 
rigor leads to rigor mortis” – particularly with freshmen – we decided to create a simple 
adaptation of the popular agile methodology Extreme Programming (XP) [18] for 

ENGR 1110 teams. 
Rather than creating a structured requirements document, students assemble simple 
user stories.  Since the project is in the context of computer animation and gaming, 
students are able to see an intuitive correspondence between user stories and software 
functionality.  There is also a clear mapping between user stories and the storyboards 
that are created during design. 
Students go through a release planning phase in which the user stories are allocated 
to specific system releases.  While the instructional staff specifies system release dates, 

it is the responsibility of each team to ensure that user stories are implemented 

appropriately for the releases.  Iteration planning is the sole responsibility of the team.  
The just-in-time nature of iteration planning is a very nice fit for inexperienced 
freshmen.  Most students seem to see this type planning as natural and effective rather 

than an as onerous administrative burden. 
3. Engaging Students with Computer Animation 
Alice is a programming environment that provides a high-level graphical user 
interface for creating animated 3D virtual worlds [12].  Alice is very easy to use, yet it 

is powerful enough to create relatively complex computer games and movies featuring a 

wide variety of 3D characters.  Although computer animation itself is engaging, Alice 

provides particular appeal among several student demographic groups.  Young men are 

typically attracted by the possibility of creating a video game, while young women and 

minority students are often attracted by the story-telling aspect of animation shorts and 
animated movies.  ENGR 1110 student teams are given a choice of creating a game or 
an animation short. 
Alice introduces fundamentals of object-oriented programming by making objects things 
that students can see and interact with (see Figure 2).  Students build virtual “worlds” and 
populate them with objects that can behave independently as well as work in concert with 

each other.  Each object comes with predefined internal data (e.g., position, size, opacity) and 
public methods (e.g., move, turn, rotate).  User-defined methods can also be added to objects.  
Students create programs by invoking methods on various objects that are in the world. 
 Figure 2.  Example objects available in the gallery. 
All control structures (sequence, decision, and repetition) plus concurrency and event 
handling are supported and can be easily used in an Alice program.  The Alice editor prevents 
syntax errors by having students write code using an intuitive drag-and-drop interface (see 
Proceedings of the 19th Conference on Software
 Engineering Education & Training (CSEET™06) 
1093-0175/06 $20.00 © 2006
 IEEE  Figure 3).  Thus, students can concentrate on problem solving rather than learning syntactic 
rules that are so often frustrating to beginning programmers. 
Figure 3.  Drag-and-drop program editor.
ENGR 1110 students have used Alice with great success, and have created rather impressive 

projects for freshmen.  Figures 4 through 6 provide screenshots from sample projects, 
including arcade style shooting gallery games (Figure 4) as well as console style games with 

sophisticated interaction for navigation, weapon targeting, shooting, and obstacle avoidance 

(Figures 5, 6).  It should be noted that these projects require the students to address non-trivial 

issues such as concurrency, event handling, and collision detection techniques.  Alice enables 
this level of challenge to be appropriate for first-semester freshmen with little or no prior 
experience with computing. 
Figure 4.  Sample project screenshot.
Proceedings of the 19th Conference on Software
 Engineering Education & Training (CSEET™06) 
1093-0175/06 $20.00 © 2006
 IEEE  Figure 5.  Sample project screenshot.
Figure 6.  Sample project screenshot.
4. Evaluation and Summary 
Evaluation of our approach to ENGR 1110 has only begun.  Currently there is only 
anecdotal evidence, but it is uniformly positive.  Students report that they enjoy using Alice, 
and in particular they enjoy being able to develop software that is fun, engaging, and 

something that they can be proud to show their friends.  We have also noticed that students 

are able to engage in more complex problem-solving and engineering decision making earlier 
since we began using Alice in ENGR 1110.  Rather than concentrating on learning a 
language, they are able to devote their energies to team dynamics, time management, process 

issues, and true engineering problem solving.   
Proceedings of the 19th Conference on Software
 Engineering Education & Training (CSEET™06) 
1093-0175/06 $20.00 © 2006
 IEEE  The use of Alice in computing curricula is not new, but its use has typically focused on 
teaching introductory programming concepts in a CS 1 or even CS 0 course [12, 18].  In that 
context, there is ample support for its effectiveness.  In one experimental study, the use of 
Alice was shown to have a positive effect on at-risk students in early computing courses [12].  
Specifically, using Alice prior to CS 1 improved at-risk students’ course grade in CS 1 by one 

letter grade on average.  Also, the retention rate for at-risk students who used Alice prior to 

CS 1 was 88%, almost twice that of at-risk students with no Alice exposure.   
Our use of Alice is in contrast with what has been typically reported in the literature.  
Rather than focusing on teaching programming concepts, we focus on the broader software 
engineering concepts that are being taught in the course.  Alice enables students to participate 
in non-trivial development projects while concentrating on issues such as process, design, and 

teamwork.  
  One issue that we have had to consider is the effect that using Alice in ENGR 1110 has 
on the content and approach that we use in our follow-on CS 1 course COMP 1210.  After 

using Alice, student expectations can be difficult to meet in a traditional CS 1 course.  After 
using so much visualization and computer animation, students come to expect something 
similar in the next course.  Using a standard text editor and delving into Java syntax can be a 
let-down after Alice. 
COMP 1210 is an objects-early CS 1 course that uses Java and is required of all software 
engineering majors.  We use jGRASP (www.jgrasp.org) as the integrated development 

environment.  jGRASP automatically generates many visualizations for Java such as control 
structure diagrams and UML class diagrams.  The jGRASP object workbench, visual 
debugger, and dynamic object viewers allow students to work with visual representations of 

objects in Java in a way similar to how they worked with the inherently visual objects in 

Alice. 
A more formal evaluation of ENGR 1110’s effectiveness is planned for upcoming 
semesters.  Current anecdotal evidence, however, clearly suggests that the course has met its 
goal of engaging and motivating software engineering students at the beginning of their 
curriculum, while at the same time providing solid software engineering content. 
5. References 
[1] ABET Engineering Accreditation Commission, “Criteria for Accrediting Engineering Programs”, 
http://www.abet.org/. 
[2] Jay Vegso, “CS Bachelor’s Degree Production Grows in 2004; Poised for Decline”, 
Computing Research 
News
, Vol. 17, No. 2, March 2005. 
[3] Eric Chabrow, “By the Book”, 
Information Week
, August 16, 2004. 
[4] U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, http://www.bls.gov. 
[5] J.D. Davy, K. Audin, M. Barkham, and C. Joyner, “Student Well-Being in a Computing Department”, 
Proceedings of the 5
th Annual Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science Education
,Helsinki, Finland, 2000, pp. 136-139. 
[6] D. Hagan and S. Markham, “Does It Help to Have Some Programming Experience Before Beginning a 
Computing Degree Program?”, 
Proceedings of the 5
th Annual Conference on Innovation and Technology in 
Computer Science Education
, Helsinki, Finland, 2000, pp. 25-28. 
[7] M. Morrison and T. Newman, “A Study of the Impact of Background and Preparedness on Outcomes in CS1”, 

Proceedings of the 32
nd SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education
, Charlotte, NC, 2001, pp. 
179-183. 
[8] T. Busch, “Gender Differences in Self-Efficacy and Attitudes Towards Computers”, 
Journal of Educational 
Computing Research
, Vol. 12, No. 2, pp. 147-158. 
[9] E. Seymour and N. Hewitt, 
Talking About Leaving
, Boulder: Westview Press.  
Proceedings of the 19th Conference on Software
 Engineering Education & Training (CSEET™06) 
1093-0175/06 $20.00 © 2006
 IEEE  [10] Mark Ratcliffe, John Woodbury, and Lynda Thomas, “Improving Motivation and Performance Through 
Personal Development in Large Introductory Software Engineering Courses”, 
Proceedings of the 15
th Conference 
on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET 2002)
.[11] A.J. Cowling, “The Crossover Project as an Introduction to Software Engineering”, 
Proceedings of the 17
thConference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET 2004)
.[12] Barbara Moskal, Deborah Lurie, Stephen Cooper, “Evaluating the Effectiveness of a New Instructional 

Approach,” 
Proceedings of the 35th SIGCSE Technical Symposium on Computer Science Education
, March 3-7, 
2004, Norfolk, Virginia, USA. 
[13] R. Duley, G.W. Hislop, T.B. Hilburn, and A.E.K. Sobel, “Engineering an Introductory Software Engineering 
Curriculum”, 
Proceedings of the 16
th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET 
2003).[14] Pearl Brereton and Sue Lees, “An Investigation of Factors Affecting Student Group Project Outcomes”, 
Proceedings of the 18
th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET 2005)
.[15] D. Suri and M.J. Sebern, “Incorporating Software Process in an Undergraduate Software Engineering 

Curriculum: Challenges and Rewards”, 
Proceedings of the 17
th Conference on Software Engineering Education 
and Training (CSEET 2004)
, pp. 18-23. 
[16] David A. Umphress and John A. Hamilton, “Software Process as a Foundation for Teaching, Learning, and 
Accrediting”, 
Proceedings of the 15
th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET 
2002).[17] Anuja Shukla and Laurie Williams, “Adapting Extreme Programming For A Core Software Engineering 

Course”, 
Proceedings of the 15
th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET 2002)
.[18] Kent Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change
, Addison-Wesley, 1999.  
Proceedings of the 19th Conference on Software
 Engineering Education & Training (CSEET™06) 
1093-0175/06 $20.00 © 2006
 IEEE 