 Experience Report of Teaching  
Agile Collaboration and Values 
Agile Software Development in Large Student Teams 
 
Martin Kropp 
University of Applied Sciences 
Northwestern Switzerland 
Windisch, Switzerland 
martin.kropp@fhnw.ch 
 
Andreas Meier 
Institute of Information Technology 
Zurich University of Applied Sciences  
Winterthur, Switzerland 
meea@zhaw.ch 
Gerald Perellano  
Institute of Information Technology 
Zurich University of Applied Sciences  
Winterthur, Switzerland  
pero@zhaw.ch
 
 
Abstract
— Communication and collaboration are central skills 
for agile development. Trust, openness, transparency and 
equality are core agile values and there is a shortage of 
software developers with these skills. How can we teach 
software engineering so that students get these skills together 
with the needed technical competences? This paper presents 
and discusses the setup of an innovative agile educational 
student project. The didactical concept is based on results from 
several industry studies, which give insight into the required 
competencies of agile software developers. 
Keywords- agile; collaboration; values; software 
development; education 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION
 
Recent studies show that agile methodologies have 
become mainstream in the softwa
re industry [1], [2].  At the 
same time these and other studies show that especially 
collaborative practices
, like Pair Programming, Daily Stand-
up meetings and Retrospectives are rarely applied by 
inexperienced teams [2], [3],
 [6]. Consequently, reports 
about dysfunctional teams a
nd disastrous projects in 
inexperienced agile teams are, unfortunately, quite common 
[4], [5].  
So what do experienced and successful teams do 
differently? The mentioned studies show that the usage of 
collaborative practices grows gr
adually over time. In [6] the 
authors conclude that “experience leads to collaboration”. In 
other words, only mature t
eams apply most collaboration 
practices. Mature teams also apply many more 
technical 
practices
 like Automatic Testing, Continuous Integration, 
Test-Driven Development, Refact
oring or Clean Code. In [3] 
the authors found that successfu
l teams also highly respect 
the 
agile values
, like 
Commitment, Focus, Openness, Respect 
and
 Courage 
[15], or 
Simplicity, Communication, Courage, 
Respect 
and
 Feedback 
[16]. What seems to be most 
important is that the team be
havior and the culture of the 
organization are aligned to the agile values [6]. 
This lack of usage of collaboration practices in 
inexperienced organizations seems to suggest, that there is a 
high demand for well-educated software engineers in the 
agile domain who have the necessary collaboration and 
communication skills and who can live the agile values. 
Therefore, it is important, not only to give students a good 
understanding of what to expect when working in self-
organized, agile software devel
opment teams, but also that 
the agile values are discussed with and experienced by the 
students during a tangi
ble student project. 
This paper presents the setup of a “realistic” agile student 
project in which the students deve
lop an application in large, 
self-organized, teams. In these projects, the students have the 
opportunity to experience and experiment with agile 
collaboration practices and values.  
Based on the results of the recent studies, the authors, 
who have been teaching software engineering and agile 
methods for more than a decade, started developing a new 
software engineering module.
 It especially addresses agile 
methodologies with a much 
higher emphasis on teaching 
collaboration practices and agile values. In this paper, the 
authors present the agile student project in the fourth 
semester of the Computer Sc
ience studies at the Zurich 
University of Applied Sciences. The agile student project is 
an important part of the new 
software engineering module. 
The scope of the student project 
is equivalent to four ECTS 
credit points (European Credit Transfer and Accumulation 
System). One credit point is e
quivalent to approximately 30 
hours of studying; the total was therefore 120 hours.  
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section two 
discusses related work. Section three presents the didactical 
concept and its impact on the new module. Section four 
describes the setup of the agile student project and presents 
how collaboration and agile values are taught and practiced 
in the classroom. Section five evaluates and discusses our 
observations, followed by final conclusions. 
II.
 
R
ELATED 
W
ORK
 
Teaching agile software development and software 
processes has also reached acad
emia in the meantime. There 
are many courses offered at universities all over the world.  
Mahnic [7] provides a thorough 
overview of approaches 
of teaching agile software development. He shows that 
teaching Scrum in practical work
 is the most wide spread 
approach. He also describes the various approaches of 
2016 IEEE 29th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training2377-570X/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/CSEET.2016.30762016 IEEE 29th International Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training2377-570X/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/CSEET.2016.3076 assigning the different Scrum roles with its pros and cons. 
He especially argues that assigning the Product Owner role 
to a domain expert, gives a more realistic simulation with 
real customer collaboration. 
Schroeder et al. [8] report on the setup of two software 
development labs specifically designed so that the social 
interaction “how to deal 
with collaborative software 
development processes and their 
need for self-organization, 
motivation, and work coordination”, is taken into conscious 
consideration. Scharf and Koch [9] present the design of a 
Scrum based undergraduate software engineering course, 
which is based on role-playing. To ensure that their students 
understand “agile” thoroughly, they designed the complete 
course as realistically as possible. For instance, they make 
research assistants play cust
omers and a student play the 
Scrum master. Stettina et al. [10] discuss their experiences 
with teaching software engi
neering practices and their 
continuous improvement
.
 They emphasize the importance of 
an intensive coaching routine based on agile practices.  
In [11] Maurer and Anslow report about their 
experiences teaching a group based agile software 
development project course. They report that students enjoy 
the interactive exercises and th
e self-organized teams, but 
also that it is challenging to get the right customer 
involvement. In [12] Rico a
nd Sayani present their results 
after teaching student teams agile
 methods in their final year. 
They report that those teams 
who found the optimal balance 
of customer collaboration, t
echnical programming and use of 
agile methods were more productive. Little work has been 
done specifically addressing the issue of teaching 
collaboration in the classroom. In [13] Chao describes how 
he used wikis in a student pr
oject setup and reports that 
students liked this medium a lot and is therefore planning to 
continue using wiki in future 
projects. In [19] Kropp et al. 
describe the importance of advanced collaboration skills in 
agile development and make suggestions on how to integrate 
them in undergraduate courses 
III.
 
D
IDACTICAL 
C
ONCEPT
 
The overall educational objective of our student project 
is: “The students know by experience, what it feels like to 
work in a self-organized, functional agile software 
development team. And they
 know what distinguishes 
functional teams from dysfunctional ones.” 
In order to successfully develop software in an agile 
team, the students need many different competencies. The 
setup of the student project is 
formed with help of the agile 
competence pyramid in Fig. 
1. The pyramid divides the 
needed agile competencies in the three categories: Technical 
practices, collaboration practices and agile values. The 
didactical concept of the student
 project strives to integrate 
these competencies by carefully setting up a realistic 
environment in the classroom. 
A.
 
Technical Practices 
The students have been taught technical practices like 
automatic testing, refactori
ng, continuous integration or 
clean code in previous lectures. In the student project, the 
focus is on applying and refining them in practice. For 
instance, clean code and craf
tsmanship [14] are discussed 
frequently and practiced thoroughly. 
B.
 
Collaboration Practices 
One of the key differences between agile and plan-driven 
software development methodologies is the emphasis on 
collaboration, communication and feedback. Collaboration 
practices like iteration or release planning, retrospectives, 
daily standup, pair progra
mming or code review are 
encouraged and facilitated by the coach. 
C.
 
Agile Values 
The agile values are on top of the pyramid because they 
are of outmost importance in agile software development. 
One of the key-ideas of the student project is to create a 
realistic environment in which the students can experience 
and safely experiment with the agile values. The authors 
believe that just teaching the ag
ile values is insufficient; they 
have to be experienced in practice. It is the responsibility of 
the coach to create an appropriate ecosystem. 
D.
 
From Teaching to Coaching  
Since agile teams are self-organ
ized, the lecturer takes on 
the role of a coach and agile champion. The coach helps the 
team to continuously improve 
the process and to remove 
impediments, i.e. the coach helps to create functional agile 
teams. Last but not least, the coach is responsible that the 
agile values are practiced and respected. 
E.
 
Student Team Size 
Next to the competencies, the size and constitution of the 
student teams are vital. Optimal development team size is 
small enough to remain agile and large enough to complete 
significant work within an itera
tion or Sprint. In Scrum the 
recommendation is seven, plus
 or minus two [15]. Fewer 
than five team members decrease the necessity for 
interaction and collaboration. Smaller teams might also 
encounter skill constraints. More than nine members require 
too much coordination. Large development teams generate 
too much complexity for an empi
rical process, like Scrum, to 
manage. 
What is an optimal size of
 student teams? The authors 
had best results when the team size was at the upper limit. In 
 
Figure 1. Agile Competence Pyramid [3] 
7777 smaller student teams there is a risk that the students do not 
realize the necessity of proper project management. Much 
too often, project management is seen as an overhead and, in 
worst case, is only applied for the lecturer’s sake. In properly 
sized teams, project manageme
nt is crucial for success. 
Another benefit of larger teams 
is, that the students get more 
work done, which increases th
e chance of implementing 
complete results in more realis
tic software applications. In 
our experience optimal student 
team size is between seven 
and nine members. 
IV.
 
A
GILE 
S
TUDENT 
P
ROJECT
 
Table 1 shows the whole semester schedule for the 
student project. The following sections will describe the 
important concepts. 
A.
 
Scrum 
We chose Scrum [15] because it covers most of the 
collaboration practices and because of the good experiences 
we had previously made in i
ndustry and research projects. 
Further, Scrum is the most 
widely used agile methodology 
[1] in Switzerland. For the student project, Scrum was 
carefully adapted to fit the special requirements in the 
classroom as described in the following paragraphs. 
B.
 
Finding a Project Vision 
Before the start of the semester, we issued a 
call for 
projects
. Students, faculty members of the Computer Science 
department and industry partne
rs could submit project ideas. 
At the kick-off meeting, each valid proposal was presented to 
the students by the submitter in a two-minute presentation. 
After that, the students could ask questions to clarify the key 
issues of the project. Finally, the students voted for the best 
projects and the teams were formed. After approximately 
three hours, the project visi
ons and team formation was 
finished. 
TABLE I. 
 
S
TUDENT 
P
ROJECT
 
Before start of 
semester 
Students and faculty are informed about the 
project module and asked to send in project 
ideas. 
Week 1 
(Kick-off meeting) 
Kick-off Meeting. Presentation and election of 
best-suited project ideas. 
Com
p
osition of student teams 
Week 2  
Introduction of the IT-infrastructure. Exploring 
the infrastructure. Teams are trying out 
frameworks and tools for their project.  
User Stories are written and estimated. 
First version of Product Backlog is written 
Week 3 
(Sprint 0) 
Sprint 0: Students set up complete automatic 
testing and building environment (Walking 
Skeleton) 
Week 4  
Project start 
(Sprint 1) 
Demonstration of testing and building 
environment (Walking Skeleton) 
Sprint and Release Planning 
Week 6 – 14  
(Sprint 1 - 5) 
Ever
y
 even week 
Sprint Review & Sprint Retrospective 
Planning meeting of next Sprint 
Develo
p
ment of a
pp
lication 
Week 16 
Final presentation of application 
End of project 
 
 
The topics formed a wide spectrum. There were “fun” 
projects like 3D multi-player games, technical challenges as 
well as using new technol
ogies or frameworks. 
C.
 
Project Roles 
The role of the Product Owner (PO) is very critical for 
the success of an agile software project, whether it is a real 
or academic project. The role can be filled by a student, a 
member of faculty, or by even someone outside the 
university like an industrial partner. We decided individually 
for each project who should take this important role. There 
are special challenges to master 
when a team decides to work 
with an industrial partner. Th
e partner might have lack of 
knowhow or experience in agile software development. The 
partner sometimes also has too high expectations, which in 
consequence can put too much pressure on the team. The 
relationship with industrial partners has to be managed 
carefully by the lecturer. There were finally two projects 
with student POs, one with a 
member of faculty PO, and two 
with partners from industry. 
In all the projects, the Scrum 
Master role was taken by a student. The development teams 
were completely set up by students. There was the special 
agile coach role, which was taken by the lecturer and other 
faculty members. 
D.
 
User Stories and Product Backlog 
After the project vision w
as established, the students 
wrote down the User Stori
es [17], including acceptance 
criteria, on paper-cards. Next, a first version of the product 
backlog was assembled. 
E.
 
Planning for Value 
The students estimated the User Stories by playing 
Planning Poker [16], which usually delivers good enough 
results and is a lot of fun. After the User Stories were 
estimated and clarified, the product backlog was updated and 
prioritized by business value by the PO. In week four, the 
plan for the first iteration and a coarse-grained release plan 
were worked out. For the release plan, the velocity was 
estimated. For didactical reasons, we encouraged the 
students to use electronic on
line-tools sparingly and use 
pencil and paper instead. 
F.
 
Burn Down Chart and Velocity  
The students drew both iteration and release burn down 
charts on paper. Burn down charts graphically represent 
work left to do versus time. The remaining work or backlog 
can then easily be tracked and the velocity [18] can be 
calculated. Once the velocity is known, the release plan can 
easily be updated. 
G.
 
Project setup 
In week two, the team 
worked on an architecture 
prototype in order to work out which software architecture to 
use. This included choosing the technology stack for the 
realization. Table 2 gives an overview of the types and 
characteristics of the five projects. 
7878 TABLE II. 
 
S
TUDENT 
P
ROJECT 
S
ETUP
 
Domain Techology Team-
size 
Product 
Owner 
Internal / 
External 
Project 
3D Game Java 
10 Student Internal 
Simulation Java/JavaScri
p
t 9 Student Internal 
Volunteering JavaScript 8 Industry External 
Restaurant Java/JavaScri
p
t 9 Industr
y
 External 
Accounting Java/JavaScript 9 Faculty Internal 
TABLE III. 
 
L
AB 
V
IRTUAL MACHINE 
(VM) 
Operating System 
CentOS 6.5 
Continuous Inte
g
ration Server Jenkins 
Web A
pp
lication Server  Glassfish  
Virtualization Software Docker [24] 
Buildin
g
 Tools 
Maven 
Java Development Kit 
OpenJDK 1.7 
Code Versionin
g
 S
y
stem 
(
CVS
)
 Git [22], GitHub [23] 
Database MySQL, 
PostgreSQL 
Monitorin
g
 hto
p
 [25] 
 
H.
 
The Role of the Lecturer 
As mentioned in chapter III, th
e lecturer takes the role of 
a coach or agile champion. But of course, the lecturer also 
represents the university. In our experience, it is important to 
make clear at all times, if the lecturer is coaching or 
representing the university. 
I.
 
Technical Setup and Practices 
1)
 
Virtual Machines 
For this course, we set up a virtual machine with pre-
installed software for the students to use. Each team was 
allocated two virtual machin
es: One development machine 
for automatic testing and Continuous Integration, and one for 
running the application. Tabl
e 3 describes the provided 
technology stack: 
 
Each team had full access (root) to their VM so that they 
could install any software additionally required by their 
project. The students were ther
efore free to experiment and 
find their own solutions. 
2)
 
GIT and GitHub 
Git [22] is a distributed ve
rsion control system (VCS) 
designed to handle everything from small to very large 
projects with speed and effici
ency. GitHub [23] is a web-
based Git repository. GitHub pr
ovides several collaboration 
features such as bug tracking,
 feature requests, task 
management and wikis for every project. Git and GitHub 
with its collaboration features, informs the coach about the 
status quo of all student proj
ects. Additionally, they keep 
track of the individual contributions to the code base. 
3)
 
Dependency Management with Maven 
When working in an agile 
team with colleagues who 
favor different kinds of tools,
 tension is inevitable. Using 
tools like Maven [20] can eas
e the tension. Following the 
idea of 
convention over configuration,
 all members of the 
team can use their preferred 
development tools as long as 
they comply with the Maven development paradigm. 
4)
 
Continuous Integration (CI) 
Continuous Integration is an absolute must to be able to 
deliver software with high fre
quency. All student teams use 
Maven [20] and Jenkins [21] to build and integrate their 
software. CI is another valuable assessment tool for the 
coach.  
5)
 
Automatic Testing and Code Coverage 
We demand that the teams do rigorous automatic testing. 
Automatic testing is difficult, but in combination with 
refactoring it has a profound positive effect on code quality. 
It is important that the students have a test concept and test 
environment ready before they actually start coding. 
Therefore we introduced a “Sprint Zero” before the official 
project start. The goal of Sprint 
Zero is simple: All teams are 
able to do automatic testing. The students have to implement 
a complete test case, which demonstrates their ability to test 
the application from end-to-end. After every regular Sprint, 
code coverage is inspected a
nd discussed with the students. 
6)
 
Clean Code and Craftsmanship 
The idea of highlighting the importance of software 
development practice was popular
ized in [14]. The author 
introduces the disciplines, techni
ques, tools, and practices of 
software craftsmanship. Crafts
manship is much more than a 
technique: It is about attitude. Starting in the first semester, 
the students are advised to follow the Clean Code guidelines. 
We have observed that following and discussing these 
guidelines has a profound impact on the quality and design 
of the code base. 
V.
 
E
VALUATION
 
A systematic evaluation of the new agile student project 
has not yet been executed. This evaluation will be carried out 
after the second round. Instead, we present our first 
experiences and feedback from the students. In the first 
round, we had a total of 45 full-time students who were split 
into five teams. At the time of writing, we are in the middle 
of the second round with 28 part-time students and three 
teams. 
The highlight of the Softwa
re Engineering module has 
indisputably been the agile stude
nt project. This is true for 
both students and coach. The developed applications 
exceeded the expectations in scope, quality and student 
commitment. The students were initially unfamiliar with 
working together in large agile
 teams, however they soon got 
accustomed to it. This manifested itself in an increased 
productivity and creativity. We observed that the coach’s 
experience in agile software development is important for the 
outcome. Paying special attention to technical practices like 
automatic testing and clean code has had a positive effect on 
design, code quality and documentation. 
Here are some written statements
1
 from the students. 
When asked what they liked best, the students replied: “
It’s 
great that we do Agile..”, “Practical relevance of the topics 
presented”, “Good coordinati
on of lecture and project 
                                                             
1
 The statements are translated from German and are from the 
official evaluation system. All 
new lectures and modules of the 
new Computer Science study were evaluated systematically. 
7979 module”, “Best project module so
 far..”, “I liked that we 
could choose the projects ourselves..”, “Scrum!!”
. 
From the current part-time students we often get 
feedback that they can benefit from the agile practices 
directly in their job. 
Scrum, in combination with online collaboration tools 
like GitHub or Jenkins CI-Server, made it possible for the 
coach to maintain the overview of all student projects. 
Coaching the projects to the desired outcome and assessing 
the Scrum teams was possible in an efficient and transparent 
manner. Evaluation and assessment of the individual student 
is a different story, however. Assessing individual team 
members is a contradiction to the agile values. Therefore, 
individual grades versus team 
grades should be considered 
very carefully. In the first round, all the students of a Scrum 
team got the same grades. 
The team setup is critical with respect to finding a well-
balanced team with the 
necessary level of knowhow, 
motivation and commitment. Another critical issue is the role 
of the Scrum Master. We let the students themselves take the 
role of the Scrum Master. But they usually lack the necessary 
experience to fulfill the requirements of that role and should 
therefore be specifically trained by the coach. The person 
who proposed the product vision typically takes the role of 
Product Owner. Unexpectedly, the outcome was positive 
with both internal and external Product Owners. However, 
scheduling meetings and getting feedback from external 
Product Owners require more effort and should be supported 
by the coach. 
VI.
 
CONCLUSION 
In this paper we presented how educational projects can 
be setup in such a way that students gain experience in 
collaboration. The authors consider this essential since 
collaboration between team memb
ers, customers, users and 
stakeholders, is such an important part of agile software 
development in the industry, and because more experience in 
these practices, i.e. maturity, lead
s to increased collaboration.  
The student project is best realized as a “real” agile 
project. The didactical concept is based on results from 
several industry studies, which give insight into the required 
competencies of agile software developers. The overall 
educational objective is to enable students to develop high-
quality software in a functiona
l, self-organized agile team. 
To achieve this the course is guided by the agile competence 
pyramid, which divides the comp
etencies in three categories: 
Technical practices, collaboration practices and agile values. 
The student project aims to integrate all three by carefully 
setting up a realistic environment in the classroom.  
The benefits of online collaboration tools like GitHub or 
Jenkins CI-Server make it possible for the lecturer to coach, 
measure progress and steer st
udent software development 
projects. The authors are convinced, that software 
engineering education benef
its significantly by embracing 
the modern collaboration tools the Internet has made 
available. 
The evaluation of the course reveals very encouraging 
results, but also leaves some 
challenges and problems to be 
solved. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
Version One. State of Agile Development Survey results. 
http://info.versionone.com/state-o
f-agile-development-survey-
ninth.html, retrieved 2.12.15 
[2]
 
M. Kropp, A. Meier, Swiss 
Agile Study 2014,  ISSN: 2296-2476, 
FHNW and ZHAW, Brugg, Zuri
ch, www.swissagilestudy.ch 
[3]
 
M. Kropp, A. Meier, Agile Success Factors, ISSN: 2296-2476, 
FHNW and ZHAW, Brugg, Zurich, www.swissagilestudy.ch 
[4]
 
M. Sahota, An Agile Adoption an
d Transformation Survival Guide: 
Working with Organizational Culture. InfoQ. 2012. 
[5]
 
B. Meyer, Agile!: The Good, the Hype and the Ugly, 2014, Springer, 
ISBN 978-3-319-05154-3 
[6]
 
R. Biddle; M. Kropp; A. Meier, Agile Adolescence to Maturity: 
Experience leads to Collaboration (Workshop). OOP Conference 
2016, Munich, Germany, Feb. 2016 (accepted) 
[7]
 
V. M, Scrum in software engineering courses: an outline of the 
literature. Global Journal of Engineering Education 17.2 (2015). 
[8]
 
A. Schroeder, A. Klarl, P. Mayer, 
Ch. Kroiß, Teaching agile software 
development through lab courses. Global Engineering Education 
Conference (EDUCON), 2012 IEEE. 
[9]
 
A. Scharf, A. Koch, Scrum in a Software Engineering Course: An In-
Depth Praxis Report, CSEE&T 2013, San Francisco, USA. 
[10]
 
Ch. J. Stettina, Z. Zhou, Th. Bäck, B. Katzy, Academic Education of 
Software Engineering Practices: Towards Planning and Improving 
Capstone Courses Based upon Intensive Coaching and Team 
Routines, CSEE&T 2013, San Francisco, USA. 
[11]
 
F. Maurer, C. Anslow, An Experi
ence Report at Teaching a Group 
Based Agile Software Development Project Course. Proceedings of 
the 46th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science 
Education. SIGCSE ’15. Kansas City, USA. 
[12]
 
D. Rico and H. Sayani, Use of agile methods in software engineering 
education. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Agile
, 
pages 172-179, 2009. 
[13]
 
J. Chao, Student Project Collabora
tion Using Wikis, 20th Conference 
on Software Engineering Educa
tion & Training, 2007. CSEET '07. 
Dublin, Ireland. 
[14]
 
R. C. Martin, Clean Code: A Ha
ndbook of Agile Software Craftsman-
ship, 2009, ISBN 0-13-235088-2 
[15]
 
K. Schwaber, M. Beedle, Agile Software Development with Scrum, 
2001, ISBN 0-13-207489-6 
[16]
 
K. Beck, Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change. 
Addison-Wesley, 2004
 
ISBN 0-321-27865-8 
[17]
 
M. Cohn, User Stories Applied, For Agile Software Development, 
2004, ISBN 0-321-20568-5 
[18]
 
M. Cohn, Agile Estimating and Planning, 2006, ISBN 0-13-147941-5 
[19]
 
M. Kropp, A. Meier, M. Mateescu
, C. Zahn, Teaching and learning 
agile collaboration. Proceedings 2014 IEEE, 27th Conference on 
Software Engineering Education and Training - (CSEE&T 2014), 
Klagenfurt, Austria. 
[20]
 
Apache Maven Project, https://maven.apache.org, retrieved 2.12.15 
[21]
 
Jenkins - open source continuous integration server, https://jenkins-
ci.org, retrieved 2.12.15 
[22]
 
Git - 
distributed version control system, https://git-scm.com, retrieved 
2.12.15 
[23]
 
GitHub - collaboration, code review, and code management 
https://github.com, retrieved 2.12.15 
[24]
 
Docker – virtualization software, https://www.docker.com, retrieved 
2.12.15 
[25]
 
Htop - an interactive process viewer
 for Unix, http://hisham.hm/htop/ 
retrieved 2.12.15 
 
8080