 Teaching Agile Collaborati
on Skills in the Classroom 
 
Martin Kropp 
University of Applied Sciences 
Northwestern Switzerland 
Windisch, Switzerland 
martin.kropp@fhwn.ch 
Andreas Meier 
Zurich University of Applied 
Sciences  
Winterthur, Switzerland 
meea@zhaw.ch 
 
Robert Biddle 
Carleton University 
Ottawa, Ontario 
Canada 
robert.biddle@carleton.ca
 
 
 
 
Abstract
—Agile methodologies like Scrum or Extreme 
Programming have come a long way over the last fifteen years. 
Recent quantitative studies show that many companies have 
successfully adopted agile methodologies. It was found that in 
agile software development, experience leads to collaboration. It 
could also be shown that successful professional agile teams tend 
to use more collaboration practices. In 2013, the new Computer 
Science studies at the University of Applied Sciences were 
started. For this, a new curriculum was developed. This paper 
presents and discusses the lectures, labs and educational software 
projects in the programming and software engineering modules. 
It is discussed how agile collaboration and collaboration practices 
can be taught in the classroom. For this, the setup and 
observations of an agile stud
ent project are presented and 
different online collabor
ation tools are discussed. It is argued that 
software engineering educatio
n benefits significantly from 
embracing the modern collaboration tools the Internet has made 
available. 
Keywords— Software Development, Curriculum, Collaboration, 
Agile. 
I.
 
 
I
NTRODUCTION 
 
Agile software development has become a mainstream 
approach in software project management as recent studies 
show [1], [2]. With this tren
d, also many less experienced non-
expert teams have started ap
plying agile approaches. The 
authors have conducted several studies, which show that 
especially collaborative practices like pair-programming, daily 
stand-up and retrospectives are rarely applied by less-
experienced agile teams. The 
usage gradually evolves over 
time with increasing experience in agile development. The 
studies show that agile methodologies are of high practical 
relevance. Furthermore, it appears that there is a high demand 
for well-educated software engineers in the agile domain, and 
that there is a significant lack of knowledge in agile 
development. Another phenomen
on which was found was that 
distributed development, either with near-shore or off-shore 
teams, has become standard. Th
is makes collaboration more 
challenging, and makes it important to work with appropriate 
collaboration tools. 
The studies delivered excellent input for further evolution 
of undergraduate and graduate software engineering education. 
It showed what: 

 
the current state of the art in practice is 

 
competences are needed in industry 

 
competences are lacked in industry 
Based on the results, which are presented in section III.A, 
and our experience in teaching 
software engineering and agile 
methods for more than a decade
, we started developing a new 
software engineering curriculum. It especially addresses agile 
methods with a much higher emphasis on teaching 
collaboration practices and agile values. Special attention was 
paid to also integrating Internet based collaboration tools, as 
enablers for software development 
in distributed teams. In this 
paper we present this new curricu
lum approach, describe their 
first experiences and disc
uss further improvements. 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: Section two 
discusses related work. Section th
ree presents results from the 
various studies and their impact on the new curriculum. Section 
four presents the new curriculum, and especially also addresses 
agile methods and the practices th
at need to be taught. Section 
five presents how collaborati
on and agile values 
are taught and 
practiced in the classroom and the usage of appropriate 
collaboration tools. Section six evaluates the observations, 
followed by final conclusions and ongoing evolution of the 
curriculum. 
II.
 
R
ELATED 
W
ORK
 
Though it took quite a while before agile development 
methods were noticed by the 
academia, there are now many 
courses offered at universities all over the world that teach the 
agile approach.  
Schroeder et al. [6] report on the setup of two software 
development labs specifically designed so that the social 
interaction – “how to deal with collaborative software 
development processes and their 
need for self-organization, 
motivation, and work coordination” – is taken into conscious 
consideration. Scharf and Koch [7] present the design of a 
Scrum based undergraduate software engineering course, 
which is based on role-playing. 
To ensure that their students 
understand “agile” thoroughly, they designed the complete 
course as realistically as possible. For instance, they make 
research assistants play customer
s and a student play the Scrum 
master. Stettina et al. [8] discuss their experiences with 
2016 IEEE 29th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training2377-570X/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/CSEET.2016.271182016 IEEE 29th International Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training2377-570X/16 $31.00 © 2016 IEEEDOI 10.1109/CSEET.2016.27118 teaching software engineering practices and their continuous 
improvement
.
 They emphasize the importance of an intensive 
coaching routine based on agile practices. In [9] Maurer and 
Anslow report about their experiences teaching a group based 
agile software development project course. They report that 
students enjoy the interactive ex
ercises and the self-organized 
teams, but also that it is challenging getting the right customer 
involvement. Rico and Sayani present in [10] their results 
teaching student teams agile methods in their final year course. 
They report that those teams finding the optimal balance of 
customer collaboration, technical programming and use of 
agile methods had a better productivity. 
III.
 
L
EARNING 
F
ROM 
P
RACTICE
 
A.
 
Quantative Study 
The authors have conducted a bi-annual online survey, the 
Swiss Agile Study (SAS), about the application of software 
methodologies and practices in Switzerland. The first study 
was conducted 2012, followed by a second one in 2014. With 
roughly 100 participating companies and 150 IT professionals, 
it is the largest independent study in Switzerland. The full 
study report was published in [2].  
The results of the latest study show that agile software 
development has become the dominating approach in Swiss IT 
companies. More than 70% of the 
participants stated that they 
follow an agile approach [2].  
Companies applying an agile ap
proach report significant 
improvements in time-to-marke
t, change management and 
handling changing priorities as shown in Fig.1.  
With respect to teaching agile methods, it is of interest 
which practices are considered to be important for successful 
projects and which ar
e applied. We divided the practices into 
engineering practices, and management practices. The first 
group refers to technical practices, which are applied 
individually, i.e. unit testing, continuous integration, clean 
code, etc. The second group encompasses the more 
collaborative practices like pair programming, the daily 
standup and other agile meetings.  
From the viewpoint of education it is also interesting to see 
which agile practices are seen 
to be important for project 
success by the practitioners. Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 show the 
importance of the various practices for the project success, in 
decreasing order.  
 
 
Figure
. 2. Importance of management practices 
 
Figure 1. Influence of Agile Methods 
119119 In the study, we also asked which practices are actually 
applied in the daily work and analyzed the data with respect to 
how experienced the companies 
are in agile development. The 
following co-occurrence matrices in Fig. 3 show the results to 
the question “
Which of the following practices could be 
observed by someone visiting your company in the next 
month?
” with respect to the experience the companies have in 
agile development. In the co-occurrence matrix all practices are 
along the x-axes and y-axes. The diagonal shows the 
percentages of how many comp
anies use the corresponding 
practice. Blue color means high usage values, red colors low 
values. The other entries show 
how many companies use the 
two practices in common. The basic technical practices are 
listed in the upper rows, followed by collaborative practices in 
the middle rows and the more advanced practices in the bottom 
rows. The left matrix shows the companies with less than 3 
years of agile exper
ience, the middle matrix those with 3 to 5 
years, and the right one shows thos
e with more than 5 years of 
experience. The figure clearly shows that companies new to 
agile apply the basic engineering practices like unit testing, 
continues integration and coding standards. The usage rate 
increases still with more expe
rienced companies. However, 
collaborative practices like pair programming, daily standup, 
retrospectives, on site customers, or open work areas are hardly 
used by new agile companies and only slowly increase with 
more experience. 
From the perspective of software engineering education this 
could mean that the basic practices are essential skills that they 
should be taught and practiced from the basic undergraduate 
courses on. Special emphasis should be put on the collaborative 
practices, which are seen as very important as shown in Fig. 2 
but used only by experienced 
agile companies. More advanced 
practices like ATDD and BDD that are rarely used even by 
experienced companies, coul
d be taught in upper 
undergraduate courses or in graduate courses.  
B.
 
Qualitative Study 
We also conducted an interview study with eight agile 
companies in Switzerland asking them about the essential 
success factors in their agile projects. The complete study 
report is published in [3]. 
In the interviews, all the teams reported that they emphasize 
the engineering practices. These practices are seen as very 
important and as a kind of foundation, which ensures that 
software can be developed in short iterations with the required 
quality. There is a constant 
process of improvement and 
refining of these practices. Depending on the maturity of the 
team and organization, this is tr
iggered by the agile champion 
(see below), the team members or, in the case of an agile 
Figure
 4. Importance of technical practices 
Figure
 3. Applied practices by experience of the IT professionals 
120120 company, even by the management. Refactoring, automated 
tests, continuous integration and deployment, pair 
programming, test-driven development, etc. are the tools of the 
trade. Testing, continuous integration and clean coding was 
mentioned as core practices in most organizations.  
We present the findings following the three levels of the 
Agile Competence Pyramid. 
1)
 
Technical Practices 
Testing:
 In almost all the organizations automated testing on 
unit level is well established and is seen as an absolute must 
for providing a good software quality. More mature 
organizations also apply automated testing on acceptance 
testing level using new approaches like Automated 
Acceptance Testing (ATDD) and Behavior Driven 
Development (BDD). 
Continuous Integration:
 Continuous integration is seen as an 
absolute must for being able to
 deliver software with high 
frequency. Thus all organizations have established an 
automated build and test en
vironment, which provides 
immediate feedback to the developers about the quality of the 
system being built. Some organizations already strive for 
continuous delivery to automate th
e delivery process for faster 
and safer delivery to customers with less effort. 
Clean Code:
 Continuously paying attention to writing good 
code from the very beginning is considered more and more 
important. Some of the organ
izations started applying the 
Clean Code [14] approach with the goal of establishing a 
constantly high code quality. These teams also apply further 
practices like continuous quality control, regular or even 
institutionalized code reviews, 
and regular pair programming. 
2)
 
Collaboration Practices:  
All teams in our study originally started with Scrum [16]. 
However, most teams have carefully altered Scrum over time 
and customized it to the specific needs of their organizations 
and projects. The ability to alter the process is important 
because it allows the elimination of the impediments that 
hinders the team from being efficient. Retrospective is a good 
example of how to handle the dampening of the parts that fail 
and the amplifying of the parts that succeed.
 
The interviewed 
companies especially emphasized the following collaboration 
aspects: 
Customer and Requirements: 
In all the interviews, it was 
pointed out that an intensive and frequent communication with 
the customer was of outmost importance. In all the successful 
projects there was a very good understanding of the needed 
requirements by all team members. Communication solely with 
the Product owner is unsatisfying. Developers feel the need to 
communicate directly and get feedback from the end-users. 
User Stories [18] is the premier method to express functional 
and even non-functional re
quirements on cards. 
Collaboration and Communication: 
Intensive and open 
communication among all stakeholders is seen to be one of the 
key elements for successful agile projects. In our interviews we 
identified three major communication scenarios. The team 
members themselves must communicate among each other 
intensively. The team as a whole must communicate with the 
customer and end-users, and finally the team must establish 
good communication with the management (which is often 
organized in a classical hierarchical way). 
To foster communication in teams, almost all organizations 
implement co-located teams in
 an open office environment. 
Most communication is then carried out informally over the 
desk. This helps to reduce official meeting time significantly 
and make the necessary meetings much more efficient. 
Regular communication with the customers is established 
through short iterations with reviews and continuous feedback 
loops. However, developers have a clear need to communicate 
directly with end-users instead of the product owners. 
Communication and collaboration with remote teams is 
always seen as challenging. Co
mpanies invest a lot in 
establishing a good communication
 between the teams. Means 
are regular chat sessions, remote 
participation in meetings, and 
video conferencing. Despite its high costs, some companies 
value bringing the people together physically at regular 
intervals. A week of common work usually “refreshes” 
relationships for about 5-6 weeks, and then the next physical 
meeting is due. 
3)
 
Agile Values 
All interviewed organizations mentioned that developing 
agile is not only a matter of chan
ging processes, but foremost, a 
change of the culture in an or
ganization. Thus values become 
more important. Scrum defines the following five Scrum 
values [16] (in no particular order): Commitment, Focus, 
Openness, Respect and Courage. Extreme Programming [17] 
defines the values a bit differently: Simplicity, 
Communication, Feedback, Respect and Courage. In the 
following we present the findings concerning agile values. 
Transparency and Openness: 
The study showed that in all 
projects both transparency an
d openness were valued very 
highly. Openness of the individuals also means that the team 
members not only take responsibility for a dedicated area of the 
project, e.g. requirements, com
ponents, etc., but are open and 
willed to understand the system as a whole, to have the big 
picture in mind. People in agile teams take responsibility for 
what they do in the context of the project as a whole.  
Craftsmanship: 
The idea of highlighting the importance of 
software development practice has been popularized in [14]. 
The author introduces the dis
ciplines, techniques, tools, and 
practices of software craftsmans
hip. Craftsmanship is much 
more than a technique: It is about attitude. The author shows 
how to approach software development with honor, self-
respect, and pride; work well and work clean; communicate 
and estimate faithfully; face difficult decisions with clarity and 
honesty. 
In our interviews, we found that members of agile teams 
and organizations take pride in their work. They seek mastery 
in their (programming) skills. They know the importance of 
producing high quality software and great value. In the 
interviews, all the teams and organizations pointed out that 
craftsmanship, or whatever they named it, was important and 
that most developers had a high motivation to become better 
121121 experts. We found that they 
challenge themselves and they 
challenge their colleagues to continuously grow and develop. 
C.
 
Agile Competence Pyramid 
Developers in agile software development should possess a 
set of different competences. These competences can be 
divided into three categories as shown in the Agile Pyramid of 
Competences in Fig. 5. The pyramid was first presented in 
[21]: 

 
Technical Practices 

 
Collaboration Practices 

 
Agile Values 
The pyramid was initially developed from an educational 
point of view but proved to be useful as a guideline for the kind 
of competences an agile developer should possess. The analogy 
of the pyramid visualizes the decreasing number of required 
skills or competencies for an agile software developer from 
bottom to top. On the other hand, it reflects the increasing 
difficulty to learn or acquire these competences. Technical 
practices can be taught very well in the classroom or be learned 
by the individuals on the job at their own pace. Collaboration 
practices are, in our 
experience, best learnt through projects in 
teams. The most difficult competences to teach or learn are the 
agile values on top of the pyramid, since they often require a 
change in the attitude of the individual. 
With the pyramid we also visualize the order in which the 
different practice levels should be acquired. Learning the 
collaboration skills before a developer has a good working 
knowledge of the underlying engineering skills is like trying to 
build a pyramid from top to bottom. It might be possible, but at 
a very high cost. Unfortunately, many companies are using this 
approach: they send their developers to a two day Scrum 
Master course and expect them to be agile after that. The same 
is valid for the agile values. Developers usually hear about the 
values in an Agile or Scrum course. But to properly understand 
and act accordingly requires a lot of experience and time. 
The pyramid of agile competences served as a guideline in 
the development of the new curriculum. The next chapter 
presents the details of the curriculum. 
IV.
 
THE
 
NEW
 
COMPUTER
 
SCIENCE
 
CURRICULUM
 
 
In fall 2013, the new Computer Science studies at the 
University of Applied Sciences were started. For this, the 
curriculum [1] was updated an
d a lot of content newly 
developed. In this paper we will have a closer look at the 
lectures, labs and project modules in the 
programming
 and 
software engineering 
module. 
The total workload of the Bachelor program is 180 ETCS
1
 
credits. There are different stud
y models: a three-year full-time 
study, a four-year part-time study with or without a practice-
integrated Bachelor. The content of the four-year course 
corresponds to that of a full-time academic program with 180 
ECTS credits. In the first two 
years, programming and software 
development make up over a quarter of the ETCS credit. Four 
ETCS credits usually translate to a 90 minutes lecture and a 90 
minutes programming lab a week. 
T
ABLE 
I.
 
O
VERVIEW 
S
OFTWARE 
E
NGINEERING OF FULL
-
TIME CURRICULUM 
(
UNDERGRADUATE
) 
 
Programming 
in Java 
Software 
Development 
Project 
Module 
1.Semester 
4 ECTS 
- 
2 ECTS 
2.Semester 
4 ECTS 
- 
6 ETCS 
3.Semester 
- 
4 ECTS 
4 ECTS 
4.Semester 
- 
4 ECTS 
4 ECTS 
 
Part-time studies are designed in such a way that working 
while studying is supported to the greatest extent possible. For 
example, the timetable is designed compactly and credit may 
be given for professional activities. 
In the development of the ne
w curriculum, the experience 
from previous lectures and research [21] [22] was integrated. 
The curriculum was purposely designed with both plan-driven 
and agile methodologies in mind. 
A.
 
First Year: Introduction to Programming with Flipped 
Classroom 
In the first year, the main fo
cus is on general programming 
concepts from a software engineering perspective
2
. The 
students are taught object-oriented programming with Java. 
The first semester is quite extraordinary because we teach an 
“objects-first approach” [5] in combination with the “flipped 
classroom” concept [11]. 
                                                           
1
 
ECTS = European Credit Transfer System: uniform European evaluation 
system of performance criteria as part of the Bologna Reform. Around 30 
hours of student work corresponds to one credit. Full-time students study an 
average of 30 ECTS credits and part-time students 22 ETCS credits per 
semester. 
2
 Computer Science concepts are taught in different lectures and are not 
discussed in this paper.
 
Figure
 5. Agile Competence Pyramid 
122122 One of the reasons for choosing “objects-first” was that it 
allows an approach where teachers truly deal with the 
important concepts first. We use Java as programming 
language and 
BlueJ
 [12]. “
BlueJ
 is a Java simple integrated 
development environment (IDE) 
that is being developed and 
maintained at the University of Kent at Canterbury, UK, and 
La Trobe University, Melbourne,
 explicitly as an environment 
for teaching introductory object-oriented programming.” [12] 
With 
BlueJ
, students can create and interact with objects 
directly. This has the advantage, that important object-oriented 
concepts such as classes, objects, methods and parameters can 
easily be discussed in a concrete manner before looking at the 
details of Java syntax. After the students become familiar with 
Java, they are encouraged to sw
itch to a professional IDE like 
Eclipse [13].  
Flipping the classroom has the benefit that students can 
explore topics in greater depth during class time. Solving and 
discussing programming exercises 
in groups or the whole class 
create meaningful learning opportunities. The teacher explicitly 
chooses the best-suited exercises to reinforce the understanding 
of the topic. 
In a flipped classroom, content delivery may take a variety 
of forms. We use a combination of text reading and online 
collaboration. The course is based on the excellent textbook 
“Objects First with Java – A Practical Introduction using 
BlueJ” [5]. For online collaboration, a learning management 
system (LMS) is used. The textbook together with the 
information on the LMS
3
 delivers all the necessary content 
outside of the classroom. Online 
quizzes are used to assess the 
students’ progress an
d give them instant feedback. Furthermore 
the quizzes are important because they are the basis for 
choosing the above-mentioned programming exercises. 
Next to the programming introduction, the students learn to 
write automatic tests with 
JUnit
, the benefits of 
clean code
 [14] 
and how to use a code versioning system (CVS). 
In the first year, there is also a project module (Table I) 
where the students learn to dev
elop software with a plan-driven 
methodology, i.e. waterfall. In the first semester they write a 
requirements specification and in the second semester the 
software is developed, tested, reviewed by a lecturer and 
deployed.  
B.
 
Second Year: Focus on Software Engineering 
In the second year, the focus is on software development 
with iterative and agile methodologies. In the third semester, 
the students are taught the “Unified Process” (UP) [14]. Since 
the authors are not involved in this part of the curriculum, UP 
will not be further discussed in this paper. 
In the fourth semester, the focus is on agile methodologies: 
Scrum [16] and eXtreme Programming (XP) [17]. In the 
lecture the Agile Manifesto is discussed in the lecture and the 
students are introduced to agile software development, i.e. 
                                                           
3
 
The Internet simplifies flipping very much: We use a web-based e-learning 
platform for teaching, learning, assessment and communication. LMS can 
be used to provide educational content, form groups, organize users, and 
assign users to the courses. You can learn, assess, communicate, and share.
 
Scrum. The students learn about Continuous Integration (CI) 
and how to configure a CI-Server. The importance of automatic 
testing is reinforced; test-driven development (TDD) discussed 
and applied. The educational objective of the last semester is to 
sum up the technical and collaboration practices as presented in 
chapter III.C 
In the fourth and last semester of the basic study, the 
students develop a larger software
 application in an agile team 
in the second project module. Details and motivation will be 
presented in section V.B. 
V.
 
COLLABORATION
 
IN
 
THE
 
CLASSROOM
 
 
One of the key differences between agile and plan-driven 
software development methodologies is the emphasis on 
collaboration and feedback. In Scrum, the predominant agile 
methodology, the collaboration practices and values are central. 
Therefore it is important that th
e students learn to apply them 
in a realistic classroom setup. 
In the new curriculum this is done in three-steps: 
1.
 
Students learn the theory of Scrum and XP 
2.
 
Students play the 
Scrum Lego City game
 as first hands-on 
experience. 
3.
 
Students execute an agile software development project 
over one whole semester in “real” teams of five to nine 
members. 
A.
 
Scrum Lego City Game 
As a hands-on introduction to Scrum, the authors usually 
play the Scrum Lego City game 
[20] with the students. Over 
the years, we have played this game many times. It has always 
been very educational, interesting and a lot of fun. The game 
addresses every role, ceremony and Scrum principles: Starting 
with the product vision then presenting the product backlog, 
making the sprint planning, developing the Lego city (product) 
and ending with the review meeting and the retrospective. The 
game takes between two and three hours and is played in teams 
of 5 to 9 members. The teacher acts as customer – or 
Product 
Owner
 in Scrum terminology – and guides the team building 
while building their city with 
Lego bricks after their product 
visions.  
Scrum is all about teamwork, respecting people, 
cooperation, understanding and productivity. The Scrum Lego 
City Game is designed to make
 students understand and “feel” 
how and why Scrum works. The game promotes collaboration 
and uses as much as possible of what has been learned about 
Scrum in theory 
B.
 
Classroom Setup for Agile Collaboration 
1)
 
Maturity leads to Collaboration 
In [23] it was found that in agile software development, 
experience leads to collaboration. It could also be shown that 
successful professional agile teams tend to use more 
collaboration practices. Unfortunately, this transition to more 
and better collaboration tends 
to take many years. This raises 
123123 two questions: What are the barriers and can this transition to 
maturity be accelerated?  
T
ABLE 
II.
 
B
ARRIERS AND DIFFICULTIES
 
 
Comp 
Prof 
Ability to change organizational culture 
29% 
37% 
Availability of personnel with necessary skills 
18% 
14% 
Customer collaboration 
16% 
14% 
Project complexity or size 
22% 
12% 
General resistance to change 
4% 
9% 
Lack of management support 
3% 
6% 
Budget constraints 
5% 
4% 
Confidence in ability to scale agile 
1% 
3% 
 
Table II gives some hints to the first question. In the Swiss 
Agile Study [1] the participants were asked about the top 
barrier in their company. (Item: “What are the current barriers 
and difficulties to further adopt 
agile software development in 
your company?”). As can be seen
, culture, skills and customers 
are the top barriers 
In the following paragraphs, we present answers to the 
second question. 
2)
 
Educational Software Development Project 
In an educational software project, we are in a privileged 
situation because all the barriers listed in Table II are either 
irrelevant or can be minimized by choosing the project setup 
properly. Still, professional and educational projects differ in 
many ways and we have to be careful not to end up with 
mimicry. 
Some of the advantages in an educational setup are: 

 
Students can choose a project vision together with the 
coach 

 
Project has a small scope and no “real” budget 
constraints 

 
Students can collaborate with an “ideal” customer since 
the coach acts as customer 

 
Students can apply all technical and collaboration 
practices 

 
Students can experience agile values 

 
Students neither have to work with legacy code nor 
worry about the intricacies of a production environment 
 
Some of the impediments in an educational setup are: 

 
Students usually only have one project meeting per 
week 

 
Students only work sporadically on the project 

 
Students often work on the project at different times 

 
Students are not co-located, i.e. the daily stand-up 
meeting is not feasible 

 
Students are less experienced 
In the classroom, it is possible 
to set up an environment 
with little or no impediments,
 which makes th
is transition 
much easier and faster. The remi
nder of this chapter describes 
the setup of the student proje
cts and the experience made in 
respect to agile project management and collaboration 
practices. Table III gives the outline of the complete agile 
student projects. 
Scrum:
 We chose Scrum [16] as th
e methodology because of 
the good experiences we had made in industry and research 
projects. Further, Scrum is the most widely used agile 
methodology [1] in Switzerland. For the educational 
development project, Scrum was adapted to fit the special 
requirements in the classroom.  
Optimal Student Teams Size: 
Optimal development team size is 
small enough to remain agile and large enough to complete 
significant work within an iteration or Sprint. In Scrum the 
recommendation is seven, plus or minus two
4
 [16]. Fewer than 
five team members decrease interaction and collaboration, 
which might result in smaller productivity. Smaller teams 
might also encounter skill constraints. More than nine members 
require too much coordination. Large development teams 
generate too much complexity fo
r an empirical process, like 
Scrum, to manage. 
 
What about the optimal size of student teams? The authors 
had best results when the team size was at the upper limit. In 
smaller student teams there is a risk that the students do not 
realize the necessity of proper
 project management. Much too 
often, project management is seen as an overhead and, in the 
worst case, only applied because the coach says so. In properly 
sized teams, project management is crucial for success. 
Another benefit of larger teams is, that the students get more 
work done, which results in more realistic software 
applications. In our experience
 optimal student team size is 
between seven and nine members. 
Automatic Testing:
 Next to team size, we demand that the 
teams do rigorous automatic testing. Automatic testing is 
difficult, but in combination with refactoring it has a profound 
effect on the code quality. It is important that the students have 
a test concept and test environment ready before they actually 
start coding! Therefore we introduced a “Sprint Zero” before 
the official project start. The goal of Sprint Zero is simple: All 
teams are able to do automatic testing. 
The students have to implement a complete test case, which 
demonstrates their ability to test the application from end-to-
end. At the end of every regu
lar Sprint, code coverage is 
inspected and discussed with the students. 
 
                                                           
4
 The roles of Product Owner and Scrum Master are not included in this count 
unless they are also completing the work of the Sprint Backlog. 
124124 T
ABLE 
III.
 
O
UTLINE OF AGILE STUDENT PROJECTS
 
Before start of 
semester
 
Students and faculty are informed about the 
project module and asked to send in project 
ideas.
 
Week 1 
(Kick
-off 
meeting)
 
Kick-off. Presentation and election of best-
suited project ideas.
 
Composition of student teams
 
Week 2 (Sprint 0) 
Sprint 0: Students setup complete automatic 
testing and building environment
- 
Introduction to IT
-infrastructure  
Week 3 
Sprint 0: Students setup complete automatic 
testing and building environment
 
Week 4 (Project 
start: Sprint 1) 
Demonstration of testing and building 
environment
 
Sprint and Release Planning
 
Week 6 – 14 
(Sprint 1 
- 5) 
Every even week 
Sprint Review & Sprint Retrospective 
Planning meeting of new Spr
int 
Development of application
 
Week 16 
Final presentation of application 
End of project
 
 
Continuous Integration (CI): 
Continuous Integration is seen as 
an absolute must by many professionals to be able to deliver 
software with high frequency. For the student projects, the 
concept of automatic builds and CI are introduced. Every team 
uses Maven [24] and Jenkins [25] to build and integrate their 
software.
 
Clean Code and Craftsmanship: 
The idea of highlighting the 
importance of software development practice was popularized 
in Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software Craftsmanship 
[14]. The author introduces the disciplines, techniques, tools, 
and practices of software craf
tsmanship. Craftsmanship is 
much more than a technique: It is
 about attitude. Starting in the 
first semester, the students are advised to follow the Clean 
Code guidelines. The authors have observed that following and 
discussing these guidelines has a profound impact on the 
quality and design of the code base.
 
Sprint Meetings: 
At the end of every Sprint, the coach attends 
both the Sprint Review and Sprint Retrospective meetings of 
every student team. In these meetings, the coach learns whether 
the project is on track or not.
 
In the beginning of the new Sprint, the coach attends the 
Sprint planning meeting. In this meeting, the coach acts as the 
Product Owner. As Product Owner, the coach can steer the 
project in the proper direction.  
All three meetings usually take place on the same day. The 
Sprint Review takes about 30 minutes, the Sprint retrospective 
about 15 minutes and the Sprint planning, depending whether 
User Stories have to be estimated or not, between 15 and 45 
minutes. These meetings are an excellent occasion to get a 
good overview of all projects and therefore the coach should 
attend all of them. 
Final Presentation: 
At the end of the project module, all the 
teams present their application in the plenum. This is a great 
opportunity for all teams to 
present their ach
ievements. The 
presentation takes about 20 minutes and consists of the project 
vision, architecture and design of the application as well as a 
demonstration. 
C.
 
Internet simplifies Collaboration 
In the educational student project, the team is mostly not 
co-located. Additionally, the students often work at different 
times. This makes collaboration difficult because face-to-face 
communication is not easily possible. Furthermore, the teams 
cannot use physical task boards either. Fortunately, there are 
online task boards, which can be a good substitute for physical 
ones. 
In this chapter we will present some collaboration tools, 
which help to circumvent the impediments in “distributed” 
student teams 
An agile project rapidly and reliably produces new know-
how and new knowledge. Good collaboration tools make the 
exchange of new know-how and new knowledge between the 
single team members and the coach possible. Without the 
Internet and its online collaboration tools, distributed student 
teams would not be feasible. The tools simplify collaboration 
among students and make progress
 visible for the coach. The 
same is true for problems and difficulties
. 
1)
 
Jenkins CI-Server 
Jenkins [25] is an open source continuous integration 
server. It provides immediate feedback of the build status and 
the overall project progress, both to the students and the coach. 
2)
 
GIT and GitHub 
Git [26] is a distributed code versioning system (CVS) 
designed to handle everything from small to very large projects 
with speed and efficiency. Its workflow make it particularly 
well suited for distributed software development teams. Git is 
the successor of SVN (subversion) and is rapidly becoming the 
most widely used CVS. 
GitHub [27] is a web-based Git repository, which is often 
used for hosting open-source software projects. GitHub 
provides several collaboration features such as bug tracking, 
feature requests, task management and wikis for every project. 
3)
 
Trello 
Trello is a very simple collaboration tool for all kind of 
projects. Its main advantage is 
its simplicity. Trello runs in the 
web browser and almost on any mobile device. It consists of a 
task board that is very similar to a physical Scrum board. Since 
it is a web application, no software installation is needed. 
In the student project, Trello is used to manage the user 
stories and the associated tasks. Trello is a good, lightweight 
alternative to professional agile tools like JIRA [29]. By 
looking at Trello, the coach immediately knows what is going 
on in the different projects. 
125125 4)
 
OpenOLAT Learning Management System 
OpenOLAT [30] is a web-based e-learning platform for 
teaching, learning, assessment and collaboration. OpenOLAT 
is simple and intuitive to use. 
5)
 
Project Wiki 
In the student projects, a project wiki is used for 
documentation purposes
. GitHub comes with a project wiki. 
Therefore GitHub is usually used for documentation. 
6)
 
E-mail 
E-Mail is primarily used as means of communication 
between the coach and the teams. As coaches we prefer 
written, asynchronous communication to synchronous, like the 
good old phone or Skype. 
7)
 
Skype 
Members of the student teams often use Skype to ask each 
other questions and communicate. The coach does not use 
Skype with the students. 
VI.
 
EVALUATION 
A systematic evaluation of the new curriculum with respect 
to the learning targets in software engineering has not yet been 
executed for the first round. This evaluation will be carried out 
after the second or third round. Instead we present our first 
experiences and feedback from th
e students. In the round we a 
total of 45 students, and have setup five teams each with nine 
students.
 
In the first year we observed an improvement of the 
programming skills and code quality. The object first approach 
with BlueJ [5], [12] has clearly improved the understanding 
and depth of important OO-conce
pts skills of most students. 
Paying special attention to technical practices like automatic 
unit tests and clean code has had a positive effect on design, 
quality and documentation.  
Applying a Learning Management System (LMS) was 
helpful for collaboration and pr
esentation of material. This was 
especially true in the flipped classroom environment, because 
solving and evaluating the quizzes was supported by LMS. On 
the other side, the flipped class room concept showed to be 
pretty laborious in preparation. 
In the second year, the highlight was unquestionably the 
agile project module for both students and coach. The 
developed application exceeded the expectations in scope, 
quality and student commitment. We observed that the coach’s 
experience in agile software de
velopment is important for the 
outcome.  
The coordination of the software development lecture and 
the project module was reported to be excellent. The students 
liked the combination of theory and practice. Next some 
written statements
5
 of the software development lecture and 
                                                           
5
 
The statements are translated from German. The statements are taken from 
the official evaluation system. For th
e new Computer Science studies, all 
new lectures and modules were evaluated systematically.
 
project module in the fourth semester. The students were asked 
what they liked best: “It’s great that we do Agile..”, “Practical 
relevance of the topics presented”, “Good coordination of 
lecture and project module”, “Best project module so far..”, “I 
liked that we could choose the projects ourselves..”, “Scrum!!”. 
From part-time students we ofte
n get feedback that they can 
benefit of the agile practices directly in their job. 
Scrum in combination with the online collaboration tools 
made it possible, to keep the overview of the student projects. 
Coaching the projects to desired outcome and assessing the 
team members was possible in 
an efficient and transparent 
manner projects. 
With respect to evaluation and assessment of the individual 
students, it is very hard to 
find out, who did what and how 
much in the project. The team setup is critical with respect to 
finding a well-balanced team with the necessary level of 
knowhow, motivation and commitment. Another critical issue 
are the Product Owner and Scrum Master roles. We let the 
students themselves overtake th
ese roles. But they usually lack 
the necessary experience to fu
lfill the requirements to these 
roles. 
VII.
 
CONCLUSION
 
AND
 
FURTHER
 
WORK 
Collaboration between team memb
ers, customers, users and 
stakeholders is a 
very important part of agile software 
development. Maturity leads to co
llaboration; i.e. mature agile 
teams apply more collaboration practices. Therefore, it is 
important that the students learn about collaboration practices 
and how to live them. This is best realized in a “real” agile 
project. 
This paper discusses how educat
ional projects can be setup 
in such a way, that students ca
n experience the importance of 
collaboration. The Internet and its plethora of online tools act 
as an enabler of collaboration in agile educational software 
projects. The benefits of online collaboration tools make it 
possible for the lecturer to coach and steer student software 
development projects and, last but 
not least, assess the students. 
The authors are convinced, that software engineering education 
benefits significantly by embra
cing the modern collaboration 
tools the Internet has made available. 
R
EFERENCES
 
[1]
 
Version One. State of Agile Development Survey results. 
http://info.versionone.com/state-of-agile-development-survey-
ninth.html, 22.10.2015 
[2]
 
M. Kropp, A. Meier, Swiss Agile Study 2014, ISSN: 2296-2476, FHNW 
and ZHAW, Brugg, Zurich www.swissagilestudy.ch 
[3]
 
M. Kropp, A. Meier, Agile Success Factors, ISSN: 2296-2476, FHNW 
and ZHAW, Brugg, Zurich www.swissagilestudy.ch (2015) 
[4]
 
Curriculum Bachelor's degree Computer Science 
https://www.zhaw.ch/en/engineering/study/bachelors-degree-
programmes/bachelors-degree-computer-science/, retrieved 20.10.15 
[5]
 
David J. Barnes & Michael Kölling, Objects First with Java- A Practical 
Introduction using BlueJ, Fifth edition, Prentice Hall / Pearson 
Education, 2012US: ISBN 978-013-249266-9UK: ISBN 978-013-
283554-1 
[6]
 
Andreas Schroeder, Annabelle Klarl, Philip Mayer, Christian Kroiß. 
Teaching agile software development through lab courses. Global 
Engineering Education Conference (EDUCON), 2012 IEEE. 
126126 [7]
 
Andreas Scharf, Andreas Koch, Scrum in a Software Engineering 
Course: An In-Depth Praxis Report, CSEE&T 2013, San Francisco, 
USA. 
[8]
 
Christoph Johann Stettina, Zhao Zhou, Thomas Bäck, Bernhard Katzy, 
Academic Education of Software Engineering Practices: Towards 
Planning and Improving Capstone Courses Based upon Intensive 
Coaching and Team Routines, CSEE&T 2013, San Francisco, USA. 
[9]
 
Frank Maurer, Craig Anslow. An Experience Report at Teaching a 
Group Based Agile Software Development Project Course. Proceedings 
of the 46th ACM Technical Symposium on Computer Science 
Education. SIGCSE ’15. Kansas City, USA. 
[10]
 
D. Rico and H. Sayani. Use of agile methods in software engineering 
education. In 
Proceedings of the International Conference on Agile
, 
pages 172-179, 2009. 
[11]
 
Flipped classroom, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Flipped_classroom, 
14.10.2015 
[12]
 
BlueJ, University of Kent, http://www.bluej.org, retrieved 20.10.15 
[13]
 
Eclipse IDE, https://www.eclipse.org, retrieved 20.10.15 
[14]
 
Robert C. Martin, Clean Code: A Handbook of Agile Software 
Craftsmanship, 2009, ISBN 0-13-235088-2 
[15]
 
Unified Process,
 
https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Unified_Process, 
retrieved 20.10.15 
[16]
 
Ken Schwaber, Mike Beedle. Agile Software Development with Scrum, 
2001, ISBN 0-13-207489-3 
[17]
 
Kent Beck, Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change. 
Addison-Wesley, 2004
 
ISBN 0-321-27865-8 
[18]
 
Mike Cohn, User Stories Applied, For Agile Software Development, 
2004, ISBN 0-321-20568-5 
[19]
 
Agile Manifesto. http://agilemanifesto.org/, retrieved 20.10.15 
[20]
 
Scrum Lego City Game. Agile 42. 
http://www.agile42.com/en/training/scrum-lego-city/, retrieved 20.10.15 
[21]
 
M. Kropp, A. Meier. Teaching Agile Software Development at 
University Level: Values, Management, and Craftsmanship. Proceedings 
2013 IEEE, 26th Conference on Software Engineering Education and 
Training (CSEE&T 2013), San Francisco. 
[22]
 
M. Kropp, A. Meier, M. Mateescu, C. Zahn, Teaching and learning agile 
collaboration. Proceedings 2014 IEEE, 27th Conference on Software 
Engineering Education and Training - (CSEE&T 2014), Klagenfurt, 
Austria. 
[23]
 
R. Biddle; M. Kropp; A. Meier. Agile Adolescence to Maturity: 
Experience leads to Collaboration (Workshop). OOP Conference 2016, 
Munich, Germany, Feb. 2016 (accepted) 
[24]
 
Apache Maven Project, https://maven.apache.org, retrieved 20.10.15 
[25]
 
Jenkins - open source continuous integration server, https://jenkins-
ci.org, retrieved 20.10.15 
[26]
 
Git - distributed version control system, https://git-scm.com, retrieved 
20.10.15 
[27]
 
GitHub - collaboration, code review, and code management 
https://github.com, retrieved 20.10.15 
[28]
 
Trello - web-based project management application, https://trello.com, 
retrieved 20.10.15 
[29]
 
JIRA - issue tracking and project management, 
https://de.atlassian.com/software/jira, retrieved 20.10.15 
[30]
 
OpenOLAT – a leaning management system, http://www.openolat.com, 
retreived 20.10.15   
 
 
127127