  Reviewing the Curriculum of Softw
are Engineering Undergraduate Courses to Incorporate Communication and Interpersonal Skills 
Teaching   Vinícius Manhães Teles Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro Núcleo de Computação Eletrônica vinicius@improveit.com.br  Carlo Emmanoel Tolla de Oliveira 
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro Núcleo de Computação Eletrônica carlo@ufrj.br  Abstract  The major problems of software development projects are not so much technical as 
sociological in nature.  The industry seems to agree very much with this statement while the university seems to give it little importance. The article begins analyzing some related work and proposes changes in software engineering underg
raduate courses to accommodate new ways of teaching and to incorporate professional skills teaching. It also describes a course on extreme programming where some techniques will be used and evaluated.   1. Introduction  The main emphasis of Computer Science courses is the development of technical skills by 
students undertaking the course (IEEE/ACM 
cited in Pham, 1997).  This focus on technical skills 
poses problems for future professionals when they
 are supposed to build information systems 
where their activities are part of a team effort. Acco
rding to DeMarco et al. [1] since they work in 
teams and projects and other tightly knit working groups, they are mostly in the human 
communication business. Their successes stem from good human interactions by all participants 

in the effort. Researches conduced in Australia seem to confirm 
 the statement above. In Australia, surveys 
of employers have shown that the qualities they cons
istently rate most highly in graduates relate 
to their communication skills, their ability to work
 together in teams and their technical writing 
skills, besides their basic technical knowledge. (Business Higher Education Round Table and 
Department of Employment, Education and Training 
cited in Keen, 1998)  The Business/Higher Education Round Table, Australia conducted a survey in 1992 in which 
both business and university were asked to ra
nk the desired characteristics of university 
graduates. The results are shown in Table 1. [2]. 
Table 1. Desired characteristics of university 
graduates (where 1 is the most desired). 
 Desired Characteristics of Graduates Rank 
Business University 
Communication skills 1 7 
Capacity to learn new skills and procedures 2 5 
Capacity for cooperation and teamwork 3 8 
Capacity to make decision and solve problems 4 3 
Ability to apply knowledge to workplace 5 4 
Capacity to work with minimum supervision 6 6 
Theoretical knowledge in a professional field 7 1 
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE  Capacity to use computer technology 8 2 
Understanding of business ethics 9 12 
General business knowledge 10 11 
Special work skills 11 9 
A broad background of general knowledge 12 10 
 This survey indicates that business and university differ in their ranking of the importance of 
characteristics in the graduates in two major areas: 
1. Communication skills, a capacity to learn new skills and procedures, and a capacity for 
cooperation and teamwork. In each of these cases the university rankings are well below 

those of business, particularly in the area of communication skills. 
2. Theoretical knowledge in a professional field and a capacity to use computer technology. 

In these cases university has rated these char
acteristics higher than has business. [2] 
These results are consistent with the views of 
some authors, like DeMarco and Lister [1], 
Goguen and Linde [15] and Goguen [9]. They st
ate that software development is strongly 
affected by social issues. So, it cannot be treated in a purely technological way. 
Other researchers have been studying methods
 to improve the education of software 
engineering in order to address these social issues. 
In this paper, the authors review some recent 
developments in this area and propose a review in the computer science curriculum in order to 

accommodate these methods. In particular, they start proposing the introduction of an extreme 

programming course which will use some of 
the techniques presented in this article.  2. Related work  Researchers are working in two different propositions:  Changes in technical content teaching  Introduction of professional skills teaching Each of these alternatives are described in the sections ahead.  2.1. Changes in technical content teaching 
 
The Software Factory Tvedt et at. [13] propose the ﬁSoftware  Factoryﬂ, an eight-semester sequence of courses. 
These courses expose students to large-scale, team-oriented development in a software 
development organization. Each course represents 
a specific software engineering role or job 
within the development organization. 
The eight semester sequence progresses the student
s through the following roles: (1) Software 
Factory process and tools trainee, (2) software system tests, (3 & 4) software developer and 
maintainer, (5) requirements analyst and test planne
r, (6) software designer and (7 & 8) software project manager.  
Students from all courses in the Software Factor
y sequence meet simultaneously to fulfill their 
roles in the software organization. The enrollment in the program allows for multiple teams 
within the organization. The Software Factory approach is rather interes
ting since students begin to work in a long term 
project early, exercise teamwork and face non-technical issues. Furthermore, it seems to bring 

students closer to what happens in the ﬁreal-worldﬂ.  On the other hand, the adoption of this 
approach has considerable impact on the way f
aculty staff is used to work and demands a 
significant infrastructure.   Large-scale software development Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE  Sebern [16] also works with the idea of la
rge-scale software development. He proposes a 
software development laboratory in which stude
nt teams™ work for extended periods on large-
scale, ongoing projects in the context of a standardized and evolving development process. It™s 
composed of a three-course sequence.  
Students in this course believe they have achieved the objectives related to teamwork, process 
improvement and software development practice.
 As in the case of Tvedt [13] this sequence 
reflects much of the experience in the ﬁreal-world
ﬂ. But it is also hard to be implemented by 
faculty staff. 

 The Activity Weekends Ratcliffe et al. [11] describe the adoption of an integral activity weekend as part of the 
faculty™s introductory software engineering c
ourse and a second weekend to reinforce industrial awareness in the student™s second year.  
These weekends have been developed to impr
ove motivation and sta
ff-student relations, emphasizing on life skills and adaptability. The idea 
is to introduce students to the concept of team skills. With specific attention to persona
l challenge and team dynamics, these weekends 
where carefully designed to both improve motiva
tion and enhance the general employability of 
the students.  They follow a series of specially tailored outdoor
 activities that are designed to promote self 
and inter-personal skills through a series of 
shared group experiences. The activities are personally challenging and are heavily teamwo
rk oriented. They cannot be carried out 
successfully without group co-operation and group encouragement. 
Ratcliffe et al. [11] state that the response 
from the weekends is overwhelming. The students 
obviously enjoy themselves a great deal but more importantly they learn a great deal about 
themselves and working with others. It seems that 
the students learn far more about team working 
in one weekend than could have been taught to them through a whole series of class projects. 
Although the approach is very interesting and e
ffective, the costs are high. Considering the limitation of resources that affect many universities, it™s necessary to find a way to implement 

these weekends with lower costs. 
 Open Ended Group Projects Daniels et al. [10] describe the use of Open Ended Group Projects (OEGP). OEGP is a form of 
experimental learning (Kolb 
cited in Daniels et al., 2002) which can, in principle, be used to 
advantage to teach any subject with a practical application.  
Daniels et al. [10], state that in addition 
to supporting knowledge acquisition, OEGP can be 
used to help the students gain and improve skills. The most obvious skill areas which are 
involved are interpersonal communication and 
group working. However, a suitably designed 
OEGP can ensure that students must consider the problems of communication with manager and 

client and can help improve both report writi
ng and presentation skills. OEGP also assist in 
getting students to analyze problems and synthesize solutions while examining, and trying to 

mitigate the risks of things going wrong, all valuab
le skills for the software engineering project managers of the future.  
The experience of group project work prepares the students for their subsequent careers where group working is the norm. Undertak
ing open ended projects also appears to have the benefit that they force the students to think about the probl
em rather than spending time searching for the 
‚correct™ answer.  
It is also noted that OEGP appear to have 
measurable beneficial effects on student performance 
in other academic subjects. Improved motivation and greater enthusiasm seem to carry over into 

general performance, confidence levels go up and pr
oblem solving skills improve so that students 
are more willing to attempt difficult tasks. OEGP can
 also be used to encourage students to apply 
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE  theory which should lead to a better understa
nding of the theory and thus to improved 
performance in examinations. 
Daniels et al. [10] describe several project
s run in the classroom and they describe the 
students™ reaction. Firstly, feedback from the stude
nts has been generally very positive. In all of 
the OEGP with which the authors have been involved there has been positive feedback from the 
students both during the module and afterwards. It is
 also noticeable that the levels of motivation 
of the students appeared to be higher with bette
r completion rates, less plagiarism and very few 
drop outs or failures.  But OEGPs raise some criticism. Daniels et al. [10] explains that 
the main concerns that are 
expressed when the use of OEGP is suggested rela
te either to the use of group projects at all (ﬁweak students get ‚carried™, good students get ‚pulled down™ﬂ) or to the fact that the outcome 
for an OEGP is inherently unknown i.e. that there is no ‚right™ answer. The necessity for group 
working is, however, becoming more widely accepted now (Ford 
cited in Daniels et al., 2002), 
thus it is the concerns about the open ended nature of the project and the need for fair assessment 
based on problems for which there is a co
rrect answer, which are addressed here.  The obvious counter argument is that OEGP mirror real life software engineering projects 
which do not usually have known ‚right™ answers and 
there is a need to assist students to learn 
this before they start to work. Part of this
 learning process includes the intrinsically difficult 
process of finding out what the client thinks is required (Veryard 
cited in Daniels et al., 2002), negotiating with the client to agree what can be done and, later, explain what has actually been 

done and how it relates to the requirements. An alte
rnative argument is that, ultimately, all criteria 
are established and judged by people and are, ther
efore, subjective. Objective criteria are only 
regarded as objective because there is agreement about the ‚correct™ way in which something 
should be done, or said. History suggests that most
 such agreements change over time and current 
‚right™ way may well be revised later.  
A different perspective on the fair assessment of
 OEGP can be provided by considering the 
way in which science and engineering are 
advanced. All research projects have unknown 
outcomes but the methods used to undertake and 
present research are common. Thus it is possible 
to provide a fair assessment process for OEGP by
 focusing on the process which the students use rather than the product they produce [10]. 
 2.2. Introduction of professional skills teaching  
Lamp et al. [3] state that changes to the traditional systems development life cycle towards use 
of package software, prototyping, distributed 
computing, JAD etc have all placed a further 
demand on interpersonal skills as opposed to techni
cal skills. They described a major revision of 
the undergraduate teaching programme of the Depart
ment of Computer Science at the University 
of Tasmania, Australia. 
This review introduced the teaching of professional skills. The objectives were:  To introduce students to a range of prof
essional skills considered essential for their effective operation as IT professionals;  To develop skills and attitudes in students appropriate to IT professionals;  To ensure that all times the acquisition of 
these professional skills are seen by the students 
as relevant to the technical and theoretical programmes which they are concurrently 
receiving, and as being essential for the well grounded graduate. The second objective ensured that the professiona
l skills training was a genuine skills-based programme, and not just an attempt to impa
rt knowledge. Students are required to actively 
participate and to acquire appropriate levels of skills through experiential learning. The programme encompasses subjects that are taught along four years.  
Table 2. Subjects™ distribution. Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE   First Year Second Year Third Year Honours
 What is the role of an IT professional? 

Ethics in computing 

Study skills 

Report writing 
Cross cultural 
communication 

Legal Issues 
Information gathering 

Interviewing 
Organizations: groups & 
teams 

Meetings & decision 
making 

Marketing, presentation 
skills 
Presentations by students
 Groups and Teams 

Information Gathering 

Interviewing and 
ethics 
Interviewing 
Interviewing Exercises 
Metaphors 
Groups dynamics 

Meetings 
Team decision making 

Group problem solving 

Presenting a proposal 
Group presentations  Teamwork 
Team leadership 

Presentation skills 
Assertiveness 
Negotiation, 
conflict resolution 
Career 
visualization 
Skills/education 
for life 
Contract 
negotiation 
Detailed case 
study analysis 
Advanced ethics, 
legal issues 
Critical analysis 

Research skills 
Presentation 
skills 
Thesis writing 
Organizational 
contexts 
  According to Lamp et al. [3] the inclusion of the professional skills programme complements 
the social and human aspects of information systems by giving real experience in organizational 
and team based activities, and focuses understanding of the impact of information technology at 

the interpersonal level. 
 3. Proposal  Based on the evidences given before, the authors of this paper are working on a research 
project in order to change the way software engin
eering is taught at Federal University of Rio de 
Janeiro. They are trying some of the techniques presen
ted in this paper in order to change the way 
technical subjects are taught. At the present moment, experiments are underway in a technical course on Extreme 
Programming. The authors are using concepts presented in this paper such as: 
 The adoption of a large-scale project  The involvement of an external client 
 Open ended group project Their approach is to change the curriculum 
gradually trying the techniques in different 
subjects. 
 The Extreme Programming Course  This is a semester long course for a class composed
 of 20 students. The content is based on the 
books of Beck [4], Beck and Fowler [14] and Jeffries et al. [7]. The introduction of extreme 
programming teaching to computer science undergradua
te courses is not new. It has already been 
described in the works of Shukla and Williams [12] and Müller and Tichy [6]. 
Shukla and Williams [12] describe a course 
based on a 16-week semester class where the 
students completed four Java programming projects during the course of the semester. Three of 

the projects were completed as the students were
 learning and using more traditional software 
development practices. These practices were b
ased on the Collaborative Software ProcessSM 
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE  (CSPSM) developed by Williams. They found that 
one semester is not long enough to teach two 
very different methodologies nor for the students to perform meaningful assignments using them.  
Furthermore, the students didn™t work at all tim
es co-located and with a customer on site. So, 
the experience didn™t reflect the work of a real 
extreme programming project where co-location is 
strongly recommended and the customer should be present. 
Müller and Tichy [6] developed an extreme programming course where, in the first three 
weeks students solved small programming ex
ercises to familiarize themselves with the 
programming environment and to learn XP practices. The exercises introduced jUnit (the testing 
framework used throughout the course), pair programming, the test practices of XP (write test 

cases before coding, execute them automatically with
 jUnit), and refactoring. The remaining eight 
weeks were devoted to a project on visual traffic simulation. The course language was Java. All 

students had experience with Java from their 
early undergraduate courses. As in the case 
described by Williams, the students didn™t work at
 all times co-located and with a customer on 
site which brought some problems.  
The proposal of this paper tries to overcome the problems found in both cases. Firstly, it 
focuses only in one methodology, the extreme programming. Secondly, the students work only in 

one project through the course. And they develop software during the classes, so they are always 

co-located and they always have the customer on-site. 
The project is the development of software to
 support the dissertation of a graduate student who acts as the customer all over the course. This
 approach is interesting, because the teacher doesn™t act as the customer. He acts as the coach
 of the team. This project use Java as its 
development language. 
The class is divided by five to form five teams of four students each. In each team, the students 
work in pairs. They practice pair-programming at all times following the recommendations of 

Williams et at. [5][8].  
The students are evaluated in two ways, according to their individual achievements and their 
behavior working in the team. Every week 
the teacher proposes a reading assignment for the 
students. They have to read a text and answer
 some questions posed by the teacher in the 
following class. The texts are used so that students can learn more about each characteristic of the 
methodology. This evaluation represents half of the week grade. 
The other half is based on teamwork. Students are observed while they work in pairs and the 
teacher grant marks according to th
e way they work with the pair and the other teammates. The 
teacher doesn™t evaluate the final product, but 
only the process used by students to build the 
product. So, the students are not supposed to work on the project when they are not in class. 
Each class takes four hours and there™s one class pe
r week. In the first hour the teacher asks the students about the text they™ve read along the 
week before the class. In the second hour the teacher gives a lecture on the subject of the class. And in the remaining two hours the students 
work on the project.  4. Results  
In order to evaluate the results of this teach
ing method, the teacher has created a few forms 
which have been fulfilled by students. After each class the students received a form containing 

four questions about the method. The students we
re always supposed to answer the questions 
anonymously. 
In the first class the teacher has proposed a gr
oup dynamic so that students could get to know 
each other. On the following class, they™ve been 
asked if they felt better posing questions and 
making comments after knowing their classmates. For 63% of them the group dynamic has been 

really useful and gave them more confidence to take part of the class™ discussions. 
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE  They also agreed on the evaluation system. The 
teacher has proposed this system on the first 
class and the students were asked about it a few classes latter. For 94% of the students this 
evaluation system assesses fairly each student™s l
earning. As the evaluation takes place every 
week, the teacher sends the evaluation results 
to the students every week, which gives them 
feedback about their achievements. Among the student
s, 83% believe this feedback is very useful 
and helps to motivated them so that they become more interested on the course. When asked 

whether this evaluation system should be applied to other technical disciplines 89% of the 

students answered affirmatively. 
Pair programming was also very well accepted by students. All of them said they enjoyed the 
first exercises with pairs. In particular, they 
were also very enthusiastic about doing their 
exercises at the class. For 94% of the students doing their exercises at the class is far more 
effective than doing them at home. They said th
ey learn more this way because they have the 
opportunity to discuss some ideas with their friends
 about the subject they™ve just learnt. This 
reinforces the learning process.  5. Conclusion  
This paper began describing the concerns of business towards software engineering professionals in the areas of communication and interpersonal skills. Both empirical research and 

anecdotal evidence confirms that business remain
s strongly concerned over the teaching of this 
area. The authors presented some works that try 
to address those concerns. They do that changing 
the teaching of technical content or introducing the teaching of professional skills. Finally, they 

propose the adoption of some of these techniques in
 order to change the teaching of software engineering at the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro.  

 6. Future Work  
This experiment is the first of a series of experi
ments the authors intend to put in action in their 
research which looks for new ways of teaching co
mputer science courses in order to shorten the 
gap between industry expectation and university expectation. The results of this experiment will 

be available in the future in the form of a new paper. 

 7. References  [1] T. DeMarco, T. Lister,  
Peopleware Productive Projects and Teams, Dorset House Publishing Co., New York:, 
1987.  
[2] C. Keen, C. Lockwood, J. Lamp, ﬁA Client-focuse
d, Team-of-Teams Approach to Software Development Projectsﬂ, 
Proceedings of Software Engineering Education & Practice (SE: E&P™98)
, IEEE Computer Society Press 
Dunedin, 34-41 
 
[3] J. Lamp, C. Keen, C. Urquhart, ﬁIntegra
ting Professional Skills into the Curriculumﬂ, 
Proceedings of the First 
Australasian Conference on Computer Science Education, Sydney, Australia, pp. 309-316, July 1996. 
 
[4] K. Beck, 
Extreme Programming Explained Œ Embrace Change, Addison Wesley, 2000. 
 
[5] L. Williams, R.Kessler, W. Cunningham, R. Jeffries
, ﬁStrengthening the Case for Pair Programmingﬂ, 
IEEE Software, vol. 17, pp. 19-25, July 2000. 
 
[6] M. Müller, W. Tichy, ﬁCase Study: Extreme Programming in a University Environmentﬂ, 
Proceedings of the 
International Conference on Software Engineering 2001 ( ICSE 2001)
.  
[7] R. Jeffries, A. Anderson, C. 
Hendrickson, ﬁExtreme Programming Installedﬂ, Addison-Wesley, 2001. 
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE   [8] L. Williams, R. Kessler, ﬁAll I Really Need to K
now about Pair Programming I learned in Kindergarten,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM, vol. 43, pp. 108-114, May 2000.  
 
[9] J. Gouguen, ﬁRequirements Engineer
ing as the Reconciliation of Technical and Social Issuesﬂ, in Requirements 
Engineering: Social and Technical Issues, edited with Marina Jirotka, Academic Press, 1994, pp. 165-199.  
[10] M. Daniels, X. Faulkne
r, I. Newman, ﬁOpen Ended Groups Projects, Motivating Stude
nts and Preparing them for the ‚Real World™ﬂ, 
Proceedings of the 15
th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™02)
.  
[11] M. Ratcliffe, J. Woodbury, L. Thomas, ﬁImproveint Motivation and Performance Through Personal Development 

in Large Introductory Software Engineering Coursesﬂ, 
Proceedings of the 15
th Conference on Software Engineering 
Education and Training (CSEET™02)
.   [12] A. Shukla, L. Williams, ﬁAdapting Extreme Progr
amming for a Core Software Engineering Courseﬂ, 
Proceedings 
of the 15th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™02)
.  
[13] J. Tvedt, R. Tesoriero, K. Ga
ry, ﬁThe Software Factory: Combini
ng Undergraduate Computer Science and Software Engineering Education, Proceedings of the International Conference on Software Engineering 2001 ( ICSE 
2001).  
[14] K. Beck, M. Fowler, 
Planning Extreme Programming, Addison Wesley, 2001. 
[15] J. A. Goguen, C. Linde, ﬁTec
hniques for Requirements Elicitationﬂ, Proceedings of Requirements Engineering 
(RE™98), IEEE Computer Society
, 1998, pp. 152-164.   [16] M. J. Sebern, ﬁThe Software
 Development Laboratory: Incorporati
ng Industrial Practice in an Academic Environmentﬂ,  Proceedings of the 15
th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™02)
.  
 [17] B. Pham. ﬁThe changing curriculum of compu
ting and information technology in Australiaﬂ. In 
2nd Australasian SIGCSE Conference, pages 149-154, The University of Melbourne, July, 1997. 
Proceedings of the 16th Conference on Software Engineering Education and Training (CSEET™03) 
1093-0175/03 $17.00 © 2003 
IEEE 