 Resources for Agile Software Development in the Software 
Engineering Course 
Laurie Williams, Sarah E. Smith, Michael Rappa 
North Carolina State University  {lawilli3, sesmith5, mrappa} @ncsu.eduAbstractAgile software development is an emerging topic in software engineering.  Industrial 
use of agile techniques is growing faster than our educational resources are being 

updated.  Using an open courseware platform, OpenSeminar, we provide course 
resources for software engineering students about agile software development 
methodologies. These resources include readings, sites, lab exercises, lectures, examples, 

testing practices, and testing frameworks.1.  Problem Statement 
Agile software development is an emerging topic in software engineering.  The need to 
educate students in agile practices and processes is specifically addressed in the 
ACM/IEEE Computing Curricula 2001 (CC2001) Software Engineering Education 

Knowledge (SEEK) document [1]. Additionally, industrial use of agile techniques is 
growing faster than our educational resources are being updated.  These trends present 
educators with two challenges.  First, educators must learn new techniques.  Secondly, 

educators must provide resources to students.  However, educational materials provided 
in textbooks lag behind practical advances in the use of agile techniques.           
2. Open Seminar 
We have created resources to support education in agile practices.  These resources are 
appropriate for a student who has completed a CS1 and CS2 course.  We provide our 

resources via OpenSeminar (
http://openseminar.org/
), a web-based open courseware platform architected by the third author.  OpenSeminar is designed to enable professors to 

collaborate on material for similar courses.  Initially, one professor can create and 

populate a course with resources.   Subsequently, professors at other universities can 
adapt the resources of the initial course instance to meet their own needs.  The adaptation 
includes choosing which of the posted resources would be valuable for their own classes 

and adding additional resources.  When a professor adds a resource to OpenSeminar, all 

collaborating professors have visibility to this resource and can choose to suggest this 

resource to their students.  The end result of an OpenSeminar in a given subject is an 
expert-maintained repository or database of links to online information that is openly 
available on the Internet.  
The first general course created in OpenSeminar is the OpenSeminar in Software 
Engineering (OSSE, http://openseminar.org/se/), based on the software engineering 
course taught by the lead author at North Carolina State University (NCSU). The OSSE 

contains several modules with courseware related to agile development practices in 
addition to other more traditional techniques.   In total, there are 22 course modules in 
OSSE, six of which relate to agile software development.  Each module provides 

readings, sites, lab exercises, lectures, and examples.  Some specifics of these six 

modules are provided in the next section. 
Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Software Engineering Education & Training (CSEET’05) 
1093-0175/05 $ 20.00 
IEEE 3. Agile Methodology Courseware 
There are six OSSE modules which relate to agile software development:  software 
process, pair programming, testing, requirements, project management, and the 

comprehensive Monopoly example.  The intent of these resources is to increase the breath 
of possible approaches to a project to include agile alternatives.  Some details of these six 
modules are now provided.  The first five of these modules relate to knowledge units of 

CC2001 SEEK; these knowledge units will references in this discussion.   
Software process.  General resources are provided for both agile and plan-
driven software development methodologies.  Specifically a 20-page survey of 

four agile methods (written by the first author) is provided (Extreme 
Programming (XP), Crystal, Scrum, Feature-Driven Development) in addition to 
other readings, a lecture, and links to sites.  The SEEK specifically notes that 

agile software development should be included in lessons about lifecycle models 
(PRO.imp.2). 
Pair programming.  Several interactive lab exercises are provided.  Readings 
and other sites related to pair programming are provided.  The SEEK does not 
specifically mention pair programming.  However, pair programming is 
increasingly being considered as a validation and verification (V&V) practice, 

akin to desk checking (VAV.rev.1), walkthroughs (VAV.rev.2), and inspections 
(VAV.rev.3).  Additionally, pair programming provides students experience with 
group dynamics (PRF.psy) and communication skills (PRF.com).   
Testing.  The XP automated testing practices of test-driven development and 
acceptance testing are presented in detail in addition to more fundamental white-
box and black-box testing techniques.  Test-driven development is specifically 

mentioned in the Computing Essentials section of the CC2001 SEEK, 
CMP.ct.16.  An extensive reading on the automated testing techniques is 
provided in addition to tutorials, interactive lab exercises, other readings, and 

links to sites.  As will be discussed in the Monopoly example below, a complete 
working program with automated tests is provided.   
Requirements
.  The requirements module provides resources on three different 
means of recording requirements:  traditional, use case-based, and user story-
based.  User stories are the means of recording requirements in the XP 
methodology.  In addition to readings on these three methods, the Monopoly 

example requirements were done each of the three ways, enabling comparison.  
The readings explain more about when each of the methods would be most 
appropriate.  Also provided are other readings, additional links, lab exercises, 

and tutorials. The CC2001 SEEK document teaching agile-style requirements 
process fundamental (MAA.rfd.2) and requirements management (MAA.rfd.6). 
Project management.  An interactive lab exercise is provided which features the 
Extreme Hour that introduces students to the practice of writing user stories and 
managing their project via XP release planning.    The CC2001 SEEK discusses 
the need to apply project planning (MGT.pp) and project control (MGT.ctl) to 

projects that use agile methodologies.   
Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Software Engineering Education & Training (CSEET’05) 
1093-0175/05 $ 20.00 
IEEE Monopoly Example
.  A Java implementation of a Monopoly game is provided in 
addition to a myriad of supporting artifacts:  working code, automated JUnit
1unit test cases, automated FIT
2 acceptance test cases, black box/functional test 
plan, class diagram, sequence diagram, state diagram, and requirements 

specification (three complete version for each means of documenting 
requirements) 
Our collection of agile methodology courseware covers several tools and resources that 
are not yet covered in general software engineering textbooks.  Other educators could use 
our courseware to supplement current resources and/or textbooks in order to keep 
students up to date about emerging ideas and technology in the computer industry.  By 

collecting together the best resources about agile methodologies, we have provided 
professors with a single place to go to find resources to supplement their current 
courseware.     
References 
[1] ACM/IEEE-CS Joint Task Force on Computing Curricula, "Curriculum Guidelines for 
Undergraduate Degree Programs in Software Engineering,"  August 23, 2004. 
                                                          
1 http://www.junit.org/ 2 http://fit.c2.com/ 
Proceedings of the 18th Conference on Software Engineering Education & Training (CSEET’05) 
1093-0175/05 $ 20.00 
IEEE