 IEEE TRAXSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 1993 The Query Language Vizla Alfs T. Abstract- We define the query 
language Vizla, in which an- swers to queries are built up 
by pointing to 
representations of sets and functions in a conceptual 
model of the data base of an application, and to 
iconic identifiers 
of computational operators 
or control constructs. At its 
present stage of development the primary use of Vila is in 
the validation of conceptual models of information systems, 
but it is to 
be developed into a user inter- 
face to SF, a prototyping language for information 
and control systems. Moreover, it can 
be regarded as a visual programming 
language in its own right. As such it 
is based on abstract data 
tym Index Terms- Conceptual model, data type, information 
sys- tem, prototyping environment, 
query formulation, visual lan- 
guage- I. INTRODUCTION HE PRIMARY problem confronting 
developers of com- T puterized systems is the proper balancing 
of rigorous and 
unambiguous definition with user convenience. 
This problem extends from the specification of 
the system to 
its use. Our purpose here 
is to look at how this problem manifests itself 
in the formulation of 
queries to data base systems. 
We shall examine the problem, look briefly at past efforts at 
a solution, and give our own solution, which 
is the visual 
language Vizla. Although 
Vizla is quite general, the motivation 
for its development came from prototyping 
of information systems. This we see 
as its main application area. 
We shall assume that the data 
base of an information system consists 
of a collection of finite sets and functions. 
For example, an employee data base 
may consist 
of a set (of 
representations) of employees, and of 
finite functions from this 
set to auxiliary sets, such 
as (representations of) telephones, addresses, dates of birth, etc. Access to this data base 
is by look-up or by the application 
of some computational 
rule to 
the stored data. For example, 
a date of birth 
can be looked up 
directly, i.e., it is a primary datum, but 
an age is a 
secondary datum determined 
by a computation involving the date 
of birth and the current date. 
Look-up can be initiated by 
supplying a 
function name and 
an appropriate argument; 
a computational 
rule has to be specified explicitly or implicitly, and 
such specification is our 
main concern here. 
It has been suggested that 
two definitions of a system 
are needed. One describes 
it in terms that 
a client or user 
Manuscript received July 20, 1990; revised October 
1, 1991 and April 24, 
1992. This work was partially supported 
by SlzT (Swedish National Board of Technical 
Development) and AITRC (Applied Information Technologies 
Research Center). 
The author is with the Department of Computer Science, University 
of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15260, and SYSLAB, University of Stockholm, Sweden. IEEE Log Number 9211307. 
Berztiss 813 understands; the 
other relates to the needs of the 
software developer. Dieter Rombach 
[l] calls them 
C- (for client) and D- (for designer) specifications, respectively. 
An immediate problem is how to maintain consistency between 
the two 
specifications. Consistency can be guaranteed only by 
a formal 
proof or by the generation of 
the D-specification from the 
C-specification by correctness-preserving transformations. In 
either case this requires that the C-specification be expressed 
in a formal 
language, i.e., a language with 
formally defined 
syntax and semantics. But then 
one might try to 
make the C-specification executable, which 
means turning it into a 
prototype. Formal prototyping 
languages with a 
fair degree of client 
orientation have been developed 
(e.g., JSD [2], ERAE [3], INFOLOG [4], USE [5], SF [6], which are 
all briefly described 
in [7]). The prototype of an information system differs from 
its final version in that 
it may be inefficient, and may lack 
ancillary features such as prompt and help systems. However, 
the structure 
of the data base 
of the final system must be 
faithfully reflected 
in the prototype. 
The whole point of prototyping is that it allows the 
client to determine whether the 
data base 
of the system is adequate for answering 
all queries that are expected to 
be put to the system when 
it becomes operational. A facility for the formulation 
of queries must therefore be 
an integral component of 
an information system from its earliest development stages, and the query 
language has to satisfy 
formality requirements to no 
less extent than 
the prototyping language. Consequently, natural language 
is inappropriate, but, 
on the 
other hand, the formulation 
of queries as expressions in 
logic does 
not satisfy the requirement 
of client convenience. 
To take 
a simple example, consider 
a conference. Authors submit papers, but 
some authors 
may be prevented from 
attending the conference, 
and the presenter 
of a paper may then be different from an author. Consider now the query 
ﬁFind all presenters of papers who are not authors.ﬂ 
This query is ambiguous in that the term author may relate to 
four different classes of written material: 
a) the 
particular paper whose presentation is under discussion, 
b) any accepted 
paper, c) any submitted paper, or 
d) anything at all intended for publication. As a 
further illustration of the interpretation 
difficulties, suppose 
A presents paper 
X of which A is not the 
author. Let 
S be the set that 
is the answer to the query under 
interpretation a). We would put 
A in S. But now 
suppose that A is an author of paper Y, and also presents this paper. Should 
A still be a member of S? This is a 
variant of interpretation 
a) that we shall not pursue 
further. The ambiguity here has 
little to do with synonyms or other 
sources of linguistic ambiguity-it arises out of application- 1041-4347/93$03.00 0 1993 IEEE  r - 8 14 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 1993 dependent interpretation 
of components of the data base. 
The logical specifications 
of the answers to the query distinguish 
clearly between the four interpretations, but they are not 
exactly user-friendly: 
(c) (y13.r : ,r E ACC : y = Pres(z)} - (y13.r : s E PAP : y = Auth(z)}, (d) (yl3.z : .r E .4CC : g = Pres(z)} - AlJT. Here PAP is the set 
of papers submitted to the 
conference, ACC the subset 
of accepted papers, and 
AUT the general set 
of authors. Pres is a total function from 
ACC to attendees of 
the conference, and .4uth is a total set-valued function 
from PAP to the power-set 
of Sl*B, where the latter 
is the set 
of submitters of papers to the conference, 
a subset of AUT. We shall develop 
a visual representation 
of the data base 
in which the distinction between the four interpretations 
is reasonably well defined. 
The four queries are then easily 
formulated by pointing to parts of this representation. 
Our choice 
of functions rather than relations 
in the definition 
of data bases was made for 
the sake of uniformity. The concept of a function is basic to programming. In some contexts, such as functional programming or data 
abstraction, it is the dominant concept. Specifically our choice 
ensures that at a sufficiently high level 
of abstraction there 
is no difference between the response 
to a query. particularly when 
the response requires the 
use of a computational rule, 
and the evaluation of 
a function in conventional programming. 
In both instances arguments are supplied and 
values returned. Under 
this interpretation 
a query language should 
be able to deal with 
queries of arbitrary complexity, 
i.e., it should have the power 
of a general programming language. 
Section I1 gives a 
brief survey 
of visual query languages, and 
Section I11 introduces our 
languages SF and Vizla. Detailed 
discussion of the components of Vizla follows as Section IV. 
A rather complicated query 
is studied in Section V. Extensions are considered 
in Section VI, 
and our work 
summarized in 
Section VII. Although Vizla is not intended 
to be used 
as a general programming language, 
it does allow for 
queries of arbitrary complexity. We demonstrate its power by example: the Appendix presents 
a Vizla program for Dijkstra™s shortest 
path algorithm. 
11. A BRIEF HISTORY We shall not examine the entire spectrum 
of query languages because this has already been done 
in an 
outstanding way 
by Jarke and Vassiliou [SI. Instead we will adduce evidence that 
most users experience difficulties with textual query languages 
based on logic. This will lead 
us to support visual query 
languages. In general, humans prefer procedural over nonprocedural 
approaches to problem solving. Difficulties in the use 
of nonprocedural approaches, 
of which logical 
formulations are 
a particular example, have long been recognized. For 
exam- ple, students presented with 
a simple word problem made 
more mistakes in expressing the problem as 
a nonprocedural equation than 
in devising an algorithm for its 
solution [9]. Further, users have shown greater satisfaction with relational 
algebra (procedural) than with relational 
calculus (declarative) 
[ 101, [ll]. Difficulties with nonprocedural 
formulations affect reading as well as writing. Indeed, 
it has been necessary to 
provide English paraphrases 
of Gist specifications 
[ 121, and natural language paraphrasing is still needed when a 
query language has been given 
a semblance 
to a natural language, 
as is the case with SQL [13]. It seems that the most effective way to 
combine formality with understandability 
is by visual means. A visual query lan- 
guage based on a display of the structure 
of a data base 
holds the intuitive appeal 
of natural language, but, because 
a query is formulated by well-defined composition 
of components in the 
pictorial representation 
of the data base, the visual language 
can be as formal as logic. Numerous attempts have been made 
of defining visual query 
languages (see, e.g., (141-[21]), but the operators 
for the composition 
of the components of the pictorial representations have been rather primitive. 
Larson [22] provides a visual 
interface for query formulation 
that is more elaborate than the norm. Here 
the data base 
is modeled directly 
by an entity-relationship schema, and the user navigates through 
a visual representation 
of the schema. Operators for composing a 
query are selected from the syntax 
flow diagram of the query language. 
The example provided 
by Larson refers 
to a data base that 
models a 
university at 
which students take courses that bear numbers, 
and a course 
can have more than 
one section. 
In the example it is 
shown how one builds the query 
Get student where SectionNiimber 
= 3 arid CourseNumber = 177. The building blocks are the usual 
arithmetic operators, comparison operators, 
and the boolean operators 
ﬁnot,ﬂ ﬁor,ﬂ and ﬁand.ﬂ It appears though that the expressive power 
of the query language 
may not live up 
to the expectations 
of a sophisticated user. 
The resulting queries are 
in effect expressions in logic, the system merely 
guiding the user 
in the correct application 
of syntax. However, the entity-relationship 
diagram is a great help 
to the user. 
The query 
language of Kangassalo™s group at the University of Tampere [23] is 
based on similar principles. Here the 
query is constructed with the help 
of a visual conceptual 
model defined 
in the Concept-D language 
[24], and the 
system translates the query into 
SQL. As 
with Larson™s approach, 
standard arithmetic 
and logical operators are 
provided. In our investigation we 
start out with 
an approach similar 
to those of Larson and the Tampere 
group. Our 
intention,  BERZTISS: THE QUERY LANGUAGE VIZLA however, is to create an environment in which the potential 
for misunderstandings 
of the data base 
by its users is explicitly recognized, and the system 
is deliberately designed 
to take this 
into consideration. 
The design is also 
likely to facilitate the 
next steps in the research, 
one of 
which will be the construction 
of candidate queries by the system based on 
a minimal input 
by the user. 
Let us now turn 
to visual programming, 
This term has 
been used in 
many different senses, 
as indicated by the range 
of topics covered in 
a special 
issue of Computer on visual programming [25]: static and dynamic program visualization, 
displays of tabular forms, use 
of state 
transition diagrams, 
and graphic design tools. 
Our concern 
is a query language that 
has the computational 
power of a programming language. Hence the discussion here 
will be limited to graphic approaches to program development. 
In general, two approaches to program development have been 
taken. The earlier 
of the two, and perhaps 
still the more 
prevalent. has emphasized computation 
as a process. A more recent development puts 
emphasis on data. 
The distinction between the two approaches 
was analyzed by Parnas as earl! as 1972 [26], with an endorsement of the data-oriented 
approach. Under this approach, data are partitioned into types, 
\vhere each type 
is a set and 
operations on elements of the 
set. A program consists of the operations arranged into execution 
patterns by means of control constructs. 
Construction of programs 
by visual means has been confined 
to the 
process-oriented approach, and there have been 
some notable successes, 
in particular the conversion 
of Jackson System Development 
(JSD) diagrams 
to executable code in a variety of programming languages [27]. 
Prototyping of distributed systems is 
another area 
of success [28], [29]. To our knowledge. nothing comparable has been reported 
for the data-oriented approach. 
111. AS INTRODUCrlON TO SF AND VIZLA An important use of Vizla is in the validation 
of conceptual models of information systems: 
a conceptual schema is 
drawn, and users check that the information base represented 
by this schema is adequate for answering 
all queries that representa- 
tive users put 
to the system. 
If not, more 
components have to be 
added. This can be 
done in a paper-and-pencil mode, 
but our intention is to make Vizla the query 
language for 
SF, an executable specification language 
for information-control systems. We shall therefore 
start with an 
SF schema, and from it derive the diagram on which 
Vizla operates. An SF specification defines 
a collection of interacting mod- 
ules, where 
each module corresponds 
to a data type. 
An SF type consists of a universe of entities T, a finite set of interest S that consists of objects from T, and a collection of functions. For convenience we shall use 
T to denote both the type 
and its universe of entities. In an information system 
for a 
taxi company one type would 
encompass all automobiles ever built 
or to be 
built, but the corresponding set 
S would consists of automobiles the company either 
owns or has owned. 
The functions map from S or some subset of S to a type, a Cartesian product of types, or the power set 
of a type or of 
a Cartesian , 815 product, i.e., the value 
of a function may be an element, 
a tuple, or 
a set of elements or tuples. 
One of the problems faced 
by designers of languages for information systems concerns 
null values. For example, an 
employee may have no phone, although normally the employee 
will have 
a phone, or even several. In Daplex [30], the 
solution is to make all functions set-valued. Then, the value 
of the telephone number 
for our 
three cases would be the null 
set, a singleton set, or a set with more than 
one elements, respectively. This is an elegant solution 
to the problem 
of null values, but 
makes functional 
composition next 
to impossible. Another solution 
is to introduce explicit null values. 
Then, under composition, 
a function applied 
to a null value yields 
a null value, but interpretation of a function applied 
to a tuple containing a 
null value 
is complicated. In 
SF the last problem 
is avoided in that functions may map only from set 
S or some subset of 
S. Moreover, all SF functions are 
total. This is achieved in 
several ways. First, 
if functional composition is not an 
issue, the function can 
be made set-valued. 
Second, we have already seen that use 
of explicit null 
values does 
not create any problems in SF. The third solution 
is to use partitions of S. For example, a 
foreign student in the United 
States may not have been issued 
a Social Security number. 
The set of 
students is 
partitioned into 
subsets of students with and without 
a Social Security number, and the Social Security 
number function 
is defined on the former subset alone. 
Each SF type is described by a schema. We now give 
a schema definition 
of a small 
SF information base relating 
to the example 
of Section I. The set identifiers 
are abbrevia- tions: PERson, ATTendee, AUThor, SUBmitter, 
PAPer, GOUntries. Set PAP is partitioned into accepted papers 
(ACC) and papers that have 
not been accepted 
(NAC). Function Country defines the country 
of residence of 
a person, Length defines the number 
of pages in a submitted paper, the 
set-valued function 
Auth defines the authors 
of each paper, 
and Pres defines the presenter 
of each accepted paper. 
An ISA indicates type inheritance. For example, 
if X ISA Y, then the 
set of X is a 
subset of the set 
of Y, i.e., an element may be added 
to X only if it already belongs 
to Y. In a 
real-life example the type definitions would include 
a larger number 
of functions, as well as declarations of imported types 
and communication devices 
[31]. Note that 
some types, such as 
Integer (with set 
INT), are supplied 
by SF. TYPE: Person; SET PER; FUNCTIONS Country: PER-Countries; ENDTY PE: TYPE Attendee ISA Person; ENDTYPE; TYPE Author ISA Person; ENDTYPE; TYPE Submitter ISA Author; ENDTYPE; SET ATT; SET AUT; SET SUB;  816 IEEE TRASSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND 
DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 1993 Fig. 1. Type structure for the conference example TYPE Paper; SET PAP (SUBSETS: ACC, NAC); 
FUNCTIONS Length : PA P+lnteger; Auth: PAP+Submitter-set; 
Pres: ACC-Attendee; 
ENDTY PE; TYPE Countries; SET COU; ENDTYPE: Each type 
is the basis 
for a segment. In addition to the schema the segment defines events, which describe permissible 
changes to the sets and functions of 
the information base, 
and a control component, 
which allows SF events to be arranged into processes, 
allows the system 
to communicate with 
its environment, etc. Details can be found 
in [31]. If SF is used to define a prototype, then 
representations for the elements of 
the sets have 
to be selected. For example, a paper could be 
identified by 
a numerical 
code or by its title. The purpose of SF is to deal with data base changes 
and the control of processes. Basic SF functions can, 
of course, be referenced 
directly, i.e., one can find the set 
of authors of a particular paper. 
However, if the user needed to know all 
papers longer than 10 pages that have three or more authors, of which at least one lives in Canada, a means of defining the answer to this query 
has to be found. 
This is the purpose 
of Vizla. 
From an 
SF schema definition a 
user can easily create a type 
diagram such 
as Fig. 1 by listing the types 
of interest for a particular application. 
The diagram can be 
left as is. However, a user 
can examine the diagram and eliminate functions 
that are of no interest 
for the application. 
If the number of retained functions is not too large, the 
diagram can 
be redrawn with more structure shown, 
For Fig. 1 the result is the conceptual schema of Fig. 2, which displays also the 
Vizla operators. We shall refer to the representation of Fig. 2 in all that follows. Here a heavy 
arrow indicates 
ISA inheritance, heavy 
dashed arrows indicate the partitioning of a set 
into subsets, 
a light 
arrow stands for 
a set-valued function, and 
a dashed light arrow PLUS MINUS MULT DIV AND OR NOT UNION WTER DIFF SUBSET < s > 2 = f hQN MAX ALLOP NULL CONST SAW3 UNSAVE UPDATE FUNCTION INVERT COORD FILER SIZE lTERSTART ITEREND CONDSTART CONDENE 
START END 
+ Fig. 2. Type structure 
for an application and 
Vizla operators. for an element-valued function. 
The double circle 
on INT indicates that this is an infinite 
set. The schema of Fig. 2, because it clearly links presenters with 
accepted papers, suggests our first two interpretations of the query discussed in Section I to be the 
more natural. Moreover, there is a general mechanical procedure 
for distinguishing between these 
two interpretations. In the first instance one examines each member .7: of the subset 
of accepted papers 
in turn, findsPres(z) and Auth(z), and adds 
Pres(z) to the answer 
if Pres(z) $! Auth(z). In the second instance 
the set 
of all authors of accepted papers 
is subtracted from 
the set of 
all presenters. Because of the chain leading from 
accepted papers 
to papers in general, and via function 
Auth and the 
ISA to authors in general, the other 
two interpretations can be 
derived from the structure as well. 
As a general rule, whenever an ISA hierarchy or a subset partition is encountered, the possible ambiguity of a query should 
be investigated. 
The basic idea in Vizla is that by pointing to representations of functions, their domains and codomains, 
or subsets of the domains and codomains, 
as well as various operator symbols, 
new sets are assembled in a workspace. For instance, pointing 
to node ACC brings the 
set of accepted papers into 
the workspace. If Pres is pointed to next, each accepted paper is replaced in the workspace by its presenter. Since a person 
may present 
more than one paper, the workspace 
actually contains a bag rather than a 
set. A bag differs from 
a set in that elements may be 
duplicated-here the bag will contain as many elements as the set ACC. Since all presenters of papers are persons, function 
Coun,try is applicable to our bag of presenters. Hence, by pointing next to Country, each  BERZTISS: THE QUERY LANGUAGE VIZLA 817 presenter is replaced by his or her country 
of residence. Now, 
suppose that after pointing 
to ACC we point out Auth instead of Prps. Then each accepted paper 
is replaced by its set of authors, i.e., the workspace becomes 
a collection of sets. Pointing to Country now has no effect, because 
Country maps from individual elements rather than 
from sets. 
Sets constructed in this manner can 
be saved as explicitly or 
implicitly named entities. 
Let us now construct the 
sets that define the answers 
to the query 
of Section I under interpretations 
a) and b). 
We shall first find presenters who 
are not authors 
of any accepted 
paper. This requires the 
following sequence of actions, where 
-+ stands for ﬁpoint to,ﬂ and WM stands 
for a 
Workspace Monitor that displays 
an identifier of the current contents 
of the workspace: 
1) --+ START [Start 
of retrieval session] 
2) - .4CC [WM displays ACC] 3) + Pres [WM displays Pres(ACC)] 4) - SAVE [User names this 
set X; WM unchanged] 5) - ACC[WM displays ACC] 6) Auth[WM displays Auth(ACC)] 7) -+ ALLOP 8) -+ UNION [WM displays UNION(Auth(ACC))] 9) -+ SAVE [System names this set 
*9; WM unchanged] 
10) + X [WM displays XI 11) -+ DIFF 12) -+ *9 [WM displays DIFF(X, *9)] We shall refer to 
a sequence of actions such as the above 
as a querying process. 
Actions 2 
and 3 of our querying process 
identify ACC as the set 
of entities for which the value 
of Pres is to be determined, and bring the set of presenters into the 
workspace. The SAVE of Action 4, which is a 
Vizla operation, preserves this 
set, and displays 
a circle representing this set 
next to the schema of Fig. 2. A SAVE also prompts the user: 
the user 
may give an explicit name to the set, 
as is done here, 
or the naming could be 
left to the system, which would use the 
number of the operation 
by which the set 
was created for its name (as 
in Action 9). The domain of the set-valued 
function Auth is the set 
PAP. However, by pointing to its subset ACC (Action 5), only the collection of the 
sets of authors 
of the accepted papers 
is built up 
by Action 6. Actions 7 
and 8 replace the collection 
of sets by a single set that 
is the distributed union 
of the individual 
sets (UNION 
and ALLOP are Vizla operations; the latter will be discussed in Section IV). 
Actions 10-12 find the set difference 
of presenters and authors of accepted papers 
(DIFF is a 
Vizla operation). Note again that 
pointing to 
a node and then 
to a function symbol builds a bag rather than 
a set in the workspace. 
A bag 
can be turned 
into a set by, 
for example, application 
of UNION. The rules for 
bag to set conversion 
are too technical to be discussed further 
here. As we noted above, the 
Workspace Monitor 
does not display the actual 
contents of the workspace, but an identifier 
of the contents, 
e.g., the text 
string UNION(Auth(ACC)). A discussion of more advanced display features can be found in 
Section VI. The querying process defined above 
is tied too closely to the structure of set definition b) 
of Section I, and is a rather trivial 1 illustration of the 
general observation that 
a new language 
requires the development 
of a new programming 
style. To help this development we have introduced 
a fair number 
of examples throughout. A more efficient querying process now 
follows: 1) -+ START 2) -+ ACC 3) -+ Auth 4) -+ ALLOP 5) -+ UNION 6) -+ SAVE 7) + ACC 8) -+ Pres 9) --f DIFF 10) + *6 Next let us build up the set 
of presenters who are not authors 
of the particular paper, 
as required by interpretation a) of Section I. For this we need 
an iterative construct because we 
have to establish for each accepted paper individually that 
its presenter is not one of its authors. The sequence of operations: 
1) -+ START 2) -+ NULL [WM 
displays NULL] 
3) -+ SAVE [User names this 
X; WM displays NULL] 
4) -+ ITERSTART 5) -+ ACC[WM displays EACC] 6) -+ SAVE [User names this 
PI 7) -+ Auth [WM displays 
Auth(•ACC)] 8) -+ SAVE [User names this 
Y] 9) -+ P [WM displays PI 10) -+ Pres[WM displays Pres(P)] 11) -+ DIFF [WM 
displays DIFF(Pres(P), Y)] 12) -+ Y [WM displays Y] 13) -+ UNION 14) -+ X [WM displays UNION(Y,X)] 15) -+ UPDATE 16) -+ X 17) -+ ITEREND Here Actions 2 
and 3 create the empty set 
X: Action 2 initiates the work 
space to a null object, and, 
since the workspace is to contain a set, this is the null 
set; Action 3 is used to give 
it the name 
X. Actions 4 
and 17 define the 
scope of an iteration. Iteration 
is always 
over the elements of a set or 
a bag, and Action 5 designates this set or bag. Moreover, 
each time this action 
is reached in the iterative process, 
a new element from the set or bag 
is selected nondeterministically, 
and this element 
is placed as the current iteration element 
into the workspace. Action 
6 saves the iteration element 
as P. Functions are always 
applied to the elements found 
in the workspace. Here the workspace holds 
a single element, which 
represents a paper, and 
Auth applied to 
it produces the set 
of its authors. Action 
8 saves this set 
as Y. Actions 9 and 10 put the presenter 
of paper P into the workspace, but the 
set subtraction 
of Actions 11 and 12 removes it in case the 
presenter is also an author. Note that in Vizla an 
element is 
regarded as a singleton set whenever the context requires 
this. Actions 13 and 14 build up the answer 
set, and actions 15 and 16 overwrite set 
X with the current contents 
of the workspace. 
 818 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 1993 The set or bag 
of a Vizla iteration has 
to be finite. Conse- quently, iteration over 
a doubly circled set may 
not take place. 
The set or 
bag may be changed 
during the iteration, 
to allow for computations 
such as transitive closure. Since the 
system takes over after the construction of the 
loop body, which 
is also its initial 
interactive execution, ideally the user should 
be assured that the system-driven iteration will eventually 
terminate. Although termination 
of a Vizla iteration process is not guaranteed, this 
does not matter so much because the 
iteration set or 
bag may at 
all times be replaced 
by the object NULL, which causes early exit from the loop. 
On exit from the loop the iteration set 
or bag is 
restored to its original composition. This approach is preferable to the introduction 
of an ﬁexitﬂ operator because under 
our approach exit from 
the loop is 
uniformly from the 
first action of the 
loop body. 
IV. THE COMPONENTS OF VIZLA A query language causes 
operations to be performed 
on data that already exist 
in a data base. 
Vizla provides operations for 
numerical and boolean data types. For numerical data they 
are the 
four standard operations (PLUS, MINUS, MULT, 
and DIV), and for boolean data the 
operators are OR, AND, and 
NOT. Operator MINUS can 
be binary or unary (under the 
latter interpretation 
it changes the sign 
of a numerical entity). 
Moreover, for 
any data type based 
on a totally ordered 
set, one has comparison 
operators (<, 5, >, >), and the MIN and 
MAX operations. For all data types there 
is equality (=) and nonequality (f). Recall that 
Vizla is an interface to the prototyping language 
SF. An SF specification defines 
finite sets of abstract objects, and finite functions in terms 
of such objects. However, when an SF specification is converted into a 
prototype system, representations of the abstract 
objects have to be defined, and 
these are numbers, booleans, 
character strings, or tuples of the 
above. These data types are 
well understood. For operations on 
sets Vizla provides union, intersection, 
and set subtraction. The subset predicate 
is also provided. There is no need for 
a separate 
membership predicate. 
Suppose we wanted to determine whether 
an element e belongs to a set S. Since the element 
can be interpreted as a singleton set when 
the context 
warrants it, e C S is legitimate usage. 
41 the operations discussed above, with the exception 
of the NOT and the unary MINUS, 
are binary, and, 
if the binary operations are commutative and associative, they can 
be applied in a distributed sense to all elements of a set, e.g., 
addition applied 
to (6, 8, 9, 11) gives 34. Such operations 
are addition and multiplication, the MIN and MAX, the 
AND and OR, and set union and intersection. Instead of 
creating a 
distributed operator for each 
of the above, we introduce 
the functional ALLOP that takes 
for its two operands an operator and a set. The 
operator is to be applied 
to the set distributively. 
Thus we have I ALLOP(PLUS; (6, 8, 9, 11)) = 34, , If sets of ALLOP(op; S) is the null 
set, then ALLOP returns the unity element 
of op. A more detailed description 
of ALLOP can be found 
in [32]. In Vizla the set on which 
ALLOP is 
to Fig. 3. operate is always 
the workspace, and 
one merely points 
to ALLOP and to the appropriate operator. 
The result overwrites the workspace. Moreover, 
ALLOP may be used 
in Vizla with 
unary operators as well: unary 
MINUS and NOT is 
then applied to every 
element of the workspace. Another general facility is NULL, 
which generates the null 
set. We have been pointing out that 
an object can function 
as an element and 
as a singleton set. The double interpretation applies also to null sets, but is somewhat more 
complicated. The null set 
is the unity element 
of set union. 
We shall therefore interpret 
it (in its guise 
of an ﬁelementﬂ) as the unity of the OR in boolean expressions (false), and of 
PLUS in arithmetic expressions 
(zero). In string comparisons 
it is to be interpreted as the null string. 
A constant can be 
created by pointing to the operator CONST. The user is then prompted to type 
in the constant. 
This constant becomes the contents 
of the workspace. 
Sometimes it is necessary to order data, and Vizla 
allows for this by providing 
sequences in addition 
to sets. The form of the sequence icon in 
a display of the operations is 
as shown in Fig. 
3. The two 
halves of the rectangle indicate 
the head (on the left) and tail (on the right) 
of the sequence. The circled symbols stand for push (+) and pop 
(-). Thus, to convert the 
sequence S from 2678 to 6782 we go through the 
operations + circled minus 
--+ left rectangle -+ S --+ circled plus 
--+ right rectangle 
-+ S. The first three pointing 
actions change 
S from its original configuration to 
one in which its leftmost element has been 
removed. The operation is thus a mapping 
from sequences to sequences. However, there 
is the side effect that the 
removed element 
ends up in the workspace. 
The next series of actions pushes down the 
contents of the workspace 
at the right end 
of S. An empty 
sequence is 
created by NULL, but it cannot be identified 
as a sequence 
at that stage. 
This object becomes a sequence when 
the first push operation 
is performed on it. Pointing to a sequence 
without first defining a sequence 
operation brings the 
sequence into the workspace 
as an unordered bag. 
A unary Vizla function SIZE returns the number of 
elements of a set or 
bag that is in the workspace. 
Thus, in terms of the authors and presenters 
example, the number 
of accepted papers is found by pointing 
to ACC of Fig. 2, which brings 
 - r BERZTlSS THE QUERY LANGUAGE VIZLA this set into 
the workspace, 
and then 
to SIZE, which replaces 
the workspace with 
a count of the accepted papers. 
Since all SF functions are 
total, this count 
is also 
the cardinality 
of the function 
Pres. If SIZE is 
applied distributively, 
i.e., in conjunction with ALLOP, 
to a workspace consisting 
of individual elements, 
each element is 
replaced by 1; if it is applied to a collection of sets or bags, 
each set or bag 
is replaced by its size. When we speak of the total number 
of authors of accepted papers, again there 
is more than 
one interpretation. Under 
one, if Jones is 
an author 
of three papers, 
Jones contributes three 
times to the 
total. Under another, 
Jones is 
counted just once. 
The following sequence 
of pointing actions gives the 
total under the 
first interpretation: 1) - -4CC [WM displays 
ACC] 2) -+ -4uth [WM displays Auth(ACC)] 3) - ALLOP 4) - SIZE [WM 
displays SIZE(Auth(ACC))] 5) - ALLOP 6) - PLUS [WM 
displays PLUS(SIZE(Auth(ACC)))] 819 1) 4 FUNCTION 2) -+ NAC 3) --+ Auth [WM displays Auth : NAC+ SUB] The + indicates that Auth is a 
set-valued function. 
A filter may be applied to 
a set that 
is to be brought into the 
workspace. The filter is a 
boolean expression, and 
only those elements of the set 
for which the expression 
is true enter the workspace. Suppose we were to extract 
from ATT just those 
attendees whose names begin with 
B. This set is constructed as follows: 1) --+ FILTER [WM 
displays FILTER:] 2) -+ 2 [WM displays FILTER: * 2 - ] 3) -+ CONST [User types 
ﬁBﬂ; WM displays FILTER: 4) -+ AND [WM displays 
FILTER: (* 2 ﬁBﬂ) AND] 
5) -+ < [WM displays FILTER: 
(* 2 ﬁBﬂ) AND 
(* < - )] 6) -+ CONST [User types 
ﬁCﬂ; WM displays FILTER: 7) ---f ATT [WM displays 
ATT 1 (* 2 ﬁBﬂ) AND * 2 ﬁBﬂ] (* 2 ﬁBﬂ) AND (* < ﬁCﬂ)] (* < ‚‚@™)I After Actions 
1 and 2 the workspace contains a 
collection of SetS. one set 
Of authors for each accepted paper. 
NOW, if we were to apply SIZE directly to the workspace, the 
workspace would be replaced by a count of these sets, i.e., 
the number 
of accepted papers. 
We therefore modify 
SIZE with ALLOP, Action 1 defines what 
follows as a filter, and Action 7 indicates the set to which the 
filter is to be applied. 
The filter is understood to have 
the form 
(* 2 ﬁBﬂ) A (* < ﬁCﬂ) which causes each set in the workspace to be replaced 
by its cardinality. Application of 
ALLOP and PLUS adds 
the cardinalities, thus determining the total count 
of authors. This count under the 
second interpretation is given by 1) + ACC [WM displays 
ACC] 2) Auth [WM displays Auth(ACC)] 4) -+ UNION [WM displays UNION(Auth(ACC))] 
5) -+ SIZE [WM 
displays SIZE(LJNION(Auth(ACC)))] The remaining Vizla 
operations relate to control. 
The opera- tion START initiates 
a retrieval session, and END indicates its 
completion. We have already discussed SAVE 
and UPDATE, and ITERSTART and ITEREND. Operation 
UNSAVE can be used to remove sets from the temporary data base 
of the retrieval session. This is done 
by pointing to UNSAVE, and 
then to the circle that represents the set to be removed. 
Suppose now that 
some action or 
sequence of actions is 
to take place only 
if a boolean condition 
is true. This is indicated by the definition of the boolean condition, followed 
by delimiters CONDSTART and 
CONDEND. An example of use will be given 
in the next 
section. Let us consider 
the function 
Auth restricted to papers that have not been accepted. First we have to construct 
the restricted function. Pointing to 
NAC and then to 
Auth of Fig. 2 would produce a collection of 
the sets 
of authors of papers in NAC, but we want a 
set of ordered pairs 
of the form 
3) --f ALLOP I by the sequence of actions, where the actions 
are bracketed An SF function has 
a single 
set for its domain, 
but the 
codomain may be a set, a Cartesian product of sets, or a power set 
of the above. We now extend the 
filter concept to 
n-tuples. To take a simple example, 
let us find Pres restricted 
to presenters of papers whose names 
begin with A. 
One way 
of obtaining this set 
is as 
follows: 1) -+ FILTER [WM displays FILTER:] 
2) + COORD [User types 21 3) ---f < [WM displays 
FILTER: 4) -+ CONST [User 
types ﬁBﬂ; WM displays FILTER: 
<1, * < ﬁBﬂ >] 5) -+ FUNCTION 6) -+ ACC 7) -+ Pres [WM displays 
Pres: ACC -+ ATT I <1, * < ﬁBﬂ>] <1, * < - >] The filter is applied to function Pres, which is a 
set of ordered 
pairs of the form 
< paper, presenter 
>. Action 2 indicates 
that the 
filter is to be applied to coordinate 
2 of the pair, 
and Action 3 that the constraint 
is to have the 
form of a ﬁless than.ﬂ The Workspace Monitor 
displays an ordered pair 
in which the 1 as its first coordinate is 
interpreted as saying that coordinate 1 is not affected 
by the filter, and the 
second coordinate is shown 
as * < -, where the underscore 
stands for a 
value that the user 
is to supply. 
This value is supplied by Action 4, and the 
filter is now defined: 
it is to let through only those pairs 
belonging to function Pres in which the 
second < paper, set 
of its authors > To get this 
set, use has to be made 
of the Vizla 
operator FUNCTION. The 
function is then generated in 
the workspace 
by the sequence of actions coordinate is less 
than ﬁB,ﬂ i.e., begins with ﬁA.ﬂ 
If a constraint were defined for coordinate 1 as well, then an ordered pair 
would pass through the 
filter only if both its coordinates 
were simultaneously to satisfy their respective constraints. 
This interpretation generalizes to n-tuples. For 
example, if the same 1  820 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE 
AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 1993 filter were applied 
to a quadruple, then the display after Action 
4 would be FILTER: 
< 1, * < "B", 3, 4 >. Next consider the finding 
of the inverse 
of a function. In SF, functions are always 
total, and the domain 
of a function is a set, 
but the codomain may be 
a set, a 
Cartesian product of 
sets, or a power set 
of the above. Consider 
our function Auth. The inverse of this function 
as defined in mathematics would 
be a map from 
the collection of 
sets of authors that defines the 
range of Auth for a 
given domain 
(PAP, or some subset of 
PAP) to this particular 
domain. In SF and Vizla, 
on the other 
hand, the inverse 
of this function returns, 
for each author in the 
distributed union 
of the range of the 
function, the set 
of papers to which the author has contributed. Consider the function 
{<P1, {Jones, Brown} >.<P2. {Brown} >,<P3, {Jones} >} In mathematics its inverse would consist of three ordered pairs 
which would differ from the function 
shown above 
merely by having their coordinates reversed. Moreover, 
if Brown had been the author 
of P3 as 
well, the function would have 
no inverse (a function cannot contain 
two pairs with the 
same first coordinate). The 
SF and Vizla 
inverse is {<Jones. {Pl, P3} >, <Brown, {Pl, P2} >} Suppose the codomain 
of a function is a 
power set 
of triples. In this instance the inverse provides each triple 
in the distributed 
union of the range 
of the function with 
an image. We also need a facility for restricting the papers returned 
by the inverse 
of .-luth to just the accepted ones. 
The authors of accepted papers are found 
by the sequence of actions + ACC + Auth. The form of this sequence suggested 
to us that the required 
inverse should 
be constructed by the following sequence 
of actions: + I.VI-ERT + ACC -+ Auth -+ SUB. Operator INVERT 
always expects two sets 
to be indicated, 
one on each side of the function 
to be inverted. Here 
ACC and SUB are the 
two sets, and Auth is used to find the set 
of authors of accepted papers. 
Then, for 
each author 
of at least 
one accepted paper, 
all the accepted papers by this author are 
found. Suppose that set 
SUBhad been partitioned 
into subsets 
of submitters living in the United 
States (US) and not living in 
the United 
States (NUS). Now the 
sequence of actions + INVERT -+ ACC -+ Auth + NUS finds the set of authors 
of accepted papers 
as before, but this 
set is next intersected with 
NUS. Then all the accepted papers 
are found 
for each 
author belonging to the intersection. 
The order of the two sets is 
important, the domain 
of the function 
coming first. This is 
to avoid ambiguity when both indicated 
sets are subsets 
of the one set. 
V. A MORE COMPLICATED QUERY 
The fundamental objective for 
Vizla is the construction 
of a set in the workspace. For the 
examples of Section 111 this was straightforward-a function was applied to all elements of its domain or 
a restriction of the domain. 
At the end of Section 
IV we introduced the INVERT operator as 
a means for dealing 
with more complicated queries. 
We shall now 
deal with one such query: 
find presenters of papers 
who live in Canada and 
who present papers that have more than 
two authors or are 
more than ten 
pages long. Note again that 
we are not dealing 
with a normalized relational data base--our data are functions, 
and the functions may be set-valued. 
Let us 
first find accepted papers that are more than ten pages 
long or have more than two authors. 
The sequence 
of actions + ACC -+ Length would return 
just a bag 
of integers, but, as discussed earlier, 
Vizla can be used 
to define inverses of functions. The actions 
1) -+ START 2) + INVERT 3) -+ ACC 4) -+ Length 5) -+ INT [WM displays INV(Length(ACC)) WRT find the inverse of 
Length, i.e., for each 
length value the set 
of accepted papers 
of this length 
is returned. However, 
we are interested only 
in papers that have length greater than 
10. This restriction can be imposed by 
means of a filter-we replace the last action shown 
above by INTI 5) + FILTER [WM displays 
FILTER:] 6) + > [WM displays FILTER: 
* > -1 7) -+ CONST [User types 
10; WM displays FILTER: 
* > 8) + INT [WM 
displays INV(Length(ACC)) WRT 
INT I The collection of sets of papers now in 
the workspace is then collapsed into a single 
set, and the set saved 
as P: 101 (* > 10)l 9) -+ ALLOP 10) -+ UNION [WM displays UNION(previous display)] 
11) -+ SAVE [User types PI Next the papers with the appropriate number 
of authors is found. Because 
function Auth is set-valued, we have to iterate: 12) -+ NULL [WM 
displays NULL] 
13) + SAVE 14) -+ ITERSTART 15) + ACC [WM displays EACC] 16) -+ SAVE 17) + Auth [WM displays 
Auth(•ACC)] 18) -+ SIZE [WM 
displays SIZE(Auth(•ACC))] 19) + > [WM displays SIZE(Auth(EACC)) > ] 20) + CONST [User types 
2; WM displays 21) + CONDSTART 22) -+ *16 [WM displays *16] 23) + UNION 24) -+ P[WM displays UNION(*16, P)] SIZE(Auth(EACC)) > 21  BERZTISS: THE 
QUERY LANGUAGE VELA 25) + UPDATE 26) + P 27) -i CONDEND 28) -+ ITEREND Set P consisted of papers more than 
10 pages long. Now to 
this set have been added papers 
with more than 
two authors 
(if they were not already in 
P). Finally the 
presenters of these 
papers (the papers are still 
in the workspace) are 
to be 
found, but only 
those presenters 
who live in Canada: 
29) -+ Pres [WM displays Pres(UNION(*16, P))] 30) + SAVE 31) + INVERT 32) - *30 33) - Country 34) - CONST [User types ﬁCanadaﬂ; 
WM displays 
35) - SAVE [User types ANSWER] INV(Country(*30)) WRT ﬁCanadaﬂ] 36) - END VI. ADDITIONAL FEATURES 
Perhaps the most important feature needed 
in a Vizla environment is a 
display of 
a trace of 
the pointing actions that have already been 
made, together with the corresponding 
workspace displays. 
A Vizla system can, of course, indicate 
syntactic errors, 
e.g., when one points to CONDSTART, but 
the workspace 
does not contain a boolean value. 
The removal of such 
a fault may require undoing 
several steps 
in the Vizla program, and 
a Vizla system should assist 
in this backtracking. 
Moreover, a failure of the program may have been caused by 
a fault far removed from the point 
at which failure 
is detected. Although the suitability 
of Vizla for programming in general is 
in doubt, so that a program of 73 actions, as in the Appendix, is unlikely to arise in practice, the retrieval 
sequence of Section V still comes to 36 actions, and failure detected 
at Action 35 may be 
due to a fault in Action 10, say. Note that the retrieval 
of papers longer than 
10 pages ends with Action 
11, and that 
there may be no 
need to 
undo any of the 
steps that follow Action 11. This means that there has to 
be an editing facility that can be applied 
to any part of 
a Vizla program. 
Also, we have given no attention to the display 
of elements of sets or functions. 
Such a 
display facility would be 
essen- tially a test device. 
In testing the conceptual adequacy 
of a model or the appropriateness of a querying process 
one would commonly use a small 
test data base, and the 
sets generated 
by a querying 
process would be 
small enough 
to be displayed fully. Large 
sets can be given 
a partial representation. All 
SF data are ultimately numbers, text strings, 
or truth values, and 
these data are totally ordered. 
Suppose a 
set has 
352 elements. A partial display 
of this set 
shows, say, 
the lowest ten 
elements under the total order, 
then the 
count 332 enclosed in a box, 
then the 
10 highest elements. 
The display unit 
for a bag is a 
value and the number of 
occurrences of the value. For instance, 
the bag 
of truth values {T, 
F, T, T, 
F, F, T, F, T, T, 
T} has 
the representation [F, 41, [T, 71. An alternative 
is to scroll the 
set of values past a window when the size of the set 
is too 
large for display of the entire set at once. I 82 1 A d ™b Fig. 4. Vizla as a programming language 
could benefit by having 
a two-way branching facility. Although such a 
facility can be 
simulated by means of our CONDSTART/CONDEND feature, 
it may be 
convenient to introduce explicit branching. 
The branching facility requires operators BRANCH 
and CLOSE. A branch point 
is set up by defining 
a boolean condition and 
then pointing to 
BRANCH. This creates 
the display 
shown in Fig. 4. Now, by pointing to either of 
the two lines originating from 
the root, one of the branches is 
selected for development. 
After the sequence 
of actions for 
this branch 
has been generated, the 
branch is closed off by pointing to CLOSE. 
The numbers of the actions 
bound to 
the branch are added to 
the display. Any 
branch that has not been closed 
off can be selected next 
for development. No 
example of branching is given here. 
Another useful 
feature is a 
facility for reducing the 
arity of a set (or bag) 
of tuples in 
the workspace. This could be done 
by an operator REDUCE. Suppose the workspace consists 
of 5-tuples. The sequence 
of actions 1) --t REDUCE 2) -+ COORD (user types 1) 3) 3 REDUCE 4) --+ COORD (user types 
2) replaces each quintuple < XI, x2, x3, x4,55 > with the triple 
< 52,x4,25 >. Note that 
the second reduction 
is on the original 
coordinate 3 
rather than 
2 because the 
first reduction has 
already transformed the 
quintuples into 
quadruples. In addition, we have not 
yet considered input and 
output, and the modularization 
of Vizla programs. 
VII. DISCUSSION 
The features introduced in 
Section VI have been given 
low priority because 
all our practical applications have been 
limited to conceptual design 
of information systems-the determination of whether the 
conceptual model of an appli- 
cation is adequate for 
the answering of all anticipated queries, the determination of 
which functions should be 
regarded as primary data, and 
the determination of what form these functions should take. 
For example, in considering faculty and courses, 
our primary function could be the 
element-valued function Instructor, from courses to faculty, or the set-valued function 
CoursesTaught, from faculty to courses. With simplicity the 
guiding criterion we would give preference to 
an element- valued function. However, the defining of retrieval 
sequences may well show 
that the set-valued function 
is the more 
appropriate primary function. 
 a22 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 1993 Another example relates to ages of persons. Many 
examples in books and papers 
on conceptual modeling 
show Age as an attribute 
of Person. However, when we experiment with 
attributes that could be used 
to define each other, we 
find that Age can be defined 
in terms of the functions DateO f Birth and DateNow, where the 
latter returns the current date. 
Now, since the current date 
changes each day, Age also has to change. 
The appropriate primary datum 
is therefore the 
unchanging DateOf Birth. Moreover, this experimentation 
also shows 
that the subtraction 
in Age = DateO f Birth - DateNow has to be approached with 
care. Depending on 
its exact interpretation we could obtain 
AgeLastBirthday, AgeNearestBirthday, or AgeNeztBirthday, all of which are used 
in insurance practice, but with obviously different 
effect on insurance premiums. 
Next consider the 
statement ﬁAll Swedes receive support 
payments for 
their children.ﬂ 
To understand this statement 
and its effect in an 
information system, one 
needs precise 
definitions of ﬁSwedeﬂ and ﬁchildﬂ for 
this particular context. 
For argument™s 
sake, in this context, 
ﬁSwedeﬂ could refer to 
a resident of Sweden of at least six months™ 
standing. We might find, however, that 
our conceptual model 
contains no data relating to 
a person™s period 
of residence. These examples show 
that Vizla can be used very effectively 
in a paper-and-pencil mode to check the 
completeness and convenience of the conceptual model 
of an application, such as that of Fig. 2, but even 
at this level 
of usage Vizla is still experimental. Nevertheless, a few 
general observations can be made. Most importantly, as we already pointed out 
before, we see its primary use 
in retrieval of information from functional data bases 
during the prototyping of information 
systems. Hence the shortest path algorithm 
of the Appendix 
is not a typical application 
of Vizla. But 
it does show 
that Vizla has sufficient expressive power to deal with fairly complicated 
problems, and closer examination of the program 
shows that Vizla should not be dismissed out 
of hand as a general 
programming language. Although the listing 
of the 73 actions is rather long, the program 
is generated with just 
43 pointing actions to data representations, 
24 keystrokes for defining saved data objects, another 
4 keystrokes for indicating that 
in four cases 
the system 
is to assign identifiers to saved data, 
and 30 pointing actions to 
Vizla operators (or 
30 keystrokes if we had a special keyboard). 
Moreover, the 
general sequence operations 
could be re- 
placed by specialized stack or queue operations, 
where each 
stack or queue would be represented 
by a two-component symbol, and pointing to 
one or the 
other of the components would result in a push from or a pop to the workspace. 
This modification would reduce the 
actions in the program 
of the Appendix to 
65. Of course, one has to be 
careful to balance economy 
of concepts against the wish to have 
shorter programs. 
Therefore, any streamlining, such 
as the 
replacement of the general sequence 
with specializations, has 
to be postponed until practical experience has been gained. 
The only Vizla operations for 
which we have designed 
an iconic representation are the 
sequence operations, 
and we have 
taken over standard mathematical symbols for 
the comparison operators. For the 
other operations 
individual users 
can design iconic representations with which they 
feel most comfortable. 
For example, as regards set intersection, 
some users may prefer 
the symbol 
n, others the textual icon 
INTER, still others might prefer a Venn diagram of two intersecting sets 
in which the 
intersection is shaded. What does Vizla achieve? The ISA relation and subset 
partitions in a schema diagram 
alert a user to the potential 
of domain-conditioned ambiguity. 
Since such ambiguity 
is entirely dependent 
on how a user interprets the terminology 
of a particular domain, this is as far as we can go. Also, 
a Vizla schema diagram 
merely shows functions, 
and leaves their implementation open. For 
example, the sunrise 
function for Pittsburgh 
for the year 
1933, which is a 
function from 
365 dates to times of day, could 
be implemented as a computational 
rule (a function 
subprogram) or as a table. A Vizla user 
does not have to know which implementation has been 
adopted. As regards user convenience, 
the Vizla workspace concept allows a user to 
separate querying processes 
into sequences 
of small steps, save 
intermediate results 
of such sequences, 
and combine the intermediate results 
into final results. 
Such a divide-and-conquer 
approach is necessary because Vizla 
allows ad hoc queries 
of arbitrary complexity, leading 
to querying processes 
as complicated as the function 
subprogram for the Pittsburgh sunrises. 
This differentiates Vizla 
from conventional query languages. 
The latter, which are ultimately based on first-order predicate calculus, cannot 
deal with tran- 
sitive closure of a relation [33]. 
This applies also 
to the visual query languages of Larson [22] and the Tampere 
group [23]. Vizla iteration 
solves the transitive closure problem. 
The first priority in our 
future work is to be given to 
a study of the optimization 
of queries and Vizla programs. Straight- forward translation of the pointing 
actions into code can 
result in levels 
of efficiency so low as to be acceptable only 
for prototypes. Although 
it would be feasible to 
develop efficient Vizla programs, they might have 
to be so complicated that 
the edge 
Vizla programming has over textual programming 
as regards convenience would be 
lost. Consequently we shall look to mechanized preformance-enhancing transformations as 
a means of improving efficiency. This work 
could be based 
on a study of the representations generated 
by the Workspace 
Monitor. On the negative 
side, it must be noted that the construction 
of a query sequence by pointing actions need not appeal to 
all classes of users. Also, the 
36 actions for one of our queries 
seem an excessive number. 
One possibility for 
cutting down 
on the number 
of operations would be to present the 
system with a pseudo-query. Some work on pseudo-queries has been done by Motro [34], 
who refers to the 
components of a pseudo- query as tokens. For 
the examples 
of Section 111 the tokens 
of the pseudo-query would be the set 
of presenters and the 
complement of the set 
of authors. The tokens could serve 
as a base from which the 
system would construct candidate 
queries for the user™s inspection. 
The user would then select 
the proper query from the set 
of alternatives prepared by the system. It should be possible to translate queries freely from one 
representational form to another. When 
a querying 
process  BEFZTISS: THE QUERY LANGUAGE VIZLA 
Source b Fig. 5. Type structure for the shortest paths problem. is defined in terms of pointing actions, 
the representation 
generated by the Workspace 
Monitor could 
be used to con- struct a 
corresponding logical expression as 
well. The logical expression should in turn be expressible as a natural 
language paraphrase. Indeed, experience with the paraphrasing could 
lead to 
the definition of a restricted 
subset of natural lan- guage which would give more structure to the pseudo-queries 
discussed in the preceding paragraph. Here we have been 
looking at queries formulated during 
the prototyping stage in the development 
of an information system. 
We have therefore required 
strict discipline in the formulation 
of queries. During the operation 
of an information 
system the 
perspective changes somewhat. 
The concern is no longer a 
test of 
completeness of the data base, but the extraction of in- formation needed to run an enterprise. Motro has investigated ways of making an information system 
respond to a user™s needs when the user has 
no proper understanding of the data base [35]. or even of his or her own information needs 
[36]. A query facility based 
on a visualized 
conceptual model 
of an 
information system seems very appropriate for dealing with these issues. 
APPENDIX VULA AS A PROGRAMMING LANGUAGE The sequences of pointing actions 
in Vizla 
do not actually define queries. Instead, sets are constructed 
that contain the data the user 
wants to see. If the sequences of pointing actions 
were converted into programs, 
these programs could 
be opti- mized and saved for 
reuse. The preservation of pointing actions 
as programs 
is important for Vizla as a data 
base retrieval language, but it also makes Vizla a general 
programming language. Our example is Dijkstra™s algorithm for shortest paths from 
a single source 
[37]. We emphasize that Vizla is not intended for programming in general, particularly not for anything 
as complicated as 
Dijkstra™s algorithm. However, 
this application serves as 
a useful 
demonstration: if Vizla can cope with Dijkstra™s algorithm, then 
it should be 
able to cope 
with queries of arbitrary complexity. The data base for 
this application consists of the sets 
and functions shown in Fig. 5, where we have used a representational 
style popular for abstract data types (see, 
e.g., [38]). In Fig. 5, N is the set of nodes of the digraph, and N-set is its power set. 
For each node 
n, the function 
Succ identifies the set of nodes at which arcs originating 
at n terminate, and 
the 1 823 gives the length associated 
with the arc as a real 
number. The source node is identified by the constant function 
Source. The mutable function 
Length, from nodes to 
reals, ulti- mately holds the lengths of the shortest paths, 
and function Pred then allows the paths to be 
explicitly defined 
by the reverse of the sequence Pred(n), Pred(Pred(n,)), .... The visual program for 
Dijkstra™s algorithm now follows. 1) -+ START 2) ---$ N 3) + SAVE [As Q] 4) + ITERSTART 5) + N The initial actions create 
Q as a copy of set N, and initiate 
iteration over N. In Actions 6-17 a search is made for the 
element in Q with the smallest value 
of Length. This element is saved as NODE, and nodes directly reachable from NODE 
are saved 
as ENDS (Actions 18-20). Element NODE 
is then removed from Q (Actions 21-25). 6) + Q 7) -+ Length 8) + ALLOP 9) --+ MIN 10) + SAVE 11) -+ INVERT 13) + Length 14) --+ FILTER 15) + = 16) + *10 17) --+ R 18) + SAVE [As NODE] 19) + Succ 20) -+ SAVE [As ENDS] 22) + DIFF 23) + NODE 24) + UPDATE Next, in an 
iteration over ENDS, the weights on all 
arcs originating from 
NODE are extracted (Actions 
31-35), and for each arc < NODE,rri > we determine in Actions 37-41: Length(N0DE) + IVeight(NODE,n,i). 12) + Q 21) --+ Q 25) + Q. If ENDS is empty, the iteration 
sequence defined by Actions 26-71 is skipped. 26) + ITERSTART 27) + ENDS 28) + SAVE [As ENDNODE] 29) + Length 30) --+ SAVE 31) + 1 [This is the line 
labeled 1 in Fig. 31 32) + NODE 33) + 2 [This is the line labeled 
2 in Fig. 31 34) --+ ENDNODE 35) + Weight [WM displays 
Weight(NODE, END N 0 DE) 1 function Weight, which is defined only 
for arcs 
of the digraph, 36) + SAVE  824 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON KNOWLEDGE AND 
DATA ENGINEERING, VOL. 5, NO. 5, OCTOBER 1993 37) +NODE 38) + Length 40) + *36 41) + SAVE Next we replace Length(71,) by Lrngth(.VODE) + Wright(NODE, n,) if the latter is the 
smaller of the two, and make an 
appropriate change 
to Pr(d(72,) as well. In previous examples we 
used UPDATE 
to replace one set 
by another. We shall now need to 
replace functions 
by their modified versions, 
but first we have to generate 
the new 
elements that will take 
part in the modifications. 
Sequence operations 
will be used to generate these elements (which 
are ordered 
pairs here). 39) + PLUS 42) --+ < 43) + *30 44) + CONDSTART 45) -+ NULL 46) + SAVE [as L] 47) + NULL 48) + SAVE [as P] 50) + circled plus 
51) + right rectangle 
52) + L 53) -+ circled plus 
54) + right rectangle 
56) + *41 57) + circled plus 58) + right rectangle 60) + NODE 61) + circled plus 
62) - right rectangle 
Non L and P hold ordered pairs 
that are to 
replace existing 
We introduce the 
map overwrite operation MAPOVER 
(not 49) + ENDiVODE 55) + P 59) + L 63) -P. ordered pairs in functions Lrngth and Pred, respectively. shown in Fig. 2). 
In terms of function F with functionality 
F: X s2 X ... X SI; + sk+l X ... X s,, suppose MAPOVER 
is provided 
with the argument < (~1.~2 ..... nk.ok+l ..... a,, >. If no n-tuple of the form < al.a2 ..... (ik.. . . > belongs to F, then the 
argument of MAPOVER is added to F; otherwise the old < al.o2. .... ab.. . . 
> is replaced with the 
argument of MAPOVER. The 
usage is as follows: 
the la-tuple that 
is the argument of MAPOVER is expected to 
be in the workspace; the user 
points to MAPOVER and to the representation 
of the function that is to 
be changed. The next sequence of actions finishes our example: 
65) + MAPOVER 66) + Length 67) + P 68) + MAPOVER 69) + Prrd 64) + L 70) + CONDEND 71) + ITEREND 72) + ITEREND 73) + END. ACKNOWLEDGMENT The author thanks Janis Bubenko, Shi-Kuo Chang, 
and Hannu Kangassalo for introducing 
him to conceptual models 
of information systems, visual languages, 
and visual 
queries, respectively. A disagreement with John 
Sowa on the merits of natural language for 
query formulation convinced 
him of the need for the work reported here. 
REFERENCES [l J D. Rombach, ﬁSoftware 
specification: A framework,ﬂ 
Curriculum Mod- ule SEI-CM-I 1-1.0. Pittsburgh, PA: Software Engineering Institute, 
Carnegie Mellon University, 1987. [2] M.A. Jackson, System Development. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice- Hall, 1983. [3] E. Dubois, J. Hagelstein, E. Lahou, 
F. Ponsaert, A. Rifaut, and F. Williams, ﬁThe 
ERAE model: A case study,ﬂ 
in Information Systems 
Design Methodologies: 
Improving the 
Practice, T.W. Olle, H.G. Sol, and A.A. Verrijn-Stuart, 
Eds. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 
1986, pp. 87-105. [4] J. Fiadeiro 
and A. 
Sernadas, ﬁThe INFOLOG linear tense propositional 
logic of events and transactions,ﬂ Inf Systems, vol. 11, pp. 61-85, 1986. [5] A.I. Wasserman, P.A. 
Pircher, D.T. Shewmake, and M.L Kersten, 
ﬁDeveloping interactive 
information systems with the User 
Software Engineering methodology,ﬂ 
IEEE Trans. Software 
Eng., vol.SE-12, pp. 326-345, 1986. 
(61 A.T. Berztiss, ﬁData abstraction 
in the specification 
of information systems,ﬂ in Proc. IFIP World Congress 86, pp. 83-90, 1986. [7] T.W. Olle, 
J. Hagelstein, I.G. Macdonald, C. Rolland, H.G. 
Sol, F.J.M. Van Assche, and A.A. Verrijn-Stuart, Information System Methodolo- 
gies4 Framework for Understanding. Wokingham, England: Addison- 
Wesley, 1988. [8] M. Jarke and Y. Vassiliou, ﬁA framework for choosing a database 
query language,ﬂ ACM Comp. Surveys, vol. 17, pp. 313-340, 1985. [Y] J. Clement, J. Lochhead, and E. 
Soloway, ﬁPositive effects 
of computer programming on students™ understanding 
of variables and equations,ﬂ in Proc. ACM Annual Conf 1980, pp. 4677474. [IO] C. Welty and 
D.W. Stemple, ﬁHuman factors comparison 
of a procedural 
and a nonprocedural 
query language,ﬂ ACM Trans. Database Syst., vol. 6, pp. 62M49, 1981. [ 111 G.W. Hansen and 
J.V. Hansen, ﬁProcedural 
and nonprocedurai query 
languages revisited: a comparison 
of relational algebra and relational calculus,ﬂ Int. 1. Man-Machine Studies, 
vol. 26, pp. 683-694, 1987. 
[12] W. Swartout, 
ﬁGIST English generator,ﬂ in Proc. AAAINatl. Con6 1982, pp. 404409. [13] W.S. Luk and 
S. Kloster, ﬁELFS: 
English language from SQL,ﬂ ACM Trans. Database Syst., vol. 11, pp. 447472, 1986. [14] B. Czejdo, R. Elmasri, 
M. Rusinkiewicz, and 
D.W. Embley, ﬁGraphical 
query languages for semantic database models,ﬂ 
in Proc. 1987 Natl. Computer Conf, pp. 615-623. 1151 B. Czejdo, D. Reddy, 
and M. Rusinkiewicz, ﬁDesign 
and implementation of an interactive 
graphical query interface 
for a 
relational database man- 
agement system,ﬂ 
in Proc. 1988 IEEE Workshop on Visual Languages, [ 161 D. Harel, H. Lachover, A. Naamad, A. Pnueli, M. Politi, R. Sherman, and A. 
Shtul-Trauring, ﬁStatemate: a working environment for 
the development of complex reactive systems,ﬂ 
in Proc. 10th Int. Con5 Software Eng., pp. 39W06, 1988. [17] H.J. Kim, H.F. Korth, and A. 
Silberschatz, ﬁPicasso: a graphical query 
language,ﬂ Software Pract. Exp., 
vol. 18, pp. 169-203, 1988. [18] H.K.T. Wong and 
1. Kuo, ﬁGUIDE: Graphical 
user interface 
for database 
exploration,ﬂ in Proc. VLDB 1982, pp. 22-32. 1191 Z.Q. Zhang, M.O. Alberto, 
and 0. Mendelzon, ﬁA graphical query 
language for entity-relationship databases,ﬂ 
in Entity-Relationship Ap- proach to Software Engineering, C.G. Davis, S. Jajodia, P.A.B. Ng, and 
R.T. Yeh, 
Eds. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 
1983, pp. 441448. [20] M. Angelaccio, 
T. Catarci, and G. Santucci, ﬁQBD: A 
fully visual 
system for E-R oriented 
databases,ﬂ in Proc. 1989 IEEE Workshop on Visual Languages, pp. 5641. pp. 14-20. 
 BERZTISS- THE QUERY LANGUAGE VIZLA 825 L.E. Echeverria and J.A. Pino, 
ﬁAn intuitive approach for 
the expression of Boolean queries,ﬂ 
in Proc. 1989 
IEEE Workshop on Visual Languages, pp. 118-123. J.A. Larson, ﬁVisual languages for database users,ﬁ 
in Visual Languages, S.K. Chang, 
T. Ichikawa, and P.A. Ligomenides, 
Eds. New York: 
Plenum Press, 
1986, pp. 127-147. 
S. Kari, H. Kangassalo, and 
J. Poso, ﬁConceptual query language 
CQL: a visual user interface to application data bases,ﬂ 
to appear in Proc. Joint 
ScandinavianJapanese Seminar on Information Modeling and Knowledge Bases. H. Kangassalo, ﬁConcept D: A 
graphical language for conceptual 
modeling and data base use,ﬂ 
in Proc 1988 
IEEE Workshop on Visual Languages, pp. 2-1 1. R.B. Grafton and 
T. Ichikawa, Eds., special issue 
on visual program- 
ming, Computer, vol. 18, no. 6, Aug.1985. D.L. Parnas, 
ﬁOn the criteria to be used 
in decomposing systems into modules,ﬁ Comm. ACM, vol. 15, pp. 1053-1058, 1972. 
J.R. Cameron, 
ﬁAn overview of JSD,ﬂ IEEE Trans. Software Eng., M.W. Alford, 
ﬁSREM at the age 
of eight; the distributed 
computing design system,ﬂ 
Computer. vol. 18, no. 4, pp, 3&46. Apr. 1985. 
M. Graf. 
ﬁBuilding a 
visual designer™s environment,ﬂ 
in Principles of Visual Programming Systems, 
S.-K. Chang, 
Ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall, 1989, pp. 291-325. 
D.W. Shipman, ﬁThe 
functional data model and the data language 
DAPLEX,ﬁ ACM Trans. Database Syst., 
vol. 6, pp. 140-173, 
1981. A.T. Berztiss, ﬁFormal specification methods and visualization,ﬂ 
in Principles of Visual Programming Systems, S.-K. Chang, Ed. Englewood 
Cliffs. NJ: Prentice-Hall, 
1989, pp. 231-290. 
A.T. Berztiss, ﬁA notation for distributed operations,ﬂ Inf Proc. Letters, 
vol. 26, pp. 19-21, 1987. AV. Aho and 
J.D. Ullman, ﬁUniversality 
of data retrieval languages,ﬂ 
in Proc. 61hACMSymp. on Principles ofProg. Languages, pp. lI(bl17. A. Motro. ﬁConstructing queries from tokens,ﬂ 
in Proc. ACM SICMOD 1986 Int. 
Conf Manaaement Data. DD. 120-131. V~ISE-I~, pp. 222-240. 1986. 1351 -, ﬁSEAVE: A mechanism for verifying user presuppositions 
in query systems,ﬂ ACM Trans. Ofice Inf: Syst., vol. 4, pp. 312-330, 1986. 
[36] -, ﬁVAGUE: a user interface to relational databases that permits 
vague queries,ﬂ ACM Trans. Office Inf. Syst., vol. 
6, pp. 187-214, 1988. 
[37] E.W. Dijkstra, 
ﬁA note on two problems in connection with graphs,ﬂ 
Numer. Math., vol. 1, pp. 269-271, 
1959. 1381 J.A. Goguen, J.W. Thatcher, and E.G. Wagner, 
ﬁAn initial algebra 
ap- proach to the specification, correctness, 
and implementation of abstract data types,ﬂ 
in Current Trends in Programming Methodology, Vol. IV: Data Structuring, 
R.T. Yeh, Ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 
1978, pp. 
80-149. Alfs Berztiss received the Ph.D. degree 
in physics in 1964 from the University of Melbourne, Australia. 
He is on the faculty 
of the Department 
of Com- puter Science at the University 
of Pittsburgh, and 
is a research Associate 
of SYSLAB, University of Stockholm. His research interests include pro- 
totyping of information and control systems, 
un- certainties in decision support 
systems, and cur- riculum development for 
software engineering. He has developed curriculum material for SEI and has 
presented numerous courses 
on various aspects 
of software engineering 
to universities and industry 
in many countries. He is 
the author 
of Data Structures: Theory and Practice 
(Academic, 1971 and 
1975), Programming with Generators (Ellis Horwood, 1990), and numerous 
technical papers. 
Dr. Berztiss 
is a Fellow of the Australian Computer Society, and 
a member of IFIP Working Group 
8.1 (Design and Evaluation 
of Information Systems), 
ACM. IEEE CS. and EATCS. 
