 Agility in Information Systems:EnablingCapabilities for the IT FunctionGeorge HobbsRens Scheepers Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 1Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function 
  George Hobbs 
Department of Information Systems 
The University of Melbourne, Australia 
georgehobbs@gmail.com
  Rens Scheepers 
Department of Information Systems 
The University of Melbourne, Australia 
r.scheepers@unimelb.edu.au
  
 Abstract 
This research identifies how the IT function can create agility in existing information systems. 

Agility is the capability to quickly sense and 
respond to environmental 
perturbations. We con-
trasted perspectives on agility from a widely 
used industry framework and that of the IS re-
search literature. Beer™s Viable System Model 
was a useful meta-level theory to house agility 
elements from IS research and it introduced cybernetic principles to identify the processes re-
quired of the IT function. Indeed, our surveys 
of 70 organizations confirmed that the applied 
theory better correlates with reported agilit
y than does existing industry best practice.  
The research conducted two quantitative surveys to test the applied theory. The first survey 
mailed a Likert-type questionnaire to the clients of an Australian IT consultancy. The second 

survey invited international members of professional interest groups to complete a web-based 
questionnaire. The responses from the surveys were analyzed using partial-least-squares mod-
eling. The data analysis positively correlated the maturity of IT function processes prescribed by 
the VSM and the likelihood of agility in existing information systems. We claim our findings ge-

neralize to other large organizations in OECD member countries. 
The research offers an agility-capability model of
 the IT function to explain and predict agility in 
existing information systems. A further contribution is to improve industry ‚best practice™ frame-

works by prescribing processes of the IT function to develop in maturity. 
 Keywords: 
IT function, Agility, 
Viable system model. 
1Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 2 Introduction This research extends the theory on agility in 
information systems.
 Agility has been de-
scribed as the capability 
to effectively sense 
and respond to environmental change (New-

man and Logan, 2006a). Much of the current 
IS literature focuses on questions relating to 
what agility is and if information systems en-
able agility in the ente
rprise. This research 
takes up the unaddressed question of how 

the IT function of large organizations can en-
able agility. In doing so, this research extends 
the theoretical perspective to practice by of-
fering a tested model that is prescriptive for 
the IT function.  
Agility in information systems is a topic of re-
cent interest to IS academics and practition-
ers (Sambamurthy et al., 2007, Seo and La 
Paz, 2008, Weill et al., 2002). Our literature 

review of IS journals evidenced an emerging 

research interest in agility since 1998. Luft-
man and McLean™s (2004) survey of the So-
ciety of Information Management had agility 
ranked fifth amongst 22 concerns.  
This research found that information systems 
agility is also a topic of interest amongst the 
highest levels of corporate management. We 

conducted a survey of business and IT man-
agers in 70 companies that asked the highest 
level in their organizations that had discussed 
agility in information s
ystems. This 2008 sur-
vey found that the Chief Executive Office had 

discussed agility in 31.65% of cases, followed 
by corporate-level IT executives (25.32%) 
and corporate-level business executives 
(15.19%). A minority of respondents reported 
agility being discussed at a highest level be-

neath that of corporate-level offices: mostly 
amongst IT executives and a business group 
(10.13%), and business unit leaders (8.86%). 
The survey confirmed the interest in informa-
tion systems agility amongst corporate level 

executives of large organizations. 
Both IS practice and research appear to be 
converging on a common concept of agility. 
The concept consists of recognition of a busi-

ness environment that fluctuates quicker than 

conventional planning cycles, the need to 

sense environmental fluctuations, the need to 
respond using existing information systems, 
and organizational readiness to effect the 
sensing and response (Luftman and McLean, 
2004). Gartner Researc
h defines agility ﬁas 
an organization's ability to sense environmen-

tal change and respond efficiently and effec-
tively to that changeﬂ (Newman and Logan, 
2006b p. 3).  
The research topic explores how the IT func-
tion enables agility in existing information sys-
tems. Weill et al. (2002) offer a concise defini-
tion of information systems as IT-conducted 

business initiatives. This research accepted 

this definition with the qualification that the 
information systems are the result of IT in-
vestments deliberated upon by the IT function 
and not merely utilizin
g a commonplace tech-
nology.  
The IT function is the personnel and their 
work processes that have a responsibility for 

the delivery of information systems. Hender-

son and Venkatraman (1993) recognize an 

internal IT domain composed of architectures 
providing choices of the technical infrastruc-
ture configuration, work processes to operate 
the technical infrastructure and skills to man-
age the technical infrastructure. This internal 

domain is within the organization and, distinct 
from the actual technical infrastructure, cha-
racterizes the IT function. This research fo-
cused on the IT function of large enterprises, 
of 250 or more employees, in economically 

developed countries and enterprises in all 
sectors.  
This research extends the IS theoretical lite-
rature to pose the question: 
How can the IT function enable agility in ex-
isting information systems? 
The above is not to be confused with the 
question: Does agility in
 information systems 
enable business agility? The later is the sub-
ject of existing discussion in the IS research 
literature and an answer in the affirmative 

was an assumption of this research.  
To address the research question, we devel-
oped a theory for explaining and predicting (cf. 

Gregor, 2006). Cybernetics provided a meta-
level model for the explanative theory. Testa-
2Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 3ble hypotheses support a prediction that agili-
ty increases with the process maturity of the 
IT function.   
To address the research question from the IS 
practice perspective, this research also de-
veloped a theory for design and action (cf. 
Gregor, 2006). This research sought to inform 

industry ‚best practice™ frameworks on struc-

turing an IT function to
 enable agility in exist-
ing information systems. 
Literature Review 
We reviewed the current theoretical and prac-
tice perspectives on agility in information sys-

tems. First, the IS literature on agility was re-

viewed to derive the current theoretical pers-
pective. Second, we derived from the best 
practice frameworks the current practice 
perspective for the IT function to action agility. 
We identified the gaps between theoretical 

and practice perspectives on agility. 
Theoretical perspectives on IS agility  
IS researchers discuss a new era where a 

firm™s performance depends on the IS capa-
bility to effect agility and less on identifying 
strategic IT investments (Desouza, 2006, Ma-
thiassen and Pries-Heje, 2006, Overby et al., 
2006, Peppard and Ward, 2004, Sambamur-

thy et al., 2003, Weill et al., 2002). Our review 
indicated an emerging IS research interest in 
agility over the past ten 
years, with a special 
edition of the European Journal of Information 
Systems (volume 15 issue 2) causing a publi-

cation spike in 2006.  
Many authors have linked IT with enterprise 
agility. Agarwal and Sambamurthy (2002) 

discuss a number of organizational structures 

for the IT function observed in agile enter-

prises. Agarwal and Sambamurthy emphas-

ize drawing IT managerial responsibilities into 

alignment with core business units, as appro-

priate for the role of IT in a particular firm, and 

an analysis that IT now plays a more promi-

nent role in corporate agility. Weill et al. (2002) 

defines agility as a set of business initiatives 
an organization can readily implement. While 
making no claims of causality, their paper 
finds significant correlation between strategic 

agility and IT-infrastructure capability. 
Sambamurthy et al. (2003) suggest firms as-
sess their IT investments and capabilities in 
terms of their quality to generate digital op-
tions for IT-enabled business process and 
knowledge management initiatives. The im-

plication is that digital options enables agility 
in information systems by responding to an 
opportunity in less time than making a full IT 

investment at the time of the opportunity™s 
arrival. The cost of the anticipated opportunity 
failing to arrive is forgoing the initial IT in-
vestment in the digital option. A goal of a 
portfolio of digital options is that the value of 

opportunities captured from those options 
that ‚strike™ outweighs the other options that 
are ‚out of the money™.  
Peppard and Ward (2004) discuss a new era 
of information systems where an organiza-

tion™s performance significantly depends on 
an IS capability to effect agility and is less 
dependent on identifying strategic IT invest-
ments. This IS capability can be portrayed as 

having three inter-related competencies. First, 

are the ‚exploitation™ competencies of the IT 

function arising from the fusion of business 

knowledge and IS knowledge. The second 

competencies are the reusable IT infrastruc-

ture. The last competencies of an IS capabili-

ty for agility is an effective use process. This 

is a process of the IT function monitoring and 

improving the value realized from the existing 

information systems. 
Lyytinen and Rose (2006) propose early ex-
ploration and late exploi
tation capabilities as 
central for an agility model. First, sensing 

fluctuations in the business environment re-
quires an early exploration capability and has 
process goals that allow high speed, risk and 
start-up costs. Second, the late exploitation 
capability to adapt exis
ting information sys-
tems has process goals to reduce cost and 
risk and to increase quality. 
Overby et al. (2006) recognize agile firms as 
continually sensing opportunities for competi-

tive action in their environment and marshal 

their assets to seize opportunities. Overby et 

al. further supports the concept of digital op-

tions and classifies types of options for busi 

ness process and knowledge management 
3Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 4 initiatives.  
Goethals et al. (2006) give an overview of 
how organizations can create enterprise ar-
chitectures. A justification for enterprise archi-
tectures is that the availability of architectural 

descriptions enhances agility. Goethals et al. 
justification for enterprise architectures is a 
retelling of the Law of Requisite Variety in the 
context of the IT function, namely a model 
can be less complex than the operating 

process, but must be of requisite variety to 
control the process (Conant and Ashby, 
1970).  
Fink and Neumann (2007) found empirical 
support for the proposition that existing infor-
mation systems must be managed by the IT 
function for agility. They tested the hypothes-

es that IT personnel capabilities positively 

affect IT infrastructure capability and that IT 
infrastructure capability positively affect IT-
dependent organizational agility outcomes. A 
web-based survey collected data from IT 

managers across a range of industries. Fink 

and Neumann (2007) is an instance of pre-

senting an IS theory for predicting agility 

without a theoretical explanation (2006). The 

paper leaves explanatory mechanisms of how 

IT personnel and IT infrastructure capabilities 

afford agility for 
future research. 
Our review of IS theoretical literature on agili-
ty only found Sambamurthy et al. (2007) as 

an instance of a paper with a theory for ex-

plaining and predicting. The distinguishable 

attributes of the theory type is that it provides 

predictions and has both testable proposi-

tions and causal explanations (Gregor, 2006). 

However, Sambamurthy et al. (2007) has li-

mited the internal validity due to its mea-

surement model. The independent variables 

of IT and operational capabilities have only 

one or two measurement items, and the de-

pendent variables of organizational benefits 
have one reflective measure item each.  
Four elements of agility can be discerned 
from the IS literature, which become a basic 
model for agility (Figure 1). In Table 1 we 
map these elements to sources from the IS 

literature review on agility and to theory types 
defined Gregor (2006). 
First, the IT function™s fuses business and 
technical knowledge to sense directly the 

business environment to forecast opportuni-

ties and threats that might present in the fu-

ture. The second element is sensing the cur-

rent use of existing information systems, 

which indirectly senses the fluctuations in the 

environment and uncovers future trends. 

Mostly the analyzing and explaining theories 

(Gregor 2006) support both these elements.  
 Figure 1 - A basic model for agility from IS theory 
4Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 5 There is little support for these two elements 
by the theories of design and action, with the 
exception of Seo and La Paz (2008) stressing 
the personality traits and skills of IT manag-

ers for sensing and agility. 
Third is generating digital options for fore-
casted needs. This element includes con-

structing a portfolio of digital options, which 

makes initial IT investment for each digital 

option and decides to exercise a digital option 

into a full IT investment once a forecasted 

opportunity arrives. The elements are heavily 

influenced by Sambamurthy et al. (2003), 

which is seminal for other reviewed papers 

(Berente, 2005, Raschke and David, 2005, 
Sambamurthy et al., 2007). There are few 
theoretical contributions for the digital options 
competency with the design and action theo-

ries.  
After deciding to exercise a digital option, the 
last element is adapting the existing informa-
tion systems to complete the agile response. 
IS design and action theories (Gregor, 2006) 
dominate this element. The most of these 
contributions in IS literature focus on how the 
IT function addresses particular agile soft-
ware methods. 
This review of the IS research on agility re-
vealed a profile of the types of IS theory pub-

lished and distilled a basic model of agility in 

information systems. Notably, there are no 

theories for explaining and predicting (cf. 

Gregor, 2006) the basic model of agility in 

information systems. The precursor theories 

for analyzing and explaining exist, but a 

theory for explaining and predicting is yet to 

emerge. Under represented in the IS litera-

ture are theories for design and action con-
cerned with sensing future needs from the 
business environment or building a portfolio 
of digital options. 
Practice perspectives on IS agility  
The practice perspective on how the IT func-
tion can enable agility was deduced from a 
claimed ‚best practice™ framework. The Con-
trol Objectives for Information and related 
Table 1 - Concept matrix for agility from IS theory
 Agility concept 
Article 
IS Theory type 
Sensing future needs 
Desouza (2006) 
Lyytinen and Rose (2006)    

Overby et al. (2006) 
Patten et al. (2005) 
Sambamurthy et al. (2003) 

Seo and La Paz (2008) 

Seo et al. (2006)
 Analyzing
 Analyzing 

Explaining 
Analyzing 
Explaining 

Design and Action 
Explaining
 Digital options 
Cornford et al. (2007) 
Goethals et al. (2006) 

Sambamurthy et al. (2003) 
Seo et al. (2006) 
Overby et al. (2006) 

Weill et al. (2002) 
Explaining 
Design and Action 

Explaining 
Explaining 
Explaining 
Analyzing 
Sensing current use 
Galliers (2006) 
Lyytinen and Rose (2006) 
Peppard and Ward (2004) 

Sambamurthy et al. (2003) 
Seo and La Paz (2008) 
Explaining 
Analyzing 
Analyzing 
Explaining 
Design and Action 
Agile responses 
Andrade and Fladeiro (2002) 

Börjesson et al. (2006) 
Fitzgerald et al.(2006) 
Holmqvist and Pessi (2006) 
Seo and La Paz (2008) 
Seo et al. (2006) 
Umar (2005) 
Zhao et al. (2007) 
Design and Action 
Design and Action 
Design and Action 
Design and Action 
Design and Action 
Explaining 
Design and Action 
Design and Action 
5Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 6 Technologies (COBIT) is arguably the most 
appropriate control framework available to 
align information systems and business goals, 
and is increasingly being used by a diverse 
range of organizations throughout the world 

(Ridley et al., 2004). COBIT represents the 
consensus of experts (IT Governance Insti-
tute, 2007) and from this control framework 

this research deduced the dominant design 
and action theory (G
regor, 2006) for agility 
from the IS practitioner perspective. 
Within the COBIT framework is a goal of 
Create IT agility (IT Goal 5), which links four 

measurable control objectives (see Table 7).  
COBIT defines agility as responding to 
changing business requirements from the 
customer perspective and managing busi-

ness change from an internal perspective. 

This definition reflects COBIT dependence on 
received business requirements and strategy 
(IT Governance Institute, 2007). A theory to 
design and action agility is explicit in the CO-

BIT framework control objectives linked to the 

goal.  
Comparing the IS theoretical perspective on 
agility with the IS practice perspective   has 
highlighted four gaps. First, the COBIT defini-

tion of agility is narrower than the IS theoreti-
cal perspective, as it based on the IT function 
responding to received business require-
ments and strategy. The IS theoretical pers-
pective observes that deliberate alignment of 

information systems with a stated business 
strategy has had limited success (Galliers, 
2006). The IS theoretical perspective on agili-

ty has information systems being subject to 
less long-term planning strategies and more 
to constant adaptation (Desouza, 2006, Pep-
pard and Ward, 2004). The COBIT definition 
of agility is also narrower than other IS prac-

tice perspectives (Luftman and McLean, 2004, 
Newman and Logan, 2006b), which include 
the IT function sensing and responding direct-
ly with the business environment. 
The second gap was the capability for the IT 
function to sense future needs directly from 

the environment. The IS theoretical perspec-

tive emphasizes this forecasting capability 

(Desouza, 2006, Overby et al., 2006, Sam-
bamurthy et al., 2003). In the IS practice 
perspective, the capability to sense environ-
mental change is noted by Gartner (Newman 
and Logan, 2006b), but the COBIT goal of 
Create IT agility is not linked to any process 

for this capability. The COBIT concept of 
agility being a response to a received busi-
ness strategy is the likely cause of it not ad-

dressing the IT function directly sensing fu-
ture needs from the environment.  
The third gap between the IS perspectives 
was concerned with maintaining digital op-

tions that can be readily implemented. This 

element is put forward in the IS research lite-
rature on agility (Overby et al., 2006, Sam-
bamurthy et al., 2003, Weill et al., 2002). 
From the IS practice perspective, the theory 

of design and action deduced from the enabl-

ing factors for the COBIT goal to Create IT 
agility is silent on this capability.  
Last, the IT function sensing current use of 
the information systems was not included in 

the IS practice perspective on agility. There 
are several references to
 this capability in IS 
theoretical literature which discuss systemic 
insight (Sambamurthy et al., 2003), effective 
use processes (Peppard and Ward, 2004) 

and the assessment of unexpected conse-
quences that were experienced in existing 
activity (Galliers, 2006). The IS practice pers-
pective is silent on this capability, as deduced 
from the stated COBIT enablers to Create IT 

agility. 
Theory development 
This research assumes that enterprise agility 

and information system agility exist and that 

information system ag
ility enables enterprise 
agility. This research also assumes that the 
IT function enables information systems agili-
ty. From these assumptions, the theoretical 
departure made by this research was explain-

ing and predicting how the IT function 

enables agility in existing information systems. 

In other words, this research claims unearth-

ing a theoretical mechanism for the IT func-

tion to enable agility. From this departure 

point in the IS theoretical perspective, this 

research informs IS practice perspective by 
6Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 7prescribing how the IT function can enable 
agility. 
The theory development drew parallels be-
tween the IS research into agility in informa-
tion systems and an established model of cy-
bernetics. A cybernetic model was a valid 
method for a number of reasons. First, the 

business issue of agility for sensing and res-

ponding to the environment (Overby et al., 
2006) is the fundamental problem addressed 
by cybernetics (Ashby, 1956, Beer, 1984). 
Agility in information systems requires alert-

ness by IT personnel to perceive incoming 

signals from its internal and external envi-
ronments, processing the signals and res-
ponding adequately. In the research context, 
the signals might include business exceptions 

or new technology reports. The processing of 

income signals require filtering accurate in-
formation to drive decision-making for re-
sponse in a timely way. The challenge for the 
IT function is processing an overwhelming 

collection of signals, in un-standardized for-

mats, and from overlapping sources, which 

overloads decision-makers (2008). This sig-

nal overload problem of IS must be ad-

dressed for agility, and is the problem ad-

dressed in the cybernetic models to comply 

with the law of requisite variety (Ashby, 1956, 

Conant and Ashby, 1970). The law of requi-

site variety recognizes that environment inhe-

rently contains more variety than the system™s 

processes can absorb and therefore de-

mands that the system must attenuates envi-

ronmental variety to what is requisite to con-
trol the system™s processes.  
Second, enabling agilit
y in information sys-
tems appears subject to the cybernetic theo-
rem that every good controller of a system™s 
processes must be a model of that system. 

The controller of a system cannot know all 
the details of the system™s processes and 
must have variety attenuated to deliver the 
requisite amount of information to manage 
the system. Theoretical perspectives on agili-

ty of information systems require a requisite 

knowledge base to manage information re-
ceived from the environment and to enable 
adaptations of existing IT and work processes 
(Desouza, 2006). This concept is consistent 
with the cybernetic theorem of managing en-
vironmental perturbations by maintaining a 
model of operations. The model can be less 
complex than the operating process but must 
be of requisite variety to control the process 

(Conant and Ashby, 1970). This second point 
is distinct from the first made in this section, 
which was concerned with the requisite varie-

ty in the process, while the current point is 
concerned with the requisite variety in the 
model of the process controller. 
Last, elements from the basic model of agility 
from IS theory (Figure 1) can be understood 

with the cybernetic theory of the Viable Sys-
tem Model (VSM) (Beer, 1979, 1984). Two of 
these elements are externally focused future 
planning, and an internally focused effective 

use process (Desouza, 
2006, Galliers, 2006, 
Peppard and Ward, 2004). These elements 
can be interpreted as subsystems of the VSM 
and the model™s known dynamic between 
these subsystems informs an understanding 

of the basic model of IS agility. 
The validity of a cybernetic framework for an 
explaining and predicting theory is supported 
by Gregor (2006). Gregor states a commonal-
ity of cybernetics with general system theory, 

which provides a high-level way of thinking 
about IT systems. Systems are in a conti-
nuous state of exchange with their environ-
ment and other systems, and modeled with 
concepts of input, throughput, output, feed-

back, boundary and environment. Gregor 
suggests general systems theory and cyber-
netics as examples of ‚grand theories™ for ex-

plaining and predicting.  
The viable system model 
The following description of the VSM is most-
ly derived from Beer™s The Heart of Enter-
prise (Beer, 1979). The viable system model 

is a generalized description of any system 

capable of self-adaptation in a fluctuating en-
vironment. Viability is 
maintaining a separate 
existence and identity from other systems 
that share the environment. To be self-

adapting, a viable system has subsystems 

that perform operations that define the sys-
tem™s identity, and subsystems that adapt 
those operations to achieve viability. The 
7Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 8 VSM views an organization as an information 
processing system striving to maintain bal-
ance when faced with perturbations from the 
environment. The concept of recursion is es-
sential for the VSM to encompass complex 

organizations, as any viable system contains 
operational subsystems that are themselves 
viable systems, and can be diagnosed at the 

lower level of recursion.  
Figure 2 is a general representation of the 
VSM without adaptation to the research topic. 
System ONE to System FIVE denotes the 

subsystems of the VSM. For simplicity, the 

figure does not show the interactions be-
tween the three sub-systems within the meta-
system and those between the sub-systems 
within the operations of the viable system. 

The figure does show interactions that be-

tween the meta-system, the operations and 
the environment of the viable system.  
System ONE occurs in many instances in a 
viable system and each instance is an inde-
pendent operation, with their coordinated be-
haviour composing the identity of the viable 
system. An intersection of the operational re-

quirements and coherence imposed by the 
meta-system of the viable system affects the 
freedom of any System ONE instance. The 

instances of System ONE can be recognized 
as the core business systems that transact 
with the outside environment, e.g. with cus-
tomers, suppliers, business partners and reg-
ulators.  
Instances of System ONE are subject to a 
resource bargain within the organization. This 
is an exchange to provide resources for Sys-
tem ONE for performing in a preferred man-

ner. System ONE has rules of behavior that it 

must observe, e.g. legal obligations and cor-
porate rules. Figure 2 shows three instances 
 Figure 2  - The Viable System Model 
8Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 9of System ONE and each instance shows an 
imbedded VSM at the lower level of recursion. 
The function of System TWO is to damp os-
cillations that will aris
e between both the me-
ta-system and System ONE and amongst 
other instances of System ONE at the same 
level of recursion. System TWO is recogniza-

ble by the attributes of a network of elements 

for stabilizing the execu
tion of System ONE 
instances within homeostatic levels, providing 
a service to a System THREE to dampen un-
expected fluctuations from the System ONE 

instances, and transduction of code-sets to 

relay information across the boundaries of 
System ONE instances. 
System THREE is responsible for the inside 
and now control of System ONE. The tasks 

that recognize System THREE are sourcing 

for the plans, programs and schedules to 

adapt System ONE; monitoring the behaviour 

of System ONE resulting from the regulatory 

action of System TWO; and monitoring Sys-

tem TWO.  
System THREE has a helper task of System 
THREE*, which is responsibility to sporadical-
ly audit System ONE. System THREE* is not 
logically separate from System THREE, but 
normally operates physically apart from Sys-
tem THREE. The attributes that recognize 

System THREE* are ensuring that directions 
coming to System ONE from System TWO 
are being performed as reported to System 
THREE, filling any time gaps in reporting, and 
making special assessments of System ONE.  
System ONE, System TWO and System 
THREE have concentrated on the internal 

aspects of stabilizing the system. The system 

has no mechanism for planning or adapting: 

this is the role of System FOUR. System 

FOUR spends most of its time looking outside 

the system and to the future. System FOUR 

is necessary for the viable system to antic-

ipates change and adjust System ONE to fit a 

dynamic environment. This is accomplished 

by possession of a model of the viable sys-

tem and its environment and is consistent 
with the Conant-Ashby Theorem (Conant and 
Ashby, 1970) that every good regulator must 
have a model of the system it is regulating. 
System FOUR gathers data from the envi-
ronment and collects and stores data on the 
state of System ONE (obtained via System 
THREE). Based on this data, System FOUR 
can build probabilistic models for use in fore-

casting events that may occur in the envi-
ronment and predict how System ONE will 
react to those events. System FOUR indi-

cates structural changes required that lead to 
a different configuration of System ONE in-
stances and System TWO.  
System FIVE sets the overall goals of the 
system and constrains the possibilities of 

adaptive behaviour provided when System 
FOUR couples with System THREE. System 
FIVE produces policy that governs the beha-
viour of the total system i.e. top-level rules. 

System FIVE monitors the System THREE 

and System FOUR couple, supervises their 
behaviour and mediates conflicts. System 
FIVE thinks about what the system produces 
and why. Finally, System FIVE absorbs any 

variety that is not disposed of by the System 

ONE, System TWO, System THREE and 

System FOUR. 
In the recursive nature of the VSM, each in-
stance of a System ONE in a viable system 

in-focus is itself a viable system in the next 
level of recursion down. Collectively, Systems 
THREE, FOUR and FIVE are the meta-
system for the control of a viable system, but 
not viable systems themselves. The meta-

system does not exist for itself, but is a ne-
cessary redundancy to regulate the complexi-
ty in the environment that embeds the viable 

system.  
Recent VSM applications include small co-
operatives (Walker, 2001), the UK electricity 
market (Shaw et al., 2004), the Australian 

Taxation Office (Haslett and Sarah, 2006) 

and several case studies of the St Gallen In-
stitute of Management (Schwaninger, 2006). 
This research used the terms Applications, 
Integration, Control, Intelligence and Policy to 

respectively describe System ONE to System 

FIVE, for an IS research audience. An adop-

tion of localized names for the subsystems is 

a liberty often taken by interpreters of the 

VSM.  
9Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 10  Figure 3 depicts applying the VSM to the IT 
function. The viable system is composed of 

the existing information systems (circled) 

which produce the identity of the viable sys-
tem, and the IT function (boxed) as the meta-
system of the information systems.  
The VSM subsystems of System ONE are 
interpretable as the Applications of the infor-

mation systems. These are instantiations of 

electronic processes and networks used to 

enable business initiatives and the business 

users of those initiatives. The instantiations of 

the IT can be a portfolio of ERP packages or 
legacy systems. Applications receive sustain-
ing resources from the organization in return 
for performing at prescribed service levels, 
within the legal obligations and corporate 

rules.  
System TWO is interpretable as the Integra-
tion between the Applications of the informa-
tion systems. This can be instantiations of 
system integration so
ftware to stabilize appli-
cations and the transduction of code-sets. 

Examples of the integration software include 
Data Warehousing and Enterprise Applica-
tions Integration (Markus, 2000). IT support 
groups are often involved to dampen fluctua-

tions between Applications not handled elec-

tronically by the system integration software, 
i.e. though exception/error-handing work pro-
cedures. Applications and Integration com-
pose the information system, which is subject 

to the meta-system of the IT function. 
The System THREE, System FOUR and Sys-
tem FIVE meta-system of the information sys-
tems is the IT function. System THREE is in-
terpretable as the Control component of the 

IT function. Control is often the accountability 
of the Application Management Office, which 
includes a disciplined approach to delivering 
 Figure 3 - VSM applied to the basic model of agility in information systems 
10Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 11IT-enabled business initiatives beyond the 
usual view of project completion, a single 
point of ownership for application support and 
a single point of contact for operational sup-
port. The System THREE* can be seen as 

the Audit component of the IT function, such 
as COBIT high-level processes of monitoring 
and evaluating (IT Governance Institute, 

2007).  
System FOUR is interpretable as the Intelli-
gence component of the IT function. In many 
organizations, this is the accountability of the 

Strategy and Enterprise Architecture office. 

Deliverables of the office include identified IT 
trends and opportunities, approved current 
and target enterprise architectures, and tran-
sition roadmaps. The System FOUR attribute 

of building probabilistic 
models to forecast 
events and how System ONE will react to 
those events is consistent with discussion of 
the IS agility as a family of future electronical-
ly-enabled business initiatives that are readily 

implemented (Weill et al., 2002), and digital 

options (Sambamurthy et al., 2003).  
System FIVE is interpretable as the Policy 
component of the IT function. In many enter-
prises, this role is that of a steering commit-

tee, with representation by the IT function. 
The IT governance model specifying decision 
rights and accountabilities for important IT 
decisions configures the Policy component. 
The aim is to encourage desirable behaviors 

in the use of IT. Weill (2004) conducted an 
international survey of more than 250 organi-
zations and found a wide variety of IT gover-

nance arrangements for decision rights. 
These decision rights included high-level 
statements about business uses, policies and 
rules of IT; and IT project approvals and justi-
fication techniques. These decision rights of 

the surveyed IT governance arrangements 
are consistent with the System FIVE 
attributes found in Beer (1979). 
The VSM provides a theory for explaining and 
predicting for the basic model of agility (Fig-

ure 1), which is lacking in the IS research lite-

rature. The lack of a theory for design and 

action to sense future needs (Desouza, 2006, 

Otto et al., 2007, Overby et al., 2006, Sam-
bamurthy et al., 2003) and to build a portfolio 
of digital options (Overby et al., 2006, Sam-
bamurthy et al., 2003, Weill et al., 2002) is 
addressed by the prescribed attributes of the 
VSM meta-system. 
Hypothesis development  
The theory development of this research pro-

posed the applying the VSM meta-system to 

the IT function and interpreted the sub-

systems of the meta-system as the compo-

nents of the IT function. We represented the 

meta-system as the independent variable of 

POLINTCON of our primary hypothesis.  
H1. The more mature the coupled 
processes of Policy, Intelligence and 
Control of the IT function (POLINTCON), 
the more often digital-options for the ex-
isting information systems are exercis-
able (D-OPTIONS). 
In itself, POLINTCON is a composite of the 
Policy, Intelligence and Control components 

of the IT function. As a composite, POLINT-
CON possesses a mutual property to enable 
agility in existing information systems. In ap-
plying the VSM, the Policy, Intelligence and 
Control components individually do not pos-

sess this property. POLINTCON possesses 

the mutual property only by relating the com-
ponents.  
The dependent variable of hypothesis H1 re-
lates to digital options. As recalled from the 

literature review, digital options is an existing 

concept of IS theorists and defined as rights 

to future IT investment choices without a cur-

rent obligation for full investment made by an 

initial IT investment (Sambamurthy et al., 

2003). In this research, exercise refers to 
making a full IT investment at the time of the 
opportunity™s arrival. The opportunity was 
previously forecasted after sensing the busi-

ness environment and this forecasting re-

sulted in an initial IT investment to create the 
digital option. The initial IT investment for the 
forecasted opportunity might range from 
adapting an existing information system to be 
readily configurable to respond, creating a 

detailed design, creating a high-level design, 
11Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 12 to formulating an alternative IT architecture 
for a new business model.  
If the forecasted opportunity arrives, the digi-
tal option is exercisable, in that a decision is 
required for a full IT investment. Typically, a 
steering committee makes the decision to 
exercise a digital option based on resources 

required, top-level policies and the integrity of 

the information systems (cf. Beer, 1979). The 
decision to act on an exercisable digital op-
tion is that of Policy, when applying the VSM 
meta-system to the IT function. In the context 

of adapting existing information systems, an 

exercised digital option becomes the agile 
response for forecasted fluctuations in the 
environment.  
The response is agile when it is made in less 
time than conventional planning cycles (Luft-

man and McLean, 2004). In conventional 

planning, the full IT investment for a response 

commences on or after the arrival of a busi-

ness opportunity. Where there is an organiza-

tional readiness to affect agility, the initial IT 
investment of the exercised digital option re-
duces the response time required, when cal-
culated from the arrival time of the opportuni-
ty. The initial IT investment is foregone if the 

opportunity fails to arrive, or if the opportunity 
arrives and a decision is made not to exercise 
a digital option. 
The dependent variable in hypothesis H1 re-
fers to the frequency of exercisable digital 
options, in preference to exercised digital op-
tions. The frequency of exercisable digital 

options was one measure of agility in infor-

mation systems available to this research. 
Later agility activity measures are the fre-
quency of exercised digital options or the fre-
quency of agile responses implemented. The 

research measured the earlier activity to mi-

nimize the later confounding factors in the 
decision to exercise and implement a digital 
option, particularly budgetary considerations 
to make a full IT investment.  
POLINTCON and D-OPTIONS are ontologi-
cally different. POLINTCON is a structure of 
rules and non-human resources persistent in 
time. In contrast, D-OPTIONS are a sporadic 
activity of human agency enabled by PO-
LINTCON.  Exercising digital options is a ne-
cessary activity for agile responses to adapt 
existing information systems. Applying the 
VSM to the IT function, in the context of the 
basic model of the IS theoretical perspective 

of agility suggested th
e causal relationship 
between POLINTCON and D-OPTIONS. 
The hypothesis H1 is at the level of analysis 
of the IT function as a meta-system of the 
existing information systems, as interpreted 
from the VSM. This meta-system is an amal-
gam of System FIVE, System FOUR and 

System THREE. This informs a more granu-

lar level of analysis within the IT function of a 
Policy, Intelligence and Control structure. 
This analysis allows the unbundling of the 
primary hypothesis into three lower level hy-

potheses: 
H1a. The more mature the processes of Poli-
cy of the IT function (POLICY), as a 

part of POLINTCON, the more often 

digital-options for the existing informa-

tion systems are exercisable (D-
OPTIONS). 
H1b. The more mature the processes of In-
telligence of the IT function (INTELL), 
as a part of POLINTCON, the more of-
ten digital-options for the existing infor-
mation systems are exercisable (D-

OPTIONS). 
H1c. The more mature the processes of Con-
trol of the IT function (CONTRL), as a 
part of POLINTCON, the more often 

digital-options for the existing informa-

tion systems are exercisable (D-

OPTIONS). 
Hypotheses H1a, H1b and H1c are not an 
alternative to H1, but at a lower level of anal-

ysis. Wetzal et al (2009) discuss the utility of 
a two-tier hierarchical construct like POLINT-
CON. First, a hierarchical construct affords 
theoretical parsimony and reduces structural 
model complexity. Second, hierarchical con-

struct models allow matching the level of 
analysis of the independent and dependent 
variables. In this research, POLINTCON is at 

the level of whole IT function and not the of-
fices within the IT function where POLICY, 
12Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 13INTELL and CONTRL lie. Typically, Policy 
lies in the steering committees of the IT func-
tion, Intelligence in the Strategic & Enterprise 
Architecture office, and Control in the Appli-
cation Management Offices. The level of 

analysis of POLINTCON matches the whole 
of IT function level of D-OPTIONS.  
This research assumed that information sys-
tem enables the enterpri
se agility. This as-
sumption is based on the existing IS literature 
(Agarwal and Sambamurthy, 2002, Desouza, 
2006, Weill et al., 2002) and was tested by 

the secondary hypothesis of this research. 
H2. The more often digital-options for the 
existing information systems are exer-

cisable (D-OPTIONS), the more likely 

that IT-dependent strategic benefits 

(ITBENEFIT) occur. 
In summary, the hypotheses consists of a 
primary hypothesis (H1) informed by the 
theoretical development of this research; an 

unbundling of the primary hypothesis (H1a, 
H1b and H1c) also informed by the same 
theoretical development; and a secondary 

hypothesis (H2) informed by the IS literature. 
The primary hypothesis (H1) tests the enabl-
ing of IS agility and the secondary hypothesis 
(H2) tests the benefits from IS agility. 
Construct measurement 
The measurement of the variables of the hy-
potheses was by a Likert-type questionnaire. 

The research instrument is available in Hobbs 

(2010). This paper references each mea-

surement item in the questionnaire with a 

two-part code. The prefix indicates the Likert 

scale of the item: a ‚MAT™ prefix indicates a 

six-point maturity scale, ‚AGR™ a five-point 
agreement scale and ‚FRQ™ a five-point fre-
quency scale. The suffix is the question num-
ber on the questionnaire. 
The measures for POLICY, INTELL and 
CONTRL used an ordinal scale of non-
existent, initial, repeatable, defined, managed 

and optimized. The maturity scale is recog-
nizable to many IT practitioners from the ‚best 
practice™ frameworks of COBIT (IT Gover-
nance Institute, 2007) and originated from the 
maturity framework developed by the Soft-
ware Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon 
(Humphrey, 1987). The use of maturity levels 
as a scale for quantitative measures has pre-
cedents in IS research (Sledgianowski et al., 
2006).  
The variable POLICY represented the Policy 
construct of the IT function. From the theoret-

ical development of this research, this con-

struct is an interpretation of the VSM subsys-
tem of System FIVE. The measures for POL-
ICY are:  to develop and maintain a set of policies 
to support IT strategy. This includes pol-

icy intent, roles and responsibilities 

(MAT37);  to establish and maintain an optimal co-
ordination, communication and liaison 
structure within the IT function (MAT38); 
and  to create a strategic plan that defines 
how IT goals will contribute to the com-
pany™s strategic objectives (MAT39). 
The measures interpret the VSM attributes of 
System FIVE. System FIVE produces policy 

that governs the behaviour of the total system 

i.e. top-level rules (MAT37), monitors the 

System THREE and System FOUR couple, 

supervises their behaviour and mediates con-

flicts (MAT38), and thinks about what is being 

produced and why, i.e. the viable system is 

produced by System ONE (MAT39) (Beer, 

1979).  
The three measures (MAT37, MAT38 and 
MAT39) reuse existing COBIT control objec-
tives. The COBIT control objectives respec-

tively are PO6.3 IT Policies Management, 
PO4.15 Define the IT Relationship and PO1.4 
Define a strategic IT plan (IT Governance In-
stitute, 2007). 
The variable INTELL represented the Intelli-
gence construct of the IT function. Intelli-
gence is an interpretation of the VSM subsys-
tem of System FOUR. The measures for IN-
TELL are: 
 to maintain a set of high-level designs 
for IT-enabled capabilities, which are op-
13Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 14 tions for forecasted  business initiatives 
(MAT34);  to implement a set of IT-enabled capabil-
ities, which are readily configurable for 
forecasted business initiatives (MAT35); 
 to assess any unexpected operational 
consequences, arising from existing in-

formation systems, to forecast business 

initiatives (MAT36); 
 to monitor the business sector, industry, 
technology, infrastructure, legal & regu-

latory environment trends (MAT40); 
 to analyze existing and emerging tech-
nologies, and plan which technological 
direction to realize the IT strategy 
(MAT43); and  
 to develop a feasibility study that ex-
amines the possibility of implementing 

the requirements and alternative courses 
of action (MAT44). 
The measures interpret the VSM attributes of 
System FOUR. System FOUR builds proba-

bilistic models to reac
t to forecasted events 
(MAT34 and MAT36), gathers data from the 
environment (MAT40 and MAT43), and indi-
cates structural changes that lead to a differ-
ent configuration of System ONE and System 

TWO (MAT35 and MAT44) (Beer, 1979).  
Three of these six measures (MAT40, MAT43 
and MAT44) reuse existing COBIT control 
objectives. The COBIT control objectives re-
spectively are PO3.3 Monitoring of future 
trends and regulations, PO3.1 Technological 
Direction Planning and AI1.3 Feasibility Study 

and Formulation of Alternative Courses of 

Action) (IT Governance Institute, 2007). 
The variable CONTRL represented the Con-
trol construct of the IT function. This construct 

is an interpretation of the VSM subsystem of 

System THREE. The measures for CONTRL 

are:  to acquire and maintain applications in 
line with IT strategy and IT architecture 

(MAT45);  to continuously monitor specified service 
level performance, and report in a format 
that is meaningful to the stakeholders 
(MAT46); and 
 to report service desk activity to enable 
management to measure service per-
formance and to identify trends (MAT47). 
The measures interpret the VSM attributes of 
System THREE. System THREE sources the 

plans, programs and schedules to adapt Sys-

tem ONE (MAT45); monitors the behaviour of 

System ONE resulting from the regulatory 

action of System TWO (MAT46); and moni-

tors System TWO (MAT47) (Beer, 1979). 
The three measures (MAT45, MAT46 and 
MAT47) reuse existing COBIT control objec-
tives. The COBIT control objectives respec-
tively are AI2 Acquire 
& maintain application 
software, DS1.5 Monitoring and Reporting of 
Service Level Achievements and DS8.5 Re-
porting and Trend Analysis (IT Governance 
Institute, 2007). 
The variable D-OPTIONS of H1 and H2 
represented the construct of exercisable digi-
tal-options for the existing information sys-

tems. The reflective measures are the res-

pondents™ experience of how often their com-
pany has exercisable digital options and have 
an ordinal scale of very frequently, somewhat 
frequently, occasionally, rarely and never. 

The measures D-OPTIONS are: 
 have existing information systems that 
are readily configurable for a new busi-

ness initiative (FRQ07); 
 have existing detailed designs for IT that 
can be used, partially or wholly, for a 
new business initiative (FRQ08); 
 have existing, high-level designs for IT 
that can be used, partially or wholly, for 
a new business initiative (FRQ09); and 
 have alternative target IT architectures 
and road maps for new business models 

(FRQ10). This construct was suggested by the concept 
of digital options in IS literature on agility 

(Sambamurthy et al., 2003). The frequency of 
exercising digital options observed by the 
14Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 15survey respondents was the operationaliza-
tion of the concept. 
The variable ITBENEFIT of H2 represented 
the construct of IT-dependent strategic bene-
fits. Measures of IT-dependent strategic ben-
efits that might arise from agility were based 
on Mirani and Lederer (1998), who developed 

an instrument to assess the strategic benefits 

of IS projects. Most of their measures appear 
in the questionnaire:  
 enhance competitiveness or create stra-
tegic advantage (AGR24);  
 enable the organization to catch up with 
competitors (AGR25);  
 align well with stated organizational 
goals (AGR26);  
 help establish useful linkages with other 
organizations (AGR27); and  
 enable the organization to respond more 
quickly to change (AGR28).  
Survey methodology 
Three surveys tested the correlation of va-

riables of the maturity of the IT function and 
the frequency of agility outcomes. The theo-
retical development of this research proposed 
causality between these variables by applying 
Beer™s VSM to the IT function. The unit of 

analysis of this research was individuals in 
Table 2  - Profile of survey responses  
 ConsultCo clients 
LinkedIn members 
Activity of employing organization 
  Education and training 
2 1 
Electricity, gas, water and waste services 
5  Financial and insurance 
5 6 
Information media & telecommunications 
1 16 
Manufacturing 
3 2 
Mining 
2  Other community, social & personal services 
3  Professional, scientific & technical services 
2 5 
Public administration and defense 
4 1 
Rental, hiring and real estate services 
3  Retail trade 2 3 
Transport, postal and warehousing 
1 1 
unidentified 
1  Number of employees 
  Average 
10,504 22,499 
Standard deviation 
27,326 65,549 
Large enterprises of 250 or more 
34 25 
Small-medium enterprises  5 
Small office/home office of less than 10 
 4 
Role of respondent 
  Business stakeholders 
 2 
Business managers 
2 2 
Senior business managers 
10 3 
IT professionals 
1 10 
IT managers 
5 7 
Senior IT managers 
18 11 
15Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 16 the IT function of organizations who com-
pleted the survey. The level of analysis was 
the entire IT function of organizations, as the 
object of the questions.  
An industry partner in this research is Con-
sultCo, an IT consultancy active in eastern 
Australia. First, twelve consultants in the en-

terprise architecture and strategy practice of 

ConsultCo piloted the survey, of which eight 
completed the mailed questionnaire. The pilot 
tested the variables to determine whether the 
measurement items demonstrated reliability. 

The pilot data collected met the Cronbach's 

alpha benchmark of 0.7 or higher (Gefen et 
al., 2000). 
Subsequently, a mailed survey targeted the 
257 client organizations of ConsultCo. Con-

sultCo provided Australian mailing addresses 

for potential respondents, identifying an IT 

professional and a business stakeholder in 

most of the organizations. The initial mail-out 

was 12 September 2008, and the follow-up 

mail-out was 10 October 2008. Completed 
responses from both the initial and follow-up 
mailings continued to the received until 20 
November 2008. Of the total 506 individuals 
mailed a questionnaire, 169 were returned 

undelivered due to insu
fficient addressing or 
the contact no longer being at the address. 
The undeliverable questionnaires resulted 
from currency issues in the ConsultCo cus-
tomer database. This left a possible 204 or-

ganizations with at least one deliverable sur-
vey. Thirty-four organizations returned 36 
completed surveys, giving an organizational 

response rate of 16.75%. Table 2 profiles the 
responses to the mailed survey of ConsultCo 
clients. A workforce-hire firm and a fire ser-
vice each returned two questionnaires, com-
pleted by different individuals. 
The third survey was of practitioners with a 
subscribed interest in IT governance or con-
trol standards. The instrument of this survey 
was a web-based version of the question-
naire used in the mailed survey of ConsultCo 

clients. The web-based survey drew possible 

participants from four discussion groups in 
LinkedIn.com, a professional networking 
website (LinkedIn Corporation, 2008). We 
posted invitations to participate in the survey 

on the discussion boards of The Integration 

Consortium, ISACA Professionals, IT Gover-
nance and IT Governance Institute groups.  
In the LinkedIn survey, 66 members of the 
four discussion groups commenced the sur-

vey. Of these, 31 surveys were incomplete. 

Comments posted by respondents suggest 

that incompletion was due to the framing of 

the questionnaire for an employee of a com-

pany, whereas many discussion group mem-

bers were not employees or affiliated to sev-
eral companies. It cannot be assessed how 
many members were active in the discussion 
groups during the survey period of ten weeks.  
Table 2 profiles the 35 completed responses 
to the LinkedIn survey. One respondent failed 
to record a number of employees. The re-

gions where the respondents mostly work 
were: Asia-Pacific (1); Western Europe (9); 
USA & Canada (18); Greater Region of China 
(1); Central & Eastern Europe (2); Latin 
America (2); India, Pakistan & Sri Lanka (0); 

and the Middle East & Africa (2). An assump-

tion was that the 35 respondents represent 
35 different organizations. Though the web-
based survey was anonymous, the responses 
did not include any two organizations with a  
Table 3 - Summary of survey responses 
Survey 
Method
Anonymity
Period Individuals 
Organizations
Pilot of ConsultCo consultants  Mailed No Jun 2008 8 1 
ConsultCo clients  Mailed No Sep 2008 36 34 
LinkedIn discussion group 
members 
Web 
based 
Yes 
Nov 2008 
Jan 2009 
35 35 
TOTAL    79 70 
16Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 17similar region, industry sector and estimate of 
employees.  
The ConsultCo client and LinkedIn surveys 
appear to sample the same population. Each 

variable of hypotheses H1 and H2 was sub-

ject to parametric and non-parametric tests 

for the two independent samples of the Con-

sultCo client respondents and the LinkedIn 

discussion group respondents (Table 3). The 

t-test and Mann-Whitney U-test tested re-

spectively for parametric and non-parametric 

data. The independent tests for the two sam-

ples supported a claim that they represent the 

same underlying population of organizations.  
A non-response bias was not evident. Testing 
for a non-response bias was amongst the 
mailed survey of 257 ConsultCo client organ-
izations, as this survey had a known re-
sponse rate of 16.75%. Accordingly, we iden-

tified from the 36 responses of the mailed 
survey two groups of nine. These two groups 
are the first and last quartile of responses 
based on their returned mail date. The two 
response quartiles for the variables of hypo-

theses H1 and H2 had no significant differ-
ences. The conclusion is that the respon-
dents from the ConsultCo client organizations 

contained no bias between the early and late 
responders, and there is no trend to suggest 
that the non-respondents had a bias regard-
ing the tested variables.  
The reflective measures for each variable co-
vary with one another. This indicates internal 
reliability of the measures to reflect the same 
phenomenon (Petter et al., 2007). All process 
maturity measures that constitute POLINT-

CON displayed covariance when the 79 res-

ponses where plotted on a distribution chart.  
The common movement for POLICY, INTELL 
and CONTRL had three inflexion points, 

where the first inflexion point was higher than 
the last on the maturity scale. The four fre-
quency measures of D-OPTIONS also dis-

played common movement, with a high inflex-
ion point in the first part of the frequency 
scale, followed by a longer tail. The five 
agreement measures of ITBENEFIT all had a 
high inflexion point in the second part of the 

agreement scale, preceded by a long tail. 
Data analysis 
When a variable has multiple measures, the 
measurement items must demonstrate relia-
bility and validity. Conve
rgent reliability is the 
extent that all the measurement items for a 

given variable have consistent values (Gefen 

et al., 2000). A Cronbach's alpha of 0.7 is a 
benchmark for convergent reliability. A 
second measure is comp
osite reliability and a 
recommended benchmark is 0.70 (Hulland, 

1999). That the PLS path modeling exceeded 

these two benchmarks indicated strong con-
vergent reliability (Table 4). 
For measurement item™s reliability, the load-
ing of the measurement item to its respective 
variable should be 0.7 or more (Hulland, 
1999). Table 5 shows the loadings of the 
measurement items had 
sufficient reliability, 
after rounding to a single decimal place. 
Discriminant validity is the extent to which 
measurement items of a given variable differ 

from measurement items of other variables in 

the same structural model (Hulland 1999). 

The root of the average variance extracted 
(AVE) for each variable is in the italicized di-
agonal of the correlation matrix (Table 6) all 
show adequate discriminant validity. Discri-
Table 4 - Construct validity and reliability
 Variable 
AVE 
Composite reliability 
Cronbach™s alpha 
CONTRL 0.750 0.900 0.833 
D-OPTIONS 0.741 0.919 0.883 
INTELL 0.724 0.940 0.923 
ITBENEFIT 0.710 0.924 0.898 
POLICY 0.810 0.927 0.882 
POLINTCON 0.651 0.957 0.951 
17Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 18 minant validity was only required of the first-
order variables in any hierarchical construct 
(Wetzels et al., 2009). 
The 79 cases had no missing values and 
Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests suggested imper-
fect but significant data normality (Hobbs, 
2010). The software used was SmartPLS 
version 2.0.M3 (Ringle et al., 2005). The PLS 
algorithm used measurement standardization 
for the different ordinal scales in the reflective 
measures and a centroid-weighting scheme.
 Table 6 - Correlation matrix 
  CONTRL 
D-OPTIONS 
INTELL 
ITBENEFIT 
POLICY 
CONTRL 
0.866 
    
D-OPTIONS 
0.641 
0.861 
   
INTELL 0.781 0.722 
0.851 
  ITBENEFIT 
0.615 0.607 0.644 
0.843 
 POLICY 0.686 0.593 0.850 0.542 
0.900 
Table 5 - Measurement model and standardized loadings
 First order variables 
Loading 
Second order variables
Loading 
AGR24 
 ITBENEFIT  0.841   
AGR25 
 ITBENEFIT  0.789   
AGR26 
 ITBENEFIT  0.865   
AGR27 
 ITBENEFIT  0.820   
AGR28 
 ITBENEFIT  0.894   
FRQ07 
 D-OPTIONS  0.860   
FRQ08 
 D-OPTIONS  0.891   
FRQ09 
 D-OPTIONS  0.898   
FRQ10 
 D-OPTIONS  0.790   
MAT34 
 INTELL  0.890 MAT34 
 POLINTCON  0.858 
MAT35 
 INTELL  0.907 MAT35 
 POLINTCON  0.855 
MAT36 
 INTELL  0.863 MAT36 
 POLINTCON  0.877 
MAT37 
 POLICY  0.906 MAT37 
 POLINTCON  0.813 
MAT38 
 POLICY  0.893 MAT38 
 POLINTCON  0.826 
MAT39 
 POLICY  0.901 MAT39 
 POLINTCON  0.821 
MAT40 
 INTELL  0.781 MAT40 
 POLINTCON  0.765 
MAT43 
 INTELL  0.846 MAT43 
 POLINTCON  0.822 
MAT44 
 INTELL  0.804 MAT44 
 POLINTCON  0.791 
MAT45 
 CONTRL  0.829 MAT45 
 POLINTCON  0.825 
MAT46 
 CONTRL  0.899 MAT46 
 POLINTCON  0.723 
MAT47 
 CONTRL  0.868 MAT47 
 POLINTCON  0.673 
18Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 19 Figure 4 - Principal research model 
 Findings 
The primary purpose of the quantitative data 
analysis was theory testing. The use of PLS 
path modeling is valid for this purpose (Mar-
coulides and Saunders, 2006). All completed 
responses (n=79) from the mailed and web-

based surveys were utilized in the modeling 
to provide the maximum opportunity for falsi-
fication.  
The PLS path modeling in Figure 4 showed a 
positive correlation between POLINTCON 
and D-OPTIONS (ß=0.718, t=13.554, p<0.01) 
and did not falsify the H1 hypothesis. Similar-

ly, the positive correlation between D-

OPTIONS and ITBENEFIT (ß=0.607, 
t=11.690, p<0.01) did not falsify the H2 hypo-
thesis. Significance testing used a bootstrap 
procedure with 2000 samples of the 79 res-

ponses. The two-tailed, t-values of measure-

ment item weights and the variable correla-
tions were all significant at p < 0.01 for Type I 
errors. 
The PLS path modeling achieved a statistical 
power in excess of 0.80, considered by most 
researchers as acceptable to reject a false 

null hypothesis (Type II errors). The claim 
was based on the loadings of measurement 
items rounding to 0.7 or greater (Table 5) and 

path correlations between constructs were 
0.6 or greater (Figure 4). These large effect 
sizes require a sample size of 23 to achieve a 
power of 0.80, as determined in Marcoulides 
and Saunders (2006). The sample size of 79 

used was more than sufficient to claim an ac-
ceptable level of statistical power. 
Testing of hypotheses H1a, H1b and H1c un-
bundled the POLINTCON construct into a 

two-order hierarchical construct. Wetzel et al. 

(2009) recommend for hierarchical constructs 
the repeated use of each measurement item 
in each order of the construct. Thus, the three 
reflective measures for POLICY, the six 

measures of INTELL and three measures of 

CONTRL, in the first-order of the hierarchical 

construct, were again linked as twelve reflec-
19Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 20 tive measures of the second-order for PO-
LINTCON (Table 5). Wetzel et al. (2009) 
guide the deriving of the indirect effects of a 
first-order exogenous variable on an endo-
genous variable. From Figure 4, the indirect 

effects of the first-order exogenous variables 
on D-OPTIONS calculated as: 
 POLICYPOLINTCON (ß=0.280) and 
POLINTCON
D-OPTIONS (ß=0.718) 
having the product 0.201; 
 INTELL
POLINTCON (ß=0.537) and 
POLINTCON
D-OPTIONS (ß=0.718) 
having the product 0.386;  
 CONTRL
POLINTCON (ß=0.255) and 
POLINTCON
D-OPTIONS (ß=0.718) 
having the product 0.183.  
The hierarchical construct reveals the relative 
contribution of POLICY, INTELL and 

CONTRL to enable agility in existing informa-
tion systems. From th
e IS practice perspec-
tive, the IT function of a large organization 
should look first to the Strategy and Enter-
prise Architecture office, where Intelligence is 

typically housed, to see where more than half 

the capability for enabling agility is deter-
mined. Following that, attention can fall on 
the steering committees and application 
management offices, which respectively 

house Policy and Control, and share the re-

maining half of the agility capability. 
Improvement over existing prac-
tice 
A purpose of this research was to consider 
both the IS theoretical and practical perspec-
tives that inform the en
ablement of agility. We 
identified maturity objectives for the IT func-
tion based in existing practice and informed 
by cybernetic principles. PLS path modeling 

found the existing COBIT objectives linked 
the goal Creating IT agility (Table 7) had a 
weaker determination for agility outcomes (D-
OPTIONS, R2=0.379) than the research 
model that used POLINTCON as an exogen-
ous variable (Figure 4, D-OPTIONS, 

R2=0.515). Both models displayed high sta-
tistical power and significance, strong con-
vergent reliability, strong discriminant validity 

and item reliability for each measurement.  
Informed by the meta-system processes of 
the VSM and concepts from the IS literature, 
this research identified additional COBIT ob-

jectives and derived new objectives, which 

determined more than half of the variance of 
agility amongst the surv
ey responses. This 
suggested the meta-level cybernetic theory, 
applied to the IT function, better correlates 

with reported agility ou
tcomes than the exist-
ing COBIT objectives do on their own. 
What are missing in the COBIT framework 
are objectives to create agility that relate to 

the Policy-Intelligence-Control structure of the 

IT function (POLINTCON). This research 
created three new objectives (Table 8) and 
recognized eight existing COBIT objectives 
(Table 9) not previously linked to agility. A 
research recommendation is future versions 

of industry ‚best practices™ that address IT 
agility include both sets of objectives. 
One could argue that adding control objec-
tives to the existing COBIT-based model was 
an obvious improvement. The questions then 
become whether the additional objectives are 
necessary and sufficient, and how can this be 

justified theoretically? Using the VSM in this 

research offers a pathway to answer these 
fundamental questions and points towards a 
more comprehensive and defensible theory 
on agility. 
Table 5 - Existing objectives 
linked to Creating IT agility 
 Define IT processes, organization & relationships PO4 
To manage IT human resources PO7 
To acquire and maintain tech
nology infrastructure AI3 
Integrity Management PO2.4 
 20Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 21Table 6 - New objectives to be linked to Creating IT agility 
Define high-level designs for forecasted business initiatives 
Implement configurable software for forecasted business initiatives 
Assess unexpected operational conseque
nces to forecast business initiatives 
 Table 7 - Existing COBIT control objectiv
es not yet linked to Creating IT agility
 IT policies management PO6.3 
Define the IT relationships PO4.15 
Define a strategic IT plan PO1.4 
Monitoring future trends and regulations PO3.3 
Technological direction planning PO3.1 
Acquire and maintain application software AI2 
Monitoring and reporting of service levels DS1.5 
Reporting and trend analysis DS8.5 
 Generalization of findings
 We believe the research finding is transfera-
ble to other settings beyond the survey sam-
ples. Additional PLS path modeling used only 
data from the 34 client organizations of Con-
sultCo to determine transferability. This sub-
set of data collected had fully identified res-

pondents to measure their representative-
ness to a target population of large enterpris-
es in OECD member countries.  
The transferability modeling did not include 
the 35 international companies from LinkedIn 
discussion group members, as the web-

based survey was anonymous and the 

attributes of the respondents are unverifiable 

from the public knowledge of their organiza-

tions. Similarly, three responses from the 

mailed survey of ConsultCo clients were not 

included in the transfer
ability profile. In one 
case, the respondent removed the identifier 

from the questionnaire; and in two cases, 

they were the second response from an or-

ganization. Further, the eight responses from 

the pilot of ConsultCo consultants were not 

included so not to over represent the IT con-

sultancy. 
The results of the PLS path modeling for 
transferability (n=34) was comparable with 

that of the principal research modeling (n=79). 

The positive path coefficient between PO-
LINTCON and D-OPTIONS are consistent 
(ß=0.734, p<0.01 cf. Figure 4, ß=0.718, 
p<0.01). Similarly, the positive path coeffi-
cient between D-OPTIONS and ITBENEFIT 
are consistent between the two models 

(ß=0.602, p<0.01 cf. Figure 4, ß=0.607, 

p<0.01). The transferability modeling dis-
played high statistical power and significance, 
strong convergent validity, adequate discrimi-
nant validity and item re
liability for each mea-
surement.  
Consequently, the 33 client organizations 
were classified into Australian Bureau of Sta-

tistics™ industry sectors, and compared 
against each sector™s contribution to  Austral-
ian GDP in 2005-2006 (Australian Bureau of 
Statistics, 2008). The incidence of industry 
sectors in the sample of ConsultCo client or-

ganizations was mostly comparable to the 
contribution of those sectors to the total Aus-
tralian economy, within five percentage points. 
The exception was an over-representation of 
the electricity, gas and water supply, and an 

under-representation of the construction and 

wholesale trade sectors.  
The sectoral composition of Australian indus-
try is mostly representative of other OECD 

countries, with only the government, health, 

education and other personal services sector 
differing by more the five-percentage points 
from the USA. Our inference that the findings 
of this research are transferable to large en 
21Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 22  terprises was borne by the sample of the 

ConsultCo client organizations being repre-

sentative of the population of Australian or-

ganizations, and that Australian organizations 

are representative of other OECD countries.  
Limitations 
As with most Likert-type survey research, it is 

possible that common method variance (CMV) 

inflated the correlation found among the va-
riables. Malhotra et al (2006) recommend the 
marker variable technique for assessing CMV 
as effective for IS research. The question-

naire included an item that asked how fre-

quently does your company "Have escala-
tions or unresolved issues due to lack of, or 
insufficient responsibility for, assignments?" 
This measurement item met the post hoc 

analysis criteria for a marker variable by hav-

ing the smallest positive correlation with an  
endogenous variable (Malhotra et al., 2006).  
The marker variable had a correlation with D-
OPTIONS of 0.156. Table 10  shows the cor-

relations between variables of hypotheses H1 

and H2 adjusted by the CMV estimate. The 
adjusted correlations suggest that CMV may 
be present in the survey responses but only 
accounts for a small reduction from the un- 

corrected correlations. The adjusted t-values 

of the correlations remain significant at p < 
0.01. 
A second limitation might arise from the over-
representation of the clients of ConsultCo 
when generalizing the findings to other organ-
izations. It is arguable that those organiza-

tions that engage an IT consultancy may be 

less internally capable of agility, and therefore 
over-represents poor process maturity or 
poorly realized IT-dependent strategic bene-
fits.  
A research limitation was the reliance on 
COBIT as a representative industry frame-
work for the IS practice perspective on agility. 
COBIT has widespread adoption  (Ridley et 

al., 2004) and an explicit goal to Create IT 

agility (IT Governance In
stitute, 2007). The 
alternative frameworks of ITIL and TOGAF 
are not explicit in cr
eating agility and less 
suitable as a practice perspective for this re-
search. 
Conclusion  
This research contrasted the agility perspec-
tive from a widely used industry framework 
with research per
spectives on agility in the IS 
literature. This research suggested Beer™s 

Viable System Model was a useful meta-level 
theory to house agility el
ements from IS re-
search literature, and apply VSM principles to 
identify the structure required of the IT func-

tion. By means of a survey of 70 organiza-

tions, this research confirmed that the meta-
level theory better correlates with reported 
agility measures than existing practice meas-
ures do on their own. An agility-capability 

model was the product of this research (Fig-

ure 5). 
The leftmost box of the agility-capability mod-
el contains the structure of the IT function ne-
cessary to produce agility 
activities. Informed 
by the VSM meta-system Policy sets the 

overall goals of the information systems, In-
telligence looks outside the existing systems 
and to the future, and Control focuses on the 
existing systems now. A set of IT processes, 

drawn mostly from COBIT control objectives, 
reflect the agility capabilities of the IT func-
tions. 
The centre column of the agility-capability 
model has agility activi
ties gleaned from the 
IS theoretical literature, and includes the con-
cept of digital options. Digital options are 

rights to future IT configurations made by an 

initial IT investment  without an obligation for 
full investment (Sambamurthy et al., 2003).  
Table 8 - Correlations adjusted for CMV 
Independent variable 
Dependent  variable 
Unadjusted correlation
Adjusted correlation
POLINTCON D-OPTIONS 0.718 0.666 
D-OPTIONS ITBENEFIT 0.607 0.534 
22Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 23 The Policy, Intelligence and Control structure 
of the IT function links to the agility activities. 
The rightmost box of agility-capability model 
of Figure 5 shows the outcomes from the agil-
ity activities. The occurrence of exercisable 
digital options reflects the agility outcomes. 
These events are prior initial IT investments 

for forecasted business initiatives completed 

to various stages in the systems development 
life cycle, and afford a head start to delivering 
an adaptation to existing information systems 
once a forecasted business initiative arrives. 
The initial IT investments is a head start on 
the full IT investment, and allows an agile 

adaptation faster than conventional planning 
cycles, where full IT investments commences 
when the request for a business initiative is 
received. 
The agility-capability model of Figure 5 is 
theory that explains and predicts. The pre-
scribed IT function subsystems are a large 
determinant of the agility outcomes (Figure 4, 
 Figure 5 - The agility-capability model 
23Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 24 D-OPTIONS, R2=0.515). Intelligence, which 
is often associated with the strategy & enter-
prise architecture office, contributes more 
than half of the IT function determination of 
agility. Policy and Control share the remain-

ing determination of agility by the IT function, 
and are respectively associated with steering 
committees and application management of-

fices.  
The agility-capability 
model also addresses of 
the basic model for agility identified in existing 
IS research, which does not to extend to 

theories of explaining 
and predicting or theo-
ries of design and action. The model pre-
scribes IT function activities to sense future 
needs from the environment, sense current 
use of information systems, create a portfolio 

of digital options and decide to exercise a dig-

ital option.  
This research fills gaps identified in IS litera-
ture. Fink and Neumann (2007) suggest fu-

ture research to identify the mechanisms un-

derlying shared IT personnel and IT infra-
structure capabilities that afford agility. The 
theory of explanation and
 prediction for agility 
in information systems, extended by this re-
search, identifies the VSM as a plausible me-

chanism. Recognition of this IS research gap 
is echoed by Sambamurthy et al. (2007), who 
state the internal mechanisms for deploying 
and utilizing IT resources to enable organiza-
tional agility remains under-researched.  
We demonstrated in this research that the IS 
theoretical and practi
ce perspectives on agili-
ty are reconcilable through cybernetics. The 

cybernetic framework complemented the 
model of agility from th
e existing IS theoreti-
cal perspectives. The VSM application pro-
vided a testable theory of agility that explains 

and predicts (Gregor, 2006), which was miss-

ing from the IS theoretical perspectives, and 
required to inform IS practice to plan and ac-
tion agility. Gartner Research (Plummer and 
McCoy, 2006) states enterprises must learn 

how to measure agility and make investments 

to improve their capability, and predicts best 

practices for agility w
ill emerge through to 
2011. A contribution of this research is to 

meet this IS practitioner need. 
Acknowledgements 
The authors wish to acknowledge Oakton, an 

Australian technology and business consult-
ing company, as the industry partner of this 
research. We particularly thank James Wat-

son of Oakton for his continued support as 
the demands for this research evolved. This 
research was supported under Australian Re-
search Council's Linkage Projects funding 
scheme (project LP0561936). The views ex-

pressed herein are those of the authors and 
are not necessarily those of the Australian 
Research Council. George Hobbs is especial-
ly thankful for the encouragement given dur-
ing his doctoral candidature by his wife, Don-

na. References 
Agarwal, R. and V. Sambamurthy (2002) 
"Principles and models for organizing 
the IT function," 
MIS Quarterly Execu-
tive
 (1) 1, pp. 1-16. 
Andrade, L. F. and J. L. Fladeiro (2002) "Agil-
ity through coordination," 
Information 
Systems
 (27) 6, pp. 411-424. 
Ashby, W. R. (1956) 
An Introduction to Cy-
bernetics
. London: Chapman & Hall. 
Australian Bureau of Statistics. (2008) 
2008 
Australia at a glance
. Commonwealth 
of Australia ISSN 1031-0541. 
Beer, S. (1979) 
The Heart of Enterprise
. Chichester: Wiley. 
Beer, S. (1984) "The Viable System Model: 
Its Provenance, Development, Metho-
dology and Pathology," 
The Journal of 
the Operational Research Society
 (35) 
1, pp. 7-25. 
Berente, N. (2005) ERP and Innovation in 
Schumpeterian Market Dynamics, in 
AMCIS 2005 Proceedings
. Börjesson, A., F. Martinsson, and M. Timme-
ras (2006) "Agile improvement prac-
tices in software organizations," 
Euro-pean Journal of Information Systems
 (15) 2, pp. 169-182. 
24Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 25Conant, R. C. and W. R. Ashby (1970) "Every 
good regulator of a system must be a 
model of that system," 
International 
Journal of Systems Science
 (1) 2, pp. 
89-97. 
Cornford, T., W. Venters, and Y. Zheng (2007) 
Agility, Improvisation, or Enacted 
Emergence, in 
ICIS 2007 Proceedings
. Desouza, K. C. (2006) 
Agile Information Sys-
tems: Conceptualization, Construction, 

and Management
. Oxford: Butterworth 
Heinemann. 
Fink, L. and S. Neumann (2007) "Gaining 
Agility through IT Personnel Capabili-
ties: The Mediating Role of IT Infra-

structure Capabilities," 
Journal of the 
Association for Information Systems
 (8) 8, pp. 440-462. 
Fitzgerald, B., G. Hartnett, and K. Conboy 
(2006) "Customising agile methods to 
software practices at Intel Shannon," 

European Journal of Information Sys-

tems
 (15) 2, pp. 200-213. 
Galliers, R. D. (2006) Strategizing for Agility: 
Confronting Information Systems In-

flexibility, in  K. C. Desouza (Ed.) 
Agile Information Systems: Conceptu-
alization, Construction, and Manage-

ment
, Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann. 
Gefen, D., D. W. Straub, and M.-C. Boudreau 
(2000) "Structural Equation Modeling 
and Regression: Guidelines for Re-
search Practice," 
Communications of 
the Association for Information Sys-
tems
 (4) 7, pp. 1-79. 
Goethals, F. G., M. Snoeck, W. Lemahieu, 
and J. Vandenbulcke (2006) "Man-
agement and enterprise architecture 
click: The FAD(E)E Framework," 
In-formation Systems Frontiers
 (8) 2, pp. 
67-79. 
Gregor, S. (2006) "The nature of theory in 
information systems," 
MIS Quarterly
 (30) 3, pp. 611-642. 
Haslett, T. and R. Sarah (2006) "Using the 
viable systems model to structure a 
system dynamics mapping and mod-
eling project for the Australian Taxa-
tion Office," 
Systemic Practice and 
Action Research
 (19) 3, pp. 273-290. 
Henderson, J. and N. Venkatraman (1993) 
"Strategic Alignment: Leveraging In-
formation Technology for Transform-
ing Organizations," 
IBM Systems 
Journal
 (32) 1, pp. 4-16. 
Hobbs, G. A. (2010) Enabling agility in exist-
ing information systems: A capability 

structure for the IT function. PhD the-

sis, The University of Melbourne. 
Holmqvist, M. and K. Pessi (2006) "Agility 
through scenario development and 
continuous implementation: a global 
aftermarket logistics case," 
European 
Journal of Information Systems
 (15) 2, 
pp. 146-158. 
Hulland, J. (1999) "Use of Partial Least 
Squares (PLS) in Strategic Manage-
ment Research: A Review of Four 
Recent Studies," 
Strategic Manage-
ment Journal
 (20) 2, pp. 195-204. 
Humphrey, W. S. (1987) 
Characterizing the 
software process: a maturity frame-

work
. Software Engineering Institute 
Carnegie Mellon University CMU/SEI-
87-TR-11. 
IT Governance Institute. (2007) 
COBIT 4.1: 
Framework, Control Objectives, Man-
agement Guidelines, Maturity Models
. IT Governance Institute. 
LinkedIn Corporation (2008) "LinkedIn 
Groups," LinkedIn Corporation, 

http://www.linkedin.com/ (13 January, 
2008). 
Luftman, J. and E. McLean (2004) "Key Is-
sues for IT Executives," 
MIS Quarterly 
Executive
 (3) 2, pp. 89-104. 
Lyytinen, K. and G. M. Rose (2006) "Informa-
tion system development agility as or-

ganizational learning," 
European 
Journal of Information Systems
 (15) 2, 
pp. 183-199. 
25Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers
 Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 26 Malhotra, N. K., S. S. Kim, and A. Patil (2006) 
"Common Method Variance in IS Re-
search: A Comparison of Alternative 
Approaches and a Reanalysis of Past 

Research," 
Management Science
 (52) 
12, pp. 1865-1883. 
Marcoulides, G. A. and C. Saunders (2006) 
"PLS: A Silver Bullet?," 
MIS Quarterly (30) 2, pp. iii-ix. 
Markus, M. (2000) "Paradigm Shifts-E-
Business and Business/Systems Inte-
gration," Communications of the As-
sociation for Information Systems
 (4) 
10, pp. 1-44. 
Mathiassen, L. and J. Pries-Heje (2006) 
"Business agility and diffusion of in-
formation technology," 
European 
Journal of Information Systems
 (15) 2, 
pp. 116-119. 
Mirani, R. and A. L. Lederer (1998) "An In-
strument for Assessing the Organiza-

tional Benefits of IS Projects," 
Deci-
sion Sciences (29) 4, pp. 803-838. 
Newman, D. and D. Logan. (2006a) 
Achiev-
ing Agility: How Enterprise Information 

Management Overcomes Information 

Silos
. Gartner Research G00137817. 
Newman, D. and D. Logan. (2006b) 
Achiev-
ing Agility: How Enterprise Information 
Management Overcomes Information 
Silos
. Gartner G00137817. 
Otto, B., K. Wende, A. Schmidt, and P. Osl 
(2007) Towards a Framework for Cor-
porate Data Quality Management, in 
ACIS 2007 Proceedings
. Toowoomba. 
Overby, E., A. Bharadwaj, and V. Sambamur-
thy (2006) "Enterprise agility and the 

enabling role of information technolo-
gy," 
European Journal of Information 
Systems
 (15) 2, pp. 120-131. 
Patten, K., B. Whitworth, J. Fjermestad, and 
E. Mahinda. (2005) Leading IT flexibil-
ity: anticipation, agility and adaptability. 
Eleventh Americas Conference on In-
formation Systems, Omaha, Nebraska, 
2005, pp. 11-14. 
Peppard, J. and J. Ward (2004) "Beyond stra-
tegic information systems: towards an 
IS capability," 
Journal of Strategic In-
formation Systems
 (13) 2, pp. 167-
194. 
Petter, S., D. Straub, and A. Rai (2007) "Spe-
cifying Formative Constructs in Infor-
mation Systems Research," 
MIS 
Quarterly
 (31) 4, pp. 623-656. 
Plummer, D. C. and D. W. McCoy. (2006) 
Achieving Agility: Defining Agility in an 
IT Context
. Gartner Research 
G00137819. 
Raschke, R. L. and J. S. David (2005) Busi-
ness Process Agility, in 
AMCIS 2005 
Proceedings
. Ridley, G., J. Young, and P. Carroll. (2004) 
COBIT and its utilization: a framework 
from the literature. 
37th Annual Hawaii 
International Conference on System 
Sciences, 2004
, pp. 8. 
Ringle, C. M., S. Wende, and A. Will (2005) 
SmartPLS, 2.0 (beta) edition. Ham-

burg, Germany: University of Ham-

burg. 
Sambamurthy, V., A. Bharadwaj, and V. 
Grover (2003) "Shaping Agility 

through Digital Options: Reconceptua-
lizing the Role of Information Tech-
nology in Contemporary Firms," 
MIS 
Quarterly
 (27) 2, pp. 237-263. 
Sambamurthy, V., K.-K. Wei, K. Lim, and D. 
Lee (2007) IT-Enabled Organizational 
Agility and Firms' Sustainable Com-
petitive Advantage, in 
ICIS 2007 Pro-
ceedings
. Schwaninger, M. (2006) "Design for viable 
organizations: the diagnostic power of 
the viable system model," 
Kybernetes
 (35) 7-8, pp. 955-966. 
Seo, D., K. Desouza, and J. Erickson (2006) 
Opening up the Black-Box: Informa-
tion Systems and Organizational Agili-
ty, in 
AMCIS 2006 Proceedings
. Seo, D. B. and A. I. La Paz (2008) "Exploring 
the dark side of IS in achieving orga-
26Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Information Systems, Vol. 2, Iss. 4 [2011], Art. 2http://aisel.aisnet.org/pajais/vol2/iss4/2 Agility in Information Systems: Enabling Capabilities for the IT Function / Hobbs & Scheepers 
Pacific Asia Journal of the Association for Inform
ation Systems Vol. 2 No. 4, pp.1-27 / December 2010
 27nizational agility," 
Communications of 
the ACM
 (51) 11, pp. 136-139. 
Shaw, D., B. Snowdon, C. Holland, P. Kawa-
lek et al. (2004) "The viable systems 
model applied to a smart network: the 
case of the UK electricity market," 
Journal of Information Technology
 (19) 
4, pp. 270-280. 
Sledgianowski, D., J. Luftman, and R. Reilly 
(2006) "Development and Validation 

of an Instrument to Measure Maturity 

of IT Business Strategic Alignment 
Mechanisms," 
Information Resources 
Management Journal
 (19) 3, pp. 3-18. 
Umar, A. (2005) "IT infrastructure to enable 
next generation enterprises," 
Informa-
tion Systems Frontiers
 (7) 3, pp. 217-
256. Walker, J. (2001) "The Viable Systems Model: 
A guide for co-operatives and federa-
tions," 
www.esrad.org.uk/resources/vsmg_2.
2/pdf/vsmg_2_2.pdf (1 November, 

2006). Weill, P. (2004) "Don™t
 Just Lead
, Govern: 
How Top-Performing Firms Govern 
IT," 
MIS Quarterly Executive
 (3) 1, pp. 
1-17. Weill, P., M. Subramani, and M. Broadbent 
(2002) "Building IT Infrastructure for 
Strategic Agility," 
MIT Sloan Man-
agement Review
 (44) 1, pp. 57-65. 
Wetzels, M., G. Odekerken-Schroder, and C. 
van Oppen (2009) "Using PLS Path 

Modeling for Assessing Hierarchical 

Construct Models: Guidelines and 
Empirical Illustration," 
MIS Quarterly
 (33) 1, pp. 177-195. 
Zhao, J., M. Tanniru, and L.-J. Zhang (2007) 
"Services computing as the foundation 
of enterprise agility: Overview of re-
cent advances and introduction to the 
special issue," 
Information Systems 
Frontiers (9) 1, pp. 1-8. 
About Authors 
Dr. George Hobbs
 has a Masters of Informa-
tion Systems and a PhD awarded by the Uni-

versity of Melbourne in 2010. His research 

interests include the role of the IT function in 

enabling agility in information systems and 

cybernetics. He has reviewed for the Austra-

lasian Conference on Information Systems 

and the Journal of Information Technology, 

and coordinated the Organisational and So-

cial Aspects of Information Systems research 

group at the University of Melbourne. George 
has been an IT professional for over 20 years, 
with placements at Telstra, EDS Australia, 
Accenture and the National Australia Bank. 

His current position is with NBN Co, the gov-

ernment enterprise charged with networking 
Australian homes with fibre-to-the-premises 
connection.  
Dr. Rens Scheepers
 is an Associate Profes-
sor of Information Systems at the University 
of Melbourne. His research interest is in the 
implementation of, and business value de-

rived from, complex business systems. He 
has a Masters of Business Administration 
from the University of Pretoria and a PhD 
from Aalborg University awarded in 1999. 
Rens has been an Associate Editor for the 

Journal of Information Technology and for the 
Journal of Strategic Information Systems. He 
has served as the Deputy Head of the De-
partment of Information Systems at the Uni-
versity of Melbourne and is currently an ex-

ecutive committee member of the Institute for 
a Broadband-enabled Society (IBES). Rens 
has accepted the Chair of Information Sys-
tems at Deakin University. 
 27Hobbs and Scheepers: Agility in Information Systems:Enabling Capabilities for the IT FPublished by AIS Electronic Library (AISeL), 2011