 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
RESEARCH 
ARTICLETOWARD AGILE:  AN INTEGRATED ANALYSIS OFQUANTITATIVE AND QUALITATIVE FIELD DATAON SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT AGILITY1By:
Gwanhoo Lee
Department of Information Technology

Kogod School of Business

American University

4400 Massachusetts Avenue NW

Washington, DC  20016-8044

U.S.A.

glee@american.edu
Weidong Xia
Department of Decision Sciences and
Information Systems
College of Business Administration

Florida International University

11200 SW 8 Street

Miami, FL  33199

Weidong.Xia@fiu.edu
AbstractAs business and technology envi
ronments change at an unpre-
cedented rate, software development agility to respond to

changing user requirements has become increasingly critical

for software development performance.  Agile software devel-

opment approaches, which emphasize sense-and-respond,

self-organization, cross-functional teams, and continuous

adaptation, have been adopted by an increasing number of

organizations to improve their software development agility. 

However, the agile development literature is largely anec-1Detmar Straub was the accepting senior editor for this paper.  Bill Kettinger
served as the associate editor.dotal and prescriptive, lacking empirical evidence and theo-
retical foundation to support the principles and practices of

agile development.  Little research has empirically examined

the software development agility 
construct in terms of its
dimensions, determinants, and effects on software develop-

ment performance.  As a result, there is a lack of under-

standing about how organizations can effectively implement

an agile development approach.Using an integrated research approach that combines quan-
titative and qualitative data analyses, this research opens the

black box of agile development by empirically examining the

relationships among two dimensions of software development

agility (software team response extensiveness and software

team response efficiency), two antecedents that can be con-

trolled (team autonomy and team diversity), and three aspects

of software development performance (on-time completion,

on-budget completion, and software functionality).  Our PLS

results of survey responses of 399 software project managers

suggest that the relationships among these variables are more

complex than what has been perceived by the literature.  The

results suggest a tradeoff relationship between response

extensiveness and response efficiency.  These two agility

dimensions impact software development performance dif-

ferently:  response efficiency positively affects all of on-time
completion, on-budget completion, and software functionality,

whereas response extensiveness positively affects only soft-
ware functionality.  The results also suggest that team auton-

omy has a positive effect on response efficiency and a

negative effect on response extensiveness, and that team

diversity has a positive effect on response extensiveness.  We

conducted 10 post hoc case studies to qualitatively cross-

validate our PLS results and provide rich, additional insights

regarding the complex, dynamic interplays between auton-
MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1, pp. 87-114/March 2010
87 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
omy, diversity, agility, and performance.  The qualitative
analysis also provides explanations for both supported and

unsupported hypotheses.  We discuss these qualitative

analysis results and conclude with the theoretical and prac-

tical implications of our research findings for agile develop-

ment approaches.Keywords:  Software development agility, agile software
development, team autonomy, team diversity, software

development performance, requirement change, partial least

square, case studyIntroductionThe unprecedented rate of change in business and technology

has made it increasingly difficult for software teams to

determine user requirements and respond to their changes

(Schmidt et al. 2001).  A U.S. Department of Defense study

shows that 45 percent of software features fail to meet user

needs and requirements (Larman 2004).  Agile software

development approaches such as XP (eXtreme Programming),

Scrum, DSDM (Dynamic Systems Development Method),

and FDD (Feature-Driven Development) have been proposed

as solutions to improve a software team™s ability to embrace

and respond to changing requirements (Beck and Andres

2005; Coad et al. 1999; Schwaber and Beedle 2002; Stapleton

1997).  Agile development approaches differ from the tradi-

tional, plan-driven, structured approaches as the former put

more emphasis on lean processes and dynamic adaptation

than on detailed front-end plans and heavy documentation

(Nerur and Balijepally 2007).At the heart of agile development approaches is the notion of
software development agility, which is defined in this

research as a software team™s ability to efficiently and

effectively respond to user re
quirement changes.  However,
agility is difficult to achieve in practice (Cockburn 2001).  It

has been reported that only 11 percent of IS organizations

were able to keep up with business demands and that 76

percent were not able to effectively cope with changing busi-

ness needs (Koch 2006).  This lack of agility often results in

substantial financial loss (Austin and Devin 2003).Despite the growing popularity and importance of agile
approaches, little research has empirically examined their key

concepts and underlying theoretical relationships (Baskerville

2006; Boehm and Turner 2004; Larman 2004).  The core

values, principles, and practices of agile development have

been derived mainly from past experiences and its effec-

tiveness has been supported largely by anecdotal evidence and

rhetorical arguments.  Furthermore, the concept of software
development agility has not been well understood.  As a
result, many organizations adopt agile development ap-

proaches without clearly understanding how agility is defined

and measured and what factors they can control to influence

it.  Highsmith (2000) argues that ﬁtechniques without a

theoretical base are reduced to a series of steps executed by

roteﬂ (p. 14). Unfortunately, if, how, why, and when agile

development works or doesn™t work remains largely a black

box.  This research aims to fill this literature gap by

addressing critical questions pertaining to agile development

approaches.  As software development agility is a central

concept and a core value of agile development (Agile

Alliance 2001; Larman 2004), we investigate its dimensions,

determinants, and effects.
We intend to make the following contributions.  First, while
prior agile development literature has not explicitly distin-

guished different dimensions of software development agility,

we propose that it is not a monolithic, single dimensional

construct; rather, it is a multidimensional construct comprised

of different and even conflicting capabilities.  We identify and

assess two key agility dimensions, namely software team

response extensiveness and software team response effi-

ciency, which tap into different important aspects of agility. 

Indeed, agile development approaches invariably promote

extensive responses to requirement changes in a rapid and

efficient manner (Erickson et al. 2005; Henderson-Sellers and

Serour 2005; Lyytinen and Rose 2006).  Software team

response extensiveness is defined as the proportion of various

types of changing user requirements that a software team

responds to and incorporates into the software system.  For

example, if a software team incorporates 80 out of 100

different requirement changes, the team™s response exten-

siveness would be 80 percent.  Greater response extensiveness

indicates greater software development agility.  On the other

hand, software team response efficiency is defined as the

minimal time, cost, personnel, and resources that the team

requires to respond to and incorporate a particular require-

ment change.  Software development is considered agile when

the team requires re
latively little time, cost, personnel, and
resources to respond to a requirement change.  An important

question that this research addresses is:  How are these two

dimensions of software development agility related to each

other?Second, we examine how team autonomy and team diversity,
two team-level variables organizations can control in staffing

and managing projects, affect software development agility. 

In this research, team autonomy refers to the extent to which

the software team is empowered with the authority and con-

trol in making decisions to carry out the project.  Team diver-

sity refers to the extent to which team members are different
88MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
in terms of their functional backgrounds, skills, expertise, and
work experience.  Agile development views team autonomy

and team diversity as important principles and practices that

foster software development agility (Larman 2004).  For

example, agile development advocates self-organizing, self-

directed, and self-disciplined teams (Highsmith 2004; Larman

2004).  Furthermore, agile development posits that a software

team should have a variety of skills and perspectives,

necessary for sensing problems and pitfalls, thinking of

multiple ways to solve problems, and implementing solutions

(Beck and Andres 2005).  To our knowledge, no research has

empirically validated how team autonomy and team diversity

influence software development agility.
Third, this research examines how the two dimensions of
software development agility affect software development

performance in terms of on-time completion, on-budget

completion, and software functionality.  The positive effect of

software development agility on performance has been

supported in the literature mainly by anecdotal evidence and

rhetorical arguments.  Thus, rigorous empirical investigation

is required to answer the question of if and how software

development agility affects development performance.
To address these emergent, complex issues associated with
software development agility, we use an integrated multi-

method approach that combines quantitative and qualitative

methods.  This integrated approach intends to formulate

research questions and develop measurement instruments

grounded in field data, provide both statistical evidence and

rich explanations, triangulate results, and discover novel

insights that stimulate further research (Kaplan and Duchon

1988; Lee 1991; Mingers 2001).  Our research starts with

preliminary qualitative field studies and focus groups that

help formulate research problems and questions, identify key

constructs, and develop measures for new constructs.  We

then conduct a PLS analysis of the data from a large-scale

quantitative survey to validate measurement and test hypoth-

eses.  Finally, we conduct multiple mini-case studies to cross-

validate the PLS results, provide rich, additional insights, and

offer explanations for both supported and unsupported

hypotheses.Theoretical BackgroundAgile Software Development ApproachesAgile software development approaches have evolved since
the mid-1990s as new alternative solutions to the inability of

traditional ﬁheavyweightﬂ methods to address such enduring

problems as time/cost overruns and the lack of responsiveness
to changing requirements (Beck and Andres 2005; Boehm and
Turner 2004; Cockburn 2001; Highsmith 2004; Larman

2004).  Agile development views the software development

process to be dynamic, evolving, and organic, rather than

static, predefined, and mechanistic (Beck and Andres 2005;

Highsmith 2000).  Commonly used agile development

methods include XP (eXtreme Programming), Scrum, DSDM

(Dynamic Systems Development Method), and FDD (Feature-

Drive Development).  In 2001, the 4 core values and 12

principles of agile development were formally introduced and

endorsed in the publication of the 
Agile Manifesto
 by some of
the prominent members of the agile development community. 

Since then, agile development has attracted much interest

from the software industry (Dybå and Dingsøyr 2008).
According to the Agile Manifesto, agile development values
individuals and interactions over processes and tools, working

software over comprehensive documentation, customer col-

laboration over contract negotiation, and responding to

change over following a plan (Agile Alliance 2001).  It

employs ﬁlight and barely sufficientﬂ methods to minimize

time-consuming and costly software processes such as

detailed front-end planning and heavy documentation (Boehm

and Turner 2004; Fitzgerald et al. 2006).  Agile development

attempts to effectively manage volatile and changing user

requirements through a variety of practices and techniques

(Beck and Andres 2005).  It promotes frequent and con-

tinuous delivery of working software, embracing changing

requirements, close collaboration between developers and

users, self-organizing and empowered teams, face-to-face

communication, technical excellence, simplicity, and con-

tinuous adaptation (Agile Alliance 2001).  Embracing and

responding to changing user requirements is at the heart of

agile development.
Although many benefits of agile development have been
speculated and claimed, and increasingly more organizations

are adopting the approach, there have been few empirical field

studies that have rigorously examined if, how, and why agile

development is effective (Fruhling and De Vreede 2006; Moe

et al. 2008).  As a result, agile development lacks theoretical

underpinnings and scientific evidence that support its claimed

benefits and key principles (Erickson et al. 2005).  To fill this

gap, researchers have called for structured, rigorous empirical

studies on agile development with a common research agenda

(Dybå and Dingsøyr 2008).Software Development Agility, Autonomy, and DiversityWe review the prior agile development literature relevant to
our main research constructs: software development agility,
MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
89 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
team autonomy, and team diversity.  Table 1 summarizes the
definitions and descriptions pertaining to the constructs and

Table 2 summarizes the key principles and practices under-

lying the Agile Manifesto and four commonly used agile

methods that emphasize software development agility, team

autonomy, and team diversity (Beck and Andres 2005;

Cockburn 2001; Highsmith 2004; Larman 2004).
As shown in Table 1, prior lite
rature provides various defini-
tions and descriptions of software development agility.  While

the literature is vague about the underlying dimensions and

measures of software development agility, there is a common

theme underlying the various definitions and descriptions in

that agility is generally defined in terms of embracing and

responding to change (Conboy a
nd Fitzgerald 2004; Erickson
et al. 2005; Henderson-Sellers and Serour 2005; Highsmith

2004; Larman 2004; Qumer and Henderson-Sellers 2008). 

Similarly, we define software development agility in this

research as the software team™s capability to efficiently and

effectively respond to and incorporate user requirement 

changes during the project life cycle.Furthermore, it appears that prior literature tends to view
software development agility as consisting of two important

elements that correspond to our conceptualization of the two

agility dimensions:  response extensiveness and response

efficiency.  Response extensiveness relates to the extent,

range, scope, or variety of software team responses.  In con-

trast, response efficiency relates to the time, cost, resources,

or effort associated with software team responses.  As sum-

marized in Table 1, agile development promotes both

response extensiveness in terms of embracing various changes

(Henderson-Sellers and Ser
our 2005; Qumer and Henderson-
Sellers 2008) and res
ponse efficiency in terms of doing so
with high speed and low cost (Conboy and Fitzgerald 2004;

Erickson et al. 2005; Larman 2004; Qumer and Henderson-

Sellers 2008).  As shown in Table 2, software development

agility is at the heart of agile development principles and

practices.  Agile development approaches promote agility

through short, incremental, ite
rative, time-boxed development
cycles, self-organizing teams, 
active participation of stake-
holders, and continuous delivery of working software.Team autonomy and team diversity have been invariably
viewed by prior literature as important principles for im-

proving software development agility, as shown in Tables 1

and 2.  Agile development is fundamentally people-centric

and recognizes the value of team members™ competencies in
bringing agility to development processes (Nerur and Balije-

pally 2007).  It has 
been argued that getting the right people
with appropriate skills and empowering them in decision-

making are critical for agile development success (Chow and

Cao 2008; Cockburn 2007; Highsmith 2004).
Team autonomy refers to the degree of discretion and inde-
pendence granted to the team in scheduling the work, deter-

mining the procedures and methods to be used, selecting and

deploying resources, hiring and firing team members,

assigning tasks to team members, and carrying out assigned

tasks (Breaugh 1985).  It decentralizes decision-making

power to those who will actually carry out the work (Tati-

konda and Rosenthal 2000).  As shown in Tables 1 and 2,

agile development emphasizes the importance of autonomous,

self-organizing, self-directed, self-disciplined software teams

for achieving software development agility (Highsmith 2004;

Nerur and Balijepally 2007; Sharp and Robinson 2004). 

Autonomous teams have considerable leeway in how they

deliver results (Highsmith 2004).  Autonomy brings decision-

making authority to the hands of the people who face and

handle problems every day, thus
, it increases the speed and
effectiveness of problem solving (Larman 2004; Tata and

Prasad 2004).  While team autonomy is one of the key

principles in agile development, little empirical research has

tested its effect on software development agility.
Team diversity is defined as the heterogeneity within the team
in terms of individual attributes, such as age, gender, ethnic

background, education, functional background, tenure, and

technical abilities (Williams and O™Reilly 1998).  As shown

in Tables 1 and 2, agile development proposes that diverse

software teams are more effective than homogeneous teams

in sensing and responding to va
rious environmental changes
(Cockburn 2007; MacCormack et al. 2001).  Drawing upon

Ashby™s law of requisite variety (Ashby 1956), the agile

literature suggests that a software team™s internal variety

should match the variety and complexity of the environment

and that the diversity of skills amplify the internal variety that

enables the team to respond to the changing environment

(Highsmith 2004; Nerur and Balijepally 2007).  Although

conflict is the inevitable companion of diversity, agile devel-

opment suggests that software teams need to bring together a

variety of skills and perspectives to see problems and pitfalls,

to think of multiple ways to solve problems, and to implement

the solutions (Coad et al. 1999).  However, little empirical

research has tested if and how team diversity affects software

development agility.
Research Model and Hypotheses
Our research model is shown in Figure 1.  The central con-
structs of the research model are software team response

extensiveness and software team response efficiency that tap

into two different, important dimensions of software develop-

ment agility.  Hypotheses 1 through 4 posit that software team

autonomy and software team diversity have differential ef-
90MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Table 1.  Agile Development Literature on Agility, Autonomy and Diversity
ConstructLiteratureRelevant Definitions/Concepts/Ideas
Software
developmentagilityConboy & Fitzgerald
(2004)Agility is defined as the cont
inual readiness of an entity to
 rapidly or inherently, pro-
actively or reactively, embrace change, 
through high-quality, simplistic, economical
components and relationships with its environment
Highsmith (2004)Agility is the ability to both creat
e and respond to change in order to profit in aturbulent business environment; it is the ability to balance flexibility and stability
Larman (2004)Agility is rapid and flexible response to change

Erickson et al. (2005)Agility is associated with 
such related concepts as nimbleness, suppleness,quickness, dexterity, liveliness, or alertne
ss; it means to strip away the heaviness in
traditional software development methodol
ogies to promote quick response tochanging environments and changes in user requirementsHenderson-Seller &Serour (2005)Agility refers to readiness for action or 
change; it has two dimensions:  (1) the
ability to adapt to various changes and 
(2) the ability to fine-tune and reengineer
software development processes when needed
Lyytinen & Rose (2006)Agility is defined as the abilit
y to sense and respond swiftly to technical changes
and new business opportunities; it is enac
ted by exploration-based learning and
exploitation-based learningCockburn (2007)Agility is being light, barely sufficient, and maneuverable

Qumer & Henderson-Sellers (2008)Agility is a persistent behavior or
 ability of an entity that ex
hibits flexibility to accom-
modate expected or unexpected changes rapidly, follows the shortest time span,
and uses economical, simple, and quality in
struments in a dynamic environment;
agility can be evaluated by flexibilit
y, speed, leanness, learning, and
responsivenessTeam
autonomyCockburn & Highsmith(2001)Agile teams are characterized by self-organization
Highsmith (2002)Software teams should enable team decision-making
Highsmith (2004)The agile development supports se
lf-organization, self-discipline, and self-managementLarman (2004)In Scrum, the team 
is empowered with the authority 
and resources to find their own
way and solve their own problems
Sharp & Robinson(2004)Self-managing, self-organizing teams are essential for agile development culture,especially for XP
Beck & Andres (2005)One of the XP princi
ples is team responsibility and authority
Nerur & Balijepally(2007)Self-organizing teams are key 
for responsiveness and flexibilityChow & Cao (2008)Self-organizing teamwork
 is found to increase system quality
Kelley (2008)Empowerment is key for agile development
Team
diversityMacCormack et al.(2001)Teams with greater amounts of broad ex
perience are positively associated with
project performanceHighsmith (2004)Getting the right people 
with appropriate skills is critical
Beck & Andres (2005)One of the XP pr
inciples is team diversity, whic
h is enacted by the notion of ﬁwhole
teamﬂCockburn (2007)Team diversity is desirabl
e; heterogeneous teams outperform homogeneous teamsNerur & Balijepally(2007)Team diversity is key for agile development
MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
91 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Table 2.  Key Principles and Practices of Agile Approaches/Methods
Agile Approach/
MethodPrinciples/Practices Emphasizing 
Software Development Agility
Principles/Practices Emphasizing
Team Autonomy and Diversity
Agile AllianceManifesto(Agile Alliance2001)ŁWelcome changing requirements, even late
in developmentŁAgile processes promote sustainable
development ŁDeliver working software frequently 

ŁContinuous attention to technical excellence
enhances agilityŁThe best architectures, 
requirements, and designsemerge from self-organizing teamsŁBuild projects around motivated individuals; give
them the environment and support they need, and
trust them to get the job doneŁTeams reflect on how to become more effective
and adjust their behavior ŁBusiness people and developers must work
together dailyScrum(Schwaber and
Beedle 2002)ŁSoftware team determines features of each
sprint from an evolving product backlogŁCreate an increment of
 potentially shippable
software during each sprint
ŁTeams determine how much of the features in the
product backlog they want to commit to during the

next sprint ŁSelf-organizing, cross-functional teams across
different phases/sprintsXP(Beck andAndres 2005)ŁThe highest priority is continuously satisfy
changing customer needsŁRapid user review and feedback
ŁAlign team authority/cont
rol with responsibility to
get things doneŁPair programming:  two developers complement
each other™s skills and work
DSDM(Stapleton 1997)ŁDevelopment is iterat
ive, incremental, anddriven by user feedback 
ŁDelivering a perfect system is less important
than delivering a system that addresses the

current business needs ŁTeams must be empowered to make project deci-
sions without waiting for higher-level approval
ŁContinuous interactions
 and cooperation among allproject stakeholdersFDD(Coad et al.1999)ŁCustomer/feature-cent
ered iterative cycles
ŁRegular build and inspection to ensure up-to-
date systems
ŁSmall, dynamically form
ed, autonomous teams areeffectiveŁMultiple cross-functional minds are always applied
to each design decisionFigure 1.  The Research ModelSoftware TeamCharacteristics
Software Team
AutonomySoftware TeamDiversity
Software DevelopmentPerformanceOn-Time Completion
On-Budget Completion
Software FunctionalitySoftware DevelopmentAgilitySoftware TeamResponse EfficiencySoftware Team
Response ExtensivenessH1a(+)H1b(-)
H7c(+)
H7b(+)
H7a(+)
H6a(-)
H6b(-)
H6c(+)
H2(+)H3(+)
H4(-)
H5(-)92MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
fects on software team response extensiveness and response
efficiency.  Hypothesis 5 posits a tradeoff relationship be-

tween software team response extensiveness and response

efficiency.  Finally, hypotheses 6 and 7 posit that software

team response extensiveness and response efficiency have

differential effects on three dimensions of software develop-

ment performance: on-time completion, on-budget comple-

tion, and software functionality.Effects of Team Autonomy on SoftwareDevelopment AgilityWe propose two competing hypotheses for the effect of team
autonomy on software team response extensiveness.  On the

one hand, autonomy facilitates creativity in solving problems

and enhances team learning in uncertain environments (Imai

et al. 1985).  Self-organization and local control allow teams

to be open to innovative ideas (Lyytinen and Rose 2006). 

Decentralized decision making enables autonomous teams to

be effective in sensing and responding to environmental

changes (McGrath 2001).  To be adaptive and agile, a soft-

ware team must be willing and able to take risks, and experi-

ment through trial-and-error iterations.  A higher degree of

team autonomy is likely to lead to greater risk taking and

experimentation (Tushman and O™Reilly 1996).  An auton-

omous team is likely to freely experiment and search for

solutions to a broad range of user requirement changes. 

Therefore, we proposeHypothesis 1a.  Software team autonomy positively
affects the extensiveness of the team™s response to

user requirement change.On the other hand, team autonomy may reduce the exten-
siveness of software team response.  Software development

typically requires software teams to make tradeoff decisions

among the interdependent and conflicting goals of time, cost,

and scope.  If a team has a high level of autonomy, it has

more latitude to say ﬁnoﬂ to users™ change requests, in order

to meet time and cost goals.  As a result, the team can be more

selective in responding to changing requirements.  In contrast,

if a team has little autonomy, it may end up being an order

taker and responding to every change request.  In our pre-

liminary field interviews, we found that highly autonomous

teams were often selective in dealing with requirement change

requests.  Therefore, we propose the following competing

hypothesis: Hypothesis 1b.  Software team autonomy negatively
affects the extensiveness of the team™s response to

user requirement change.Increased autonomy enables a software team to make and
execute decisions at a higher speed with lower cost, because

the team does not need to go through the bureaucratic

organizational hierarchy, whic
h is time-consuming and costly
(Clark and Fujimoto 1991).  An empowered, self-organized,

autonomous team can sense and respond to requirement

changes efficiently through direct and close interactions with

users without waiting for managerial approval.  As a result,

increased autonomy allows the software team to reduce the

time, cost, and resources required to sense requirement

change needs and to make necessary changes to the system. 

Therefore, we proposeHypothesis 2.  Software team autonomy positively
affects the efficiency of the team™s response to user

requirement change.Effects of Team Diversity on SoftwareDevelopment AgilityDiversity can be a double-edged sword, improving group
performance in certain tasks but, often, disrupting group

processes (Milliken and Mar
tins 1996; Pelled 
et al. 1999). 
Responding to a changing requirement is essentially a

problem-solving process because a requirement change

reflects a complex business and/or technical problem.  To be

agile, a software team should be able to develop effective

solutions to various complex problems.  According to the

cognitive resource perspective, qualities such as a variety of

expertise, experiences, backgrounds, and perspectives brought

by diverse members increase the team™s cognitive resources

and ability to engage in complex problems (Aladwani 2002;

Watson et al. 1993).  Team members with diverse compe-

tencies and perspectives stimulate learning and innovation,

and generate more alternative solutions for complex problems

(Campion et al. 1993; Watson et al. 1993).
Furthermore, team members with diverse expertise and
experiences can access diverse social networks and profes-

sional communities in their domains of expertise (Ancona and

Caldwell 1992).  The access to large external networks and

communities can facilitate acquisition and development of

new knowledge and skills that are necessary to respond to

requirement changes.  Diverse functional backgrounds help

the software team understand the contexts of various change

needs.  Therefore, we expect a diverse team to be more

capable of handling a wide range of requirement changes.
Hypothesis 3.  Software team diversity positively
affects the extensiveness of the team™s response to

user requirement change.MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
93 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
However, team diversity may negatively affect the efficiency
of team response process.  Social identity theory and self-

categorization theory (Turner et al. 1987) suggest that, due to

intergroup categorizations and different identities among

workgroup members, diversity decreases team cohesion and

integration (Webber and Donahue 2001), causes communi-

cation failures (Miller et al. 1998), and increases task-related

conflict (Pelled et al. 1999).  Diversity makes it difficult for

team members to develop a shared mental model due to

knowledge gaps within the team (Klimoski and Mohammed

1994; Mathieu et al. 2000).  As a result, a diverse software

team is likely to incur more time, cost, and efforts in com-

municating and coordinating tasks and making decisions to

sense and understand change requests, to develop response

strategies, and to implement appropriate responses.  There-

fore, we proposeHypothesis 4.  Software team diversity negatively
affects the efficiency of the team™s response to user

requirement change.Relationship Between Response Extensivenessand Response EfficiencyWe propose that team response extensiveness negatively
affects team response efficiency.  Considering the impacts of

requirement changes on time/cost/scope goals that are

inherently conflicting, software teams tend to first choose how

much they would respond to changes.  This choice in turn

affects response efficiency.  One of the common practices

underlying many agile development approaches is time

boxing by which the software team balances its conflicting

needs for embracing as many user requirement changes as

possible and meeting time and cost goals at the same time

(Larman 2004).  For example, with Scrum, software teams

first decide on the scope of the requirement changes in the

user backlog that they need to address in the next sprint, and

then implement them as efficiently as possible to meet project

goals (Schwaber and Beedle 2002).  Similarly, XP™s weekly

and quarterly development cycles enforce the same pattern;

the customers first choose the scope of work for the next

development cycle and then the software team implements it

as efficiently as possible to meet the project goals (Beck and

Andres 2005).  Therefore, the agile approaches suggest that

the choice of response extensiveness tends to precede

response efficiency.Furthermore, we argue that the more extensively the team
responds to changes, the less efficient the team is in imple-

menting each change.  When a software team attempts to

address a wide variety of requirement changes, the team is
likely to respond not only to familiar or anticipated changes
but also to unfamiliar or unanticipated changes.  As a result,

the team often needs to develop or acquire new knowledge

and capabilities through search, experimentation, innovation,

and variation.  This process 
consumes a substantial amount of
time, cost, and resources and reduces the team™s attention to

speed or cost, thus decreasing response efficiency (Lyytinen
and Rose 2006).  In one of our preliminary field interviews,

we found that a software team tried to incorporate all user

change requests, some of which related to issues with which

the team was not familiar.  As a result, the team was over-

whelmed with the variety and amount of change requests and

could not address any of the changes efficiently.In contrast, narrow, selective,
 and controlled team responses
to requirement changes would lead to higher response

efficiency.  When a software team selectively responds to

certain types of user requirement changes, the team can refine,

optimize, and streamline its response process through

repeated implementations.  As a result, the team is likely to

reduce coordination and implementation costs for handling

requirement changes, thus increasing response efficiency. 

Therefore, we proposeHypothesis 5.  Software team response extensiveness
negatively affects software team response efficiency.
Effects of Software Development Agility onSoftware Project PerformanceBoth the traditional software development literature and the
agile literature suggest that on-time completion, on-budget

completion, and software functionality are important dimen-

sions of software development performance (Highsmith 2004;

Kerzner 2005; Mitchell 2006; Nidumolu 1995).  On-time

completion and on-budget completion refer to the extent to

which a software project meets its baseline goals for duration

and cost.  Software functionality refers to the extent to which

the delivered software system meets its functional goals, user

needs, and technical requirements (Weitzel and Graen 1989). 

There are inherent tradeoffs among time, cost, and func-

tionality because pursuing one often comes at the expense of

the others (Nidumolu 1995).
We posit that extensive responses cause time and cost over-
runs.  To extensively respond to many different requirement

changes, software teams may need to acquire new resources

and capabilities or reconfigure existing resources, processes,

and capabilities, requiring substantial organizational learning

and knowledge transfer.  This requires a substantial amount

of additional time, cost, and resources.  On the other hand, we
94MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
posit that extensive software team responses positively affect
software functionality.  For example, a software team™s

responsiveness to user requests has been found to improve the

correctness of system configuration (Gefen and Ridings

2002).  Organizations often experience important business

changes during software development that, in turn, require

changes in user requirements.  The functionality of the soft-

ware system would not satisfy up-to-date user needs if the

team fails to embrace important changes.  Therefore, we

proposeHypothesis 6a.  Software team response extensive-
ness negatively influences on-time completion of

software development.Hypothesis 6b.  Software team response extensive-
ness negatively influences on-budget completion of

software development.Hypothesis 6c.  Software team response extensive-
ness positively influences software functionality.2Managing requirement changes accounts for an increasing

portion of software development duration and cost in today™s

turbulent business environment.  If the efficiency of team

response is high, the amount of additional time and costs

necessary for handling requirement changes is minimal.  That,

in turn, would help reduce time and cost overruns and meet

the initial time and budget goals.  Furthermore, we propose

that efficient team responses improve the functionality of the

delivered software system.  As the software team repeatedly

implements responses to similar types of requirement

changes, not only does the team increase efficiency of their

response process but also streamlines, optimizes, and perfects

their work.  In contrast, inefficient team responses are more

likely to cause problems and errors in the work process.  All

else being equal, efficient team responses are expected to

result in high quality software functionality that effectively

satisfies user requirements.  Therefore, we propose
Hypothesis 7a.  Software team response efficiency
positively influences on-time completion of software

development.3Hypothesis 7b.  Software team response efficiency
positively influences on-budget completion of soft-

ware development.4Hypothesis 7c.  Software team response efficiency

positively influences software functionality.Research MethodsResearch Process and Study SampleThe detailed description of our research process is provided

in Appendix A.  In summary, we used an integrated multi-

method approach that includes both quantitative and quali-

tative data analyses, consisting of five phases: (1) preliminary

field interviews, (2) survey data collection, (3) measurement

validation, (4) hypothesis testing, and (5) post hoc case

studies.  Quantitative data were collected and analyzed in

Phases 2, 3 and 4, whereas qualitative data were collected and

analyzed in Phases 1 and 5.  The integration of quantitative

and qualitative approaches helps address limitations of each

approach by providing both statistical objectivity and a deeper

understanding of contexts (Kaplan and Duchon 1988; Lee

1991; Trauth and Jessup 2000).Preliminary field interviews, focus groups, sorting procedure,
and pilot tests were used in Phase 1 to formulate research

problems and questions, identify key constructs, and generate

and refine measurement items.  The survey respondents in

Phase 2 were members of the Information Systems Specific

Interest Group of the Project Management Institute (PMI-

ISSIG).  The target respondents were 1,740 North American

members who were project managers and had recently

managed a software development project.  After measures

were validated in Phase 3, the PLS analysis of 399 survey

responses in Phase 4 provided statistical evidence for the

hypothesized relationships among the constructs.  In Phase 5,

post hoc case studies were conducted to validate the PLS

results, provide richer explanations and insights for the

results, and reveal the complex dynamics of tensions among

the constructs.  We selected the cases that demonstrated

diverse project profiles in terms of system type, project size,

development methods, and project performance as well as

different patterns of team autonomy, diversity, response

extensiveness, and response efficiency.  We identified and

solicited 25 target projects from the survey sample and 10

projects agreed to participate in our post hoc case studies.2Software team response extensiven
ess and software functionality are
conceptually distinct constructs in th
at the former only concerns the extent
of team responses to requirement changes that arise during the project

whereas the latter concerns meeting the entire requirements including both

the original and changed requirements.
3Software team response efficiency and on-time completion are conceptually
distinct constructs in that the former
 only concerns the efficiency of team
responses to requirement changes that
 arise during the project whereas the
latter concerns on-time completion of the entire project.
4Similarly, software team response efficiency and on-budget completion are
conceptually distinct constructs.MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
95 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Measures
The final items for measuring the constructs are shown in
Appendix B.  We developed new measures for the two agility

dimensions as they are newly proposed with no existing

measures in the literature.  Software team response exten-

siveness was measured by how much a software team incor-

porates changing requirements in system scope, input data,

output data, business rules/processes, data structure, and user

interfaces.  Software team response efficiency was measured

by the relative level of time, cost, personnel, and resources

needed by the software team to respond to and incorporate a

given requirement change.  Software team response efficiency

is considered higher when a team needed less effort to

incorporate a given requirement change and vice versa.  In the

original scale of the measures, a higher number indicates

more effort and thus lower response efficiency.  For intuitive

interpretation of results, we reve
rsed the scale in data analysis
so that a higher number indicates higher response efficiency.
Software team autonomy was measured by four items that
were adapted from prior literature (Breaugh 1985; Janz et al.

1997; Zmud 1982).  These items tapped into the extent to

which the software team had discretion, freedom, and inde-

pendence in making project-related decisions, such as

choosing tools/technologies, setting goals, handling user

requirement changes, and assigning personnel to the team. 

Software team diversity was measured by four items adapted

from prior literature (Campion et al. 1993).  These items

tapped into diversity and heterogeneity of team members™

expertise areas, skills, prior work experiences, and functional

backgrounds.Software development performance was measured by three
dimensions: on-time completion, on-budget completion, and

software functionality.  Based on the objective data of project

start date, planned completion date, and actual completion

date, we computed time overrun rate using the ratio of time

overrun (i.e., actual completion date minus planned com-

pletion date) to planned duration (i.e., planned completion

date minus project start date).  Greater time overrun rate

indicated lower on-time completion performance.  Similarly,

we obtained planned project cost and actual project cost and

computed cost overrun rate using the ratio of cost overrun

(i.e., actual project cost minus planned project cost) to

planned project cost.  Greater cost overrun rate indicated

lower on-budget completion performance.  In addition to

these objective measures, we measured perceived on-time

completion and perceived on-budget completion for cross-

validation (Deephouse et al. 1996; Nidumolu 1995).  Software

functionality was measured by four items adapted from prior
literature (Nidumolu 1995; Weitzel and Graen 1989).  These
items measured the extent to which the final software system

achieved functional goals, met user requirements, satisfied

user needs, and met technical requirements.
ResultsCharacteristics of the Survey SampleWe received survey responses from the managers of 565

different projects.  After elim
inating 60 invalid responses, we
retained 505 usable responses fo
r data analysis, resulting in an
effective response rate of 29.0 pe
rcent.  As shown in Table 3,
the sample represented a wide range of industry sectors and

included small, medium, and large organizations with $2.5

billion annual sales and 14,786 employees on average.  The

sample was also representative of small, medium, and large

software development projects.  On average, the sample pro-

jects had a budget of $2 million, 34 team members, and dura-

tion of 12 months.  All respondents were project managers of

software development projects with their affiliations and

functional backgrounds including internal IT managers,

internal business managers, and external IT consultants.  
To examine the possibility of nonresponse bias, we split the
sample into two half-sized subgroups based on the time when

each response was received (Bailey 1987; Sivo et al. 2006). 

We then compared the early response group with the late

response group on demographic and project variables such as

project duration, team size, pr
oject type, industry, organi-
zational size, and PMP (Project Management Professional)

certification.  No significant differences between the two

groups on these variables were found, indicating that non-

response bias was not likely to be an issue.To assess whether or not potential common method bias was
a significant issue (Malhotra et al. 2006), we performed two

different statistical analyses.  Fi
rst, we tested the consistency
between objective measures and perception-based Likert-scale

measures of two variables: on-time completion and on-budget

project completion.  We found high correlations between the

objective measures and the perception-based measures (r =

.715 for on-time completion, r = .762 for on-budget comple-

tion).  Second, we conducted a Harman™s one-factor test

(Podsakoff and Organ 1986) on all of the latent constructs. 

Results showed that multiple factors are present and the most

covariance explained by one factor is only 25.2 percent,

indicating that common method biases are not likely to be a

serious concern (Podsakoff and Organ 1986).96MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Table 3.  Characteristics of the Survey Sample
OrganizationsSoftware Projects
Industry categoryNumber of project members
Consulting5.8%Less than 1024.7%

Finance/Insurance20.1%10 Œ 5055.7%

Government8.7%Over 5019.6%

Healthcare5.8%

Manufacturing13.9%Project budget

Retail5.1%Less than $100,00017.8%

Software10.1%$100,000 Œ $1 million40.9%

Telecom/Network5.4%Over $1 million41.3%

Transportation4.0%

Utility7.6%Project duration

Other13.5%Less t
han 6 months24.5%
6 Œ 12 months40.5%
SalesOver 12 months35.0%
Less than $100 million26.2%

$100 million Œ $1 billion31.1%
Respondents
Over $1 billion42.7%Affiliation/Background
Internal IT manager63.4%
Number of EmployeesInternal business manager9.2%
Less than 1,00026.8%Exter
nal IT consultant27.4%
1,000 Œ 10,00040.6%

Over 10,00032.6%
Measurement Validation
We modeled the indicators of team autonomy, team diversity,
on-time completion, on-budget completion, and software

functionality as reflective measures.  However, we modeled

the indicators of response extensiveness and response

efficiency as formative measures since these indicators are not

expected to have covariation within the same latent construct

and they are causes of, rather than caused by, their latent

construct (Petter et al. 2007).  Reflective indicators and

formative indicators require different approaches and criteria

for validating reliability, convergent validity, and discriminant

validity (Gefen et al. 2000; Petter et al. 2007).  Our validation

results suggest that all reflective measures demonstrated

satisfactory reliability and constr
uct validity and  all formative
measures demonstrated satisfactory construct validity and no

significant multicollinearity.  Therefore, all of the measures

were valid and reliable.  Deta
iled procedures and results of
measurement validation are presented in Appendix C.
Test of the Structural Model
The final sample size for the analysis of the proposed struc-

tural model was 399 after excluding 106 responses with

missing objective data for project duration and budget.  We

conducted t-tests to compare these 399 projects with the 106

projects excluded on variables such as firm annual sales, firm

employee size, project team si
ze, project type, and project
manager™s project management experience.  No significant

differences between the two groups on these variables were

found.Our PLS results are shown in Figure 2.  Team autonomy has
a significant negative effect (Œ.272, p < .01) on response

extensiveness and a significant positive effect (.247, p < .01)

on response efficiency, supporting H1b and H2.  Team diver-

sity has a significant positive effect (.261, p < .01) on

response extensiveness, supporting H3.  However, team diver-

sity does not show a significant effect on response efficiency,
MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
97 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Note:  *p < .05; **p < .01Figure 2.  PLS Resultsnot supporting H4.  Response extensiveness has a significant
negative effect (Œ.397, p < .01) on response efficiency, thus

supporting H5.  Response extensiveness has a significant

positive affect (.396, p < .01) on software functionality, sup-

porting H6c.  However, it has no significant effects on either

on-time completion or on-budget completion, not supporting

H6a or H6b.  Response efficiency demonstrates significant

positive effects on on-time completion (.362, p < .01), on-

budget completion (.325, p < .01), and software functionality

(.298, p < .01), supporting H7a, H7b, and H7c.Response extensiveness and response efficiency collectively
explain 13.4 percent of the variance in on-time completion,

11.0 percent in on-budget completion, and 13.7 percent in

software functionality.  In summary, the results provide

support for Hypotheses 1b, 2, 3, 5, 6c, 7a, 7b, and 7c but no

support for Hypotheses 1a, 4, 6a, or 6b.  In addition, we tested

a modified second-order PLS model to examine the effects of

response extensiveness and response efficiency on overall

software development performance by combining all three

performance measures.  We found that both response exten-

siveness and response efficiency have a significant positive

effect on the overall development performance.  Detailed

results are reported in Appendix D.Although the PLS results support the majority of our
hypotheses and reveal interesting findings, more in-depth

investigation of individual cases is deemed necessary to

explore plausible explanations for unsupported hypotheses,

cross-validate supported hypotheses, and provide rich insights
for the complex, dynamic relationships among the constructs
above and beyond their path coefficients.  We discuss below

the 10 case studies that we conducted.  Results of Post Hoc Case StudiesAs shown in Table 4, these cases represent diverse software
development profiles in terms of types of system develop-

ment, industry sectors, and project size.  The cases showed

various combinations of different degrees of autonomy,

diversity, response extensiveness, response efficiency, and

project performance.  Most cases used a combination of agile

development approaches and traditional waterfall approaches,

whereas Case A used an agile development approach alone,

Case F used a vendor proprietary evolutionary/iterative

approach, and Case H used the waterfall approach.
5  We
interviewed the project manager for each project and, when

possible, the project manager identified one or two team

members for further interviews.  In total, we conducted 17

interviews for the 10 cases.  Table 5 shows a summary of key

findings.5To ensure variability in software 
development agility among the cases, we
selected projects with varying levels
 of agile methods, ranging from a pure
agile approach, to hybrid appro
aches, to a waterfall approach.
Software Team
Response
Extensiveness
Software Team
Response
Efficiency
SoftwareTeam
Autonomy
SoftwareTeam
Diversity
Software
Functionality
On-Budget
Completion
On-Time
CompletionR2 = 0.268
R2 = 0.142
R2 = 0.134
R2 = 0.110
R2 = 0.137
-0.272**
0.247**
0.261**
0.017
-0.397**
-0.009
-0.014
0.396**
0.362**
0.325**
0.298**
98MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Table 4.  Case DescriptionCaseProject Objective
DurationCostTeam sizeDevelopment 
MethodologyAutonomy/Diversity/
Response Extent/Response Efficiency(High/Medium/Low)Project PerformanceInterview
AOff-the-shelf software imple-
mentation for core business
processes and business intelli-
gence in a dairy foods company
17 months$30M
65 peopleAgileH/H/M/H1 month overrun; $1.2M cost
overrun; 95% of system

functionality goals met
projectmanager BIn-house development of manu-facturing and financial applica-
tions in a manufacturing
company24 months$16M
100 peopleAgile +Waterfall
M/M/L/MCancelled after 18 months
with $9M cost-overrun and 5

month time-overrunprojectmanager COff-the-shelf software 
implementation in a retail
company12 months$20M
45 peopleAgile +Waterfall
M/H/H/M3 months overrun; $1.5M
cost overrun; 75% system

functionality goals met
projectmanager DMajor application revision andmaintenance in an airline
company12 months$1.3M
50 peopleAgile +Waterfall
M/M/M/H4 month time ahead of
schedule; $100K cost
overrun; 100% system

functionality goals met 
projectmanager EIn-house applicationdevelopment in a transportation
company8 months$1.5M 
100 peopleAgile +Waterfall
H/M/M/H3 month time overrun;
$150K cost overrun; 95%
system functionality goals

metprojectmanagerFERP implementation(finance/accounting module) for
a federal agency12 months$30M
160 peopleEvolutionary(vendorproprietary)
M/H/L/M6 month time overrun; $1M
cost overrun; system

functionality was marginally

satisfactory
projectmanager &
one memberGIn-house development of afaculty load management and

reporting system for a commu-

nity college
18 months$400K
3 peopleAgile +Waterfall
H/H/H/MOn-time completion; $100K
cost overrun; system

functionality was very

satisfactory
projectmanager &
two

membersHERP implementation for amilitary organization
36 months$226M
403 peopleWaterfallL/H/M/LSignificant time and cost
overruns; system

functionality was largely

satisfactory
projectmanager &
one member IIn-house development of a dataprocessing system for a

government agency48 months$1M
16 peopleAgile +Waterfall
M/L/L/M10 month time overrun;
$1.4M cost overrun; system

functionality was

unsatisfactoryprojectmanager &
two

members JImplementation of an off-the-shelf fund raising system for a

radio station7 months$450K
4 peopleAgile +Waterfall
L/M/M/MOn-time completion; $10K
cost overrun; system

functionality was largely

satisfactory
projectmanager &
one memberMIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
99 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Table 5.  Key Findings from Case Studies
IssuesFindingsRemark
Relationshipsbetween

software
developmentagility and
performance(H6a/b/c &H7a/b/c)When responding to a requirement change, software teams evaluate its impact on business andtime/cost/scope and its technical difficulty. T
heir response decision is influenced by these
tradeoffs.  (Cases G, I)Insights forH6a/b/cTime and/or cost constraint is sometimes a main factor for determining the extent of teamresponse to changing requirements.  (Cases B, H)Insights for H6a/bHigh business-impact changes tend to be addressed regardless of constraints.  (Case A)Insights for H6c
Too much response interrupts project continuity and may result in poor software systems under
time/cost pressures.  (Cases F, D)Extensive responses to changes in early stages can save time and cost in later stages.  (Case G)Explains
unsupported
H6a/bPursuit of response efficiency ma
y cause quality/functionality problems.  (Case A)Insights for H7c
Standardized processes, methodologies, and tools help manage changes, time, and cost.  (CaseF)Insights forH6a/b, H7a/bTeams re-baseline time line and budget to accommodate large changes and relieve time and costconstraints.  (Case H)Relationshipsbetween
responseextensivenessand responseefficiency(H5)More responses generally result in lowe
r response efficiency.
  (Cases C, I)Validates andexplains H5Extensive changes affecting the project baseline require approval by upper management, which
slows down the response process.  (Case C)
Too much response results in work overload for 
the team, which undermines efficiency.  (Case E)
Responding to too many requirement changes
 causes lack of focus.  (Case D)Clear specification of requirements helps strike the balance.  (Case F)Insights for H5
Additional requirements are addressed in the next phase or in a separate project.  (Cases D, E)Needed changes are spread out across deliverables.  (Case E)Effective management of time and cost helps achieve greater agility in both response
extensiveness and response efficiency.  (Case I)
Effect ofautonomy on
agility(H1a/b & H2)Autonomy generally increases response 
efficiency.  (Case G)Validates H2
Autonomy allows software teams to limit their re
sponses to changes in order to meet overallproject goals.  (Case A)Validates H1b;explains
unsupported H1aAutonomy may not be effective for 
government projects.  (Case H)Insights for H1,
H2Autonomy may not be effective if team members are not competent.  (Case A)
Effect of diversityon agility(H3 & H4)Diversity helps solve complex probl
ems effectively.  (Cases E, F)
Validates H3Diversity helps better translate and underst
and complex requirement changes.  (Case C)Diversity slows down team response due to c
onflicts and costly communication.  (Case D)
Explainsunsupported H4Diversity can help solve pr
oblems quickly.  (Case C)
Individuals™ expertise, knowledge, sk
ills, and mind-set are important for agility.  (Case J)Insights for H3,
H4Relationships Between Software Development
Agility and Project Performance
The case study results suggest that software teams dynami-
cally evaluate and manage the complex tensions and tradeoffs

between software development agility and software develop-

ment performance.  When responding to a requirement
change, software teams holistically assess its business impact,
its impact on time/cost/scope goals, and its technical diffi-

culty.  Based on these assessments, they determine the extent

to which they respond to user requirement changes.
It was important to keep balance between how much
we respond to user change requests and meeting
100MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
time and cost goals.  We probably addressed 80
percent of user requirement requests to make the

client happy and satisfied.  Yet, at the same time, we

tried to minimize less important changes.
  (Case G)
The stakeholder determined the needed require-
ments and the nice-to-haves.  The software team

advises based on technical evaluation what is

feasible for each requirement.  Change requests are

determined during an engineering review board

meeting where the project team evaluates the cost

and scope of the requirement added to the project. (Case I)Depending on the specific project context, time is sometimes
the main driver for determining how much the team responds

to changing requirements, whereas cost can be the main

consideration in other cases.  Due to the fact that it was past schedule, I put a very
tight and stringent change request policy in place. 

(Case B)When the project had a tremendous amount of
requirement changes, the project team could not

address that many changes simply because they

were running out of money.  (Case H)However, we found that high impact, business-disruptive
requirement changes tend to be addressed almost always,

regardless of time and cost constraints.  
We really responded to thos
e things that were trulybusiness disruptive.  So we would get the people that

needed to be there that knew best about different

aspects of that particular problem, both functionally

and technically, come up with a design and then

build it, regression test it, make sure we understood

what the implications were from a usage perspec-

tive, and then implement that fix.  (Case A)Although the case results generally confirm the positive effect
of response extensiveness on software functionality, when

severe time/cost pressures are present, extensive responses

may result in poor software functionality due to the lack of

task continuity and integration.Too much response may interrupt the flow and
continuity of the project execution.  Too much

response also has a tendency to create rush changes

to meet implementation schedules, which can lead to

poorly defined and developed solutions.  (Case F)The tension is you™re going to be spread too thin and
you™re not going to get them tested well enough and

integrated well enough, and then you™re not going to

have a good product at the end.  (Case D)Notably, some cases suggest that extensive responses should
not necessarily negatively affect on-time and on-budget

completion as we hypothesized.  If software teams respond to

many important requirement changes in early stages, they can

actually save time and cost in later stages.  This finding may

explain why we did not discover a negative effect of response

extensiveness on on-time and on-budget completion with our

PLS analysis.We tried to respond to changes as much as possible
early on, and this turned out to save us much time

and cost down the road.  We did not have to deal

with many changes toward the end of the project.
 (Case G)Furthermore, our case results suggest what appears to be con-
tradictory to the PLS results: pursuit of response efficiency

may cause software functionality problems because efficiency

may come at the cost of quality if software teams are not

sufficiently competent.
We were pretty efficient about it, but not always
effective, because we would make mistakes.  People

would put the change in and everything would be

good but then they forgot that they didn™t have the

security set up right.  So I think the team was pretty

efficient but it wasn™t quite as effective just because

of human error and complexity.  (Case A)While it is a challenge for software teams to be agile while
meeting other project goals, we found that standardized

processes/methodologies/tools help manage this tension. 

When possible, teams sometimes re-baseline their project

goals and relieve time and cost pressures in order to

accommodate large changes.
I found that following a standard methodology is
critical to managing scope and changes.  An estab-

lished change control process with tools that track

changes are essential for managing CRs (change

requests), cost, and schedule.
  (Case F) Instead of responding to large changes under the
current constraints of time, cost, and scope goals,

we sometimes revise the project baseline and set

new goals to incorporate large-scale changes.  By

so doing, we are free from unrealistic constraints
MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
101 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
that did not account for the emergent changes and
can be more flexible in responding to the changes. (Case H)Two cases are worth noting:  Case B was a big failure,
whereas Case D was a remarkable success, among other

cases.  The difference in their performance can be partly

explained by their different levels of response extensiveness
and response efficiency as shown in Table 4.  Furthermore,

our results reveal that the Case B team used a very strict

policy in responding to changing user requirements since they

were experiencing severe time and cost overruns halfway

through the project and because they lacked important skills. 

The lack of response to important requirement changes

rendered the project unsustainable.The knowledge of certain aspects of this new appli-
cation was something we didn™t have in our skill set,

which made it difficult to turn things around.
  (Case
B)In contrast, the team in Case D was highly efficient in
responding to changes and focused on addressing high-

priority changes.  Although they did not incorporate every

single change request, the final system successfully met most

of the important user requirements.
Relationships Between Response Extensiveness
and Response EfficiencyWith respect to the tension between response extensiveness
and response efficiency, our case 
results generally confirm the
tradeoff between the two.There is a diminishing rule of return on that.  The
more change requests you get, you absolutely will

suffer on the efficiency and quality of looking at that

change.  (Case C)The project team yielded fewer implementations but
greater quality and efficiency for each response, as

opposed to more responses but less efficiency and

quality.  (Case I) Our case results suggest several plausible explanations for this
tradeoff relationship.  Respons
es to extensive requirement
changes are more likely to require upper management

approval due to their significant impact on business and

project goals.  Furthermore, too much response results in

work overload and lack of focus, thus decreasing response

efficiency.I knew that, based on my forecast, making this
change would send me so close to budget or over

budget that it would switch a dashboard color on the

project, and I would actually need management

approval for that.  (Case C)There were times where we had a lot of change
going on in the project and the team got over-

whelmed and we had to push back.  (Case E)If I responded to too many change requests, I not
only got stretched too thin and lost focus but also

had to shoot at moving targets, and sometimes I felt

we didn™t even have targets.  (Case D)We found that project managers tend to believe that they can
strike the right balance if us
er requirements are clearly spe-
cified and communicated.  Furthermore, by spreading out

necessary changes across different phases, deliverables, or

projects, software teams may achieve high response efficiency

while responding to changes extensively.  Effective manage-

ment of time and cost also helps achieve both dimensions of

agility simultaneously.
The balance between response extensiveness and
efficiency comes from the ability of the team to

clearly define and document specifications related to

user requirements.  (Case F)We spread out the deliverables and broke it up into
three different deliverables, and that was another

way to balance the numbe
r of changes we had on
this project.  We could focus on certain changes for

the December deliverable, then focus on the changes

for the January deliverable, then focus on the final

changes.  (Case E) It is possible to reach both response extensiveness
and response efficiency if the project cost and time

is managed effectively throughout.  To do so, the

project team needs to leverage the expertise of the

staff to make solid project decisions.  (Case I)Effect of Team Autonomy on Software
Development Agility
Our case results confirm that team autonomy generally has a
positive effect, mainly on response efficiency because of

empowered decision making by team members.  
Each team member was able to respond to small
system changes individually although the whole team
102MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
discussed change requests that are important.  We
were very efficient in responding to change partly

due to our authority to make decisions.  (Case G)We found that autonomous software teams occasionally
limited their responses to changing requirements in order to

meet project goals because they were empowered to choose

if and how to respond to changes, whereas less autonomous

teams had no choice but to take orders from users and

implement them.  This finding partly explains why team

autonomy was found to have a negative effect, rather than a

positive effect, on response extensiveness.If you can™t put a 
boundary around t
hat, that™swhere you go way out of whack on budget and

schedule.  The business always wants to add addi-

tional things, which were never in the scope of what

the project was supposed to accomplish.  We said

ﬁNoﬂ to a lot of change requests because we were

empowered to make decisions on our own.
  (Case A)
Effect of Team Diversity on Software
Development Agility
Our case results confirm that team diversity improves
response extensiveness because it helps solve various

problems effectively.  Diverse expertise also makes it easier

to translate and understand a variety of requirement changes.
The more diverse team will be better able to respond
to changes because people will bring different levels

of experience, different background, different skill

sets.  A team that doesn™t have that diversity can get

tunnel vision on a solution and not be as open to

other options.  (Case E)The subject matter experts were actually required to
attend and speak to a change so that it could be

translated, if you will, for those that don™t under-

stand it, which is absolutely critical.  (Case C) We found that diversity can decrease response efficiency due
to conflicts and costly communication.  On the other hand,

however, diversity can increase response efficiency through

accelerated problem-solving enabled by readily available

expertise and skills.  These findings may explain why we

found no significant effect of team diversity on response

efficiency.The diversity made it more difficult to communicate
and manage change, because the change required
interaction amongst a diversity of workgroups, and
that made it harder for people to be on the same

page and agree to these changes.  (Case D)The make-up of the team, by getting a lot of subject
matter experts, resulted in the ability to get answers

quickly and to have sort of an automatic trust that

the person knows the right answer and you don™t

have to look for somebody else to validate that. 

(Case C)DiscussionImplications for Research and PracticeOur research approach, combining both quantitative and

qualitative data analyses, allowed us to not only statistically

test the hypotheses, but also complement the quantitative PLS

results with richer explanations and insights obtained from the

case studies.  The benefits from the case studies are three-

fold: (1) the case study results validate and explain the sup-

ported hypotheses; (2) the results provide explanations for the

unsupported hypotheses; (3) the results reveal rich, additional

insights on the complex relationships among the constructs

above and beyond the quantitative results. The findings and insights of this research have significant
implications to research and practice in agile development

approaches.  As our results suggest a negative effect of

response extensiveness on response efficiency, examining

only the aggregate agility may produce misleading results. 

Researchers should distinguish between response exten-

siveness and response efficiency when developing and testing

theories in agile development.  This negative effect occurs in

part because extensive responses are likely to cause work

overload and lack of software team focus and require time-

consuming involvement of upper management.  However, a

possible reverse direction of the relationshipŠthat is,

response efficiency affecting 
response extensivenessŠshould
not be completely ruled out as the relationship is yet to be

fully understood.  A software team™s efficiency in responding

to changes may determine the extent of changes to which the

team responds.  With this reasoning, however, response

efficiency is expected to positively affect response exten-

siveness, which is not consistent with our results.  Future

research should further investigate if the reverse causality can

happen under certain conditions.  Practitioners need to be

aware of the multifaceted nature of software development

agility and understand the tension between its two different

dimensions in order to build appropriate types of agility. 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
103 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Software teams can maintain an appropriate balance between
the two agility dimensions by implementing such agile

development practices as short, incremental iterations and

time boxing methods.
The agile literature tends to take a simplistic view on the
tension between software development agility and develop-

ment performance; it views agility to be universally desirable

and does not recognize differential effects of agility on

different aspects of development performance.  Our PLS

results show that response extensiveness has a positive effect

only on software functionality, whereas response efficiency

has a positive effect on on-time/on-budget completion as well

as software functionality.  Therefore, software teams should

take cautions when implementing such agile principles as

ﬁWelcome changing requirements even late in development
ﬂ:when time and cost are top priorities, teams can be better off

by selectively responding to changing requirements and thus

increasing response efficiency.  Agile practices such as

ﬁdecision in one hour
ﬂ in Scrum can be useful for improving
response efficiency.Our case results provide a plausible explanation for the non-
significant effect of response extensiveness on on-time and

on-budget completion.  While ex
tensive responses generally
require substantial time, cost, and resources, extensive

responses in early development stages can save software

development time and cost for later development stages. 

Therefore, extensive responses might have both positive and

negative effects on on-time and on-budget completion,

resulting in a nonsignificant net effect.  Our case results also

suggest that, contrary to our PLS results, it is possible for

response efficiency to negative
ly affect software functionality
as efficiency might compromise system quality if the team is

not competent.  Similarly, extensive responses can negatively

affect software functionality under severe time/cost

constraints.Agile development approaches advocate self-organizing,
autonomous teams with cross-functional, diverse members. 

However, no theoretical foundation or empirical evidence has

been provided in support of the principle.  This research

provides empirical evidence that team autonomy and team

diversity are important team variables that organizations can

control to build their software development agility.  More

importantly, team autonomy and team diversity do not

universally increase software development agility.  The

results suggest that increased autonomy without increased

diversity may result in decreased response extensiveness, and

that only autonomy, not diversity, increases response

efficiency.  The results suggest that a software team needs to

manage team autonomy and diversity based on which
dimension of agility the team needs to address.  Software
teams should be aware of a potential negative effect of self-

organization on their ability to respond to a wide range of

changes.  When implementing ﬁ
the whole teamﬂ and ﬁpairprogrammingﬂ with XP, the team and the pairs should have
a high degree of diversity for greater response extensiveness.
Our case results suggest that autonomous software teams may
strictly limit their responses to changing requirements in order

to meet other project goals such as time and cost.  However,

researchers should not entirely rule out the possibility that

autonomy may actually increase response extensiveness since

autonomous teams, in theory, are free to choose their actions

in either direction.  Future re
search should further investigate
this relationship.  In additi
on, our case results suggest two
opposite effects of team diversity on response efficiency. 

While diversity may cause conflicts and costly communi-

cation, it may accelerate a software team™s response process,

thanks to readily available expertise and skills.  These

findings partly explain the nonsignificant effect of diversity

on response efficiency as its positive and negative effects may

be cancelled out.LimitationsAlthough we employed a rigorous, multiphase approach to the

development of new measures for response extensiveness and

response efficiency, the new measures have some limitations. 

While response extensiveness is measured by the count of

incorporated changes vis-à-vis total changes, it would have

been more accurately measured using the amount of addi-

tional scope, above and beyond the original scope, in terms of

such metrics as function points.  Furthermore, response

extensiveness measures the extent to which a software team

actually implemented and incorporated various changes into

the system while not fully capturing other forms of team

responses.  A software team may just as well respond to

requirement changes by rejecting or postponing them to meet

other important project goals.  A more comprehensive mea-

sure is desirable to fully capture different forms of software

team responses.
Our measure for response efficiency did not take into account
the fact that different requirement changes from different

development phases might have different levels of business

impact and response difficulties.  Therefore, combining all

phases in the measure may not precisely capture how efficient

a team™s responses were.  To measure it more accurately,

appropriate weights based on relative impact and difficulty

need to be assigned to different types of changes.  Another
104MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
issue associated with the response efficiency measure is that
survey respondents may have had a lack of clear guidance in

interpreting the measurement question and assessing relative

time, cost, and resources required in responding to a given

requirement change.  Although we have found no statistical

evidence that suggests any measurement problems due to

potential misinterpretation, fu
ture research is needed to
further validate the measure.
ConclusionsDue to the ever-increasing uncertainty in business and

technology environments, the agility to effectively deal with

changing requirements has become an imperative, not an

option, for software development.  Given the complex rela-

tionships among response extensiveness, response efficiency,

team autonomy, team diversity, and software development

performance, software teams face difficult challenges in

identifying and achieving the right balance between the two

agility dimensions.  While the prior agile development litera-

ture offers little guidance for such challenges, this research

offers some useful insights that are theoretically based and

empirically tested.  Software teams should first prioritize the

performance goals of time, cost, and functionality, which will

determine how much each dimension of agility is needed. 

That, in turn, will determine how much autonomy and

diversity their software teams should require.
Since this research is one of the initial efforts to empirically
examine the principles and practices of agile development

approaches, we believe that many important questions and

issues are yet to be answered in this important area.  We hope

our study serves as a stepping-stone for developing and

testing theories that guide the agile development principles

and practices so that organizations can effectively build and

sustain software development agility that will ultimately

improve their software development performance.
AcknowledgmentsThis study was supported by research grants provided by the Uni-
versity of Minnesota, the Juran Center for Leadership in Quality,

and the UPS (United Parcel Servi
ce) Foundation.  The Information
Systems Specific Interest Group of 
the Project Management Institute
sponsored the collection of the survey data.  We thank Carl Adams,

Izak Benbasat, Erran Carmel, 
Gordon Davis, William DeLone,
J. Alberto Espinosa, Jungpil 
Hahn, Anita LaSalle, Bob Zmud,
and research workshop participants
 at the American University,
Lehigh University, Syracuse Univ
ersity, Tulane University, the
University of British Columbia, 
and the University of Minnesota
for helpful comments on earlier versions of the paper.ReferencesAgile Alliance.  2001.  ﬁManifes
to for Agile Software Develop-
mentﬂ (www.agilemanifesto.org).
Aladwani, A. M.  2002.  ﬁAn 
Integrated Performance Model of
Information Systems Projects,ﬂ 
Journal of Management Infor-
mation Systems (19:1), pp. 185-210.Ancona, D., and Caldwell, D.  1992.  ﬁDemography and Design:
Predictors of New Product Team Performance,ﬂ 
OrganizationScience (3:3), pp. 321-341.Ashby, W. R.  1956.  
An Introduction to Cybernetics
, London:Chapman and Hall.Austin, R., and Devin, L.  2003.  
Artful Making:  What Managers
Need to Know About How Artists Work
, Boston:  Financial Times
Prentice Hall.
Bailey, K. D.  1987l  
Methods of Social Research
, New York:  Free
Press.
Baskerville, R. L.  2006.  ﬁArtful Planning,ﬂ 
European Journal of
Information Systems (15:2), pp. 113-115.Beck, K., and Andres, C.  2005.  
Extreme Programming Explained:
Embrace Change, Boston:  Addison-Wesley.
Boehm, B. W., and Turner, R.  2004.  
Balancing Agility and Disci-
pline:  A Guide for the Perplexed
, Boston:  Addison-Wesley.
Breaugh, J. A.  1985.  ﬁThe Measurement of Work Autonomy,ﬂ
Human Relations (38:6), pp. 551-570.Campion, M. A., Medsker, G. J., 
and Higgs, A. C.  1993.  ﬁRelations
Between Work Group Characteristics and Effectiveness:  Impli-

cations for Designing Effective Work Groups,ﬂ 
PersonnelPsychology (46:4), pp. 823-850.Chin, W. W.  1998.  ﬁThe Par
tial Least Square Approach to
Structural Equation Modeling,ﬂ in 
Modern Methods for Business
Research, G. A. Marcoulides (ed.), Mahwah, NJ:  Lawrence
Erlbaum Associates, Inc.
Chow, T., and Cao, D.-B.  2008.  ﬁA Survey Study of Critical
Success Factors in Agile Software Projects,ﬂ 
The Journal of
Systems and Software (81:6), pp. 961-971.Clark, K. B., and Fujimoto, T.  1991.  
Product DevelopmentPerformance, Boston:  Harvard Business School Press.Coad, P., De Luca, J., and Lefebre, E.  1999.  
Java Modeling in
Color, Englewood Cliffs, NJ:  Prentice Hall.Cockburn, A.  2001.  
Agile Software Development
, Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Cockburn, A.  2007.  
Agile Software Development:  The Coopera-
tive Game, Boston:  Addison-Wesley.
Cockburn, A., and Highsmith, J.  
2001.  ﬁAgile Software Devel-
opment:  The People Factor,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer
 (34:11), pp.
131-133.Conboy, K., and Fitzgerald, B.  2004.  ﬁToward a Conceptual
Framework of Agile Methods,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 2004 ACM
Workshop on Interdisciplinary Software Engineering Research,Newport Beach, CA, November 5, 2004, pp. 37-44.
Deephouse, C., Mukhopadhyay, T., Go
ldenson, D. R., and Keller,
M. I.  1996.  ﬁSoftware Proce
sses and Project Performance,ﬂ
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (12:3), pp. 187-205.
Diamantopoulos, A., and Siguaw, J.
 A.  2006.  ﬁFormative Versus
Reflective Indicators in Organi
zational Measure Development:MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
105 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
A Comparison and Empirical Illustration,ﬂ 
British Journal of
Management (17:4), pp. 263-282.Diamantopoulos, A., and Winklhofer, H. M.  2001.  ﬁIndex Con-
struction with Formative Indicators:  An Alternative to Scale

Development,ﬂ Journal of Marketing Research
 (38:2), pp.
269-277.Dybå, T., and Dingsøyr, T.  2008.  ﬁEmpirical Studies of Agile
Software Development:  
A Systematic Review,ﬂ 
Information andSoftware Technology (50:9-10), pp. 833-859.Erickson, J., Lyytinen, K., and Si
au, K.  2005.  ﬁAgile Modeling,
Agile Software Development, 
and Extreme Programming:  The
State of Research,ﬂ 
Journal of Database Management
 (16:4), pp.
88-100.Fitzgerald, B., Hartnett, G., a
nd Conboy, K.  2006.  ﬁCustomising
Agile Methods to Software Practices at Intel Shannon,ﬂ

European Journal of Information Systems (15:2), pp. 200-213.Fruhling, A., and De Vreede, G.-J
.  2006.  ﬁField Experiences with
eXtreme Programming:  Developing an Emergency Response

System,ﬂ 
Journal of Management Information Systems
 (22:4), pp.
39-68.Gefen, D., and Ridings, C. M.
  2002.  ﬁImplementation Team
Responsiveness and User Evalua
tion of Customer Relationship
Management:  A Quasi-Experime
ntal Design Study of Social
Exchange Theory,ﬂ 
Journal of Management Information Systems
(19:1), pp. 47-69.Gefen, D., Straub, D. W., and B
oudreau, M.-C.  2000.  ﬁStructural
Equation Modeling and Regressi
on: Guidelines for Research
Practice,ﬂ 
Communications of the AIS (4:7), pp. 1-77.Henderson-Sellers, B., and Serour, M. K.  2005.  ﬁCreating a
Dual-Agility Method: The Value of Method Engineering,ﬂ

Journal of Database Management (16:4), pp. 1-23.Highsmith, J.  2000.  
Adaptive Software Development:  A Col-
laborative Approach to Managing Complex Systems
, New York:
Dorset House Publishing.Highsmith, J.  2002.  ﬁAgile Proj
ect Management:  Principles and
Tools,ﬂ Cutter Consortium Executive Report
, March 9 (availableonline at  http://www.cutterconsortium.com/research/2004/

edge040309.html).Highsmith, J.  2004.  
Agile Project Management
, Boston: 
Addison-Wesley.
Imai, K., Ikujiro, N., and Takeuc
hi, H.  1985.  ﬁManaging the New
Product Development Process:  
How Japanese Companies Learn
and Unlearn,ﬂ in 
The Uneasy Alliance
,  R. H. Hayes, K. B. Clark,
and C. Lorenz (eds.), Boston: 
 Harvard Business School Press,
pp. 337-375.Janz, B. D., Wetherbe, J. C., Davi
s, G. B., and Noe, R. A.  1997.
ﬁReengineering the Systems Development Process:  The Link

between Autonomous Teams and 
Business Process Outcomes,ﬂJournal of Management Information Systems (14:1), pp. 41-68.Kaplan, B., and Duchon, D. 1988.  ﬁCombining Qualitative and
Quantitative Methods in Information Systems Research:  A Case

Studyﬂ 
MIS Quarterly (12:4), pp. 571-586.Kelly, A.  2008.  
Changing Software 
Development: 
 Learning to
Become Agile, Chichester, England:  John Wiley & Sons.
Kerzner, H.  2005.  
Project Management:  A Systems Approach to
Planning, Scheduling, and Controlling, Hoboken, NJ:  Wiley.
Klimoski, R. J., and Mohammed, 
S. 1994.  ﬁTeam Mental Model:
Construct or Metaphor,ﬂ 
Journal of Management
 (20:2), pp.
403-437.Koch, C.  2006.  ﬁThe Truth about SOA,ﬂ 
CIO, June 15 (available
online at http://www.cio.co
m/article/21975/
The_Truth_
About_SOA).Larman, C.  2004.  
Agile & Iterative Development:  A Manager™s
Guide, Boston:  Addison-Wesley.
Lee, A. S.  1991.  ﬁIntegrati
ng Positivist 
and Interpretive Ap-
proaches to Organizational Research,ﬂ 
Organization Science(2:4), pp. 342-365.Loch, K. D., Straub, D. W., and 
Kamel, S.  2003.  ﬁDiffusing the
Internet in the Arab World: The Role of Social Norms and

Technological Culturation,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Engineering
Management (50:1), pp. 45-63.Lyytinen, K., and Rose, G. M.  
2006.  ﬁInformation System Devel-
opment Agility as Organizational Learning,ﬂ 
European Journalof Information Systems (15:2), pp. 183-199.MacCormack, A., Verganti, R., a
nd Iansiti, M.  2001.  ﬁDeveloping
Products on ‚Internet Time™:  The Anatomy of a Flexible Devel-

opment Process,ﬂ 
Management Science (47:1), pp. 133-150.Malhotra, N. K., Kim, S. S., a
nd Patil, A.  2006.  ﬁCommon Method
Variance in IS Research:  A Comparison of Alternative

Approaches and a Reanalysis of Past Research,ﬂ 
ManagementScience (52:12), pp. 1865-1883.Mathieu, J., Goodwin, G. F., Heffn
er, T. S., Salas, E., and Cannon-
Bowers, J. A.  2000.  ﬁThe Influe
nce of Shared Mental Models on
Team Process and Performance,ﬂ 
Journal of Applied Psychology
(85:2), pp. 273-283.McGrath, R. G.  2001.  ﬁExplorat
ory Learning, Innovative Capacity,
and Managerial Oversight,ﬂ 
Academy of Management Journal
(44:1), pp. 118-131.Miller, C. C., Burkle, L. M., and Glick, W. H.  1998.  ﬁCognitive
Diversity Among Upper-Echelon Ex
ecutives:  Implications for
Strategic Decision Processes,ﬂ 
Strategic Management Journal
(19:1), pp. 39-58.Milliken, F. J., and Martins, L. L.  1996.  ﬁSearching for Common
Threads:  Understanding the Multiple Effects of Diversity in

Organizational Groups,ﬂ 
Academy of Management Review
 (21:2),
pp. 402-433.Mingers, J.  2001.  ﬁCombining IS
 Research Methods:  Towards a
Pluralist Methodology,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
 (12:3),
pp. 240-259.Mitchell, V. L.  2006.  ﬁKnowle
dge Integration and Information
Technology Project Performance,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly
 (30:4), pp.
919-939.Moe, N. B., Dingsøyr, T., and Dybå, T.  2008.  ﬁUnderstanding
Self-Organizing Teams in Ag
ile Software Development,ﬂ
Proceedings of the 19
th Australian Conferences on Software
Engineering, Perth, Australia, pp. 76-85.Moore, G. C., and Benbasat, I.  
1991.  ﬁDevelopment of an Instru-
ment to Measure the Perceptions
 of Adopting an Information
Technology Innovation,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
 (2:3),
pp. 192-222.Nerur, S., and Balijepally, V.  2007.  ﬁTheoretical Reflections on
Agile Development Methodologies,ﬂ 
Communications of the
ACM (50:3), pp. 79-83.106MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Nidumolu, S. R. 1995.  
ﬁThe Effect of Coordination and Uncertainty
on Software Project Performance:  Residual Performance Risk as

an Intervening Variable,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
 (6:3),
pp. 191-219.Pelled, L. H., Eisenhardt, K. M., 
and Xin, K. R.  1999.  ﬁExploring
the Black Box: An Analysis of Work Group Diversity, Conflict,

and Performance,ﬂ 
Administrative Science Quarterly (44:1), pp.
1-28.Petter, S., Straub, D., and Rai, 
A.  2007.  ﬁSpecifying Formative
Constructs in Information Systems Research,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly
(31:4), pp. 623-656.Podsakoff, P. M., and Organ, D. W.
  1986.  ﬁSelf-Reports in Organi-
zational Research: Problems and Prospects,ﬂ 
Journal of
Management (12:4), pp. 531-544.Qumer, A., and Henderson-Sellers, B.
  2008.  ﬁAn Evaluation of the
Degree of Agility in Six Agile Methods and its Applicability for

Method Engineering,ﬂ Information and Software Technology
(50:4), pp. 280-295.Schmidt, R., Lyytinen, K., Keil, M., and Cule, P.  2001.  ﬁIdenti-
fying Software Project Risks: 
An International Delphi Study,ﬂ
Journal of Management Information Systems (17:4), pp. 5-36.Schwaber, K., and Beedle, M.  2002.  
Agile Software Development
with Scrum, Upper Saddle River, NJ:  Prentice-Hall.Sharp, H., and Robinson, H.  
2004.  ﬁAn Ethnographic Study of XP
Practice,ﬂ 
Empirical Software Engineering (9:4), pp. 353-375.Sivo, S. A., Saunders, C., Chang, Q
., and Jiang, J. J.  2006.  ﬁHow
Low Should You Go?  Low Response Rates and the Validity of

Inference in IS Questionnaire Research,ﬂ 
Journal of the AIS
(7:6), pp. 351-414.Stapleton, J.  1997.  
DSDM:  Dynamic Systems Development
Method, Harlow, England:  Addison Wesley.
Tata, J., and Prasad, S.  2004.  
ﬁTeam Self-Management, Organi-
zational Structure, and Judgmen
ts of Team Effectiveness,ﬂ
Journal of Managerial Issues (16:2), pp. 248-265.Tatikonda, M. V., and Rosenthal, S. R.  2000.  ﬁSuccessful Execu-
tion of Product Development Proj
ects:  Balancing Firmness and
Flexibility in the Innovation Process,ﬂ 
Journal of Operations
Management (18:4), pp. 401-425.Trauth, E. M., and Jessup, L. 
M. 2000.  ﬁUnderstanding Computer-
Mediated Discussions:  Positivist and Interpretive Analyses of

Group Support System Use,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly (24:1), pp. 43-79.Turner, J. C., Hogg, M. A., Oakes, P. J., Reicher, S. D., and
Wetherell, M. S.  1987.  
Rediscovering the Social Group:  A Self-
Organization Theory, New York:  Blackwell.
Tushman, M. L., and O™Reilly, C. 
A.  1996.  ﬁAmbidextrous Organi-
zations:  Managing Evolutionary
 and Revolutionary Change,ﬂ
California Management Review (38:4), pp. 8-30.Van de Ven, A. H., and Delbecq, A.
 L.  1974.  ﬁThe Effectiveness
of Nominal, Delphi, and In
teracting Group Decision MakingProcesses,ﬂ 
Academy of Management Journal
 (17:4), pp.
605-621.Watson, E. W., Kumar, K., and Mich
aelsen, L. K.  1993.  ﬁCultural
Diversity™s Impact on Interaction Process and Performance:

Comparing Homogeneous a
nd Diverse Take Groups,ﬂ 
Academyof Management Journal (36:3), pp. 590-602.Webber, S. S., and Donahue, L. M.  2001.  ﬁImpact of Highly and
Less Job-Related Diversity on Work Group Cohesion and
Performance:  A Meta-Analysis,ﬂ 
Journal of Management
 (27:2),
pp. 141-162.Weitzel, J. R., and Graen, G. B.  1989.  ﬁSystems Development
Project Effectiveness:  Problem-Solving Competence as a

Moderator Variable,ﬂ Decision Sciences (20:3), pp. 507-531.Werts, C. E., Linn, R. L., and Jo
reskog, K. G.  1974.  ﬁIntraclass
Reliability Estimates: Testing 
Structural Assumptions,ﬂ 
Educa-tional and Psychological Measurement (34:1), pp. 25-33.Williams, K. Y., and O™Reilly, C. A.  1998.  ﬁDemography and
Diversity in Organizations:  A Review of 40 Years of Research,ﬂ

in Research in Organizational Behavior
,  B. M. Staw and L. L.
Cummings (eds.), Greenwich, CT:  JAI Press, pp. 77-140.Yi, M. Y., and Davis, F. D.  2003.  ﬁDeveloping and Validating anObservational Learning Model of Computer Software Training
and Skill Acquisition,ﬂ Information Systems Research
 (14:2), pp.
146-169.Zmud, R. W.  1982.  ﬁDiffusion 
of Modern Software Practices:
Influence of Centraliza
tion and Formalization,ﬂ ManagementScience (28:12), pp. 1421-1431.About the AuthorsGwanhoo Lee
 is an associate professor and UPS Faculty Scholar in
the Kogod School of Business at the American University,

Washington, DC.  He is the director of the Center for IT and the

Global Economy at the American Un
iversity.  His research areas
include software development agility and complexity, distributed

software teams, IT-enabled co
llaboration and innovation, technology
adoption, and CIO leadership. He has been working closely with IT

executives from large U.S. organizations on those research areas

through collaborative forums and programs.  His research has been

published in Journal of Management Information Systems, European
Journal of Information Systems, Communications of the ACM,

Information & Management, Information Technology and People,

IEEE Pervasive Computing, Journal of Information Technology

Management, and 
Academy of Management
 Best Paper Pro-
ceedings, as well as in the proceedings of the International Con-
ference on Information Systems, the Hawaii International Con-

ference on System Sciences, and the Americas Conference on

Information Systems.  He earne
d his doctorate in management
information systems from the University of Minnesota.
Weidong Xia 
is a faculty member in the College of Business
Administration at Florida International University.  His research

focuses on IT strategy and govern
ance, software development com-
plexity and flexibility, and innovation adoption.  He was on the

faculty of the Carlson School of Management at the University of

Minnesota.  He has worked with a number of large companies as the

cofounder and codirector of the CIO Research Consortium.  His

research has been published in 
MIS Quarterly
, Decision Sciences,Journal of Management Information Systems
, Communications of
the ACM, European Journal of Information Systems
, Journal of
Information Technology Manageme
nt, Journal of Statistics and
Management Systems, International
 Journal of Career Development,
and Journal of End-User Computing.  He received his doctorate in
information systems from the University of Pittsburgh.
MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
107 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Appendix AThe Research ProcessTable A1 provides detailed information about
 our five-phase research process, incl
uding subject characteristics, outcomes, and 
techniques/methods/processes.  In Phase 1, we formul
ated research questions and identified key 
constructs of the re
search through prelimin
ary field
interviews with 36 IS managers and executiv
es who were affiliated with an academic re
search center at a large U.S. public unive
rsity.  The
questions asked during 90-minute semi-structured interviews included(1)How would you define agility in the c
ontext of business software development?
(2)What are the important dimensions of software development agility?

(3)How does software development agility 
affect software development performance?
(4)What factors are important for building software development agility? 
Then, we conducted a focus group brainstormi
ng session with another 45 IS 
managers who enrolled in the part-time MBA programs a
t the same
university.  A brief summary of the preliminary interview results
 was presented to the group to provide the initial conceptuali
zation of software
development agility.  Using the nominal group technique (Van de 
Ven and Delbecq 1974), the particip
ants created a list of measu
res of software
development agility.  As a result, we obtained 24 initial measures 
for software team response exte
nsiveness and software team r
esponseefficiency, respectively.
The initial measurement items were refined through a sorting proce
dure and two pilot tests of the survey instrument.  We follow
ed the sorting
procedure used by Moore and Benbasat (1991) to qualitatively asse
ss the construct validity of measurement items.  Each measurem
ent itemwas placed into an appropriate category by 
four judges who were doctoral candidates with
 extensive IS project experience.  The 
item placement
hit ratio was 91 percent, which was calculated by dividing the num
ber of items correctly placed by the total number of items.  
Several items
were dropped because they were too ambiguous or unclear.
The items were further refined by two pilot tests of the surv
ey instrument.  The first pilot test was conducted through one-hou
r interviews with
another four IS managers and three IS doc
toral students affiliated with the university
.  The participants evaluated the importa
nce and relevanceof each measurement item of software development agility.  The ite
ms that had higher mean scores in both importance and relevan
ce wereretained.  As a result, we retained six 
items for response extensiveness and another 
six items for response efficiency.  The se
cond pilot testinvolved another 15 IS managers.  The participants validated a prototype of our on-lin
e survey questionnaire in terms of readab
ility, format,
and wording.  Based on the feedback, the format of the questionna
ire was improved and the wordings of the measurement items wer
e fine-tuned. There was no overlapping of study participants
 across the different sessions in Phase 1 
and none of them participated in the ma
in field survey
in Phase 2.
In Phase 2, we used a Web-based online instrument to collect qua
ntitative survey data from project managers of software develop
ment projects. 
A PMI-ISSIG-sponsored e-mail letter with a hyperlink to our online su
rvey was sent to the target group.  The participants were 
entered intoa drawing to receive 10 awards of a PMI-ISSIG official shirt a
nd 40 awards of a $25 gift certificate.  A reminder was sent 2 we
eks after the
initial PMI-ISSIG-sponsored e-mail was sent out, fo
llowed by a second email reminder 2 weeks later.
After the data was obtained, we validated convergent validity, di
scriminant validity, and reliability of the measures in Phase 
3, using different
approaches for reflective measur
es and formative measur
es, following the guidelines recommended by Petter et al. (2007).  Appen
dix C showsthe details of measuremen
t validation.  In addition, we 
assessed nonresponse bias and common me
thod variance to ensure that the
 PLS results
were not biased.In Phase 4, we used partial least square (P
LS) to test the research model.  PLS is 
more appropriate than LISREL for exploratory
 research (Chin
1998; Petter et al. 2007).  Response extensivene
ss and response efficiency are formative la
tent variables.  Furthermore, as the
se two constructs
are newly proposed in this research, the hy
potheses are exploratory in nature.  After 
testing the proposed research model, we a
lso tested a
modified PLS model where overall software 
development performance is m
odeled as a second-order cons
truct that combines on-time
completion, on-budget completion, and software functionality.
In Phase 5, we conducted post hoc case studies on 10 software development projects selected from the survey sample in order to 
providecomplementary, additional, richer insights and findings on the 
complex relationships between software development agility, auto
nomy, diver-
108MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Table A1.  Multiphase, Multimethod, Research ProcessPhaseResearch Process and Results
Phase 1
 Preliminary 
field studies forproblem formulation,constructidentification, andmeasurementdevelopmentŁPreliminary field interviews 
Œ90 minute semi-structured intervie
ws with 36 IS managers and executives
ŒThe interviewees were affiliated with a resear
ch center at a large U.S. public university and
represented a variety of industries including 
manufacturing, financial services, healthcare,consulting service, restaurant, insurance, agriculture, transportation, package delivery service,
and medical equipmentŒThe interviewees had over 10 years 
of IS work experience on average
ŒConstructs were identified and defined;
 research questions were formulated
ŁFocus group session
ŒA one-hour brainstorming session with 45 IS managers 

ŒThe participants were part-time MBA student
s at a large U.S. public universityŒThe participants had minimum 3 years of work experience

ŒUsing the nominal group technique (Van de V
en and Delbecq 1974), participants created a listof measures of software dev
elopment agility and ranked them
Œ24 initial items for response extensiv
eness and response efficiency were generated
ŁA sorting procedure
ŒThe procedure used by Moore and 
Benbasat (1991)  was conducted
ŒFour judges were doctoral candidates in informa
tion systems with an average 8 years of prior
work experience
ŒA placement hit ratio of 91%
ŁPilot tests of the survey instrument
ŒThe first pilot test involved four IS 
managers and three doctoral students and evaluatedimportance and relevance of measuresŒThe second pilot test involved 15 IS manager
s and validated the on-line survey questionnaire
ŒAll participants had at least 4 years of
 work experience in the IS field
ŒSix items for response extensiveness 
and response efficiency were retained
ŒThe on-line survey questionnaire was finalized
Phase 2
Survey data
collectionŁAn online survey was administered
ŒTarget respondents were 1,740 PMI-ISSIG members

Œ505 valid responses with an effective response ratio of 29%
Phase 3
MeasurementvalidationŁDifferent methods were used for validat
ing reflective vs. formative measuresŁValidation of convergent/discr
iminant validity and reliability
ŁAssessment of nonresponse bias
 and common method variancePhase 4
Hypotheses testing
ŁPLS was used to analyze the final sample of 399 projects
ŁEstimation of structur
al path coefficients and R2ŁAdditional data analysis was conducted
ŁA model with a second order construct for software development performance 
Phase 5
Post hoccase studiesfor rich, additionalinsightsŁField interviews with 17 project managers and team members from 10 cases 
Ł90 minute semi-structured interviews

ŁInterview results were compared within and across cases

ŁValidation of and plausible ex
planations for the PLS resultsŁRich, additional insights and findings

ŁIdentification of other
 important factors for further researchsity, and performance.  We conducted 17 semi-s
tructured interviews for 10 cases with project managers and team members (see Table 4 fordetails).  All interviews were one-on-one meetings and were about 90 minutes long.  The questions asked during the interview includedŁHow does the software team determine the importance/priority of 
changes?  How does the software 
team decide on how a particula
rchange request should be handled? 
ŁHow would you describe the relationship and tension between
 response extensiveness and response efficiency? How does the
software team strike a balance between them? 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
109 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
ŁHow did various agile development practi
ces affect software development agility?
ŁHow would you describe the tension between (1) needs for m
eeting time, cost, and scope, and (2) needs for implementing user
requirement changes? How doe
s the software team go about managing this tension?ŁHow does team autonomy and diversity affect software development agility? 

ŁWhat are the other organizational/technological fact
ors that affect software development agility?
Each interview was recorded and transcribed for analysis.  We
 identified important comments from each interview and compared th
em within
and across cases.  We found that comments from multiple interviewees 
within cases were largely cons
istent.  However, when there
 were notable
differences, we asked the interviewees to
 clarify and resolve the differences.  We
 obtained key insights through several iterat
ions of comparing
and contrasting interview comments.Appendix BMeasurement Scales and ItemsSoftware team response extensiveness 
(formative) (1 = 0%; 2 = 20%, 3 = 40%, 4 = 60%, 5 = 80%, 6 = 100%)To what extent did the software team actually incorporate requi
rement changes in each of the following categories?  (For exampl
e, if the project
actually incorporated four out of ten different change
s in a specific category, your answer would be 40 %.)
1.System scope (EXT1)

2.System input data (EXT2)

3.System output data (EXT3)

4.Business rules/processes (EXT4)

5.Data structure (EXT5)

6.User interface (EXT6)
Software team response efficiency
1 (formative) (1 = very little; 7 = very much)
How much additional effort was required by 
the software team to incorporate the following changes?  (Effort includes time, cost
, personnel,and resources.)
1.System scope (EFF1)

2.System input data (EFF2)

2.System output data (EFF3)

4.Business rules/processes (EFF4)

5.Data structure (EFF5)

6.User interface (EFF6)
Software team autonomy
 (reflective) (1 = strongly disagree; 7 = strongly agree)
1.The project team was allowed to freel
y choose tools and technologies (AUTO1)
2.The project team had control over what 
they were supposed to accomplish (AUTO2)
3.The project team was granted autonomy on how 
to handle user requirement changes (AUTO3)4.The project team was free to assign personnel to the project (AUTO4)
Software team diversity
 (reflective) (1 = strongly disagree; 7 = strongly agree)
1.The members of the project team were from different areas of expertise (DIV1)

2.The members of the project team had sk
ills that complemented each other (DIV2)
3.The members of the project team had a 
variety of different experiences (DIV3)
4.The members of the project team va
ried in functional backgrounds (DIV4)Software functionality
 (reflective) (1 = strongly disagree; 7 = strongly agree)
1.The software delivered by the proj
ect achieved its functional goals (FUNC1)2.The software delivered by the proj
ect met end-user requirements (FUNC2)3.The capabilities of the software fit end-user needs (FUNC3)

4.The software met tec
hnical requirements (FUNC4)110MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
On-time completion (OnTime) (reflective)1.Objective measure:  project start date:  (mm/dd/yyyy), planned completion date:  (mm/dd/yyyy), actual completion date (mm/dd/
yyyy)2.Perception-based measure
2 (1 = strongly disagree; 7 = strongly agree)
The project was completed late according to the original schedule
On-budget completion 
(OnBudget) (reflective)1.Objective measure:  planned project cost: 
(in dollar), actual project cost:  (in dollar)2.Perception-based measure
2 (1 = strongly disagree; 7 = strongly agree)
The project was completed over budget according to the original budget
Notes:1.These scale items were reversed for data analysis. With
 the reversed scales, higher scores indicated higher response ef
ficiency.
2.These items were reversed for data anal
ysis. With the reversed scales, higher scores indicated higher project performance.
Appendix CMeasurement ValidationThe reliability indexes of latent constructs with reflective i
ndicators were evaluated by composite reliability.  Composite rel
iability of 0.70 or
higher is considered acceptable (Werts et al. 1974).  For adequate
 convergent and discriminant validity, the square root of the
 average variance
extracted (AVE) should be at least 0.707 and exceed the correlations
 between the focal construct and other constructs (Gefen et
 al. 2000). 
Furthermore, standardized item loadings s
hould be greater than 0.70 and items should 
load more highly on their intended constru
ct than on
other constructs (Gefen et al. 2000).The measurement validation results for the reflective constructs 
are shown in Tables C1 and C2. 
 The results suggest that compo
site reliability
indexes for the three  perceptually measured reflective constr
ucts (team autonomy, team diversity, and software functionality) 
are much higher
than 0.70. The square root of the variance extracted (AVE) for 
all constructs is higher than 0.
707, all standardized item loadi
ngs except for
AUTO4 are greater than 0.70, and all items load more highly on 
their intended construct than on other constructs.  Since on-tim
e completion
and on-budget completion were each measured by a single item deri
ved from objective performance data, their AVE is 1.0 and thei
r reliabilitycannot be calculated.  Although the factor loading of AUTO4 to au
tonomy is slightly lower (0.690)
 than the criterion of .70, this item loads
much more highly on autonomy than on other constructs.  Moreover,
 the composite reliability of the latent construct team autono
my decreases
if AUTO4 is removed.  Therefore, it deems reasonable to retain AUTO4 for data analysis.
Table C1.   Reliability and Convergent and Discriminant Validity for Reflective Constructs
Latent
Construct
Composite
ReliabilityAutonomyDiversityFunctionalityOn TimeOn Budget
Autonomy0.839
0.753Diversity0.8830.003
0.809Functionality0.9660.0370.197
0.937On Timen/a0.2690.0740.044
1.000On Budgetn/a0.
3100.0220.0290.633
1.000Notes:  Composite reliability (
c) = ( i)2 / [(
 i)2 + 
 var(
i)], where 
i is the component loading to an indicator and var (
i) = 1 - i2; diagonalelements in bold case are the square root of average variance extrac
ted (AVE) by latent constructs
 from their indicators; off-d
iagonal elements
are correlations among latent constructs.MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
111 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Table C2.   PLS Component-Based Analysis:  Cross-Loadings for Reflective Constructs
Scale ItemsAutonomyDiversityFunctionalityOn TimeOn Budget
AUTO1
0.728-0.054-0.0330.1610.204
AUTO2
0.7930.0400.0840.3040.289
AUTO3
0.8020.0050.0520.1920.271
AUTO4
0.6900.0280.0050.1440.167
DIV1-0.083
0.7580.0370.017-0.009
DIV20.117
0.7430.2970.1880.084
DIV3-0.005
0.8640.1770.0590.006
DIV40.007
0.8820.1580.0070.006
FUNC10.0370.168
0.9450.0530.024
FUNC20.0400.190
0.9560.0610.032
FUNC30.0540.195
0.9430.0240.019
FUNC40.0070.201
0.9250.0300.032
On Time0.2670.0780.045
1.0000.633On Budget0.3100.0240.0280.633
1.000Notes:  To calculate cross-loadings, a factor score for each 
construct was calculated based on t
he weighted sum, provided by PL
S results.  Factor
scores were correlated with individual items to calculate cro
ss loadings.  Boldface numbers are 
loadings (correla
tions) of indi
cators to their own
construct.We followed the guidelines proposed by Petter et al.  (2007) to 
validate the measurement of soft
ware team response extensivenes
s and software
team response efficiency.  We used a modified MTMM (multitraitŒ
multimethod matrix) analysis proposed by Loch et al.  (2003) for
 validating
convergent and discriminant validity.  We created a weighted sc
ore for each construct using the formative weights provided by P
LS results. 
We then created a correlation matrix consisting of the indicators 
and formative latent constructs.  If the majority of inter-it
em correlations and
item-to-construct correlations for a given la
tent construct are significant, the meas
ures achieve convergent validity.  If the 
items tend to correlate
more with one another within the same cons
truct than with items of other constructs
, the measures achieve discriminant validity
.  The presence
of violation, however, does not necessarily suggest that the fo
rmative construct does not have construct validity, because form
ative indicatorsdo not necessarily have high correlations am
ong them (Petter et al. 2007).  If there are 
violations in the modified MTMM matrix
, efforts shouldbe made to understand why these violations 
occurred.  The results shown in Table C3 
suggest that all inter-item correlations an
d item-to-
construct correlations for the m
easures used to assess response extensiveness a
nd response efficiency are significant.  They al
so suggest that
all items correlate with one another within the same construct mu
ch higher than with items of th
e other construct, with no exce
ption.  Therefore,
we concluded that the two formative constr
ucts, response extensiveness and response efficiency, exhibited adequate convergent a
nddiscriminant validity.
Assessing reliability is more difficult with fo
rmative measures than with 
reflective measures and it is not always possible to 
accomplish it
(Diamantopoulos and Winklhofer 2001; Petter et al. 2007).  In a se
nse, very high reliability can be undesirable for formative c
onstructs because
excessive multicollinearity among formative indicators can destabili
ze the model (Petter et al. 2007).  To ensure that multicol
linearity is not
a significant issue, we assessed the VIF (variance inflator facto
r) statistic.  If the VIF statistic is greater than 3.3, the c
onflicting item shouldbe removed as long as the overall content 
validity of the construct m
easures is not compromised 
(Diamantopoulos and Siguaw, 2006).  The
VIF estimates for the meas
ures of response extensiveness and 
response efficiency are shown in 
Table C4.  The results suggest th
at all indicators
except for EXT3 have VIF statistics lower than 3.3.  The VIF st
atistic for EXT3 (software team
 response extensiveness to output
 data change)
is slightly higher (3.83) than the criteri
on.  However, removing this indicator app
ears to compromise the content validity beca
use its counterpart
item EXT2 (software team re
sponse extensiveness to input data 
change) and EFF3 (software team 
response efficiency to output dat
a change)are integral parts of the data analysis. 
 Thus, removing EXT3 would result in unbalan
ced content coverage for the response exte
nsiveness and
response efficiency constructs.  
The threshold value for VIF (3.3) in this research
 is much more conservative compared to tradi
tional criteriasuch as 5 or 10.  Based on the above considerations, we retained the item EXT3 for data analysis.
112MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
Table C3.  Inter-Item and Item-to-Construct Correlation Matrix for Formative Indicators
EXT1EXT2EXT3EXT4EXT5EXT6EXTEFF1EFF2EFF3EFF4EFF5EFF6EFF
EXT11.000

EXT20.6241.000

EXT30.6560.7861.000

EXT40.6600.6960.7471.000

EXT50.5920.660
0.6320.6611.000
EXT60.6120.6170.
6690.6190.5801.000
EXT0.8960.7790.839
0.9050.7620.7101.000
EFF1-0.362-0.254-0.271-0.
309-0.268-0.239-0.3651.000
EFF2-0.254-0.317-0.270-0.322
-0.282-0.196-0.3250.5171.000
EFF3-0.278-0.309-0.347-0.370-0
.278-0.245-0.
3660.5350.6811.000
EFF4-0.294-0.300-0.307-0.396-0.
298-0.212-0.3800.
5360.5850.6251.000
EFF5-0.248-0.246-0.227-0.275-0.375
-0.205-0.3060.513
0.5640.5190.5281.000
EFF6-0.275-0.256-0.272-0.232-0.212-0
.314-0.2890.4510.437
0.5390.4320.4791.000
EFF-0.391-0.334-0.351-0.403-0.339-0.
294-0.4380.9000.6700.
7450.8070.6650.6421.000
Note:  All correlations are significant at the 0.01 level.Table C4.  VIF Statistics for Formative Indicators
ConstructIndicator
Ri 2VIFSoftware Team
ResponsiveExtensivenessEXT10.5432.19
EXT20.6763.09

EXT30.7233.61

EXT40.6512.87

EXT50.5422.18

EXT60.5272.11
Software Team
ResponsiveExtensivenessEFF10.4151.71
EFF20.5482.21

EFF30.5912.44

EFF40.4921.97

EFF50.4411.79

EFF60.3611.56
Note:  The VIF statistic for a formative indicator Xi is calculated by the following
formula:  VIF (Xi) = 1 / (1 Œ Ri2), where 
Ri2 is the coefficient of determination of the regression equation Xi = 1X1 + 2X2 + 3 X3+...+ kXk + e.Appendix DTest of a Second-Order PLS ModelIn this second-order model, the 
software project performance
 construct is modeled as a second-order la
tent variable consisting of three first-
order latent variables (on-time completion,
 on-budget completion, software functionality).
  Due to the lack of PLS capability t
o directly test
second-order models, we separately tested th
e first-order constructs and then used the 
computed first-order factor scores as ma
nifest indicators
MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
113 Lee & Xia/Software Development Agility
of the second-order construct (Yi and Davis 2003).  Since on-tim
e completion and on-budget completion are modeled as single-ind
icators, only
software functionality needs to be tested
 separately to obtain its factor score.
As shown in Figure D1, both team response ex
tensiveness (.234, p < .01) and team respons
e efficiency (.472, p < .01) have a sig
nificant positiveeffect on the second-order software project 
success construct.  Team response extensiv
eness and team response efficiency collec
tively explain
17.6 percent of the variance in software project performance.  
Team autonomy and team diversity
 collectively explain 14.3 perce
nt of the
variance in response extensiveness, whereas
 team autonomy, team diversity, and res
ponse extensiveness collectively explain 27.2
 percent of
the variance in response efficiency.  The coefficients for other 
paths remain stable between the second-order and the first-ord
er models,
suggesting the robustness of the research model.Note:  *p < .05; **p < .01Figure D1.  Results of the Second-Order PLS ModelSoftware Team
Response
Extensiveness
Software Team
Response
EfficiencySoftware
Team
Autonomy
Software
TeamDiversityFunctionality
On-Budget
On-Time
R2 = 0.272
R2 = 0.143
-0.270**
0.253**
0.264**
0.009
-0.395**
0.234**
0.472**
Software
ProjectPerformance
R2 = 0.176
0.509*
0.427*
0.619**
114MIS Quarterly Vol. 34 No. 1/March 2010
 Copyright of MIS Quarterly is the property of MIS Quarterly & The Society for Information Management andits content may not be copied or emailed to multiple sites or posted to a listserv without the copyright holder'sexpress written permission. However, users may print, download, or email articles for individual use.