 RESEARCH 
ARTICLESOFTWARE PROCESS DIVERSITY:  CONCEPTUALIZATION,MEASUREMENT, AND ANALYSIS OF IMPACT ONPROJECT PERFORMANCE1Narayan Ramasubbu
Joseph M. Katz Graduate School of Business, University of Pittsburgh, 354 Mervis Hall,
Pittsburgh, PA  15260  U.S.A.  {narayanr@pitt.edu}
Anandhi Bharadwaj
Goizueta Business School, Emory University, 1300 Clifton Road NE,
Atlanta, GA  30322  U.S.A.  {abharad@emory.edu}
Giri Kumar Tayi
School of Business, State University of
 New York at Albany, 1400 Washington Avenue,
Albany, NY  12222  U.S.A.  {g.tayi@albany.edu}
This article investigates software process diversity, 
defined as the project condition arising out of the
simultaneous use of multiple software development pro
cess frameworks within a single project.  Software
process diversity is conceptualized as the response of 
a project team to such contingencies as requirements
volatility, design and technological novelty, customer in
volvement, and the level of organizational process
compliance enforced on the project.  Moreover, we con
ceptualize that the degree of fit (or match) between a
project™s software process diversity and the level of pro
cess compliance enforced on the project impacts overall
project performance.  This conceptualization was empi
rically tested by utilizing data collected from 410 large
commercial software projects of a multinational firm.  
The results show that higher levels of requirements
volatility, design and technological novelty, and customer involvement increased software process diversity

within a project.  However, software process diversity decreased relative to increases in the level of process
compliance enforced on the project.  A higher degree of fit between the process diversity and process com-

pliance of a project, rather than the effects of thos
e variables independently, 
was found to be significantly
associated with a higher l
evel of project perf
ormance, as measured in terms of project productivity and
software quality.  These results indicate that increasi
ng software process diversity in response to project-level
contingencies improves project performance only when
 there is a concomitant increase in organizational
process compliance efforts.  The implications of thes
e results for research are discussed and prescriptive
guidelines derived to manage the fit between process di
versity and process compliance for improving software
project performance. 1Keywords:  Software process diversity, process compliance, 
plan-based processes, agile processes, software
engineering, productivity, quality, fit as matching
1Arun Rai was the accepting senior editor for this paper.
  Likoebe Maruping served as the associate editor.MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4, pp. 787-807/December 2015
787 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
IntroductionPursuing firm-wide process standardization has traditionally
been prescribed as a ﬁbest practiceﬂ for software organizations

aiming to address the challenges of developing high-quality

software in a cost-effective way (Harter et al. 2000; Hum-

phrey 1989; Ramasubbu et al. 2008; Van der Pijl et al. 1997). 

Until recently, such standardization efforts have been

typically implemented through a firm-wide adoption of a

single plan-based or agile normative software process frame-

work2 (Krishnan and Kellner 1999; Lycett et al. 2003; Rama-
subbu 2014).  Accordingly, a majority of prior research on

software development processes implicitly treats project-level

processes as being uniformly derived from a single normative

process framework (Agarwal and Chari 2007; Jiang et al.

2004; Krishnan et al. 2000).  However, project-level pro-

cesses in software development can be divisible, and project

teams can customize their processes by selecting and com-

bining elements from multiple plan-based and agile normative

frameworks (Fitzgerald et al. 2006; Napier et al. 2008). 

Practitioner reports from the field also suggest that firms are

increasingly adopting multiple process frameworks for their

projects and embracing 
software process diversity (Anderson2005; Bella et al 2008).  Software process diversity refers tothe condition of project-level processes being composed of

elements drawn from 
multiple normative software process
frameworks that could differ in their underlying attributes and

philosophies (Deck 2002; Lindvall and Rus 2000).There is growing recognition that software process diversitycould aid teams in overcoming the limitations imposed by

standardized processes based on a single normative process

framework that advocates strict 
adherence to either plan-based
processes or agile processes (Magdaleno et al. 2012; Napier

et al. 2008; Vinekar et
 al. 2006).  Past research studies have
highlighted that the combination of plan-based and agile pro-

cesses within a single project, and the resulting increase in

software process diversity, could help software teams to better

adapt to changing user requirements and design specifications

(Harris et al. 2009; Ramesh et al. 2012).  Capabilities gained

from embracing process diversity could also help teams ad-

dress the conflicting demands in a project such as the need to

be efficient versus the need to be flexible (Subramanyam et al.

2012).  By increasing process diversity, software teams that
traditionally use plan-based frameworks could infuse flexi-
bility into their context by adopting certain components of

agile process frameworks such as accepting requirement

changes and by submitting to more frequent testing (Boehm

2003; Ramasubbu and Balan 2009).  Similarly, by embracing

process diversity, agile software teams could incorporate

some elements of structure and formal communication asso-

ciated with plan-based process approaches to enhance effi-

ciency and overall predictability of outcomes (Ramesh et al.

2012).While examining the impacts of software process diversity on
the performance of custom software development projects, it

is important to recognize the presence of another counter-

vailing force in the form of the organizational 
processcompliance enforced in those projects.  Stringent compliance
to established process standards is considered to be an impor-

tant firm capability in the custom software development

industry (Ethiraj et al. 2005; Ramasubbu 2014).  Software

firms are known to voluntarily seek compliance verification

and certification from third-party standards organizations in

order to gain the reputation of ﬁhigh process maturityﬂ firms

(Gopal and Gao 2009; Van der Pijl et al. 1997).  These firms

allocate significant resources to monitor project teams for

their compliance to organizational process standards

(McGarry and Decker 2002; Ramasubbu et al. 2008; Staples

and Niazi 2008).  Enforcing such organizational process com-

pliance on project teams can be expected to influence both the

levels of process diversity pursued by individual project teams

and their subsequent performance.  However, there is a dearth

of research examining the impact of software process diver-

sity on the performance of projects executed in an environ-

ment of stringent process compliance mandates.  We address

this gap through this study.We raise the following research questions:  
What factors
contribute to an increase in software process diversity in real

world projects that are also actively monitored for com-

pliance to mandated process standards?  What is the joint

effect of software process diversity and process compliance

on project performance?
  To answer these research questions,
we proceeded as follows.  First, we conceptualized the soft-

ware process diversity construct and developed its empirical

formulization.  Then, by theorizing software process diversity

as a risk response mechanism to project-level contingencies,

we developed a research model of the antecedents and perfor-

mance implications of software process diversity.  Subse-

quently, we partnered with a leading multinational software

firm in order to conduct field observations of software

projects and data collection.  We tested and verified our con-

ceptualization by utilizing archival data from 410 software

projects completed at the research site.  Finally, based on the

results from the analysis and on follow-up discussions with
2Normative software process frameworks refer to a wide array of models (or
methodologies) of software developm
ent published by standards organi-
zations in the software industry, such 
as the Software Engineering Institute,
Scrum.org,, and the International Or
ganization for Standardization (ISO). 
These frameworks, such as the capab
ility maturity model (CMM) and Scrum,
provide templates and guides for firms 
to model their software development
processes.  Firms often seek certifica
tions from the industry standards bodies
to signal to the market that their soft
ware processes are compliant with the
prescriptions of the adopted normative frameworks.
788MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
project managers from the field, we developed a set of pre-
scriptive guidelines for effectively balancing process diversity

and process compliance in software projects. 
A Conceptualization of Software
Process DiversityWhen software teams adopt and fuse multiple normative pro-
cess frameworks within a single project, they increase the

overall software process diversity of the project.  While there

have been anecdotal and case descriptions of software process

diversity in prior research (e.g., Boehm 2003; Jakobsen and

Jhonson 2008; Jakobsen and Sutherland 2009), a rigorous

analysis of the concept of software process diversity,
 its rela-
tionship with organizational process compliance, and their

joint impact on project performance is absent in the literature. 
To address this gap, we draw on the broader management
literature, which has focused on various forms of organiza-

tional diversity, such as demographic differences and dif-

ferences in values, functional skills, and personality types. 

Harrison and Klein (2007) reviewed the literature on organi-

zational diversity and provided 
guidelines for its conceptuali-
zation and measurement.  They recommended conceptualizing

diversity as an amalgamation of the differences in the beliefs

and values of team members (diversity as 
separation); the
differences in the knowledge, experience, and perspectives of

team members (diversity as 
variety); and the differences in the
influences and resources held by team members (diversity as

disparity).  To build on this, we theoretically define 
softwareprocess diversity as the composition of differences in separa-
tion, variety, and disparity of key process areas implemented

in a software project.  A key process area (KPA) is a cluster of related activities (or
tasks) in a project that, when performed collectively, achieves

a set of goals for successful software development (Rama-

subbu et al. 2008).  Normative software process frameworks

prescribed by industry-based standards organizations clearly

specify the number and scope of KPAs that they support.  For

example, the CMMI framework for software development

consists of a total of 22 KPAs covering the entire lifespan of

a development project.
3  When a software organization adopts
a normative process framework such as the CMMI, a 
processtemplate covering the KPAs of the framework is instituted. 
This process template provides a predefined collection of arti-
facts that can be used to organize the workflow spanning the
KPAs throughout a project™s life cycle.  In organizations that

allow project teams to simultaneously use multiple normative

frameworks, process templates corresponding to the different

frameworks are made available to the software project team. 

Software teams typically activate specific components of each

of those templates for use in their projects (Fitzgerald et al.

2006; Ramasubbu et al. 2008).  Thus, in this scenario, mul-

tiple process templates collectively implement the entire set

of KPAs of a project.  Since 
the use of process templates by
a software team is logged and traceable, longitudinal observa-

tions of the membership of a project™s KPAs to the different

process templates provide an empirical basis to reliably mea-

sure software process diversity and the underlying dimensions

of separation, variety, and disparity of the KPAs implemented

in a project.The separation
 dimension of software process diversity
measures the composition of differences among KPAs in a

software project belonging to process templates as derived

from a plan-based versus an agile normative process frame-

work.  This is analogous to assessing diversity in a project

team by acknowledging the differences in knowledge bases,

perspectives, and deeply held values and beliefs among the

team members (Kilduff et al. 1995; Homan et al. 2007).  Plan-

based and agile process frameworks vary in their overall

values, beliefs, and practice attitudes (Boehm 2002; Boehm

and Turner 2003).  For example, while plan-based frame-

works such as the CMMI favor structured planning processes

and comprehensive documentation for traceability, agile

frameworks such as extreme programming tend to emphasize

ﬁindividuals and interactions over tools, working software

over documentation, customer collaboration over contract

negotiation, and responding to change over following a planﬂ

(Beck et al. 2001).  Measuring the composition of KPAs

belonging to the plan-based and agile process templates in a

project captures the extent to
 which a project™s KPAs are
diverse in their process values and beliefs.The variety dimension of software process diversity measures
the composition of differences in the 
spread of KPAs acrossthe different process templates used in a project.  This

accounts for differences among the varieties of process frame-

works used in a project even when they are not separated in

their overall philosophy (e.g., plan versus agile).  For ex-

ample, a software project might utilize templates from two

plan-based frameworks such as the CMMI and rational

unified process (RUP), and allocate to each 50 percent of the

total project KPAs.  Another project in the firm might utilize

the same two process templates, but allocate 25 percent of its

KPAs to the CMMI process template and 75 percent of its

KPAs to the RUP template.  The separation diversity score for
3For more details on the 22 KPAs of the CMMI framework for development,
refer to the technical report, ﬁCMMI
 for Development, Version 1.3,ﬂ
CMU/SEI-2010-TR-033, published by the Software Engineering Institute.
MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
789 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
these two projects would be zero, as both CMMI and RUP
impose a plan-based development paradigm and there is no

separation of values in this case.  However, the two projects

still differ in the extent to which they allocate KPAs to the

two varieties of process templates (CMMI and RUP).  Thus,

there is a need to capture differences among software projects

with respect to the number of process templates that they use

and the way they allocate KPAs to those different varieties of

process templates.  The variety dimension of software process

diversity accomplishes this by capturing the spread of the

KPAs among the different varieties of process templates used

in a project.The disparity dimension of software process diversity mea-
sures the composition of differences in the 
resourceallocation to the KPAs belonging to the different varieties of
process templates utilized in a project.  Measuring disparity

in resource allocation is impor
tant, because it captures the
extent to which the diverse elements in a process were

actually utilized in project activities.  Resource allocation in

software projects has been typically measured as the percent-

age of total project effort allocated to a particular activity

(Krishnan et al. 2000; Ramasubbu et al. 2008).  Accordingly,

the disparity dimension of process diversity accounts for

resource allocation differences by considering the differences

in the project effort allocated to the different KPAs and the

process templates with which they are associated.
In summary, rather than assuming that the KPAs of a project
are homogenously distributed with respect to the underlying

normative process framework(s), the construct of software

process diversity allows us to account for the separation,

variety, and disparity of software processes within a project. 

Next, we develop a research model of the antecedents and

consequences of software process diversity, and formulate our

key hypotheses.Relating Software Process Diversity,
Process Compliance, and
Project PerformanceResearch Model
Keeping in mind the dual forces of software process diversity
and process compliance in high process maturity environ-

ments, we began our model formulation by building on prior

research findings of ﬁcontrolled-flexibleﬂ process designs

(Harris et al. 2009).  Controlled-flexible process designs aim

for both process improvisation and the establishment of

disciplined management controls to enforce compliance. 
Using case studies, Harris et al. (2009) established evidence
for the superior performance of controlled-flexible process

designs when compared with pure plan-based designs.  Those

case studies revealed cross-project variations in the way

controlled-flexible process designs were enacted by different

project teams under the influence of technological and market

uncertainties.  Addressing how teams could adapt to such

uncertainties, Vidgen and Wang (2009) studied software

process design through the lens of complex adaptive systems

and discussed the coevolution of software processes along

with the business environment.  In the software engineering

literature, project-level contingencies such as requirements

volatility, degree of customer involvement, and code size

have been reported as influencing specific process design

choices made by a software team (Boehm and Turner 2003;

Magdaleno et al. 2012; Maruping et al. 2009).  Finally, prior

research has also established that high process maturity

organizations, such as those assessed at CMM level-5 process

maturity, enforce stringent process compliance mechanisms

to ensure minimal deviance from prescribed standards (Ethiraj

et al. 2005; Ramasubbu et al. 2008).  Process compliance

efforts tend to reduce process variations within a project, and

they have been associated with the benefits of minimizing

schedule deviation and lowering the number of defects in the

delivered software (Harter et al. 2000; Harter et al. 2012;

Krishnan and Kellner 1999).The above research findings motivated our  model devel-
opment as follows:  (1) depending on specific project-level

contingencies, software teams make choices regarding the

underlying normative process frameworks for their projects,

which could result in increased levels of software process

diversity within the projects; and (2) process diversity and

process compliance efforts expended on a project jointly

impact project performance outcomes.  We build on these to

develop specific hypotheses on the antecedents of within-

project software process diversity and on the joint influence

of organizational process compliance and process diversity on

project performance.
As noted earlier, software process variations within a project
reflect the choices made by the software team in response to

specific contingencies encountered during the project life

cycle.   Prior research on software project risk has examined

how specific project-level contingencies (or project risk fac-

tors) contribute to overall project risk and impact performance

outcomes (Barki et al. 1993; Keil et al. 2000).   Much of this

work characterizes project risks as stemming from various

types of uncertainties related to project requirements, end user

involvement, underlying technol
ogical and design complexity,
project team composition, and the overall organizational

environment (Wallace et al. 2004).  We draw on the risk
790MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
framework proposed by Wallace et al. (2004) to develop
specific hypotheses that relate project risk factors to software

process diversity.   In doing so, we characterize the extent of

process diversity observed in a project as the collective

response of the project team to the perceived project risks

through a key mechanism they control, namely, process

design.   However, as noted earlier, a countervailing choice

exercised by managers in the form of process compliance

enforcements attempts to rein in the within-project process

diversity.  Software process diversity is, therefore, the result

of both 
project-specific risk factors
 and the extent of organi-
zational process compliance enforced on the project.In contrast to prior studies that have examined project risks in
relation to overall project performance, we focus on the inter-

mediate outcome of software process diversity, which in our

conceptualization is a key conduit through which project risk

factors impact project performance.   Accordingly, among the

six dimensions of project risk identified by Wallace et al.,
4 we
develop hypotheses pertaining to requirements risk, design

and technology risk, and end-user (customer) involvement

risk.  We account for the remaining risk factors in our empi-

rical models through appropriate control variables, such as

software project size, team size, and personnel experience.
The final component of our conceptualization is the joint
impact of process diversity and process compliance on project

performance.  In hypothesizing this effect, we consider two

project performance dimensions widely examined in the

information systems development literature:  productivity and

quality (Harter et al. 2000; Krishnan et al. 2000; Ramasubbu

et al. 2008).  We utilize the ﬁfit as matchingﬂ perspective

(Venkatraman 1989) to characterize the fit (or match) be-

tween process diversity and process compliance and consider

its impact on project performance.  Conceptually, project

performance improves with a good fit.  That is, when a higher

(lower) level of process diversity is matched with a higher

(lower) level of investment in process compliance, there is an

improvement in productivity and quality.  Table 1 presents a

summary of the key hypothesized constructs and Figure 1

shows our overall research model.
Requirements VolatilityRequirements volatility refers to the extent to which the func-

tional and nonfunctional requirements for a software system

under development change during the project™s life span
(Agarwal and Chari 2007; Barry et al. 2006).  Requirement
changes and subsequent alterations of software code have

been reported to create ripple e
ffects of rework in a project
(Harter et al. 2000; Mookerjee and Chiang 2002).  Rework

might result due to legitimate changes in a client™s needs, but

can also stem from ambiguous, inadequate, or incorrect

articulation of requirements in the first place (Wallace et al.

2004).Plan-based and agile processes vary in their approaches to
handling requirements volatility, the underlying causes, and

the subsequent ripple effects of rework.  Plan-based ap-

proaches primarily work toward minimizing requirements

volatility thr
ough a combination of formal contracts that
evoke client commitments and partitioning mechanisms that

freeze requirements over certain stages of the life cycle of a

project.  In contrast, agile processes tend to respond to

requirements volatility through improvisation, rapid adapta-

tion, and incremental delivery of software (Boehm 2002;

Maruping et al. 2009).  The rapid adaptation and social ap-

proach inherent in the agile process framework, however,

have been noted as unscalable due to the inefficiencies of

frequent informal meetings (Begel and Nagappan 2007; Dyba

and Dingsoyr 2008).  Thus, in the presence of requirements

volatility, there are tradeoffs to be made when any single

framework is used exclusively in a project.
One way to remove the constraints of such tradeoffs, then, is
to adopt both plan-based and agile process frameworks within

a project.  Using multiple process frameworks would help

project teams to better handle fluidity in requirements, as they

could cordon off parts of the project with different levels of

volatility and then tackle them through different process

approaches.  For example, teams could partition a project into

different phases (or iterations) of high and low volatility in

order to use different process frameworks for these phases

(MacCormack and Verganti 2003).  Teams could also parti-

tion the software into different modules according to the

requirements volatility levels and then suitably apply different

varieties of processes to them (MacCormack et al. 2001).
Using different varieties of process templates from both plan-
based and agile frameworks creates 
separation in the overall
philosophies toward software development within a project. 

Also, it has been observed that requirements volatility may

not occur homogeneously throughout a project™s life cycle,

and it does not affect all parts of a system™s development in a

uniform way (Banker and Slaughter 2000; Barry et al. 2006). 

The heterogeneous patterns of requirements volatility, in turn,

cause a disparity in effort expenditure on the different project

phases, the parts of partitioned systems developed during

those phases, and their associated process templates.  Thus, an
4The six dimensions are organizational environment risk, user risk, require-
ments risk, project complexity risk, pl
anning and control risk, and team risk. 
MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
791 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
Table 1.  Key Constructs in Conceptualization
Model ComponentC
onstructDescription
Correspondence to
Wallace et al. (2004)
Risk DimensionAntecedents ofsoftware process

diversityRequirements volatilityUncertainty surrounding project
requirements and frequent change in
requirementsRequirements riskDesign and technologicalnoveltyThe level of newness and unfamiliarity with
the system design and 
the implementationtechnologyProject complexity risk
Customer involvementThe level of involvement from key
stakeholders of the client firmUser riskOrganizational processcomplianceThe extent of effo
rt spent on meetingprocess standards mandated by the firm 
Planning and controlriskPerformanceimplications of
software process

diversityFit (misfit) between
process diversity and

process complianceThe degree of congruence (deviance)
between the extent of 
process diversity and
efforts spent on process compliance
activities in a projectNAProductivityOverall efficiency in delivering the project
(output/input)Project performanceQualityOverall quality of delivered software
(1/defects delivered)Project performanceFigure 1.  Research Modelincrease in the requirements volatility of a project tends to
increase the variety, separation, and disparity of processes

within the project, which leads to an overall increase in

software process diversity.  Therefore, our first hypothesis is
H1.A higher level of requirements volatility in a
project is associated with a higher level of soft-

ware process diversity.Design and Technology NoveltyProject teams facing new software design and technologies
face a steep learning curve dur
ing the development process
(Boh et al. 2007; Kemerer 1992).  Initially, such teams might

employ agile processes with rapid iterations to gain early

feedback and accelerate team 
learning (MacCormack et al.
2001).  However, over time, as the new technological features
792MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
become more familiar and tasks get predictable, the focus can
shift to a plan-based approach that facilitates enhanced effi-

ciency and benefits due to the scale economies of longer

iterations (Banker and Slaughter
 1997).  Furthermore, the use
of novel design and technologies in a software project could

be a significant contributor to project complexity, resulting in

higher levels of project management risk (Wallace et al.

2004).  Normative process frameworks that prescribe an

exclusive plan-based or agile paradigm advocate different

approaches for mitigating such risks.  Plan-based frameworks

often prescribe explicit risk management goals and practices. 

For example, in the CMMI framework, risk management is a

level-3 KPA that prescribes 
specific steps for preparation,
identification, analysis, and mitigation of risks (Chrissis et al.

2011).  In contrast, agile process frameworks tend not to

formally prescribe explicit templates for risk management,

leaving it open for resolution by project teams (Anderson

2005; Moran 2014).Higher levels of design and technological novelty present a
demanding requirement on software teams, who are tasked

with accommodating quick iterations to both facilitate effec-

tive learning and implement a planned approach to manage

risks.  Teams facing such challenging requirements resort to

combining the attributes of multiple varieties of process

frameworks, as it helps them to develop ambidextrous capa-

bilities (Magdaleno et al. 2012; Napier et al. 2008; Ramesh et

al. 2012).  In such a scenario, 
the variety of process frame-
works chosen by a project team would include a number of

agile-oriented process components, because rapid iterations

facilitated by agile processes aid efficient learning and effec-

tive client feedback during early project stages (MacCormack

et al. 2001).  Inclusion of agile-oriented process components

in high process maturity environments, where the use of struc-

tured and plan-based approaches is the organizational norm,

naturally leads to a separation of values and beliefs within a
project.Furthermore, learning curve effects resulting from higher
levels of design and technological novelty cause variance in

the effort expended on project tasks over the life cycle of the

project (Kemerer 1992).  As teams learn and become familiar

with new designs and technologies, the effort required to

complete project tasks tends to decrease, although the patterns

of such a decrease may not be uniform during the different

project stages (Boh et al. 2007).  This variance in effort

expenditure corresponds with a variance associated with the

use of different varieties of process templates during the early

and late project stages.  That is, there is 
disparity in the allo-cation of resources to the different varieties of process tem-

plates utilized during the various project life cycle stages. 

Thus, an increase in design and in technological novelty

increases the variety, separation, and disparity of processes

within a project and therefore, our second hypothesis isH2.A higher level of design and technological
novelty in a project is associated with a higher

level of software process diversity.Customer InvolvementThere are divergent findings in prior research about the level

of customer (end user) involvement in a project and its

influence on a project™s processes and performance outcomes. 

Wallace et al. (2004) categorize 
the lack of user involvement
in a project as a significant project risk and note that such

risks could contribute to project failures.  Exploring customer-

developer links in software projects, Keil and Carmel (1995)

show that projects with a higher degree of participation from

customers tend to perform better.  Such project success has

been attributed to the ability of software teams to match their

processes to customer needs through appropriate changes to

development processes (MacCormack and Verganti 2003). 

On the one hand, when there is a high degree of customer

participation in a project, team members might be expected to

more actively respond to evolving customer requirements

(Maruping et al. 2009; Matook and Maruping 2014; Subra-

manyam et al. 2010).  On the other hand, a higher degree of

customer participation might also necessitate the need for

more formal communication plans, especially when there are

organizational boundaries between the customer and the

vendor teams (Pikkarainen et al. 2008; Ramesh et al. 2012). 
To respond to such dual needs in managing customer
involvement in a project, software teams could potentially

draw appropriate process components from multiple norma-

tive frameworks for their projects as customer engagement

approaches in plan-based and agile approaches vary signi-

ficantly.  While the plan-based approaches opt for formal and

punctuated interactions, the agile approaches prefer con-

tinuous, informal, and frequent interactions (Matook and

Maruping 2014).  Furthermore, as highlighted in prior

research, a higher degree of customer involvement positively

influences a project team™s orientation toward selecting more

agile process components (Matook and Maruping 2014;

Ramasubbu and Balan 2009).  Naturally, in the context of

custom software development executed by high process

maturity firms, this leads to a situation in which a software

team must grapple with 
separate value systems enshrined in
the different varieties of process templates used in the project. 
Moreover, the degree of client involvement in a project may
not be uniform throughout the different phases of a software

project (Subramanyam et al. 2010)
.  There are also variations
in the expectations of different end users of a customer firm

with respect to the formalism required in project-level

communications and the corresponding coordination mech-
MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
793 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
anisms (Andres and Zmud 2002; Nidumolu 1995).  These
variations result in overall heterogeneity in effort expenditures

across formal (documents, contracts, etc.) and informal

(mutual adjustments, informal interaction, etc.) coordination

schemes.  In turn, these would cause a corresponding 
dis-parity in the effort allocation to the different KPAs belonging
to the plan-based and agile process templates that respectively

facilitate formal and informal coordination.  Thus, we expect

the degree of customer involvement to positively influence

the variety, separation, and disparity of the processes of a

project team.  Therefor
e, our third hypothesis isH3.A higher level of customer involvement in a
software project is associated with a higher

level of software process diversity.Process ComplianceProcess compliance mechanisms are procedures enacted to

ensure the fidelity of the software design processes to the

selected process frameworks (such as the adherence of the

team to the normative prescriptions of the CMMI framework).

Process compliance is typically enforced by quality control

groups, who are charged with the responsibility of auditing

and evaluating the adherence to quality metrics including the

normative prescriptions for process design and documentation

(Ogasawara et al. 2006; Rama
subbu 2014).  In high process
maturity environments, project 
teams are expected to report
all process tailoring activities, and the teams are monitored

and evaluated through internal audits and related quality

assurance activities.   Thus, process compliance efforts con-

tribute to an indirect selection mechanism wherein a

deliberate investment is made to monitor the project-level

processes and assess their fit with the overall project and firm

context.  Compliance efforts act as a stabilizing force that

tends to limit process diversity by blocking process variations

that are deemed unfit, unnecessary, or noncompliant with firm

standards, as evaluated by the independent quality assurance

personnel.Apart from pruning project-level process variations, higher
levels of process compliance enforcement can also provide

learning opportunities for reconciling disparate values among

project members (Ramasubbu et al. 2008).  This can result in

project teams utilizing more cohesive process components

that are not too distinct in their underlying value attributes.

Also, with a higher level of process compliance, process com-

ponents that do not receive significant levels of resource

commitments from the project team could be identified as

potentially less useful variations that can be eliminated with-

out significantly impacting project outcomes.  Thus, we

expect process compliance to act as a countervailing force to
software process diversity by reducing the variety, separation,
and disparity of processes in 
a software project.  Hence, we
hypothesizeH4:A higher level of process compliance effort in a
software project is associated with a lower level

of software process diversity.Fit Between Process Diversityand Process ComplianceThe discussion up to this point has focused on examining the
project-level contingencies th
at increase software process
diversity and the role of process compliance in reining in pro-

cess diversity.  In this section, we examine the fit (or match)

between process diversity and process compliance, and

examine their joint effects on overall project performance. 

Following well-established protocols in prior literature for the

measurement of software project performance (e.g., Harter et

al 2000; Krishnan et al 2000;
 Ramasubbu et al. 2008), we
conceptualize project performance along the two dimensions

of the 
development productivity
 of a project team and the
conformance quality in the software code delivered by the
project team.
Development productivity refers to the efficiency of a project
team in developing and delivering software code by using

resources available to the team (Krishnan et al. 2000).  When

lower levels of process diversity in a project are matched with

a high degree of process compliance investments, the result is

suboptimal use of organizational resources.  The excessive

compliance efforts in the above scenario could have otherwise

been used for core project tasks such as software development

and verification.  Similarly, when a project team is subjected

to a lower level of investments in organizational process com-

pliance, but operates using a higher level of process diversity,

there is a mismatch and a negative impact on productivity.

This is because insufficient process compliance efforts often

lead to the propagation of suboptimal or bad practices that

cause rework during the late stages of a project (Stamelos

2010).  The costs of such rework are difficult to constrain

because of complex dependencies that cause ripple effects

through all parts of the software system that is under develop-

ment (Mookerjee and Chiang 2002).  Such additional expen-

ditures due to rework ripples dent the overall development

productivity of a project.  Similarly, when higher levels of

process diversity are met with lower levels of process com-

pliance efforts, there are insufficient resources available to

detect software errors committed during development (i.e.,

lower levels of conformance quality).  Such undetected devel-

opment errors are likely to be reported by customers after the

delivery of software code; for example, during acceptance
794MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
testing.  Rectifying software errors after delivery is chal-
lenging and leads to an overall increase in project rework and

cost of quality (Harter et al. 2000).In contrast, a good fit between process diversity and process
compliance enables a project team to optimally balance the

increased flexibility resulting from the use of multiple process

frameworks and the rigor needed to detect and rectify soft-

ware development errors before delivery.  Such an optimal

balance has been reported to engender process-based learning

in software development that helps teams to realize improve-

ments in productivity and reduce the number of defects

delivered to customers (Ramasubbu et al. 2008; Subra-

manyam et al. 2012).  A good fit between process diversity

and process compliance also leads to the development of

coevolutionary change mechanisms that help project teams

adapt to uncertain business situations in an efficient way

(Vidgen and Wang 2009; Volberda and Lewin 2003).  Thus,

a better fit between process diversity and process compliance

endows project teams with capabilities that help them cope

with project contingencies in an efficient way and reduce

defects (or improve quality) through improved learning and

effective quality control mechanisms.  Therefore, our final set

of hypotheses isH5a:A higher degree of fit between process
diversity and process compliance in a soft-

ware project is associated with a higher

level of project productivity.H5b:A higher degree of fit between process
diversity and process compliance in a soft-

ware project is associated with a higher

level of software quality.Analysis and Results
Data CollectionTo collect data for this study, we collaborated with a leading

multinational software development firm that was a recipient

of the IEEE Software Process Achievement Award (IEEE

SPA 2010) and had an industry-wide reputation as a leader in

process innovation.  The firm operated in 55 countries with

over 100,000 employees and about $8 billion in annual

revenues at the time of our data collection.  All the devel-

opment centers from which we collected data for this study

were assessed as operating at CMM level-5 process maturity

by an independent auditing agency.  The high process

maturity environment at the firm was attractive for our study,

as it would facilitate our collection of reliable and fine-

grained data on project-level software processes.We first engaged with the firm to assess the suitability of its
business context, processes, and overall environment for our

study.  We conducted 27 focus group meetings and 28

structured interviews that involved 109 managers and soft-

ware project personnel.  These discussions and interviews

involved participants who described their team™s development

environment, process design rationale, and lessons learned

from their experiences.  Through these interactions, we were

able to confirm the presence of within-project process design

variations involving both plan-based and agile-process

approaches at the firm.  Practitioners also highlighted the

influential role played by the firm™s software engineering

process group (SEPG), which was an autonomous organiza-

tional unit that conducted rigorous internal audits on project

teams to enforce compliance to the firm™s process standards. 

Those operational characteristics of the firm made it an ideal

setting for testing the research model of this study, and we

proceeded to the second stage of our data collection.In the second stage, we collected archival data from 410
commercial software projects completed by the firm in a

recent two-year period.  The archival data were collated from

multiple databases at the firm, including those maintained by

the SEPG, individual project managers, and the human

resources division of the firm.  The data set utilized in the

study was independently audited multiple times by the firm™s

external auditors for quality certification purposes, including

the annual CMMI level-5 compliance checks and the nomina-

tion for the IEEE SPI award.  Thus, we were able to utilize a

unique and highly reliable data set for our analysis.   Variables in DatasetProcess Diversity
As noted earlier, we consider a KPA as the fundamental unit
of a software process design.  At our research site, a majority

of the software development centers used the 22 KPAs

prescribed for CMMI level-5
5 development operations.  Other
normative process frameworks to which project teams sub-

scribed during the time period of this study were IBM™s

Rational Unified Process (RUP), Agile RUP, Scrum, and

Extreme Programming (XP).  The baseline process templates

for all of these five normative process frameworks were

standardized and controlled by the firm™s centralized SEPG. 

Individual projects were allowed to implement all of or a

subset of the five process templates for their specific use.
5CMMI is an integrated process impr
ovement framework developed by the
Software Engineering Institute at Carneg
ie Mellon University.  Level-5 of the
CMMI is the highest maturity level, 
indicating a quantitatively controlled and
well-optimized process.
MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
795 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
Therefore, software teams ha
d the flexibility 
to both choose
a set of relevant process templates for their project and to

design the spread of KPAs across the process templates,

which resulted in project-specific customizations of plan-

based and agile frameworks.  To be able to monitor and con-

trol such customized processes through uniform metrics, the

firm™s SEPG teams mapped the KPAs of the normative

process frameworks under a seamless and uniform process

compliance framework.
6  The project-level process customi-
zations and the spread of KPAs to the different process

templates formed the basis for the measurement of the process

diversity construct.  For each of the KPAs implemented in a

project, we observed the membership of the KPA to the

corresponding process template and traced its use throughout

the project™s life cycle.  Then, we calculated the separation,

variety, and disparity process diversity scores for each project. 
The separation dimension was derived using a standard
deviation-based measurement scheme.  By assigning an agile

score for each KPA of a project (1 if the KPA belongs to an

agile process template, 0 otherwise), the separation dimension

of process diversity is derived asSeparation
agilescoreagilescore
simean
is=−=()21 where a project uses 
s KPAs belonging to process templates
derived from either a plan-based normative framework (in

which case the agile score = 0) or an agile-based process

framework (agile score = 1).  For example, consider a

scenario in which three diffe
rent projects each use 22 KPAs
for software development; project 1 uses only CMMI; project

2 implements 12 KPAs using CMMI and 10 KPAs using

RUP; and project 3 uses CMMI for 12 KPAs and SCRUM for

10 KPAs.  The separation diversity score for both project 1

and project 2 would be zero, as there is no separation among

the KPAs in these projects (they all belong to plan-based

process frameworks, either CMMI or RUP).  In contrast, for

project 3, the separation score is 0.498,
7 indicating the
presence of a plan-based (CMMI) and agile (Scrum) process

separation among the KPAs of the project.

  
The variety dimension of diversity has been traditionally

measured using the Blau™s index (Gibbs and Martin 1962;

Harrison and Klein 2007), which we adapted to the context of

software process diversity as follows:Varietyp
iiv=−=120where, pi would be the proportion of the 
s KPAs that belongto the 
v variety of process templates.  Consider the previous
example scenario in which three different projects each use 22

KPAs for software development:  project 1 uses only CMMI;

project 2 implements 12 KPAs using CMMI and 10 KPAs

using RUP; and project 3 uses CMMI for 12 KPAs and Scrum

for 10 KPAs.  As explained above, the separation diversity

scores for projects 1, 2, a
nd 3 would be 0, 0, and 0.498,
respectively, which captures the separation of KPAs into

plan-based and agile categories.  On the other hand, the

variety diversity scores for projects1, 2, and 3 would be 0,

0.496, and 0.496, respectively,
8 which captures the different
patterns of the spread of KPAs across different process

templates,  but unlike the separation diversity score, it does

not explicitly capture the separation of plan-based KPAs and

agile KPAs.Disparity dimension of diversity has been typically measured
using a coefficient of variation (Harrison and Klein 2007),

which we adapted to the context of this study as follows:  ()Disparity
efforteffort
veffort
imean
ivmean=−=21where efforti is the percentage of total project effort spent on
KPAs belonging to a 
v variety of process templates.  Ex-
panding the previous example 
scenario where each of the
three different projects used 22 KPAs for software devel-

opment, let us say project 1 uses only CMMI and allocates

100 percent of its effort to it; project 2 implements 12 KPAs

using CMMI and 10 KPAs using RUP, and allocates 65

percent of project effort to CMMI KPAs and the remaining 35

percent to RUP KPAs; and project 3 uses CMMI for 12 KPAs

and Scrum for 10 KPAs, and allocates 70 percent of project

effort to the CMMI KPAs and the remaining 30 percent to the

RUP KPAs.  As discussed before, the separation diversity

scores for projects 1Œ3 are 0, 0, and 0.498, respectively; the

corresponding variety diversity sc
ores are 0, 0.496, and 0.496. 
The disparity scores for projects 1Œ3 are 0, 0.424, and 0.566,

respectively,9 which capture the differences in the effort allo-
cation between the different varieties of process frameworks

used in the projects.6A generalized example of such a mapping of CMM KPAs and Extreme
Programming framework can be found in Paulk (2001).
7The mean agile score for project 3 is 0.455 and the overall separation score
is the standard deviation of the agile
 scores (10 counts of 1 and 12 counts of
0, yielding a standard
 deviation of 0.498).
8Project 1 variety score = (1 Œ 1) = 0); project 2 variety score = 1 Œ (12/22)
2Œ (10/22)
2  =0.496; project 3 variety score = 1 Œ (12/22)
2 Œ (10/22)
2 = 0.496.
9Project 1 disparity score = 
((100 Œ 100)
2/1)/100 = 0; project 2 disparity
score = (((65 Œ 50)
2+(35 Œ 50)
2)/)2)/50 = 0.424; project 3 disparity score =
(((70 Œ 50)
2 + (30 Œ 50)
2)/)2)/50 = 0.566.
796MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
Process ComplianceProcess compliance efforts in a project involve the moni-
toring, assessment, and auditing of process engineering

activities in a project.  The process compliance personnel at

our research site reported to both the project manager of a

software team and the compliance supervisor at the SEPG.

Although compliance personnel had sufficient autonomy

within a software project team, executing process compliance

activities required them to collaborate with individual

developers.  The extent of resources allocated to process

compliance varied across the projects and we observed a

corresponding variance in the extent to which the process

compliance personnel were able to systematically monitor and

assess process variants across projects.  We had access to the

task-level accounting and work log of all SEPG personnel

participating in a software project, and we were able to iden-

tify and trace the overall process compliance effort expended

on a project.  Similar to prior research in which investments

in quality management processes were measured as a

percentage of total project effort (Ramasubbu et al. 2008), we

derived the process compliance variable as the percentage of

total project effort spent on process compliance activities.
Fit Between Process Diversity
and Process ComplianceTo derive the fit variable, we follow the ﬁfit as matchingﬂ
perspective developed in prio
r literature (see Tang and Rai
2014; Venkatraman 1989).  The fit as matching technique

enables us to derive the match between process diversity and

process compliance without reference to an external criterion

variable (such as project performance).  The criterion-

independent matching perspective is particularly apt for our

study because process diversity and process compliance
efforts are primarily influenced by different and independent

actors in a project who have different goals and incentives. 

While process diversity is driven by project-level contin-

gencies faced by software teams, process compliance efforts

are driven by standards mandated at the organizational level

that are enforced by central SEPG agents.We utilized the deviation score and residual score approaches
to measure the match between process diversity and process

compliance (see Venkatraman 1989).  In the deviation score

approach, misfit (or mismatch) is derived as the absolute

difference between the standardized scores of process diver-

sity and process compliance variables.  Inversing the sign of

the misfit variable obtained from the deviation score approach

reflects fit, and it is used fo
r easier interpretation of the
regression coefficients.  In 
the residual score approach, we
derive the fit variable using the residuals from the regression
of process compliance on process diversity.  To verify the
robustness of results, we also used the residuals from the

regression of process diversity on process compliance to

derive the fit variable as recommended in the literature (see

Dewar and Werbel 1979).
Project PerformanceThe dependent construct in our model, project performance,
is measured using two variables:  software productivity and

quality.  To derive the productivity variable, we first mea-

sured project size using function points, which is a program-

ming language-independent measure of software functionality

(Kemerer 1993).  Then, we calculated productivity as an

efficiency measure by treating the total function points pro-

duced by a software team as the output of a project and the

total project effort as the input.  Following methods applied in

prior research, we utilized the log-transformed productivity

variable for the regression estimations (Harter et al. 2000;

Krishnan et al. 2000; Ramasubbu et al. 2008).  We derived the

second performance measure, software quality, as the inverse

of the total number of unique software defects reported by

customers (Subramanyam and Krishnan 2003).
Requirements VolatilityThis variable measures the extent to which requirements
changes from customers induced rework in a software project.

We calculated requirements volatility as the percentage of

effort spent on rework due to change in customer require-

ments, and we held the planned development effort before the

change occurred as the baseline.Design and Technology Novelty
The extent to which the software design and technology
involved in a project was new to the project team was self-

reported by project managers and programmers using a

questionnaire adapted from Takeishi (2002).  We sought at

least two survey responses from each project team:  one from

a manager and the other from a technical team member.  The

survey asked participants to rate the extent to which their

project involved ﬁdesign newnessﬂ and their familiarity with

the technology used to implement the designs.  The responses

were measured using a 0 to 100 point scale, ranging from old

design (0%), some modifications to old design (less than

30%), to radically different from prior designs (100%).

Similarly, technological familiar
ity was measured using scales
ranging from being completely familiar to old technologies

used (0%) to dealing with a completely new and unfamiliar
MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
797 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
technology (100%).  The responses to the design newness and
technology familiarity items were highly correlated (0.94),

and we took an average of those item scores to calculate the

value of design and technology novelty in a project.Customer Involvement
We calculated the extent of customer involvement in a project
as the percentage of total project effort spent by a software

team in engaging with end users.  We systematically parsed

the daily time logs submitted by software project members

that were utilized for billing and cost accounting purposes of

the firm in order to identify the time allocation of individual

team members for client-facing activities.  Then, we aggre-

gated the total time spent on these client-facing activities at

the project level.  Next, we identified and accounted for the

presence of clients in team meetings, peer reviews, and

quality inspection meetings that were not specifically reported

as client-facing activities in the time logs by matching the

meeting participant logs with the list of project personnel that

we obtained from project managers. 
Control VariablesAs mentioned before, we used software code size measured
using function points to derive the productivity variable.

Similar to methods used in prior research, we used log-

transformed code size in the regression analysis as a control

variable (Harter et al. 2000; Krishnan et al. 2000).  We utilize

the full-time equivalent count of personnel involved in a

project as the team-size control variable to account for the

extent of the coordination and administration needs of the

project.  Since the cumulative 
experience of a project team
could potentially influence the overall project performance

(Boh et al. 2007), we included the average professional work

experience of the project team (in years) in the regression

models.  Finally, some project managers at our research site

had obtained professional certifications on specific normative

process frameworks (e.g., certified Scrum Master).  To

account for this difference among the managers, we included

a categorical control variable in the models, coded as 1 if a

project manager possessed any professional certifications and

as 0 otherwise. Estimation and ResultsThe functional forms of the various relationships embedded

in the research model (Figure 1) are shown in equations 1Œ3.

Equation 1 shows that process diversity within a project is a

function of project-specific conditions and process com-
pliance.   Equations 2 and 3 indicate that, after controlling for
other project variables, the project performance outcomes,

productivity, and quality, are a function of fit between process

diversity and process compliance.  To establish the robustness

and validity of the results using the fit as matching perspec-

tive, original process diversity and process compliance

variables are also included in equations 2 and 3 apart from the

match variable derived from these individual components. 

We also included the absolute level of agile process KPAs

used in a project in equations 2 and 3 to control for an

alternate explanation that process agility might drive project

performance.
10Process diversity =
0 + 
1*(process compliance) +
2*(requirements volatility) + 
3*(design andtechnology novelty) + 4*(customer involvement) +
5*(team size) + 
6*(team experience) + 
7*(codesize) + 8*(project manager certification) + 
(1)Productivity = 
0 + 
1*(fit between process diversity
and process compliance) + 
2*(process diversity) +3* (process compliance) + 
4* (agile KPA score) +
5*(requirements volatility) + 
6*(design andtechnology novelty) + 7*(customer involvement) +
8*(team size) + 
9*(team experience) + 
10*(codesize) + 11*(project manager certification) + µ
(2)Quality = 
0 + 1*(fit between process diversity and
process compliance) + 
2*(process diversity) + 3*(process compliance) + 
4* (agile KPA score) +
5*(requirements volatility) + 
6*(design andtechnology novelty) + 7*(customer involvement) +
8*(team size) + 
9*(team experience) + 
10*(codesize) + 11*(project manager certification) + 
 (3)Before estimating the regression equations, we examined the
empirical relationship between the three process diversity

scores, namely, separation, variety, and disparity scores. 

Pairwise correlation between the three scores (shown in

Table 2) revealed a high degree of correlation (at p < 0.01)

between them.
One reason for such a high correlation between the different
diversity scores could be because all of the projects at our

research site during our observation period existed in a CMMI

level-5 organizational environment, and they moved toward

higher levels of process diversity from that baseline.  So

project-level variations that caused process variety also simul-

taneously caused a separation of KPAs into plan-based and
10We thank an anonymous reviewer for this suggestion.  We measured the
agile KPA score control variable as the 
percentage of total KPAs of a project
that were implemented using agile process frameworks.
798MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
Table 2.  Correlation Between Variety, Separation, and Disparity Scores
Diversity Score123
Separation11.00  

Variety20.791.00 

Disparity30.780.801.00
agile frameworks in a project.  Further, the effort allocation
across the different varieties of process templates followed the

same pattern as the proportion of KPAs allocated to the

different varieties of process templates in the project.  There-

fore, we are not able to sufficiently tease out the differences

between the separation, variety, and disparity dimensions of

software process diversity using our empirical data.  As a

result, to avoid multicollinearity issues, we only infer our

results using each of the separation, variety, and disparity

scores individually and mutually exclusively in the regres-

sions.  Results were similar across the models where the

separation, variety, and disparity
 scores were separately used
as the process diversity variable.  Also, the process diversity

variable calculated as a linear combination (additive, average,

etc.) of the separation, variety, and disparity scores yielded

similar results.
11The summary statistics and correlations between the variables

utilized in the regression models are presented in Tables 3 and

4, respectively.  We note that the fit variables derived using

the deviation score and the residual score approaches are

highly correlated with each other (0.83) as expected.  How-

ever, the fit variables have relatively lower levels of

correlation with the individual components that are used to

derive them (process diversity and process compliance),

which indicates a good level of discriminant validity for them.
Given that our model specification contained three linear
equations (equations 1Œ3) with potential contemporaneous

cross-equation error correlations, we use seemingly unrelated

regression (SUR) to estimate the model (Zellner 1962).  We

tested for endogeneity in the system of equations using the

DurbinŒWuŒHausman test (Davidson and MacKinnon 1993,

pp. 237-242).In all cases, the DurbinŒWuŒHausman test indicated that the
null hypotheses (variables are exogenous) could not be

rejected, which indicates that the SUR regression results are
consistent.12  As an additional robustness check, we also per-
formed a two-stage least squares instrumental variable regres-

sion to test the relationship among software process diversity,

productivity, and quality.13  The two-stage least squares
regressions yielded results consistent with SUR, lending

support for the use of the SUR results for hypotheses testing.
Our results pertaining to the antecedents of process diversity,
and which were utilized to verify hypotheses 1Œ4, are

presented in Table 5.  In Table 
6, we present results pertaining
to two project performance variables, productivity and

quality, which we estimated using two different ways of

measuring fit between process diversity and process com-

pliance.  We see that all models are statistically significant at

the p < 1% level and the adjusted R-squared values are

indicative of good explanatory power.  Post-regression diag-

nostics used to detect outliers from Cook™s distance metric

and leverage plots did not reveal any problems.  The highest

variance inflation factor among all the models was 2.6, and

the highest condition index was 16.23, which confirms that

multicollinearity issues are of no concern (Belsley et al. 2004,

p. 105).Referring to Table 5, we see that requirements volatility,
design novelty, and customer involvement all had a positive

and statistically significant effect on process diversity. 

Confirming hypothesis 1, the results indicate that a percentage

increase in requirements volatility leads to about a 13

percentage-point increase in process diversity (
 = 0.129; p <
0.001).  In a validation of hypothesis 2, we see that a unit

increase in the design and technology novelty score increases

process diversity by about 31 percentage points (
 = 0.309; p
< 0.001).  As predicted by hypothesis 3, a percentage increase

in customer involvement in the project increased process

diversity in the project by about 6 percentage points (
 =0.056; p < 0.001).  Hypothesis 4 posited that an increase in
11We thank the review team for sugges
ting the different ways of deriving a
process diversity variable to be used in the regression models.
12DurbinŒWuŒHausman test statistics 
for the productivity and quality equa-
tions were, respectively, F(1, 399) = 0.63, p > F = 0.427; F(1, 399) = 1.02;

p > F = 0.312.
13We utilized instrumental variables us
ed in prior studiesŠnamely, defect
density of in-process defects and the 
ratio of upfront project investmentsŠ
in order to uniquely identify the two-stage least square regression models

(Harter et al. 2000; Krishnan et al. 2000).
MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
799 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
Table 3.  Summary Statistics (
N = 410)VariableMeanStd.  Dev.MinMax
Productivity0.160.260.013.37

Quality0.020.030.71x10
-30.28Process diversityƒ0.280.260.000.91
Process compliance16.4811.171.0142.35

Fit between process diversity and process compliance
(deviation score)-1.120.87-3.12-0.01
Fit between process diversity and process compliance
(residual score)0.031.17-2.152.53
Agile KPAs score27.1424.672.2741.54
Requirements volatility15.5822.270.00275.05
Design and technology novelty35.0048.000.00100.00

Customer involvement16.7511.310.00100.00
Team size10.8610.482.00116.00

Team experience3.812.260.1921.86

Code size1,467.342,
645.1825.9432,767.00
Project manager certification0.450.500.001.00
Notes:  
ƒDisparity process diversity score used in regression models; resu
lts are similar for the use of separation and variety process 
diversity scores.
Table 4.  Correlations (N = 410)Variable1234567891011121314
Productivity11.00          

Quality20.181.00         

Process diversityƒ30.160.131.00        
Process compliance4-0.11-0.10-0.331.00       

Fit (deviation)50.090.08-0.320.411.00

Fit (residual)60.150.10-0.070.050.831.00

Agile KPA score7-0.250.160.38-0.18-0.31-0.251.00

Requirements volatility8-0.030.040.24-0.11-0.27-0.220.371.00     

Design and technologynovelty9-0.10-0.130.54-0.27-0.54-0.510.250.041.00   
Customer involvement10-0.02-0.100.55-0.12-0.41-0.490.520.400.021.00  
Team size11-0.06-0.31-0.11-0.07-0.01-0.15-0.230.010.18-0.181.00 

Team experience12-0.020.04-0.010.030.060.01-0.070.130.190.170.031.00

Code size130.47-0.170.15-0.10-0.07-0.020.210.010.17-0.040.290.011.00

Project managercertification
140.030.050.21-0.120.060.030.190.070.230.040.040.270.031.00
Notes:  All pairwise correlations > 0.1 or <
 0.1 are significant at p < 0.05.  
ƒDisparity process diversity score used in regression models.  Results are similar for the use
of separation and variety process diversity scores.
800MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
Table 5.  Estimation Results:  Antecedents of Process Diversity
ƒIndependent VariablesEffect on Process Diversity
Process compliance1-0.087
** (0.035)
Requirements volatility20.129
*** (0.038)
Design and technology novelty30.309
*** (0.091)
Customer involvement40.056
*** (0.015)
Team size5-0.024
*** (0.006)
Team experience6-0.146
*** (0.039)
Code size70.087
*** (0.033)
Project manager certification80.293
*** (0.086)
Intercept90.352 (0.281)

Sample size410

Adjusted R²0.713
²1112.20***Notes:  Standard error in parentheses.  
***Significant at < 1%; 
**Significant at < 5%; 
*Significant at < 10%.  
ƒDisparityprocess diversity score used in regression model; results 
do not vary across the use of disparity separation, and
variety process diversity scores as well as their linear combinations.
Table 6.  Estimation Results:  Performance ImplicationsIndependent Variables
Fit Measured as Deviation ScoreFit Measured as Residual Score
ƒ(1) Effect onProductivity
(2) Effect onQuality(3) Effect onProductivity
(4) Effect onQualityFit between process diversity and process
compliance11.152***(0.340)0.312***(0.088)1.14***(0.322)0.282***(0.098)Process diversity⁄2-0.559(0.365)-0.015(0.010)-0.309(0.287)-0.007(0.005)Process compliance3
-0.547(0.384)-0.017(0.011)-0.208(0.152)-0.014(0.010)Agile KPA Score4
-0.229(0.202)-0.038(0.050)-0.149(0.139)-0.032(0.043)Requirements volatility5
-0.296**(0.119)-0.086(0.062)-0.215**(0.087)-0.054(0.050)Design and technology novelty6
-0.257***(0.087)0.006(0.007)-0.292***(0.081)0.003(0.004)Customer involvement7
-0.007**(0.003)-0.001***(0.28x10-3)-0.006**(0.003)-0.001***(0.24x10-3)Team size8
-0.038***(0.011)-0.005***(0.001)-0.037***(0.011)-0.006***(0.002)Team experience9
0.013(0.014)0.002***(0.001)0.006(0.012)0.001**(0.44 x10-3)Code size10
0.614***(0.181)-0.075***(0.022)0.616***(0.182)-0.067***(0.020)Project manager certification11
-0.021(0.035)-0.001(0.002)-0.037(0.055)-0.005(0.009)Intercept12
-5.404***(1.389)0.114***(0.029)-6.033***(1.551)0.174***(0.045)Sample size410410410410

Adjusted R²0.6050.2510.5820.243
²613.34***136.96***743.55***129.78***Notes:  Standard error in parenthesis.  
***Significant at < 1%; 
**Significant at < 5%; 
*Significant at <1 0%.  
ƒResidual scores calculated from regression of process diversity
on process compliance and vice versa yield consistent results.  
⁄Disparity process diversity score was used in regression model; results do not vary across the use of
disparity, separation, and variety process divers
ity scores as well as their linear combinations.
MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
801 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
process compliance efforts in a project would be negatively
associated with process diversity.  Our results support this

prediction and show that a unit increase in process com-

pliance efforts decreases process diversity within a project by

about 9 percentage points (
= -0.087; p < 0.05).  Results for
the other control variables show that larger, more experienced

teams have lower levels of process diversity.  In contrast, pro-

jects with a bigger code base and projects led by managers

who were professionally certified in any of the five normative

process frameworks adopted by the research site were asso-

ciated with increased levels of software process diversity.Recall that hypotheses H5a and H5b predicted that a better fit
between process diversity and process compliance efforts

yields higher productivity and quality respectively.  To verify

this prediction, we refer to the results in columns 1Œ4 in

Table 6.  Coefficients presented in columns 1 and 2 pertain to

the regression specifications using the fit variable derived as

a deviation score.  Columns 3 and 4 present the regression

coefficients when an alternate residual score measure is used

to derive the fit variable.  Overall, the regression results are

consistent irrespective of the way the fit between process

diversity and process compliance is measured.  The results

confirm our hypotheses that a better fit between process

diversity and process compliance efforts is associated with

higher levels of project performance.  We see that a unit

increase in the fit between process diversity and process

compliance improves productivity by 1.15 units (
 = 1.152;
p < 0.001; Table 6, column 1) and increases software quality

by 0.31 units (
 = 0.312; p < 0.001; Table 6, column 2).  The
individual, direct effects of bot
h process diversity and process
compliance on productivity and quality are not statistically

significant.  An important insight from this empirical result is

that the fit between process diversity and process compliance,

and not those mechanisms acting independently, has an

impact on project performance.  Therefore, in order to benefit

from process diversity, concomitant investments in organi-

zational process compliance activities are necessary.
Results for other control variables show that requirements
volatility has a significant negative effect on productivity, but

does not significantly affect quality.  Based on this result, we

infer that project teams in our data set encountered produc-

tivity losses for maintaining higher-level software quality

when they faced client-driven requirements changes.  We also

find that bigger software code base and larger team size have

a negative effect on software quality.  Finally, we find that a

higher degree of customer involvement is negatively asso-

ciated with project performance.  This implies that the project

teams we observed worked better when presented with well-

specified and codified customer contracts that facilitated mini-

mal intervention from customers.  Although a higher level of

customer involvement in a project is commonly expected to
be positively associated with project success, prior research
findings have shed light on some of the mixed effects of high

degree of customer involvement, such as the possibility of a

conflict-ridden, lengthy, and 
less-effective development
process (Heinbokel et al. 1996; Subramanyam et al. 2010).  It

is possible that the presence of process diversity in a high

process maturity environment exacerbates such negative

effects of a higher degree of client involvement.  Also, clients

could have increased their involvement if they perceived their

projects as not performing well.  Beyond these speculations,

we do not have a sufficient basis to tease out the causal

direction of the effects of cust
omer involvement.  There is a
need for further investigation of the effects of customer

involvement on project performance in the presence of

process diversity in high process maturity environments.
Robustness Test for Group Size EffectsDiversity variables operationalized to measure group-level
separation, variety, and disparity
 scores have been reported to
suffer from biases when there is a large variation of group

sizes in the sample (Biemann and Kearney 2010).  Recall that

we treat a KPA as the fundamental unit of a software process,

and group size is determined by the membership of KPAs to

process templates.  To rule out group-size-induced biases in

our results, we specifically accounted for group size (number

of KPAs), while deriving the variance and standard deviation

scores as recommended in the literature (see Biemann and

Kearney 2010).  Regression estimates using the original and

the bias-corrected process diversity scores were similar,

indicating that group size-induced 
biases are not of a concern
in this study.14DiscussionImplications for ResearchThis study takes an important step forward in rigorously

conceptualizing, measuring, and analyzing software process

diversity.  We have laid the groundwork for theorizing soft-

ware process diversity as an outcome of choices made by a

project team in response to specific contingencies faced

during the life cycle of the project.  By drawing on prior work

on organizational and demographic diversity (see Harrison

and Klein 2007), we conceptualized how software process

diversity can be understood not only in terms of the traditional
14We thank the senior editor and the 
associate editor for recommending this
robustness check.
802MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
separation of plan versus agile dichotomies (i.e., the separa-
tion dimension), but also along the variety and disparity

dimensions.  Going beyond the surface level classification of

plan versus agile, a consideration of the additional process

variety and disparity dimensions might suggest that there is

greater heterogeneity, such as 
when project teams adopt and
fuse different frameworks from within the agile or within the

plan-based family of process frameworks.  We believe that

the study has laid a good foundation to ﬁmove beyond en-

trenched disagreements about 
planning versus agilityﬂ (Austin
and Devin 2009, p. 476), and has created a theoretically well-

informed and empirically verifiable framework for studying

software process diversity.  We have established a rigorous

case for usefully combining the disparate control and

flexibility-focused process frameworks that could facilitate a

new generation of software process innovations.Our finding regarding the importance of a good fit between
process diversity and process compliance has important

implications.   It suggests that, as process diversity prolifer-

ates within a project, adequate and appropriate process com-

pliance mechanisms are needed to mitigate hazards due to

poor or ill-conceived process variants.  This result calls for

expanding the current theoretical conceptualizations of soft-

ware project risk management to accommodate process

variations within a project as a potential and distinct source of

risk that spans both the social and technical subsystems of a

project (Iversen et al. 2004; Wallace et al. 2004).
The need to achieve a good fit between software process
diversity and process compliance has at least two additional

implications for software project management.  First, it is

important to understand how adequate autonomy and appro-

priate coordination mechanisms could be instituted between

project-level personnel and centrally organized (at firm-level)

compliance personnel without exacerbating the tradeoffs

between efficiency and flexibility (Ramasubbu 2014; Subra-

manyam et al. 2012).  Second, prior conceptualizations of

project control (e.g., Kirsch et al. 2002; Nidumolu and Subra-

mani 2003) should be complemented with new mechanisms

that explicitly take into consideration the effects of process

diversity.  We only studied the overall effort expended on

process compliance, leaving open the need for further investi-

gations of how specific portfolios of controls could be

designed and implemented to regulate the fit between process

diversity and process compliance.
Implications for PracticeAn important implication for practice stemming from this

research is the need to judiciously manage the alignment
between process diversity and process compliance in software
projects.  Based on our discussions with practitioners at our

research site, we provide a few implementable guidelines for

software development organizations.  First, development of

meta-routines or problem-solving procedures that are indepen-

dent of specific normative process frameworks would provide

firms with an organization-wide platform for improving the

efficiency of compliance mechanisms without compromising

overall flexibility (Adler et al. 1999).  Such meta-routines

need to be enabled through appropriate infrastructural and

organizational support mechanisms such as automation of

process template audits and adequate separation of concerns

between organizational-level SEPG personnel and project-

level development personnel (Ramasubbu 2014).
Second, we noticed that teams used scope and temporal
partitioning for creating effective boundaries between the

applications of different varieties of processes in their pro-

jects.  The possibility of spatial partitioningŠthat is, the use

of separate specialized units that could independently handle

the distinct aspects of plan-based and agile processesŠwas

also raised during our discussions with project managers.  The

use of such scope, temporal, and spatial partitioning of tasks

within a unit has been known to aid organizational ambi-

dexterity (Puranam et al. 2006).  In such scenarios, the

partitioning and switching events of a project need to be used

to trigger the necessary process compliance investments.  For

example, whenever a software team performs process parti-

tioning or switching, an automatic audit by SEPG could be

triggered, thereby facilitating a systematic way to match the

levels of process diversity and process compliance in a soft-

ware project.  Furthermore, process partitioning and switching

milestones could be used for enrichment and learning

activities such as peer-reviews, root-cause analyses, and

formal training that improve software project performance

(Ramasubbu et al. 2008).  Thus, we recommend that SEPG

managers develop infrastructural capabilities that help imple-

ment mechanisms to track and trace project-level process

partitioning and switching events.Finally, since our results indicated that customer involvement
plays an important role in the way project teams initiate

process variations, we recommend SEPG personnel use cues

from customer communication at the organizational level

(e.g., customer satisfaction surveys) to triangulate and verify

the actual need to approve or block process variations.  Such

triangulation of customer feedback from multiple communi-

cation channels (organizational 
and project levels) could help
process compliance personnel to identify and rectify the

existence of contradictory customer policies at different

levels, and, thereby, avoid unnecessary or risky process

variations. MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
803 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
Limitations and Further ResearchThere are some limitations of this study that future research
could address.  First, we could not fully distinguish the unique

effects of separation, variety, and disparity dimensions of

software process diversity in this research.  The three diver-

sity scores were highly correlated in our data set, and we

suspect that idiosyncratic characteristics of the development

environment at our research site could be a reason for this. 

Future research could shed light on the factors that lead to

distinct effects of the separation, variety, and disparity process

diversity dimensions through data gathered from a broader set

of firms.  Second, since we observed only custom (bespoke)

software development projects, we should be cautious in gen-

eralizing our results across all types of software development

projects (maintenance, reengineering, product development,

etc.).  The research model and empirical analysis utilized in

this study can be replicated in other project settings and future

research could embark on the necessary comparative analyses.

Third, we did not observe the long-term impacts of process

diversity and only studied its impact on immediate project

performance outcomes.  Further research is needed to ascer-

tain the long-term impacts of software process diversity on the

learning curves and the capability development of project

teams.  Fourth, we studied onl
y software projects using stan-
dard process components drawn from well-established

normative process frameworks.  Not all software teams utilize

standard process frameworks, and we need to be cautious in

extrapolating the results reported in the paper to teams that

use a variety of homegrown processes.  Finally, the distinct

coexistence of several process designs in a software produc-
tion ecosystem for longer periods of time, and the way those

diverse process designs coevolve and adapt to each other,

warrants further examination.  We believe these are fruitful

lines of inquiry for future research on software process

diversity.AcknowledgmentsWe thank Senior Editor Arun Rai, the associate editor, three
anonymous reviewers, Sandra A. Slaughter, and seminar participants

at the University of Pittsburgh, Te
mple University, Georgia Institute
of Technology, Indiana University, University of Waterloo, Naval

Postgraduate School, Southern 
Methodist University, Nanyang
Technological University, and Microsoft Research for helpful

comments.  We thank Gregory M.  Latshaw for excellent editing. 

Errors and omissions remain our own.ReferencesAdler, P. S., Goldoftas, B., and Levine, D. I.  1999.  ﬁFlexibility
Versus Efficiency:  A Case Study of Model Changeovers in the
Toyota Production System,ﬂ 
Organization Science (10:1), pp.
43-68.Agarwal, M., and Chari, K.  2007.  ﬁSoftware Effort, Quality, and
Cycle Time:  A Study of CMM Level 5 Projects,ﬂ 
IEEE Trans-
actions on Software Engineering (33:3), pp. 145-156.Anderson, D. J.  2005.  ﬁStretching Agile to Fit CMMI Level 3Š
The Story of Creating MSF for CMMI Process Improvement at

Microsoft Corporation,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of 2005 Agile Devel-
opment Conference
, Washington, DC, July 24-29, pp. 193-201.
Andres, H. P., and Zmud, R. W. 
 2002.  ﬁA Contingency Approach
to Software Project Coordination,ﬂ 
Journal of Management
Information Systems (18:3), pp. 41-70.Austin, R. D., and Devin, L.  2009.  ﬁResearch CommentaryŠ
Weighing the Benefits and Costs of Flexibility in Making

Software:  Towards a Contingency Theory of The Determinants

of Development Process Design,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
(20:3), pp. 462-477.Banker, R. D., and Slaughter, S. A.
  1997.  ﬁA Field Study of Scale
Economies in Software Maintenance,ﬂ 
Management Science
(43:12), pp. 1709-1725.Banker, R. D., and Slaughter, S. A.
  2000.  ﬁThe Moderating Effects
of Structure on Volatility and Complexity in Software Enhance-

ment,ﬂ Information Systems Research
 (11:3), pp. 219-240.Barki, H., Rivard, S., Talbot, J.
  1993.  ﬁToward an Assessment of
Software Development Risk,ﬂ 
Journal of Management Infor-
mation Systems (10:2), pp. 203-225.Barry, E. J., Kemerer, C. F., and 
Slaughter, S. A.  2006.  ﬁEnviron-
mental Volatility, Development Decisions, and Software

Volatility:  A Longitudinal Analysis,ﬂ 
Management Science
(52:3), pp. 448-464.Beck, K., Beedle, M., van Benne
kum, A., Cockburn, A., Cunnig-
ham, W., Fowler, M., Grenning, J., Highsmith, J., Hunt, A.,

Jeffries, R., Kern, J., Marick, B., Martin, R. C., Mellor, S.,

Schwaber, K., Sutherland, J., a
nd Thomas D.  2001.  ﬁManifesto
for Agile Software Developmentﬂ (http://agilemanifesto.org/;

accessed April 6, 2014). Bella, F., Hormann, K., and Vana
mali, B.  2008.  ﬁFrom CMMI to
SPICEŠExperiences on How to Survive a SPICE Assessment

Having Already Implemented CMMI,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 9
thInternational Conference on Pr
oduct-Focused Software Process
Improvement
, Monte Porzio Catone, Italy, June 23-25, pp.
133-142.Belsley.  D. A., Kuh, E., and Welsch, R. E.  2004.  
Regression
Diagnostics:  Identifying Influential Data and Source of Col-

linearity, Hoboken, NJ:  John Wiley & Sons.
Begel, A., and Nagappan, N.  
2007.  ﬁUsage and Perceptions of
Agile Software Development in an Industrial Context:  An

Exploratory Study,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the First International
Symposium on Empirical Softw
are Engineering and Measure-ment, Madrid, Spain, September 20-21.Biemann, T., and Kearney, E.  2010.  ﬁSize Does Matter:  How
Varying Group Sizes in a Sample Affect the Most Common

Measures of Group Diversity,ﬂ 
Organizational Research Methods
(13:3), pp. 582-599.Boehm, B.  2002.  ﬁGet Ready 
for Agile Methods, with Care,ﬂ 
IEEEComputer (35:1), pp. 64-69.804MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
Boehm, B.  2003.  ﬁUsing Risk 
to Balance Agile and Plan-Drive
Methods,ﬂ IEEE Computer (36:6), pp. 57-66.Boehm, B., and Turner, R.  2003.  
Balancing Agility and Discipline: 
A Guide for the Perplexed
, Reading, MA:  Addison-Wesley.  
Boh, W. F., Slaughter, S. A., and 
Espinosa, J. A.  2007.  ﬁLearning
from Experience in Software Development:  A Multilevel

Analysis,ﬂ 
Management Science (53:8), pp. 1315-1331.Chrissis, M. B., Konrad, M., and Shrum, S.  2011.  
CMMI for Devel-opment:  Guidelines for Process Integration and Product

Improvement
, Reading, MA:  Addison-Wesley.  
Davidson, R., and MacKinnon, J. G.  1993.  
Estimation and Infer-
ence in Econometrics, New York:  Oxford University Press.
Deck, M.  2002.  ﬁManaging Process Diversity While Improving
Your Practices,ﬂ 
IEEE Software (18:3), pp. 21-27.Dewar, R., and Werbel, J.  1979. 
 ﬁUniversalistic and ContingencyPredictions of Employee Satisfaction and Conflict,ﬂ 
Adminis-trative Science Quarterly (24:3), pp. 426-448.Dyba, T., and Dingsoyr, T.  2008.  ﬁEmpirical Studies of Agile
Software Development:  
A Systematic Review,ﬂ 
Information andSoftware Technology (50:9-10), pp. 833-859.Ethiraj, S., Kale, P., Krishnan, M.
 S., Singh, J. V.  2005.  ﬁWhere
Do Capabilities Come From and How Do They Matter?  A Study

in the Software Services Industry,ﬂ 
Strategic ManagementJournal (26:1), pp. 24-25.Fitzgerald, B., Hartnett, G., and 
Conboy, K.  2006.  ﬁCustomising
Agile Methods to Software Practices at Intel Shannon,ﬂ 
Euro-pean Journal of Information Systems (15:2), pp. 197-210.Gibbs, P. J., and Martin, W. T. 
 1962.  ﬁUrbanization, Technology,
and the Division of Labor:  International Patterns,ﬂ 
AmericanSociological Review (27:5), pp. 667-677.Gopal, A., and Gao, G.  2009.  ﬁC
ertification in the Indian Offshore
IT Services Industry,ﬂ 
Manufacturing and Service OperationsManagement (11:3), pp. 471-492.Harris, M. L., Collins, R. W., and 
Hevner, A. R.  2009.  ﬁControl of
Flexible Software Development Under Uncertainty,ﬂ 
InformationSystems Research
 (20:3), pp. 400-419.Harrison, D. A., and Klein, K. J.
  2007.  ﬁWhat™s the Difference? 
Diversity Constructs as Separation, Variety, or Disparity in

Organizations,ﬂ Academy of Management Review
 (32:4), pp.
1199-1228.Harter, D., Kemerer, C., and Slaughter, S. A.  2012.  ﬁDoes Soft-
ware Process Improvement Reduce the Severity of Defects?  A

Longitudinal Field Study,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering (38:4), pp. 810-827. Harter, D., Krishnan, M. S., and Sl
aughter, S. A.  2000.  ﬁEffects of
Process Maturity on Quality, Cycletime, and Effort in Software

Product Development,ﬂ 
Management Science
 (46:4), pp.
451-466.Heinbokel, T., Sonnentag, S., Fres
e, M., Stolte, W., and Brodbeck,
F. C.  1996.  ﬁDon™t Underestimate the Problems of User Cen-

teredness in Software Deve
lopment ProjectsŠThere Are
Many!,ﬂ 
Behaviour and Info
rmation Technology
 (15:4), pp.
226-236.Homan, A. C., van Knippenberg, D., Van Kleef, G. A., and
De Dreu, C. K. W.  2007.  ﬁBridging Faultlines by Valuing
Diversity:  Diversity Beliefs, Information Elaboration, and
Performance in Diverse Work Groups,ﬂ 
Journal of Applied
Psychology (92:5), pp. 1189-1199.Humphrey, W. S.  1989.  
Managing the Software Process, Reading,MA:  Addison-Wesley 
IEEE SPA.  2010.  IEEE Computer Society Software Process
Achievement Award  (http://www.computer.org/web/awards/

humphrey-spa; accessed October 17, 2010). 
Iversen, J. H., Mathiassen, L., and 
Nielsen, P. A.  2004.  ﬁManaging
Risk in Software Process Im
provement:  An Action Research
Approach,ﬂ MIS Quarterly (28:3), pp. 395-433.Jakobsen, C. R., and Johnson, K. 
A., 2008.  ﬁMature Agile with a
Twist of CMMI,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 2008 Agile Conference
,Toronto, August 4-8, pp. 212-217.Jakobsen, C. R., and Sutherland, J.  2009.  ﬁScrum and CMMI
Going from Good to Great,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 2009 Agile
Conference
, Chicago, August 24-28, pp. 333-337.Jiang, J. J., Klein, G., Hwang, H-
G., Huang, J., Hung, S-Y.  2004. 
ﬁAn Exploration of the Relationship Between Software

Development Process Maturity and Project Performance,ﬂ

Information and Management (41:  3), pp. 279-288.Keil, M., and Carmel, E.  1995.  ﬁCustomer-Developer Links in
Software Development,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
 (38:5), pp.
33-44.Keil, M., Wallace, L., Turk, D., 
Dixon-Randall, G., and Nulden, U. 
2000.  ﬁAn Investigation of Risk
 Perception and Risk Propensity
on the Decision to Continue a Software Development Project,ﬂ

Journal of Systems and Software (53:2), pp. 145-157.Kemerer, C. F.  1992.
  ﬁHow the Learning Curve Affects CASE
Tool Adoption,ﬂ IEEE Software (9:3), pp. 23-28.Kemerer, C. F.  1993.  ﬁReliability
 of Function Points Measurement: 
A Field Experiment,ﬂ Communications of the ACM
 (36:2), pp.
85-97.Kilduff, M., Angelmar, R., and Me
hra, A.  1995.  ﬁTop Management
Team Diversity and Firm Performance:  Examining the Role of

Cognitions,ﬂ Organization Science (11:1), pp. 21-34.Kirsch, L. J., Sambamurthy, V., Ko
, D-G., and Purvis, R. L.  2002. 
ﬁControlling Information Systems 
Development Projects:  The
View from the Client,ﬂ 
Management Science
 (48:4), pp. 484-498.
Krishnan, M. S., and Kellner, M. 
I.  1999.  ﬁMeasuring Process Con-
sistency:  Implications for 
Reducing Software Defects,ﬂ 
IEEETransactions on Software Engineering (25:6), pp. 800-815.Krishnan, M. S., Kriebel., C. H
., Kekre, S., and Mukhopadhyay, T. 
2000.  ﬁAn Empirical Analysis of Productivity and Quality in

Software Products,ﬂ Management Science (46:6), pp. 745-759.Lindvall, M., and Rus, I.  2000. 
 ﬁProcess Diversity in Software
Development,ﬂ IEEE Software (7:4), pp. 14-18.Lycett, M., Macredie, R. D., Pate
l, C., and Paul, R. J.  2003. 
ﬁMigrating Agile Methods to 
Standardized Development
Practice,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer (36:6), pp.79-85.MacCormack, A., and Verganti, R.
  2003.  ﬁManaging the Sourcesof Uncertainty:  Matching Process and Context in Software

Development,ﬂ Journal of Product Innovation Management
(20:3) pp. 217-232.MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
805 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
MacCormack, A., Verganti, R., a
nd Iansiti, M.  2001.  ﬁDeveloping
Products on ‚Internet Time™:  The Anatomy of a Flexible Devel-

opment Process,ﬂ 
Management Science (47:1), pp. 133-150.Magdaleno, A. M., Werner, C. M.
 L., and Araujo, R. M.  2012. 
ﬁReconciling Software Devel
opment Models:  A Quasi-
Systematic Review,ﬂ 
Journal of Systems and Software
 (85:2), pp.
351-369.Maruping, L. M., Venkatesh, V., and Agarwal, A.  2009.  ﬁA
Control Theory Perspective on Agile Methodology Use and

Changing User Requirements,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
(20:3), pp. 377-399.Matook, S., and Maruping, L. M. 
 2014.  ﬁA Competency Model for
Customer Representatives in Agile Software Development

Projects,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly Executive
 (13:2), pp. 77-95.McGarry, F., and Decker, B.  2002.  ﬁAttaining Level 5 in CMM
Process Maturity,ﬂ 
IEEE Software (19:6), pp. 87-96.Mookerjee, V., and Chiang, I. R. 
 2002.  ﬁA Dynamic Coordination
Policy for Software System Construction,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on
Software Engineering (28:7), pp. 684-694.Moran, A.  2014.  ﬁAgile Risk
 Management,ﬂ Chapter 3 in 
AgileRisk Management, pp. 33-60.Napier, N. P., Mathiassen, L., and Robey.  D.  2008.  ﬁFrom
Dichotomy to Ambidexterity:  Tr
anscending Traditions in Soft-
ware Management,ﬂ in 
Proceedings of the 14
th Americas Confer-
ence on Information Systems, Toronto, Canada, August 14-17.Nidumolu, S. R.  1995.  ﬁThe E
ffect of Coordination and Uncer-
tainty on Software Project Pe
rformance:  Residual PerformanceRisk as an Intervening Variable,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
(6:3), pp. 191-219.Nidumolu, S. R., and Subramani 
M. R.  2003.  ﬁThe Matrix of
Control:  Combining Process and Structure Approaches to

Managing Software Development,ﬂ 
Journal of Management
Information Systems (20:3), pp. 159-196.Ogasawara, H., Ishikawa, T., a
nd Moriya, T.  2006.  ﬁPractical
Approach to Development of SPI Activities in a Large

Organization:  Toshiba™s SPI History since 2000,ﬂ in 
Pro-
ceedings of the 28
th International Conference on Software
Engineering, Shanghai, China, May 20-28, pp. 595-599.
Paulk, M. C.  2001. 
 ﬁExtreme Programmi
ng from a CMM Perspec-
tive,ﬂ IEEE Software (18:6), pp. 19-26.Pikkarainen, M., Haikara, J., Salo
, O., Abrahamasson, P., and Still,
J.  2008.  ﬁThe Impact of Agile Practices on Communication in

Software Development,ﬂ 
Empirical Software Engineering
 (13:3),
pp. 303-337.Puranam, P., Singh, H., and Zollo, 
M.  2006.  ﬁOrganizing for Inno-
vation:  Managing the CoordinationŒAutonomy Dilemma in

Technology Acquisitions,ﬂ 
Academy of Management Journal
(49:2), pp. 263-280.Ramesh, B., Mohan, K., and Cao,
 L.  2012.  ﬁAmbidexterity in
Agile Distributed Development:  
An Empirical Investigation,ﬂ
Information Systems Research
 (23:2), pp. 323-339.Ramasubbu, N.  2014.  ﬁGoverning 
Software Proce
ss Improvementsin Globally Distributed Product Development,ﬂ 
IEEE Trans-
actions on Software Engineering (40:3), pp. 235-250.Ramasubbu, N., and Balan,
 R. K.  2009.  ﬁThe Impact of Process
Choice in High Maturity Environments:  An Empirical Analysis,ﬂ

in Proceedings of the 31
st International Conference on Software
Engineering, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, pp.
529-539.Ramasubbu, N., Mithas, 
S., Krishnan, M. S., 
and Kemerer, C. F. 
2008.  ﬁWork Dispersion, Proce
ss-Based Learning, and Offshore
Software Development Performance,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly
 (32:2), pp.
437-458.Stamelos, I.  2010.  ﬁSoftware Pr
oject Management Anti-Patterns,ﬂ
Journal of Systems and Software (83:1), pp. 52-59.Staples, M., and Niazi, M.  
2008.  ﬁSystematic Review of
Organizational Motivations for Adopting CMM-Based SPI,ﬂ

Information and Software Technology (50:7-8), pp. 605-620.Subramanyam, R., and Krishnan, M.
 S.  2003.  ﬁEmpirical Analysis
of CK Metrics for Object-Oriented Design Complexity:  Implica-

tions for Software Defects,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions on Software
Engineering, (29:4), pp. 297-310.Subramanyam, R., Ramasubbu, N., a
nd Krishnan, M. S.  2012.  ﬁIn
Search of Efficient Flexibility:  Effects of Software Component

Granularity on Development Effort
, Defects, and Customization
Effort,ﬂ Information Systems Research
 (23:3), pp. 787-803.Subramanyam, R., Weisstein, F. 
L., and Krishnan, M. S.  2010. 
ﬁUser Participation in Soft
ware Development Projects,ﬂ 
Commu-nications of the ACM (53:3), pp. 137-141.Takeishi, A.  2002.  ﬁKnowledge
 Partitioning in the Interfirm
Division of Labor:  The Case of Automotive Product Develop-

ment,ﬂ Organization Science (13:3), pp. 321-338.Tang, X., and Rai, A.  2014.  
ﬁHow Should Process Capabilities be
Combined to Leverage Supplier Relationships Competitively?,ﬂ

European Journal of Operational Research
 (239:1), pp. 119-129.
Van der Pijl, G. J., Swinkles, G. 
J. P., and Verrijdt, J. G.  1997. 
ﬁISO 9000 Versus CMM:  Standard
ization and Certification of IS
Development,ﬂ Information & Management
 (32:6), pp. 267-274.
Venkatraman, N.  1989.  ﬁThe Concep
t of Fit in Strategy Research: 
Toward Verbal and Statistical Correspondence,ﬂ 
The Academy of
Management Review (14:3), pp. 423-444.Vidgen, R., and Wang, X.  2009.
  ﬁCoevolving Systems and the
Organization of Agile So
ftware Development,ﬂ 
InformationSystems Research
 (20:3), pp. 355-376.Vinekar, V., Slinkman, C. W., and 
Nerur, S.  2006.  ﬁCan Agile and
Traditional Systems Development Approaches Coexist?  An

Ambidextrous View,ﬂ 
Information Systems Management (23:3),
pp. 31-42.Volberda, H. W., and Lewin, A.
 Y.  2003.  ﬁCo-evolutionary
Dynamics Within and Between Firms:  From Evolution to Co-

evolution,ﬂ 
Journal of Management Studies
 (40:8), pp.
2111-2136.Wallace, L., Keil, M., and Rai, A.  2004.  ﬁHow Software Project
Risk Affects Project Performance:  An Investigation of the

Dimensions of Risk and an Exploratory Model,ﬂ 
Decision
Sciences (35:2), pp. 289-321.  Zellner, A.  1962.  ﬁAn Efficien
t Method of Estimating Seemingly
Unrelated Regressions and Te
sts for Aggregation Bias,ﬂ 
Journalof American Statistics Association (57), pp. 348-368.806MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
 Ramasubbu et al./Software Process Diversity
About the AuthorsNarayan Ramasubbu
 is an assistant professor of Business
Administration at the Joseph M. Ka
tz Graduate School of Business.
He received a Bachelor of Engineering degree from Bharathiar

University, India, and a Ph.D. degree from the University of

Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.  Prior to his academic career, he was a

senior software developer and 
product manager at SAP AG and CGI
Inc.  His current research interests include software process and

product design with a focus on globally distributed product

development and service delivery; 
the design, implementation, and
governance of enterprise informat
ion systems; and software-drive
innovation. He currently serves as an associate editor for 
Manage-ment Science and Information Technology and Management.Anandhi Bharadwaj
 is the Goizueta Term Professor of Information
Systems at the Goizueta Business 
School of Emory University.  Her
research interests include the business value and impact of infor-

mation technology, digital business 
strategies, health IT systems,
and technology outsourcing. She cu
rrently serves as a department
editor for Management Science
 and as a senior editor for 
Infor-mation Systems Research.  In the past she has served on the editorial
boards for MIS Quarterly and Journal of the Association for Infor-
mation Systems.  Her research has been presented in leading journals
such as 
Information Systems Research, Management Science, MIS
Quarterly, Organization Science,
 Production & Operations Man-
agement, and IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management
, andat numerous conferences worldwide.
Giri Kumar Tayi
 is a professor of Management Science and
Information Systems at the State University of New York at Albany. 

His research and teaching interests are interdisciplinary and span the

fields of Information Systems, 
Operations Management, and Opera-
tions Research.  He serves or has served on the editorial boards of

academic journals such as 
Information Systems Research, IEEE
Intelligent Systems, IEEE Computi
ng Now, Decision Sciences, ACM
Journal of Data and Information Quality, Information Technology

Management, Information Systems Frontiers, Information and

Management, and 
International Journal of Shipping and Transport
Logistics.  His papers have appeared in 
Operations Research, Infor-
mation Systems Research, Manageme
nt Science, MIS Quarterly,
IEEE Transactions, Networks, Nava
l Research Logistics, EJOR,
Journal of Combinatorial Optimization, INFORMS Journal of

Computing, Journal of Computer 
Security, Government InformationQuarterly, and Communications of the ACM.MIS Quarterly Vol. 39 No. 4/December 2015
807 CopyrightofMISQuarterlyisthepropertyofMISQuarterlyanditscontentmaynotbecopiedoremailedtomultiplesitesorpostedtoalistservwithoutthecopyrightholder'sexpresswrittenpermission.However,usersmayprint,download,oremailarticlesforindividualuse.