  
 Volume 10 
Article 3 
Issue 3 
The Impact of Pricing and Opportunistic Behavior on
 
Information Systems Development 
Karlhe
inz Kautz
 Department of Informatics 

Copenhagen Business School 

Karl.Kautz@cbs.dk
 Information systems development (ISD) takes place w
ithin an economical context. However, the economica
l 
conditions that shape ISD practice have hardly been
 researched. In this paper we study how pricing aff
ects ISD in 
practice. Based on data collected in the Danish IT 
industry, we used a grounded theory approach to dev
elop a 
model of the impact of pricing on ISD. The model wa
s refined through the use of principalŒagent theory
 and 
economic game theory in the form of the prisoner™s 
dilemma. The model describes pricing structure, ris
k distribution, 
opportunistic behavior and their relationships as t
he elements that influence ISD practice. On this ba
sis we argue for 
the uptake of new development approaches, such as a
gile software development (ASD), to improve ISD pra
ctice 
and its outcomes. 

 
 
Keywords:
 Information systems development, pricing, principa
lŒagent theory, prisoner™s dilemma, pricing structu
re, 
risk distribution, opportunistic behavior, agile so
ftware development. 









˘
 Tuure Tuunanen acted as the Senior Editor for this 
paper. 
  
 The Impact of Pricing and Opportunistic Behavior on
 
Information Systems Development
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
INTRODUCTION 
Information systems development (ISD) takes place w
ithin an economical context. Cost overruns are freq
uently 
reported, and the delivery of quality information s
ystems within appropriate time and cost limits has 
even been given 
as one justification for the utilization of ISD met
hodologies (Avison and Fitzgerald 1995). However, t
he economical 
conditions that shape ISD practice areŠbeyond studi
es of IT service outsourcing (for an overview see, 
e.g., Lacity 
and Hirschheim 1993; Dibbern et al. 2004)Šrarely re
searched by the information systems and the softwar
e 
engineering communities. 

 
In the software engineering community, the term sof
tware economics has been coined (Boehm and Sullivan
 2000). 
However, it mostly concentrates on questions relate
d to effort estimation (see, e.g., Boehm 1981; Boeh
m et al. 
1995; Jørgensen and Carelius 2004; Jørgensen et al.
 2004; Jørgensen and Grimstad 2005). 
 
In the information systems community, Ciborra (1996
) takes a contractual view of ISD and based on tran
saction cost 
theory discusses concepts of market, bureaucracy an
d hierarchy, and clan with their differing levels o
f trust and task 
uncertainty as a basis for different forms of ISD a
pproaches. A number of other IS-related studies (se
e, e.g., Banker 
and Kemerer 1992; Richmond et al. 1992; Whang 1992;
 Ang and Beath 1993; Richmond and Seidmann 1993; 
Wang et al. 1997; Banerjee and Duflo 2000) describe
 features of contracts, contract types, and pricing
 structures 
and investigate their economical role, but do not r
elate them to actual ISD practice. 
 
Lichtenstein and McDonnell (2003) and Lichtenstein 
(2004) are exceptions and provide two such studies.
 They 
consider software development as outsourcing, and, 
based on an economical perspective, they formulate 
a number 
of hypotheses about the relationship among the freq
uency of milestones, project risk, uncertainty, and
 price 
structure as determined in ISD contracts, but they 
do not obtain any clear results. 
 
Sabherwal (1999) and Bjerknes and Mathiassen (2000)
 discuss the antithetic relation between trust and 
control with 
regard to supplierŒcustomer interactions and contra
cts. Based on this work, a case study carried out b
y Madsen and 
Kautz (2002) found that information systems develop
ment encounters difficulties when performed in an i
terative way 
acknowledging uncertainty, but according to a fixed
 price contract. Against this background we formula
ted the 
following research question: How does pricing impac
t on information systems development in practice? 
 
Based on data collected in the Danish IT industry, 
we used a grounded theory approach to develop a mod
el of the 
impact of pricing on ISD. The model was refined thr
ough the use of principalŒagent theory and economic
 game 
theory in the form of the prisoner™s dilemma. The m
odel describes the pricing structure, risk distribu
tion, 
opportunistic behavior, and their relationships as 
the elements that influence ISD practice. On this b
asis we argue 
CONTRIBUTION 
Our study provides new insights into the mutual imp
act of pricing and opportunistic behavior on inform
ation systems development. 
 
Based on the recognition that the established prici
ng structures that build on fixed price or time and
 material contracts have an embedded 
distribution of risk among the systems development 
organization, the supplier, and the customer, we fo
und the following opportunistic 
behaviors: when the customers hold the risk, the su
ppliers might show opportunistic behavior in the fo
rm of a relaxed handling of deadlines 
and project steering, slippage and extension of the
 project scope, and in the form of the development 
of extra features, also called gold 
plating. The customers themselves might have an exa
ggerated focus on following up development activiti
es and might show less 
acceptance of the developers™ estimates and bills. 
When the suppliers hold the risk, the customers mig
ht behave opportunistically and refuse 
to provide material, personal, and business knowled
ge; they might care less about working toward agree
d-upon deadlines and might try to 
enforce extra requirements. The suppliers themselve
s might try just to satisfy the minimum requirement
s, cut out some system functionality, 
freeze the system™s scope, and agree to only minimu
m changes to the requirements. As a novelty in ISD 
research applying principleŒagent 
theory and the prisoner™s dilemma, these findings c
omprise a model of the impact of pricing and opport
unistic behavior on ISD. 
 
As a further contribution, these findings uncover t
he consequences of cooperation and opportunistic be
havior in information systems 
development. While mutual cooperation might lead to
 mutual trust and the agreed earnings for the suppl
ier and the agreed product quality 
for the customer, mutual opportunism might lead to 
mutual mistrust, low earnings, and inferior product
 quality. One-sided cooperation and 
opportunistic behavior might lead to either very la
rge or very small earnings that are
 accompanied by inferior or superior product quality
 and 
a relationship characterized by some mistrust. Thus
, as a final contribution, we argue for development
 approaches, contracts, and pricing 
structures that allow for the creation of trust. Su
ch approaches, which are promoted under the label o
f agile software development, make 
operational features available to the customer at t
he end of each of several iterative delivery cycles
 and allow for the continuous evaluation 
of value and of the cooperation between customer an
d supplier. 
25
  
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
for the uptake of new development approaches such a
s agile software development (ASD) to improve ISD p
ractice 
and its outcomes. 

 
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows
: In the next section we present our research metho
dology. The 
following section describes our empirical findings,
 which build the basis for the grounded theory mode
l. Then we 
introduce the two theories that we used to refine o
ur model and explain and discuss the model itself. 
We finish by 
reflecting on the implications of our findings for 
academia and practice and provide some conclusions 
and research 
directions for the future. 
RESEARCH METHODOLGY 
The ontological and epistemological assumptions of 
the study are informed by the interpretive paradigm
, and 
accordingly the role of those involved in the inves
tigated phenomenon is understood as that of active 
constructors of 
meaning as well as active interpreters of reality. 
Their meaning construction process is central and f
orms the basis 
for understanding their actions. Drawing from symbo
lic interactionism (Blumer 1969), the meaning const
ruction 
process is seen as occurring in social interaction 
between the actors involved in the investigated phe
nomenon. 
Moreover, the study adopts a social constructivist 
view of reality, implying that reality is socially 
constructed by the 
observer (Berger and Luckmann 1967). 

 
The research approach of the study is inductive and
 based on a strong empirical foundation on which ne
w 
theoretical insight into the impact of pricing on I
SD practice is created. Specically, the study uses
 an adapted 
version of grounded theory (Glaser and Strauss 1967
) also referred to as constructivist grounded theor
y (Charmaz 
2000). Its two processes, discovering and emerging,
 are understood as covering a meticulous interpreta
tive process 
in which the resulting concepts, and eventually the
ory, are constructed. In other words, we do not see
k the truth as 
universal and lasting, but we see the research prod
uct as a rendering of one interpretation among mult
iple 
interpretations of a shared or individual reality (
Charmaz 2000). 
Data Collection 
The data collection was based on twelve semi-struct
ured interviews with employees from seven companies
, which 
were part of the Danish IT and software industry. T
he interviews were performed within a three-month p
eriod at the 
end of 2004. The number of interviews was limited d
ue to resource restrictions, but as we could see a 
certain 
saturation of the data material during the later in
terviews, we do not consider this a disadvantage. 
 
The interview partners were recruited through conve
nience sampling, as they were either members of the
 alumni 
association of the local business school or otherwi
se related to the professional network of the resea
rcher. To 
counteract a possible bias, they represented divers
e application areas and sectors such as aerospace, 
banking and 
finance, media and advertisement, health, and publi
c administration and provided content management, d
ocument 
handling, e-business, process management, and many 
other kinds of information systems. They represente
d 
companies with as few as ten employees and as many 
as 50,000 employees. The companies were between six
 and 
forty+ years old. 

 
As the project aimed at understanding the impact of
 pricing on ISD projects, we were interested in dat
a from those 
stakeholders involved in the tasks spanning from th
e actual sales to the delivery of the final product
. Thus, we 
interviewed two sales personnel, four project manag
ers, and six developers across the different compan
ies with 
three to 2-twenty-five years of experience in the f
ield. The questions in the individual interviews we
re based on 
existing literature within the subject, and for thi
s purpose we worked out interview guides for the in
dividual 
interviews. As we worked with semi-structured inter
views, the interview guide was used as a checklist 
for issues that 
had to be covered during the interview and not as a
n actual outline for the interviews. The nature of 
the interviews 
was open, and when the conversation moved toward ne
w and interesting areas relevant to the subject, we
 pursued 
and probed the new directions. All the interviews l
asted between sixty and seventy-five minutes and we
re tape 
recorded and transcribed. The interviewees had the 
opportunity to see and approve the transcripts. To 
appreciate 
the context of the investigation (Klein and Myers 1
999), Table 1 contains a summary of the information
 about the 
participants in the investigation. 
Data Analysis 
The data analysis was conducted using a grounded th
eory approach. As grounded theory is used within di
fferent 
research traditions based on different epistemologi
cal assumptions, we find it important to emphasize 
how it was 
used in this study. 
26
   
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
 Table 1: The Investigation™s Participants
 Res-
 pon- 

dent 
Job Title Exper- 
ience/ 

Years 
Tasks Com-
pany 
Age/Size Customers/Products 
  1 Developer/ 
ERP 

consultant 

 8 Team leader/ 
Production of offers/ 

Business analyst/ 

Designer 
  2 Developer/ 
ERP 

consultant 
6 Systems analyst/ 
Programmer/ 

Organizational 

implementation 
A 

 30 years; 

20000 

employees 

globally; 

30 in the 

investigated 

department  
Enterprise systems for space, 

oil, energy, and trading 

industries 
  3 Developer 3 Team leader/ 
Designer/ 

Programmer 
  4 Developer 6  Systems analyst/ 
Programmer/ 

Tester/ 

Organizational 

implementation 
  5 Developer 8 Systems architect/ 
Programmer 
B 

 20 years; 350 

employees 
Information systems for the 

health and defense sectors 
  6 Developer 7 Systems analyst/ 
Programmer/ 

Tester/ 

Organizational 

implementation 
  7 Project 
manager 
15 General project 
management 
  8 Project 
manager 
6 Project administration 
including contract 

negotiation and 

monitoring 
C 

 20 years; 

650 employees 
Document handling, process 

systems, management 

systems, e-business, 

enterprise systems for the 

health sector and 

pharmaceutical industry 
  9 Project 
manager 
25 Project management 
for agile projects 
D 40+ years; 
50000 

employees 

globally; 300 in 

the investigated
 unit 
General IT and management 

systemsŠboth bespoke and 

enterprise systems 
10 Project 
manager 
4 Project management 
for agile projects 
E 6 years; 
40 employees 
Information systems for bank, 

finance, insurance, and 

transportation industries 
11  Sales 
person/CEO
 6 Project acquisition/ 
Customer care/ 

Contract negotiations/ 

Business analyst 
F 6 years; 
10 employees 
Web-based information 

systems especially content 

management, e-business, 

marketing systems for trading, 

maritime, health, marketing, 

and media industries 
12 Sales 
person 
5 Project acquisition/ 
Customer care/ 

Contract negotiations/ 

Business analyst 
G 20 years (5 
years in 

Denmark); 

14000 

employees 

globally; 

350 in the 

investigated 

unit 
Information systems, 

especially resource and 

document management 

systems for the public sector, 

health care, banking, and 

insurance industries 
 27
  
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
Acknowledging the positivist leanings of the origin
al authors (Glaser and Strauss 1967), we have used 
a later 
adoption of the theory by interpretive researchers,
 which stresses that theory does not emerge from da
ta, but data 
are constructed from the many events observed, read
 about, or heard about (Strauss and Corbin 1998; Ch
armaz 
2000; Locke 2001). The interpretation and recasting
 of the data in analytical and new terms involve th
e actors™ as 
well as the researcher™s interpretations (Strauss a
nd Corbin 1998). From an interpretive perspective, 
the term 
emergence, therefore, covers a meticulous interpret
ative process, including the construction of concep
ts. 
 
Based on our experience from earlier studies (Kautz
 et al. 2004; Kjærgaard and Kautz 2005) the analysi
s was 
conducted in a four-stage process. First, we named 
and compared incidents, identified concepts, and di
scovered 
their properties, similarly to what Strauss and Cor
bin (1998) refer to as open coding. Then we integra
ted the 
concepts and categories to build the first skeleton
 of a theory. Third, we reduced the number of categ
ories, 
delimiting the theory, in order to identify the mos
t relevant and robust categories to form a story. F
inally, we 
presented the data and the results in the form of a
 narrative and a model for understanding the interr
elationship of 
the different concepts that constitute the impact o
f pricing on ISD practice. 
 
In line with the view of reality as socially constr
ucted, we do not claim objectivity, but instead we 
argue that the 
emergent theory is one of several possible explanat
ions of reality constructed with the researchers as
 active 
instruments. The theory or explanation reflects the
 viewers as well as the viewed. This does not mean 
that all 
explanations are equally relevant, credible, and ac
ceptable, but that it is up to us as researchers to
 argue the case 
for the explanation that we want to present. 
EMPIRICAL FINDINGS 
The findings from the analysis are presented in the
 following subsections. First, the concepts and cat
egories from 
the grounded theory analysis are introduced in more
 detail as they present the skeleton of our model o
f the impact of 
pricing on ISD. In the second subsection, first the
 theoretical frameworks, which contributed to the r
efinement of the 
analysis, are described. Subsequently, a stepwise m
ovement through the resulting model will provide fu
rther insights 
from the analysis, as well as clarification of the 
relations between the model™s constituting elements
. 
 
As a background for our further analysis, we identi
fied the pricing structures our respondents used du
ring the 
contract negotiations and realization of new ISD pr
ojects. In line with Overby et al. (2003) in their 
review of pricing 
structures, we found the following pricing structur
es in ISD practice: a fixed price comprises all the
 costs of a 
development project and the suppliers™ profit depen
ds on their ability to provide the desired system w
ithin time and 
budget. With its origin in a given task with a fixe
d scope, a fixed deadline, and a fixed price, a fix
ed price with 
payment for extra effort contains an explicit mecha
nism for dealing with changed or additional require
ments. Time 
and material bills the actual effort, while time an
d material with an upper limit sets a threshold for
 the maximum 
expenses. Finally, we came across a fifth structure
 called 
framework agreements.
 Framework agreements comprise 
a maximum number of hours that a customer can book 
a supplier within a given time frame. This might gi
ve a 
customer a lower price per hour and gives both part
ies the liberty to negotiate the actual use of the 
hours according 
to all the available pricing structures. 

 
The main concepts that we discovered and that emerg
ed from the analysis are now presented as first emp
irical 
findings and as the basic building blocks for const
ructing a grounded theoretical model. We identified
 two main 
categories, namely, opportunistic behavior and risk
 distribution, which are both related to pricing an
d pricing 
structures and which are described below. 
Opportunistic Behavior 
Opportunistic behavior is the first major category 
that we discovered through our analysis. Opportunis
tic behavior 
can be found on the part of both the suppliers and 
the customers. However, the behavior is different d
epending on 
the underlying pricing scheme. 
Suppliers™ opportunistic behavior related to fixed 
price contracts 
When the suppliers work under a fixed price contrac
t, time pressure is often a consequenceŠas one deve
loper put 
it: ﬁI™ll say time, whether you™re able to stay wit
hin the time, that™s the biggest challengeﬂŠand, as
 a result, the 
suppliers might not be able to deliver the desired 
functionality. They then just try to satisfy the mi
nimum 
requirements, and sometimes they choose to change t
he scope without the acceptance of the customer. Tw
o 
developers admitted: ﬁWhen you suddenly see that yo
u have problems to deliver within the determined ti
me frame 
you have two possibilities, you can change the scop
e or you can change the time frameﬂ and ﬁ–
 if you are 
supposed to do it faster, you just have to cut out 
some of the functionality – and sometimes you just t
ry to get as 
close as possible.ﬂ
  28
   
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
Suppliers also choose to deny customers the possibi
lity of changing the requirements during the projec
t or, by 
applying requirements management, try to minimize t
heir amount and extent. A project manager reported,
 ﬁOne can 
very well keep oneself off the change of requiremen
ts and say, ‚this does not concern us: we do what t
he 
requirements specification says.™ As one can say, ‚
that™s what you described and that™s what you get,™
ﬂ and 
continued, ﬁIn projects of a certain size you can s
ee a whole office with people who do nothing else t
han 
requirements management. And every time the custome
r says a word, which hasn™t been mentioned before, 
they™ll 
say ‚well, that will be expensive,™ ‚that™s the fir
st time you said that,™ ‚we have to estimate that,™
 and ‚is there 
something you can do without them?™ﬂ
 As a consequence the customers might not obtain the
 systems they want, 
and they might choose another supplier in the futur
e. 
Suppliers™ opportunistic behavior related to time a
nd material contracts 
When suppliers work under a time and material contr
act, they no longer have an incentive to steer a pr
oject strictly 
toward a hard deadline. According to a project mana
ger, project management and project work become dif
ferent, 
more relaxed tasks: ﬁWith time and material it is o
ften the customer who provides a project leader; wi
th a fixed price 
we always operate with one of our project managers,
ﬂ and he further commented:
 ﬁThe customer needs to put more 
effort in; it™s them who need to follow up every we
ek. They have to allocate time to keep track of the
 project. With 
time and material, we have all the time the custome
r wants.ﬂ 
 
Even when the suppliers are in situations in which 
they need personnel, material, or knowledge from th
e customer to 
solve a problem, their effort to obtain these resou
rces is not that great: ﬁWith time and material we 
clearly give the 
customer a longer leash as compared to fixed price.
 After all it™s them who pay when we are busy waiti
ng,ﬂ as one 
project manager put it. He also experienced more fl
exibility and fewer problems with changed deadlines
, if the 
change is caused by circumstances for which the cus
tomers are responsible: ﬁWith time and material it 
is easier to 
push deadlines, as it™s the customer who™s paying t
he extra money.ﬂ 
 
Under time and material contracts, projects have a 
tendency to slide away from their original scope, w
hich 
sometimes leads to an extension of the scope. One p
roject manager reported that he has difficulties st
eering 
projects under these conditions. One developer conf
irmed this view. He expressed that his efforts are 
not specified 
and controlled in the same way as they are in proje
cts where the supplier works under a fixed price co
ntract. As a 
reason for the lesser control, he stated that a pot
entially inadequate effort has no direct economical
 consequences 
for the supplier company: ﬁI have much freer hands 
from my company when it™s not a fixed price, as we 
can™t sit with 
any extra bills afterwards. We might get a problem,
 but we do not sit with any extra unpaid bills.ﬂ
 Another developer 
stated that he tries new things to a greater extent
 in projects where the customer carries the risk, a
nd he reported a 
concrete case in which he actually experimented tog
ether with the customer with new things that expand
ed the 
project™s scope: ﬁSome of the customer™s folks coul
d very well see that this was exciting and asked wh
ether we just 
could try this and that – Yes, you can well say that
 there is a risk that one runs a little bit too fas
t and a little bit off 
the track to see the exciting things.ﬂ
  
Under time and material contracts, developers have 
a larger tendency not just to be content with satis
fying the 
customer™s requirements, but to develop a system fu
rther single-handedly without their management™s or
 the 
customer™s acceptance. This phenomenon is called 
gold plating
 and all the interviewed developers justified their
 
motivation with professional pride: ﬁIt should be a
s good as possible and there should not be any erro
rs. And it 
should also be able to do this and that. And it wou
ld be smart if it even could do this and that. Some
times it™s the 
technology, which is interesting. One can also just
 do this, or just try that – ﬂ and
 ﬁSometimes you sit and just want 
to do it smart. You also want to do it properly. Th
is was what they asked for, but if you do it just l
ike that, it really will 
be good.ﬂ However, beyond professional pride, extra
 payment for overtime work in the evening has also 
been 
mentioned as a reason for gold plating by one devel
oper: ﬁYeah, well, then you might not be so effecti
ve during the 
day, because you know if you stay longer, your hour
s will count more and give you more money..... Ther
e is quite a 
bit of gold plating, I™ll say. The folks feel that 
they really get something out of it, and then they™
ll easily find an excuse 
to do this or that.ﬂ 

 
On the other hand, gold plating is an example of an
 opportunistic behavior exhibited by suppliers whic
h has an 
impact on the price of a project. It is often conne
cted with projects that are run under time and mate
rial contracts. 
Although the developers do not keep to the requirem
ents as described by the customer and develop extra
 
functionality, the suppliers still try to obtain pa
yment for that work by selling it as utility value.
 A developer said, 
ﬁBecause when you™ve got twenty hours for doing som
ething and then the whole thing starts to slip, bec
ause you 
have been sitting and done some gold plating, it th
en gets hard to explain to the customer why the tas
k took double 
the time,ﬂ
 and a project leader expandedŠwhen speaking about c
ompetitors at a customerŠﬁ– and so they go in to 
sell and in the course of the project they give the
 customer an understanding of the value of what the
y got and they 
hope that they do not have something against spitti
ng in more money. However, the customer got very sc
ared of this 
kind of behavior.ﬂ 
29
  
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
Customers™ opportunistic behavior related to time a
nd material contracts 
Our respondents expressed that customers do show op
portunistic behavior. Under time and material contr
acts, 
customers pay strong attention to how and for what 
a supplier uses the hours, and the suppliers need t
o put in extra 
time to provide the demanded evidence. As a develop
er put it, ﬁThe customer has a larger focus on what
 you are 
doing and they like to have an account of what you 
are using your time for. They make a much bigger fu
ss out of this 
in a time and material project than they do in a fi
xed price project.ﬂ 
 
Customers are also less willing to accept a price f
or a provided effort when billing is carried out ac
cording to time 
and material, especially without an agreed estimate
. In such a situation it can be hard to collect the
 charges for 
some provided development work. A project leader re
ported, ﬁWhen they pay for time and material, it is
 their right to 
ask for changes. But as with all customers it is mu
ch easier for them to ask for something than to loo
k at the bill 
afterwards. So there easily can crop up a conflict 
if one does not steer a project sharply with estima
tes, but even 
then it happens.ﬂ 
Customers™ opportunistic behavior related to fixed 
price contracts 
Under fixed price contracts, some customers might n
ot see any incentive to support the suppliers. Stil
l, the suppliers™ 
earnings depend on the customers™ efforts in a numb
er of areas. One of these is the provision of mater
ial and 
devices. One developer described his experience as 
follows: ﬁI am supposed to be out at a customer™s a
nd there 
should be a computer for me so that I can carry out
 the project. When it™s a fixed price project, it m
ight very well be 
that the customer does not see the incentive to pro
vide the device – especially in big and bureaucratic
 
organizations you will experience that it can take 
time to get things organized – but if you are at a 
customer, who 
has got a bill before and the project is run with t
ime and material, they™ll take utter care that you 
get your screen to 
work at–.ﬂ 

 
Another challenge is to gain access to the right pe
rsonnel. Developers often have the experience that 
those staff 
members they needed were also those on whom the org
anization was most dependent and who were not made 
available. However, a salesman also commented on th
e question of what he experiences as a problem: ﬁI 
think 
that™s user involvement – as the customers do not al
ways see why they should spend money on it–.ﬂ As a 
result 
suppliers insist on specifying the customers™ effor
ts in the contract andŠaccording to one developerŠﬁ
that the 
customers provide competent people, because when th
ey then don™t do that, one can go in and say, that™
s what we 
have a contract about.ﬂ 

 
The limited access to competent personnel has to be
 seen in a wider context. Often customers consider 
the 
requirements specification as a complete descriptio
n of the desired system and are not willing to prov
ide further 
business knowledge. One developer summarized his ex
perience as ﬁRequirements specifications can be a h
elp, so 
that we understand each other right, but when you p
ut them instead of communication, so that™s what wi
ll go wrong. 
And that™s how it is. They™ll say ‚haven™t we writt
en down what we want to have; read it and do it™ –ﬂ 
and concluded 
that this attitude and the limited contact with the
 customer is one reason why information systems do 
not live up to 
the customers™ expectations. 

 
Under fixed price contracts suppliers also experien
ce that customers do not put in the effort that is 
oriented toward 
meeting a deadline, even if this would be sensible 
from a business perspective. The contributions and 
the 
productivity of the customers™ employees do not liv
e up to the agreements made between the two parties
. A project 
leader reported, ﬁActually it should be extremely i
mportant for them to get the thing finished, will s
ay from a business 
perspective to finish in time, much more than I hav
e experienced it.–.ﬂ The respondents think that thi
s might be 
related to the lack of a direct incentive for the e
mployees or for the customers in general with regar
d to the particular 
projects where this occurs. To counteract this effe
ct some suppliers specify the required customer eff
ort in even 
more detail in their contracts. 

 
Customers™ opportunistic behavior in the form of la
cking access to customer personnel and knowledge an
d lacking 
customer effortsŠoften under fixed-price contractsŠ
increases the workload of the supplier. This comes 
in the form 
of a larger expenditure of hours to compensate for 
the customers™ missing dedication. The extra hours 
that become 
necessary are often not included in the official pr
oject plan and the developers are forced to work ov
ertime to be 
able to finish their tasks on time. A developer des
cribed the situation: ﬁWell, the less time you have
, the more you 
have to work every day so that you can reach the go
als, which have been set; isn™t it like that? So th
is means 
automatically longer working hours.ﬂ Another develo
per had similar experiences from a project where a 
customer 
came up with new requirements late in the project. 
In this case the customer had provided the agreed e
ffort, but the 
new requirements had not been taken into account in
 the original planning of the project. This increas
ed the 
developers™ workload as they were bound to a fixed 
deadline and ﬁYeah, well, so we simply worked more.
 So we put 
in these 45Œ55Œ60 hours per week, where we work unt
il 10 or 11 
P.M. in the night.ﬂ
 This has consequences for the 
supplier, especially when it is not possible to dem
and a payment for the extra effort, as it usually n
ecessitates 
30
   
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
payment of the overtime to the company™s developers
. As one developer said,
 ﬁWe are so fortunate here that we get 
fixed wages and a payment for overtime, which we re
ally get paid. So it costs the company when we work
 extra.ﬂ 
 
On the other handŠbeyond the accepted general pheno
menon that both suppliers and customers learn more 
about 
a system™s potential during the course of a develop
ment projectŠwhen they are not carrying the risk, c
ustomers 
have a tendency late in a project to press extra re
quirements into the scope of the project that might
 lead to rework 
and extra resources. The dilemma for the project ma
nagers and developers is that denying the changes m
ight have 
consequences for future cooperation with the custom
er, and accepting them leads to extra workload, tim
e pressure, 
and shifting deadlines. The respondents think that 
the customer behavior is not necessarily based on a
 malicious 
exploitation of the situation. According to one pro
ject manager, it might be the missing experience th
at results in 
customers not being able to accept the relationship
 between the amount of requirement changes and the 
run time of 
a project: ﬁBut they have not tried this before; th
ey have not tried that this is a kind of gentlemanl
y give-and-take 
game,ﬂ and a developer confirmed, ﬁIf someone hasn™
t tried to be a customer before – many requirements 
first 
come toward the end of a project – and when they say
 they want to have this here, they do not have an 
understanding that this will take a longer time.ﬂ 

 
To prevent such situations, attuning expectations a
t the beginning of a project is important, especial
ly with regard to 
the effort both parties expect each other to put in
to the project, and these expectations can then be 
part of the 
contract. One project leader shared his experiences
 in this respect: ﬁSo, there are some things that o
ne should 
agree to settle in the start. If one gets a good ba
lancing, one gets a good project.– Customers like it
 when one 
agrees on things up front; they hate it when one co
mes sweeping in afterwards – so in the plan, there a
re the things 
they should do and when I expect them to be ready, 
specified down to the week – and that is what they h
ave to live 
up to; otherwise I can™t hold my fixed price.ﬂ 
Risk Distribution 
Risk distribution emerged as the second main catego
ry. Pricing and pricing structures embody a distrib
ution of risk 
between the supplier and the customer. Using a fixe
d price as the pricing structure means that it is s
olely the 
supplier who carries and manages the risk. The pric
ing scheme, fixed price with payment for extra effo
rts, moves the 
part of the risk that deals with changes of the pro
ject scope toward the customer, because these are d
escribed and 
billed separately. The supplier carries the risk of
 the original project, while the customer carries t
he risk for the 
changes. The customer assumes the whole risk when a
 project is paid according to time and material. Ev
ery hour 
that suppliers disburse contributes to securing the
ir earnings from a project. This means that the ris
k of delays, 
changes, and unexpected costs is carried by the cus
tomer. When time and material with an upper limit i
s applied, a 
part of the risk is pushed back to the supplier, as
 costs that are above the determined limit are defr
ayed by the 
supplier. The supplier has guaranteed the customer 
a maximum expense, but is willing to let the custom
er have the 
savings in case the project is finished before the 
maximum budget has been exceeded. 
 
Both time and material with a limit and fixed price
 with payment for extra efforts are hybrids of fixe
d price and time 
and material. For them the exact distribution of ri
sk between the supplier and customer is hard to det
ermine. 
However, the tendency is clear. The more a pricing 
structure resembles a fixed price, the more risk ha
s to be carried 
by the supplier, and the more the structure resembl
es time and material, the more risk has to be carri
ed by the 
customer. A project manager and a salesman expresse
d this clearly: ﬁTime and material ... the customer
™s risk. 
Fixed price – my risk. It™s just that simple,ﬂ
 and ﬁIt™s quite obvious who™s carrying the risk–.. W
ith a fixed price it™s us 
and with time and material it™s the customer.ﬂ 

 
Framework agreements differ from the others, as the
 contract does not specify any task and any kind of
 billing. The 
risk is on the customers™ side, as they have paid f
or some work before it is delivered. When a concret
e project is 
performed under a framework agreement, the risk can
 be pushed toward the supplier again, depending on 
the actual 
pricing structure used. Our respondents, however, d
id not go into further detail with regard to framew
ork 
agreements. Therefore, in the remainder of our deli
berations, they will not be discussed any further. 
 
When suppliers work under a pricing model, which in
duces an element of risk for them, they compute a r
isk 
premium, which they add to the project™s price. The
 same project leader said, ﬁWhen we give a fixed pr
ice, we 
always add another 10Œ15 percent as contingency to 
cover unexpected costs, and then the customer gets 
the 
account as fixed price. That™s how we do it. If the
re is a high uncertainty, we even put in a higher c
ontingency for that 
respective task, which can be up to 25 percent.ﬂ
 The risk supplement rises corresponding to the risk
. Another project 
manager stated that there is a natural limit for ho
w great a risk suppliers are willing to take. If a 
project is too risky, 
they reject fixed price as an acceptable model. 

 
According to the suppliers the customers™ perceptio
n of the distribution of risk has an influence on t
heir demands for 
the price structure of future projects with a given
 supplier. At the beginning of a cooperation betwee
n a supplier and 
31
  
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
a customer, both parties are uncertain about each o
ther™s capabilities to render an effort that lives 
up to the mutual 
expectations of a good cooperation. There is also u
ncertainty regarding whether the other party™s inte
nsions are 
honest and trustworthy. New customers are quite rel
uctant with regard to taking on risk and in general
 prefer a fixed 
price contract. One developer said, ﬁAs a rule ther
e is not really a choice between the two pricing st
ructures, 
because the customer typically demands a fixed pric
e project,ﬂ
 and another confirmed,
 ﬁIt™s nearly always the 
customer who demands a fixed price.ﬂ
 One project leader provided the explanation that th
e customers are uncertain 
whether they can rely on the suppliers™ estimates a
nd that there is no basis for trust in these earlie
r stages of the first 
contract negotiations due to a lack of familiarity 
with each other. The customers might be afraid of b
eing burdened 
with further costs after the end of the negotiation
s. He described the situation: ﬁWhen we come to a n
ew customer, 
the question always is ‚will this run away?™ So, wh
at shall we answer: ‚Listen, I am a quite honest pe
rson, it will cost 
this and this, as this is what is written there.™ﬂ 
All the respondents confirmed this initial mistrust
 and some gave 
examples of customers™ earlier experiences where th
eir trust was abused. 
 
However, it is possible to sell time and material p
rojects, especially when the supplier and the custo
mer know each 
other and by virtue of their cooperation have built
 up trust in each other. This trust is built up thr
ough continuous 
cooperation over a longer period of time or through
 many projects. One salesman put it this way: ﬁWe h
ave also time 
and material projects; it really depends on the cus
tomer. But typically these are customers we know,ﬂ 
and another 
added: ﬁThe more projects we have performed, the be
tter we know each other, the better we can also wor
k in a less 
restricted setting.ﬂ 

 
With trust building between the parties, it becomes
 possible for the supplier to convince the customer
 to take larger 
parts of the risk, which allows them to cut down th
e risk supplement of the fixed price offers. This e
nables the 
supplier to deliver a system for a lower price and 
thus gives them a competitive advantage. As one sal
esman 
concluded, ﬁUltimately, it is about getting the pri
ce down so that we have a bigger chance to get the 
assignment.ﬂ 
 
Experience from previous cooperation can also lead 
to a situation where the customers dare to take the
 larger part 
of the risk in future projects; however, as stated 
above, earlier experience can also result in the op
posite reaction, 
namely, that a customer only wants to work under co
nditions where the supplier carries the full risk i
n the form of a 
fixed price contract. The same salesman summarized 
this as: ﬁIf one once has been offered to do someth
ing on a 
time and material basis and has abused it, you™ll n
ot get this kind of contract another time.ﬂ 
THEORY BUILDING AND DISCUSSION  
When the findings had been explored in some depth a
nd the theory was taking shape, we returned to the 
literature 
to compare the findings and to look for relevant th
eoretical contributions to the further analysis and
 discussion of the 
data. Before introducing the grounded theoretical m
odel, we, therefore, briefly present the two theori
es from which 
we have drawn in the construction of the model. 
The Prisoner™s Dilemma 
The prisoner™s dilemma is a behavioral theory that 
formalizes situations of mutual dependency, such as
 those of 
principals and agents and it is part of the economi
cal game theory (Douma and Schreuder 2002). In a mo
re general 
form the theory can be used to characterize coopera
tion and deviation from a contract, termed as oppor
tunistic 
behavior, by two business partners, where cooperati
on of both parties is considered a winŒwin situatio
n, cooperation 
of one party and deviation from the contract by the
 other one as a winŒlose or loseŒwin situation, res
pectively, and a 
situation where both parties deviate from the contr
act as a loseŒlose situation. Then the following fo
ur outcomes for 
each business partner can be distinguished: they ca
n receive (1) a reward for solely acting opportunis
tically (RSO), 
(2) a reward for mutual cooperation (RMC), (3) a re
ward (punishment) for mutually acting opportunistic
ally (RMO), 
and (4) a reward (punishment) for (the naivety of) 
solely cooperating (RSC). To be defined as a prison
er™s dilemma 
the subsequent relationship among the four outcomes
 has to apply: RSO  > RMC > RMO > RSC. This leads t
o the 
situation depicted in Table 2. 

 
We have not found any studies that have been used t
o explain the impact of pricing on ISD practice. Th
e prisoner™s 
dilemma, however, has been used earlier in the area
 of ISD to discuss open source development where co
llective 
action is no longer considered a prisoner™s dilemma
 because the developers do not regard their partici
pation as 
costly. Von Hippel and von Krogh (2003) argue that 
developers freely contribute to the provision of a 
public good as 
they achieve private benefits from doing so because
 open source development as a game in which materia
l pay-offs 
constitute a prisoner™s dilemma is transformed into
 a game in which cooperation is an equilibrium outc
ome where 
both pecuniary and social motivations are taken int
o account. This is, however, a situation that is qu
ite different from 
commercial ISD. 

 
 32
   
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
Table 2: The General Form of the Prisoner™s Dilemma
 Business Partner 1 
 Cooperation Opportunistic 
Behavior 

(Deviation from 

Contract) 
Co-operation RMC, RMC 
WinŒWin 
RSC, RSO 

Lose muchŒWin 

much 
 
Business 

Partner 2 
Opportunistic Behavior 

(Deviation from 

Contract) 
RSO, RSC 

Win muchŒLose much 
RMO, RMO 

LoseŒLose 
Principal-Agent Theory 
With regard to the relationship between suppliers a
nd customers, principalŒagent theory provided a sui
table 
background for our study. It describes how a princi
pal, a customer, should build up an incentive struc
ture, a pricing 
structure, or a scheme to achieve a desired behavio
r from an agent, a supplier. PrincipalŒagent theory
 is based on 
the assumption that people do not always keep the c
ontracts and the agreements they have made. Such be
havior, 
which might lead to advantages at the expense of ot
hers, is called 
opportunistic behavior
 (Douma and Schreuder 
2002). Opportunism has been discussed as a characte
ristic of ISD practice since the early 1990s; howev
er, in the 
more general sense of taking advantage of developme
nt opportunities, which are created by new requirem
ents or 
partial solutions (see, e.g., Guindon 1990; Visser 
1990; Visser 1992; Visser 1994), by deviating from 
a prescribed 
methodology (Nandhakumar and Avision 1999), or as a
n element of amethodical systems development (Truex
 et al. 
2000), but not in the sense of taking advantage at 
the expense of others. A characteristic of such opp
ortunistic 
behavior is that only some people, and also only at
 some times, exhibit it. It is difficult, if not im
possible, to 
distinguish honest from dishonest people before the
y actually show opportunistic behavior. PrincipalŒa
gent theory 
deals with the avoidance of opportunistic behavior.
 In this context two concepts are important, namely
, risk, in 
particular the possibility of loss, and here especi
ally the suppliers™ relationship to risk, and obser
vability, in particular 
the customers™ possibility to observe a supplier. 

 
Within the ISD literature requirements and software
 development risks have been discussed extensively,
 and 
frameworks for risk management have been presented 
and successfully applied (see, e.g., Lyytinen et al
. 1996; 
Lyytinen et al. 1998; Mathiassen et al. 2007), but 
they have not explicitly stressed the role of prici
ng and pricing 
structures. 

 Table 3: Opportunistic Behavior in ISD 
 Supplier™s opportunistic behavior Customer™s oppor
tunistic behavior 
Time 

and 

material 

contracts
  Relaxed handling of 
deadlines and project 

steering 
 Slippage and expansion of 
scope 
 Gold plating 
 Strong focus on follow-up 
 Less acceptance of bills and estimates
 Fixed 

price 

contracts
  Satisfaction of minimum  
requirements   
 Cut out of functionality 
 Freezing of scope 
 Minimizing change of 
requirements 
  No provision of material 
 No provision of personal 
 No provision of business  
 knowledge 
 Not working toward deadlines 
 Enforcing extra requirements 
A Grounded Theoretical Model of Pricing and Opportu
nistic Behavior in ISD 
The above analysis shows the mutual dependency of t
he suppliers and the customers. The empirical data 
and 
findings have uncovered various forms of opportunis
tic behavior. The prisoner™s dilemma allows us now 
to reflect on 
their consequences, as well as on the consequences 
of a cooperation between the two parties in terms o
f winŒlose, 
loseŒwin, loseŒlose, and winŒwin situations. The wi
nŒlose and loseŒlose situations are characterized b
y one or both 
parties thinking ﬁmeﬂ and ﬂthem,ﬂ while in a winŒwi
n situation both parties think ﬂweﬂ and ﬂus,ﬂ takin
g care of the 
mutual dependency and relationship, and working to 
achieve their shared objectives. 
33
  
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
Under fixed price contracts, customers experience t
he fulfillment of minimum requirements and the clip
ping of 
functionality as well as the freezing of scope and 
limitation of requirement changes as opportunistic 
supplier 
behavior, in which they lose and the suppliers win.
 Under fixed price contracts the suppliers experien
ce the 
customer behavior of no provision of material, no p
rovision of personnel, and no provision of business
 knowledge, 
as well as not working toward deadlines and enforci
ng extra requirements as opportunistic behavior wit
h a win for 
the customers and a loss for the suppliers. 

 
Under time and material contracts, the customers se
e the suppliers™ relaxed handling of deadlines and 
steering, 
slippage and expansion of scope, and gold plating a
s opportunistic behavior and as a win for the suppl
iers and a 
loss for themselves, while the suppliers see the cu
stomers™ strong focus on follow-ups and the lesser 
acceptance of 
bills and estimates as opportunistic behavior and a
 loseŒwin situation for themselves. Table 3 summari
zes these 
behaviors. 

 
If none of the parties show opportunistic behavior,
 they will achieve a winŒwin situation; if they bot
h show 
opportunistic behavior, they will end up in a loseŒ
lose situation. This is described in more detail be
low. 
 
The opportunistic behavior of both suppliers and cu
stomers can have a number of consequences. These ar
e 
summarized in Table 4. Dependent on which of the pa
rties shows opportunistic behavior, this can lead t
o an 
increase in costs and prices, changes in the produc
t functionality, its scope, and ultimately its qual
ity, or a 
reimbursed or non-reimbursed increase in the suppli
er™s development expenses. Opportunistic behavior m
ight also 
lead to mistrust between the parties. However, in c
ases where both parties observe the terms of earlie
r contracts, 
they are able to build up trust in each other and t
hereby create the possibility to cooperate under a 
less strict 
framework. Suppliers and customers experience a mut
ual dependency, which satisfies the conditions of t
he general 
model for the prisoner™s dilemma. This means that t
he collective benefit will be highest when both par
ties cooperate 
to reach a winŒwin situation. In such a situation t
he customers will gain a product that satisfies the
ir expectations 
and with the quality as agreed in the contract. Lik
ewise, the suppliers will receive the earnings as a
greed in the 
contract and both parties will develop trust in eac
h other. 
 Table 4: The Consequences of Opportunistic Behavior
 and Cooperation in ISD
  Co-operation Opportunistic behavior 
Co-operation 

 Supplier: 
 Earnings as agreed in contract 
 Trust in customer 
 
Customer: 
 Product quality as agreed in 
contract 
 Trust in supplier 
Supplier: 
 Minimization of earnings  
 Mistrust in customer 
 
Customer: 
 Maximization of product quality 
 Opportunistic 
 behavior 

 Supplier: 
 Maximization of earnings 
 Customer: 
 Minimization of product quality 
 Mistrust in supplier 
 Supplier: 
 Minimization of earnings  
 Mistrust in customer 
 
Customer: 
 Minimization of product quality 
 Mistrust in supplier 
 
The relationship between suppliers and customers is
, however, characterized by the temptation, which e
ach party 
experiences, to think or work toward achieving a wi
nŒlose situation. In a case in which the suppliers 
work toward 
such a situation and the customers work toward a wi
nŒwin situation, the suppliers will be able to maxi
mize the 
earnings from the respective project. The profit wi
ll be of such a magnitude that the suppliers will e
arn more from the 
project by acting opportunistically than they would
 earn in a winŒwin situation for that one project. 
This happens at 
the expense of the customers, who either gain a pro
duct that does not meet their expectations or has l
ess 
functionality and thus quality, or who have to pay 
more. In any case, the customers develop mistrust. 
 
If, in contrast, the customers work for a winŒlose 
situation and the suppliers for a winŒwin situation
, the customers 
will experience the fulfillment of their expectatio
ns and the quality of the product. The maximization
 will be to such an 
extent that the customer will achieve a better syst
em by acting opportunistically than by working for 
a winŒwin 
situation. This happens at the expense of the suppl
ier, who will be forced to use more resources and t
hus will have a 
smaller profit for that respective project as agree
d. It will, however, also lead to mistrust by the s
upplier for the 
customer. 
34
   
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
Finally, when both parties act opportunistically, t
hey end up in a loseŒlose situation. Both parties w
ill gain less than 
in a winŒwin situation. Beyond less profit for the 
suppliers, less product quality and fewer fulfilled
 expectations for the 
customer, both parties will also develop a mutual m
istrust for each other. 
 
The issue of trust and mistrust brings us back to o
ur original research question: How does pricing imp
act on ISD in 
practice? Applying principalŒagent theory, we recog
nize customers as principals and ISD organizations 
as supplying 
agents. With regard to pricing, pricing structures 
have an embedded distribution of risk between both 
the supplier 
and the customer. The choice of pricing structure h
as an impact on risk distributionŠand price level. 
Fixed price 
contracts shift the risk to the supplier. If, in co
ntrast, a time and material contract is used, the r
isk moves to the 
customer and the price level increases with risk su
pplements, which reflect the risks that the supplie
rs perceive. 
 
The distribution of risk and the pricing structure 
have an impact on the opportunistic behavior that b
oth suppliers and 
customers show. When suppliers carry the risk under
 a fixed price contract their opportunistic behavio
r is derived 
from the experienced time pressure they work under 
to reach a deadline. They might then try to fulfill
 the customers™ 
requirements with as little functionality as possib
le and sometimes even leave out some of it. They mi
ght also insist 
on the requirements specification as originally dev
eloped and not accept any changes to the requiremen
ts after the 
contract has been signed. In any case, the supplier
 compromises the functionality of the product to be
 delivered, as 
well as the customer expectations and, as such, in 
many cases the system™s expected quality. 
 
When the customers carry the risk under a time and 
material contract, the suppliers™ behavior is influ
enced by the 
fact that their earnings will be higher the more ti
me they use for an assignment. Thus, project manage
ment 
sometimes relaxes with regard to keeping deadlines,
 and progress and the customers™ effort are not ste
ered and 
monitored to the same extent as if the suppliers th
emselves carried the risk. Suppliers also extend an
d let the scope 
of a project slip by experimenting with new functio
nality and even technology. Unauthorized further de
velopment and 
attempts for perfection, known as gold plating, hap
pen more often. Ultimately, the customers might not
 receive the 
systems they want and, as a consequence, might choo
se another supplier in the future. 
 
The customers™ opportunistic behavior differs depen
ding on which party is carrying the risk. When the 
suppliers hold 
the risk, their earnings depend on the customers™ e
fforts. Suppliers, however, experience that the cus
tomers do not 
provide them with the material, the personnel, and 
the business knowledge they need. They also complai
n that the 
customers do not work dedicatedly toward agreed dea
dlines and that they try to press new requirements 
into the 
projects. This is a problem for them, because denyi
ng these demands might have an impact on future bus
iness with 
the customer, while accepting them results in extra
 hours, time pressure, and changes to deadlines. 
 
When the customers themselves carry the risk, they 
tend to demand more documentation with regard to th
e hours 
that the suppliers spend on the project. This, in t
urn, leads to larger administrative expenses for th
e suppliers. 
Customers also show less acceptance of the supplier
s™ use of time, which sometimes results in reluctan
ce to pay for 
the suppliers™ efforts. In that situation it can be
 hard for the suppliers to collect the charges for 
some provided 
development work. 

 
The behavior of the suppliers and customers in retu
rn has an impact on the distribution of the risk be
tween the two 
parties and on the pricing and pricing structure fo
r a project. As described above, lacking customer e
fforts might lead 
to an increased workload and economical strain in t
he form of less profit for the suppliers and relaxe
d project 
steering and handling of deadlines might cause more
 billable hours and increased profit and thus highe
r costs for 
the customer. The same is true for slippage and exp
ansion of scope as well as for gold plating. 
 
The customers™ experiences from previous projects w
ith regard to distribution of risk and price level 
have an impact 
on their choice of pricing structure for future pro
jects. A basis for trust is created when suppliers 
live up to the 
customers™ expectations, which means that the custo
mers will be more willing to choose a pricing struc
ture in which 
they carry more of the risk. However, when supplier
s abuse this trust either by decreasing functionali
ty or raising 
prices, mistrust develops and customers will not ac
cept the same degree of risk in future projects. Fi
gure 1 
comprises a model of the mutual impact of pricing a
nd opportunistic behavior on ISD in practice. 
 
As principalŒagent theory describes how a principal
, the customer, should put together a reward struct
ure, i.e., 
pricing structure, to achieve the desired behavior 
from an agent, the supplier, in this context observ
ability of the 
suppliers™ efforts plays an important role. The cus
tomers are usually not able to observe the supplier
s™ efforts directly 
and often realize that it is too expensive and unre
alistic, e.g., as project leaders in severe technic
al projects, to 
observe the suppliers directly. Therefore, they lea
ve the management of the projects to the suppliers 
and demand 
and choose to use signals as an indication of the a
ctual effort. The suppliers meet the demand and exp
erience the 
necessity to send these signals and give them in th
e form of project plans and follow-ups. 
 35
  
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
 Figure 1:
 A model of the mutual impact of pricing and opportu
nistic behavior on ISD in practice 
In order to give the supplier the biggest possible 
incentive to deliver an effective effort, customers
 are put in a 
situation where they can choose between shifting th
e risk over to the supplier in the form of demandin
g a fixed price 
contract or remunerating the supplier in accordance
 with the provided signals. The choice between thes
e two 
possibilities is made on the basis of the extra cos
ts that are implied by a shift of risk. 
IMPLICATIONS AND CONCLUSIONS 
Our analysis and model of the impact of pricing and
 opportunistic behavior on ISD practice show that s
uppliers and 
customers are mutually dependent on none of the par
ties showing opportunistic behavior to ensure that 
the 
suppliers™ earnings and the customers™ expectations
 concerning the system™s functionality and ultimate
ly quality turn 
into what was agreed upon in the contract. This has
 implications for research and practice. 
 
By emphasizing the role of pricing and pricing stru
ctures in the distribution of economical risks and 
the related 
opportunistic behavior, our research contributes to
 the earlier work on requirement and software devel
opment risks 
and extends this body of knowledge by pointing to f
urther possible risk resolution strategies. 
 
In line with Bjerknes and Mathiassen (2000), who fo
und that while trust promotes creativity and mutual
 learning, both 
necessary elements of ISD, and contracts promote de
cisions and monitoring of progress according to the
 
agreement, we argue that to enhance practice it is 
necessary to reconsider the customerŒsupplier relat
ionship and 
to change the current form of pricing structures an
d contracts. This argument is supported by Madsen a
nd Kautz™s 
(2002) case study, which indicates that iterative d
evelopment with its explicit focus on learning is p
roblematic when 
ISD has to be performed according to a fixed price 
contract. Ciborra (1996) has argued that if task un
certaintyŠas is 
often the case in information systems developmentŠi
s high, the most efficient work arrangement is one 
based on a 
high level of trust. The question then arises regar
ding how to handle the contradiction between trust 
and control and 
how to develop trust. 

 
 36
   
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
We agree with Highsmith (2002), who promotes as one
 way of creating trust what he calls ﬁdelivered-fea
tureﬂ 
contracts and pricing structures, where the supplie
r makes operational features available to the custo
mer at the end 
of each iterative delivery cycle. Such contracts ar
e based on the time and material pricing structure.
 They provide 
visibility and observability and allow for the cont
inuous determination of value and of the contract, 
but they require a 
development approach and model that support short i
terations as promoted more recently under the label
 agile 
software development (ASD) (Highsmith 2000; Cockbur
n 2002; Highsmith 2002), but already advocated for 
more 
than a decade and known as, e.g., evolutionary syst
ems development (Budde et al. 1992). 
 
Agile software development is feature-based, iterat
ive, time-boxed, and risk-driven. Highsmith (2002) 
argues that 
instead of seeing changes as a problem, which has t
o be controlled by restrictive management strategie
s, ASD 
views changes as producing opportunities, which are
 pursued through risk entrepreneurship. Risk entrep
reneurship 
evaluates risks continuously and critical risks dri
ve the plans and the execution of iterative ISD, as
 already stated by 
Boehm (1988) when he introduced the spiral model fo
r software development. In this context time boxes 
are not 
used to force staff into long hours or to decrease 
quality, but to focus and to bring about the decisi
ons that are 
necessary to prioritize development work (Schuh 200
5; Hazzan and Dubinsky 2007). The challenge remains
 to 
convince both suppliers and customers to apply such
 approaches. Our work, which demonstrates the impac
t of 
pricing on ISD practice, might provide an argument 
for the further uptake of agile software developmen
t. 
 
The presented model contributes with a cumulative t
reatment of the interrelationship of pricing, prici
ng structure, risk 
distribution, and the opportunistic behavior of sup
pliers and customers in ISD practice. This provides
 a solid basis for 
future studies. As a novelty in ISD research, we ha
ve applied principleŒagent theory and the prisoner™
s dilemma to 
refine our model. 

 
We have limited our study to the development of new
 information systems and excluded operation, mainte
nance, 
and further development, as well as the development
 and adjustment of off-the-shelf products and have 
not 
researched whether there is any relationship betwee
n particular pricing structures and development mod
els. These 
issues and the defendable limitationŠas we were int
erested in their perspective in particularŠthat we 
only 
interviewed supplier and not customer organizations
, should be considered when performing future inves
tigations. 
 
Our grounded theoretical model is also based on emp
irical data, which was provided by a limited number
 of 
informants. Now as the model is established it shou
ld be validated further in several ways, e.g., by p
erforming some 
in-depth studies in selected cases and through a mo
re comprehensive and broader survey. Such future st
udies 
should take all the above described limitations int
o account to provide a profound basis to both refin
e the model and 
to offer additional operational advice concerning p
ricing and contracts, risk distribution and opportu
nistic behavior to 
improve professional ISD practice. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 
The author would like to thank Bjarke Nielsen, who 
was involved in the data collection and the origina
l data analysis 
in the early phases of the research, which led to t
he development of the presented model. 
REFERENCES 
Ang, S., and C.M. Beath, ﬁHierarchical elements in 
software contracts,ﬂ
 Journal of Organizational Computing
, 1993, 
3:3, pp. 329Œ361. 

 
Avison, D.E., and G. Fitzgerald, 
Information Systems Development: Methodologies, Tec
hniques and Tools
, 
Maidenhead, UK: McGraw-Hill, 1995. 

 
Banerjee, A., and E. Duflo, ﬁReputation effects and
 the limits of contracting: a study of the Indian s
oftware industry,ﬂ
 Quarterly Journal of Economics
, 2000, 115:3, pp. 989Œ1017. 
 
Banker, R.D., and C.F. Kemerer, ﬁPerformance evalua
tion metrics for information systems development: a
 principal-
agent model,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
, 1992, 3:4, pp. 379Œ401. 
 
Berger, P.L., and T. Luckmann, 
The Social Construction of Reality: A Treatise in t
he Sociology of Knowledge
, 
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin, 1967. 

 
Bjerknes, G., and L. Mathiassen, ﬁImproving the cus
tomer-supplier relation in IT development,ﬂ In 
Proceedings of the 
33rd Hawaii International Conference on Systems Sci
ences (HICSS)
, Los Alamitos, CA : IEEE Computer Society 
Press, 2000. 

 
Blumer, H., 
Symbolic Interactionism: Perspective and method, 
Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1969. 
37
  
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
Boehm, B.W., 
Software Engineering Economics
, Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1981. 
 
Boehm, B.W., ﬁA spiral model of software developmen
t and enhancement,ﬂ 
IEEE Computer
, 1988, 21, pp. 61Œ72. 
 
Boehm, B.W., and K.J. Sullivan, ﬁSoftware economics
: a roadmap,ﬂ In 
Proceedings of the International 
Conference on Software Engineering,
 Conference on the Future of Software Engineering
, 
IEEE-
CS: Computer Society, Irish Computer Society, 2000,
 pp. 319Œ343. 
 
Boehm, B.W., B. Clark, E. Horowitz, J.C. Westland, 
R.D. Madachy, and R.W. Selby, ﬁCost models for futu
re 
software life cycle processes: COCOMO 2.0,ﬂ 
Annuals of Software Engineering
, 1995, 1, pp. 57Œ94. 
 
Budde, R., K. Kautz, K. Kuhlenkamp, and H. Zülligho
ven, 
PrototypingŠAn Approach to Evolutionary Systems 
Development
, Berlin, Germany: Springer Verlag, 1992. 
 
Charmaz, K., ﬁGrounded theory. Objectivist and cons
tructivist methods,ﬂ in Denzin, N.K., and Y.S. Linc
oln (eds.), 
Handbook of Qualitative Research
, Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage, 2000. 
 
Ciborra, C., 
Teams, Markets and Systems
, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
 
Cockburn, A., 
Agile Software Development
, Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, 2002. 
 
Dibbern, J., T. Goles, R. Hirschheim, and B. Jayati
lka, ﬁInformation systems outsourcing: a survey and
 analysis of 
the literature,ﬂ 
ACM SIGMIS Database
, 2004, 35:4, pp. 6Œ102. 
 
Douma, S., and H. Schreuder, 
Economic Approaches to Organizations
, Third Edition, Englewood Cliff, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 2002. 

 
Glaser, B.G., and A.L. Strauss, 
The Discovery of Grounded Theory Œ Strategies for Q
ualitative Research
, New York, 
USA: Aldine De Gruyter, 1967. 

 
Guindon, R., ﬁKnowledge exploited by experts during
 software systems design,ﬂ 
International Journal of Man-
Machine Studies
, 1990, 33, pp. 279Œ304.
  
Hazzan, O., and Dubinsky, Y., ﬁThe software enginee
ring timeline: a time management perspective,ﬂ 
Proceedings
 of 
the
 IEEE International Conference on SoftwareŠScience, 
Technology & Engineering
, Herzelia, Israel, 2007, pp. 95Œ
103. 

 
Highsmith, J., 
Adaptive Software Development: A Collaborative Appr
oach to Managing Complex Systems
, New 
York, USA: Dorset House, 2000. 

 
Highsmith, J., 
Agile Software Development Ecosystems
, Boston, USA: Addison-Wesley, Pearson Education, 2
002. 
 
Jørgensen, M., and C.G. Carelius, ﬁAn empirical stu
dy of software project bidding,ﬂ 
IEEE Transactions of Software 
Engineering
, 2004, 30:12, pp. 953Œ969. 
 
Jørgensen, M., K.H. Teigen, and K.J. Moløkken-Østvo
ld, ﬁBetter sure than safe? Overconfidence in judgm
ent based 
software development effort prediction intervalsﬂ, 
Journal of Systems and Software
, 2004, 70:1Œ2, pp. 79Œ93. 
 
Jørgensen, M., and S. Grimstad, ﬁOver-optimism in s
oftware development projects: ‚The winner™s curse,™
ﬂ In 
Proceedings of IEEE Coniele Comp
, Puebla, Mexico: IEEE Society Press, 2005, pp. 280
Œ285. 
 
Kautz, K., B. Hansen, and D. Jacobsen, ﬁThe utiliza
tion of information systems development methodologi
es in 
practice,ﬂ 
Journal of Information Technology Cases and Applica
tions
, 2004, 6:4,pp. 1Œ20. 
 
Kjærgaard, A., and K. Kautz, ﬁKnowledge management 
as an autonomous venturing process: a process model
 of 
establishing knowledge management,ﬂ In 
Proceedings of the 
 International Conference on
 Information Systems
, Las 
Vegas, NV, December 11Œ14, 2005. 

 
Klein, H., and M. Myers, ﬁA set of principles for c
onducting and evaluating interpretive field studies
 in information 
systems,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly,
 1999, 23:1, pp. 67Œ93. 
 38
   
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
Lacity, M.C., and R. Hirschheim, ﬁThe information s
ystems outsourcing bandwagon,ﬂ 
Sloan Management Review
, 
1993, Fall, pp. 73Œ86. 

Lichtenstein, Y., ﬁPuzzles in software development 
contracting,ﬂ 
Communication of the ACM
, 2004, 47:2, pp. 61Œ65. 
 
Lichtenstein, Y., and A. McDonnell, ﬁPricing softwa
re development services,ﬂ In 
Proceedings of the European 
Conference on Information Systems
, Naples, Italy, June 16Œ21, 2003. 
 
Locke, K., 
Grounded Theory in Management Research
, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 2001. 
 
Lyytinen, K., L. Mathiassen, and J. Ropponen, ﬁA fr
amework for software risk management,ﬂ 
Journal of Information 
Technology
, 1996, 11:4, pp. 275Œ285. 
 
Lyytinen, K., L. Mathiassen, and J. Ropponen, ﬁAtte
ntion shaping and software risk: a categorical anal
ysis of four 
classical approaches,ﬂ 
Information Systems Research
, 1998, 9:3, pp. 233Œ255. 
 
Madsen, S., and K. Kautz, ﬁApplying system developm
ent methods in practiceŠthe RUP example,ﬂ In
 Proceedings 
of 11
th
 International Conference on Information Systems De
velopments, Methods and ToolsŠTheory and Practice
, 
Riga, Latvia, September 12Œ14, 2002. 

 
Mathiassen, L., T. Saarinen, T. Tuunanen, and M. Ro
ssi, ﬁA contingency model for requirements developm
ent,ﬂ 
Journal of the Association of Information Systems
, 2007, 8, pp. 569Œ597. 
 
Nandhakumar, J., and D.E. Avison, ﬁThe fiction of m
ethodological development: a field study of informa
tion systems 
development,ﬂ 
Information Technology and People
, 1999, 12:2, pp. 176Œ191. 
 
Overby, M. L., J. Vang, and V. Mahnke, 
Strategic IT Outsourcing
 (In Danish), Copenhagen, DK: Thomsen, 2003. 
 
Richmond, W., and A. Seidmann, ﬁSoftware developmen
t outsourcing contract: structure and business 
value,ﬂ
Journal of Management Information Systems
, 1993, 10:1, pp. 57Œ72. 
 
Richmond, W., A. Seidmann, and A. Whinston, ﬁIncomp
lete contracting issues in IS development outsourci
ng,ﬂ 
Decision Support Systems
, 1992, 8:5, pp. 459Œ477. 
 
Sabherwal, R., ﬁThe role of trust in outsourced IS 
development projects,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM
, 1999, 42:2, 
pp. 80Œ86. 

 
Schuh, P., 
Integrating Agile Development in the Real World
, Brookline, MA : Charles River Media, 2005. 
 
Strauss, A., and J. Corbin, 
Basics of Qualitative Research
, London, UK: SAGE Publications, 1998. 
 
Truex, D., R. Baskerville, and J. Travis, ﬁA method
ical systems development: the deferred meaning of s
ystems 
development methods,ﬂ 
Accounting, Management and Information Technology
, 2000, 10, pp. 53Œ79. 
 Visser, W., ﬁMore or less following a plan during d
esign: opportunistic deviations in specification,ﬂ 
International 
Journal of Man-Machine Studies
, 1990, 33:3, pp. 247Œ278. 
 Visser, W., ﬁDesigners™ activities examined at thre
e levels: organization strategies and problem-solvi
ng process,ﬂ 
Knowledge-Based Systems
, 1992, 5:1, pp. 92Œ104. 
 
Visser, W., ﬁOrganization of design activities: opp
ortunistic, with hierarchical episodes,ﬂ 
Interacting with Computers
, 
1994, 6:3, pp. 235Œ274. 

 
Von Hippel, E., and G. von Krogh, ﬁOpen source soft
ware and the ‚private-collective™ innovation model:
 issues for 
organization science,ﬂ 
Organization Science
, 2003, 14:2, pp. 209Œ223.
  
Wang, E.T.G., T. Baron, and A. Seidmann, ﬁContracti
ng structures for custom software development: the 
impacts of 
informational rents and uncertainty on internal dev
elopment and outsourcing,ﬂ 
Management Science
, 1997, 43:12, 
pp. 1726Œ1744. 

 
Whang, S., ﬁContracting for software development,ﬂ 
Management Science
, 1992, 38:3, pp. 307Œ324. 
39
  
 Volume 10
 Issue 3 
Article 3 
ABOUT THE AUTHOR 
 
Karlheinz Kautz is professor in Systems Development
 and Software Engineering at the 
Department of Informatics at the Copenhagen Busines
s School, Denmark. His primary 
research interests are in information systems devel
opment, knowledge management and 
software quality and process improvement in the IT 
industry and the  diffusion and adoption 
of information technology innovations. Karl is a fo
unding member and former chair of the 
IFIP TC8 WG 8.6 on Diffusion, Transfer, and Impleme
ntation of Information Technology. 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Copyright © 2009 by the Association for Information
 Systems. Permission to make digital or hard copies
 of all or part 
of this work for personal or classroom use is grant
ed without fee provided that copies are not made or
 distributed for 
profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear
 this notice and full citation on the first page. C
opyright for 
components of this work owned by others than the As
sociation for Information Systems must be honored. 
Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy other
wise, to republish, to post on servers, or to redis
tribute to lists 
requires prior specific permission and/or fee. Requ
est permission to publish from: AIS Administrative 
Office, P.O. 
Box 2712 Atlanta, GA, 30301-2712 Attn: Reprints or 
via e-mail from ais@aisnet.org. 
40
  Reproduced
with
permission
of
the
copyright
owner.
Further
reproduction
prohibited
without
permission.
