 Communications of the Association for Information Systems#246˛˝˛ˆˇ˝ˆ#ˆ$!˝ˇ˘˛ˇ"College of Business, Prairie View A&M University(%$/,-(3$/8$07('7ˇ˚˙˚˝University of Texas at Arlington˝˝˜˝University of Texas at Arlington1(4$('72//2'',6,2124.6+?5(/$,51(245<,$6(4,27*+2741$/&64,%4$4ˇ!(˝(&&(36(20071,&$6,21552&,$61)240$6:56(076+24,;('0,1,564$6&64,%4$4ˇ!(˝0$6/($5216$&6(/,%4$451(24* (&200(1'(,6$6,21$/,-(3$//:(17˘23$/$+$3$64$$'+$˙$16(4744,'+$55(55,1(4521$/,642=/(2>9$4(8(/23(45*,(8(/230(1($0Communications of the Association for Information Systems2/468$,/$%6+?5(/$,51(2425 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 55 
  ASSESSING PERSONALITY PROFILES OF SOFTWARE 
DEVELOPERS IN AGILE DEVELOPMENT TEAMS 
 VenuGopal Balijepally 
College of Business 
Prairie View A&M University 
vebalijepally@pvamu.edu
   RadhaKanta Mahapatra 
Sridhar Nerur 
College of Business Administration 
University of Texas at Arlington 
 ABSTRACT 
Agile methodologies are changing the way we 
develop software.  Their emphasis on team-
oriented development, joint code ownership, 
and reliance on people rather than predefined 
processes to guide activities, is transforming 
software development into a socio-technical 
process.  As methodologies become increasi
ngly more people and team-oriented, there is an 
urgent need to investigate the personality profile
s of software developers and their likely impact 
on the productivity of the development team.  A revi
ew of the IS research 
literature on personality 
studies found Jungian typology oper
ationalized as Myers-Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) to be the 
most popular approach for assessing personality pr
ofiles.  We compared the Five Factor Model 
(FFM) of personality, which is currently gaining 
popularity among personality psychologists, with 
MBTI.  Our analysis, based on extant research 
literature in personality psychology and group 
behavior, suggests that FFM not on
ly provides better measures for 
all factors that are measured 
by MBTI, but it also allows us to assess Neurot
icism, an important personality trait that is of 
interest to researchers studying work groups, such as the agile development team.  Our finding 

has important implications for researchers stud
ying the agile development process.  It is also 
highly relevant to studies investigating the perso
nality profiles of IS professionals.  Thus, our 
study attempts to bring in fresh insights from Pe
rsonality Psychology, our 
reference discipline, to 
enrich IS research.      
Keywords
: Five Factor Model of Personality; Myers-
Briggs Type Indicator; Agile Methodologies; 
Software Development; Programmer Team 
I. INTRODUCTION 
Agile software development methodologies have 
recently generated great enthusiasm among 
both practitioners and researchers 
[Orr, 2002; Larman, 2004; Erickson et al., 2005; Turk et al., 
2005].  Extreme Programming (XP), Feature-Driv
en Development, Crystal Methods, Scrum, 
Dynamic Systems Development, and Adaptive Softw
are Development are some of the popular 
agile methods.  XP is by far the best documented 
and most widely practiced agile method [Orr, 
2002].  The common principle underlying agile methods is their emphasis on cooperative 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 56 
software development [Beck et al., 2001].  The focus is more on people and the dynamics of their 
interactions, rather than on elaborate requirem
ents planning and rigid software development 
processes.  Customers actively participate in the development process as full time members of 
development teams.  Short iterat
ions of planning, designing, c
oding, and testing are adopted 
along with continuous integration to accommodate changes throughout the system™s life cycle. 
Software developers frequently iterate between 
these different phases of systems development 
and alter their roles accordingly.  Thus, the 
roles and expectations 
of software developers 
involved in agile teams differ dramatically from
 those using traditional plan driven methodologies 
[Cockburn and Highsmith, 2001; Orr, 2002].   
The traditional profile of the software develop
er as the specialist working predominantly 
individually within a software development team is gi
ving way to the versatile team player that can 
frequently and effectively switch roles among analyst, designer, and coder.  Traditionally, innate 
intellectual abilities [Rasch and Tosi, 1992] and programming experience [Chrysler, 1978; 
Benbasat and Vessey, 1980] were considered critic
al factors for the effectiveness of software 
developers.  Agile methodologies, due to their 
critical emphasis on team-oriented development, 
make additional demands on the social and interpersonal skills of software developers.     
Social skills of individuals are greatly influenced by their personalities [Hogan, 1991].  Personality 
traits are relatively enduring characteristics that
 are not easily changed with behavioral training 
[Kichuk and Wiesner, 1997].  Personality profiles 
of members are important predictors of team 
performance [Hackman and Morris, 1975; Ridgew
ay, 1983] and organizational success [Moad, 
1994; Kichuk and Wiesner, 1997].  We know from sm
all group research that the composition of a 
team affects the team™s performance [Gist et al., 1987; Volkema and Gorman, 1998].  In general, 
heterogeneous teams perform better in unstru
ctured creative tasks, whereas homogeneous 
teams do well in more structured tasks.  The fit 
of a software developer™s personality profile to the 
assigned role as well as his/her ability to effe
ctively perform as a t
eam member would have a 
large effect on the outcome of agile software
 development projects [Cockburn, 2000].   
With software development methodologies becoming more people and team-oriented, there is an 
imperative need to investigate the personality prof
iles of software developers and the impact that 
personality dimensions may have on the effectiveness 
of agile teams.  The objective of this study 
is to facilitate this stream of 
research by evaluating the extant 
research literature on personality 
and cognitive studies addressing software development. 
 A review of the IS research literature on 
personality studies shows that Jungian typology 
operationalized in Myers Briggs Type Indicator 
(MBTI) [Myers et al., 1998] was the most popular approach used to assess personality and 
cognitive dispositions.  These 
studies were also predominantly
 focused on the individual as 
opposed to the team.  Introduced to the IS rese
arch community by the seminal paper by Mason 
and Mitroff [Mason and Mitroff, 1973], MBTI has se
rved the community well 
in investigating the 
impact of individual personality traits on the devel
opment and deployment of information systems.  
However, it is imperative to revisit this issue 
in light of recent developments in the areas of 
personality psychology and software development.   
The Five-Factor Model (FFM) of personality is 
currently gaining prominence among personality 
psychologists as the consensual 
model of choice in understanding personality traits [Digman, 
1990; Costa and McCrae, 1992a; McCrae and John, 1992].  It measures individual personality 
traits in terms of five dime
nsions: Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness to Experience, 
Agreeableness, and Conscientiousness (Please s
ee Section 4 for more details).  We compared 
FFM with MBTI with regard to their suitabilit
y in assessing personality 
profiles of agile team 
members.  Our analysis, based on extant resear
ch literature in personality psychology and group 
behavior, suggests that FFM not on
ly provides better measures for 
all factors that are measured 
by MBTI, it also allows us to assess Neuroticism,
 an important personality trait that is of interest 
to researchers studying work groups, such as
 the agile development team.  We, therefore, 
recommend the use of FFM in studying the impac
t of personalities of team members on the 
performance of agile teams.  Our finding has im
portant implications for 
researchers studying the 
agile development process.  It is also highly re
levant to studies investigating the personality 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 57 
profiles of IS professionals.  The merit of our st
udy lies in bringing fresh insights from Personality 
Psychology, our reference discipline, to enrich IS research.      
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows.  In the following section we compare agile 
software development methodologies with traditional plan driven methodologies and highlight the 

importance of studying personality profiles of softw
are developers.  We then present a review of 
the research literature on personality and cognitive 
studies of IS personnel.  The FFM is then 
discussed and compared with MBTI with regard to
 its suitability for studying agile teams.  The 
insights FFM could provide concerning agile t
eam dynamics and performance are then briefly 
illustrated.  Finally, some future research directions and conclusions of t
he study are presented. 
II. AGILE VS. TRADITIONAL SOFTWA
RE DEVELOPMENT METHODOLOGIES Change is a constant in all product development efforts in organizations, including software 
development.  Hyper-competitive environments, 
rapid technological changes, and changing 
business needs all call for changes in requirements during various stages of product 
development.  Over the years it 
became apparent that these driv
ers of change affect software 
development to a greater extent than other produc
t development efforts.  The effect of rapid 
technological changes is particularly important in this regard.   
Traditional software development methodologies are based on the premise that a software 
system should be specified to the 
fullest extent prior to implementation.  These methodologies 
address change by emphasizing foresight and 
detailed upfront planning.  The traditional 
methodologies are therefore referred to as plan-driven methodologies [Boehm and Turner, 2004].  
In its purest form, the developmen
t process, based primarily on the 
waterfall model
 or its 
variation, follows a predominantly sequential ap
proach [Beck, 1999].  Extensive requirements 
gathering is followed by detailed system desi
gn.  The specifications thus developed guide 
implementation and testing.  Developers specialize in specific tasks, such as analysis, design, 

and coding.  Uncertainties in project management, 
such as time and cost overrun, are reduced 
through elaborate planning, documentation, and enf
orcement of strict process guidelines.  Some 
variants of traditional development however involv
ed a more incremental and iterative approach 
without diluting the documentation and trace
ability requirements [Boehm and Turner, 2004].  
While traditional methodologies served the software community well in the past, they may not be 
appropriate for all contexts.   Agile methodologies 
evolved in this setting through experimentation 
involving ‚exploratory projects™ that used 
frontier technologies [Highsmith, 2002].  Unlike 
traditional methodologies that attempt to address all foreseeable change at the analysis and 
design stages, agile methods are designed to work 
in an environment where the specifications of 
the software system continue to evolve throughout
 the development cycle.  Thus, agile methods 
are philosophically and pragmatically different fr
om traditional software development methods in 
important ways.  Table 1 provides a summary of these differences.  Though the contrast between 
the two approaches is striking, nei
ther of them is considered a silver bullet. Boehm and Turner 
(2004) while highlighting the home grounds of 
each of the methodologies have attempted a 
synthesis of the two through a risk-based approach.  
PROCESS CHARACTERISTICS  
Agile development methodologies emphasize incremental development of software in short 
iterative cycles.  A typical cycle in XP is about 
3 weeks.  Each cycle involves analysis, design, 
coding, and testing, and results in working code t
hat is added to the production system.  Thus the 
system incrementally grows with
 the addition of a few new features during each cycle.  This 
contrasts with the long development cycle spanning 
several months that characterizes traditional 
development approaches.  The user participates as
 an active member of the agile development 
team and determines the features to be implemen
ted in each cycle.  He/she also provides 
constant feedback during development.  The short de
velopment cycles combined with direct user 
participation make agile development highly ad
aptable to cope with constantly evolving 
requirements.                  
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 58 
Table 1 Œ Differences Between Traditional and Agile Methodologies 
 Traditional Agile Focus Individual creativity 
Processes and tools 
Technical 

Optimization 
Creative teamwork 
People and interactions 
Socio-technical 

Adaptation and Learning 
Process Characteristics 
   Change Readiness 
Low High Process flow Predominantly sequential 
Parallel and iterative.  User Involvement 
Partial Complete 
Coding standards 
Useful but not critical 
Highly important 
Dominant mode of 
communication 
Documentation 
Barrier-free interpersonal 
interaction  Project Management    
Key decision maker Project manager Development team members 
Management control Through plans, processes, 
and verification Trust based collaboration and 
self organization 
People Issues 
  Roles 
Defined and relatively 
constant 
Change, often at developer™s 
discretion 
Code ownership 
Individual accountability 
Team based collective 
ownership 
Rewards 
Individual Team based 
 An important mode of communication among 
developers in traditional development 
methodologies is documentation.  The outcome of 
each phase is captured in a set of documents 
that drives the next phase.  Analysis results in 
requirement specification.
  Design documents are 
created based on these requireme
nts, that guide implementation, and unit testing.  Acceptance 
tests are designed based on requirements.  Agile te
ams place little emphasis on documentation.  
Instead, they emphasize tacit knowledge and direct communication among team members, 
including the user representative.  Collective ow
nership of code as against individual ownership in 
traditional software development is another aspect 
of some agile methods.  This requires the 
agile developer to strictly adhere to coding stan
dards so that others ca
n easily understand the 
code. 
PROJECT MANAGEMENT ISSUES  
In traditional development the project manager 
determines the schedule, assigns responsibilities 
to developers, and monitors progress.  Accordingly, the authority and responsibility regarding 
timely completion of the project are vested wi
th the project manager.  Agile methodologies 
emphasize a team-based approach by delegating a number of key decision-making 

responsibilities to team members.  Agile manager
s acting as facilitators set goals and constraints, 
and provide agile teams with overall boundaries.
 Teams themselves set priorities, determine 
schedules, design, test, and deliver
 the software [Orr, 2002].  This 
significantly redefines the role 
and authority of the project manager in agile development.  Project management in agile 
development thus moves away from the verifi
ability and control requirements of traditional 
management style to a trust based collaborative deci
sion-making involving self-directed teams.  
PEOPLE ISSUES  
A major difference between agile and traditional methodologies occurs at the level of people and 
their roles, responsibilities, and rewards.  A key 
concept promoted by the 
agile manifesto is that 
people (software developers and users) form t
he cornerstone of the software development 
process [Beck et al., 2001].  It argues that peopl
e working together in creative teams can 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 59 
significantly enhance the success rates of softwar
e projects.  This emphasis on the team, rather 
than the individual developer, entails a huge c
hange for software developers and IS managers 
who, by practicing the tenets of traditional
 software development methodologies, have been 
trained to be individualists [Orr, 2002].    
The traditional methodologies emphasize skill spec
ialization.  Software de
velopers specialize in 
tasks such as systems analysis, database design, 
programming, etc.  This role specialization 
breaks down in the agile team, which is collectively responsible for analysis, design, 

development, and delivery of working code.  Ag
ile methodologies consequently encourage 
ﬁgeneralizing specialistsﬂ [Ambler, 2004]. The ro
le played by an individual in the agile team 
changes frequently based on mutual agreement. 
 In the absence of documentation, it is 
imperative that all the team members develop a taci
t knowledge of the overall system.  Such role 
changes foster understanding of the system and th
e code by agile team members and promote 
greater knowledge sharing.  It also supports the notion of collective responsibility for and joint 
ownership of the code, the end product of so
ftware development.  Team-based responsibility 
naturally leads to team-based rewards.                            
The emphasis on collaborative ownership and
 teamwork, which distinguishes agile 
methodologies from traditional development approach
es, offers substantial scope for conflict.  
Such conflicts could be task or relationship based.
  Task conflicts arise 
over substantive issues, 
such as differences in ideas, opinions, and ways 
of approaching a task.  Relationship conflicts, on 
the other hand, refer to interpersonal or socio-
emotional disagreements related to feelings of 
animosity or annoyance [Bono et al., 2002].  While ta
sk conflicts within a certain limit could have 
a beneficial effect on a team™s performance, 
relationship conflicts are usually considered 
detrimental to the team™s effectiveness.   
Aspects of agile methodologies, such as, pluralistic decision-making involving multiple 
stakeholders, self-organization, jo
int code ownership, etc., could tr
igger task related conflicts.  
Such conflicts, if not managed properly, could potent
ially contribute to relationship conflicts with 
negative consequences.  For organizations migrat
ing from traditional methodologies to agile 
methodologies, transition issues could also trigge
r conflicts [Nerur et al., 2005].  Change in work 
habits, transition from process and control environ
ment to a more collaborative environment, lack 
of clear design documents to go by, giving up code ownership, and relinquishing individual 

rewards in favor of team-based rewards could all contribute to conflicts.   
The above discussion under
scores the fact that adoption of 
agile methodologies significantly 
changes the work environment of the software de
veloper.  Traditionally, innate intellectual ability 
is considered a critical factor in determi
ning a person™s success as a software developer 
[Benbasat and Vessey, 1980; Rasch and Tosi, 1992]. 
 While intellectual ability will continue to be 
a predictor of success, the personality profile of
 the software developer is likely to greatly 
influence the effectiveness of the agile team.  Several recent meta analytic studies have 
highlighted the effect of personality on job 
performance [Barrick and Mount, 1991; Tett et al., 
1991].  It is now widely accepted that people have stable dispositional traits that influence their 
behavior in work settings [Mount et al., 1998]. Perso
nality could help predict job performance and 
career success over and above general mental ab
ility [Day and Silverman, 1989; Tett et al., 1991; 
Judge et al., 1999].  Therefore, IS researchers interested in studying adoption of agile 
methodologies must consider, among other factors,
 the personality traits of software developers 
and their impact on the performance of the agile teams.   
The following section reviews the extant research 
literature on personality fa
ctors in the context of 
traditional software development.  This review wi
ll help us understand the current body of 
knowledge in this area and provide input to chart a path for future research on personality studies 

in the context of agile teams.          
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 60 
III. PERSONALITY STUDI
ES IN IS RESEARCH 
We have categorized research on personality and 
cognitive dispositions of IS personnel using 
two dimensions: instrument type (Jungian vs. Non-
Jungian) and the contex
t of study (individual 
vs. team).  Figure 1 lists IS research papers clas
sified into four quadrants using this framework.  
Those papers that address multiple issues are 
appropriately listed in more than one quadrant. 
This list does not include studies that investigat
e cognitive issues outside the IS context.  Also 
excluded from the list are papers 
on cognitive dispositions of 
end-users, which sometime ago 
formed a vibrant research stream in MIS and 
DSS design (see for example, [Bariff and Lusk, 
1977; Benbasat and Taylor, 1978; Zmud, 1979].  While we have made an attempt to create a 
comprehensive list of research papers, we do not claim this to be an exhaustive list. 
Much of the research on cognitive characteristic
s of IS personnel investigate typical cognitive 
profiles that are likely to predict
 success of individuals in the fi
eld of computing.  Research in 
team context, on the other hand, try to unrav
el the differences between successful and 
unsuccessful IS teams in terms of the cognitive
 profiles of their members.  The notion that 
personality and cognitive styles 
of members can impact team performance [Driskell et al., 1987] 
seems to have influenced research on IS teams.          
   Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 61 
Instruments based on the Jungian typology we
re found to be most popular among IS 
researchers, with MBTI being the 
instrument of choice.  Other instruments based on the Jungian 
typology or its variations used 
by IS researchers include Personal
 Style Inventory (PSI) [Hogan 
and Champagne, 1980] and Kiersey Temperament 
Sorter [Keirsey, 1984]. The Jungian typology 
describes human personality using eight factors that
 are arranged as bi-polar preferences along 
the following four dimensions: 
Field of View:   Extraversion (E)  –.. Introversion (I) 

Perceptual dimension:  Sensing (S)   –.. Intuition (N) 
Judging dimension:  Thinking (T)   –.. Feeling (F) 
Way of Life:   Judging (J)   –.. Perceiving (P) 
Field of view describes the orientation of a pers
on.  Extroverts tend to be people oriented, while 
Introverts are more comfortable with the world of
 ideas.  The Perceptual dimension reflects how a 
person perceives information.  A Sensing type 
person prefers hard fact
s while searching for 
information, whereas an Intuitive person loo
ks for relationships and patterns among data. The 
Judging dimension deals with decision-making.  A Thinking type person makes decisions based 

on logic and analysis, while the Feeling type tends to rely on emotions and personal values.  
Finally, Way of Life relates to how a person deals with the world.  The Judging type person tends 
to prefer a planned, orderly life, while the Perc
eiving type tends to prefer a more spontaneous 
and flexible life.  Although a given individual™s cogniti
ve disposition may include all eight factors to 
some degree, usually one factor in each dimension tends to be dominant [White, 1984a].  The 
research findings are discussed below.   
INDIVIDUAL AND JUNGIAN INSTRUMENTS 
IS personnel are found to be predominantly Introv
erted [Barnes, 1975; Bush and Schkade, 1985; 
Lyons, 1985; Capretz, 2003] and Thinking [Barne
s, 1975; Lyons, 1985; Te
ague, 1998; Capretz, 
2003] types.  Programmers tend to be mostly Thin
king types with the near exclusion of Feeling 
types.  While some studies suggest no diffe
rence among IS personnel on the Perceptual 
dimension (Sensing vs. Intuition) [Kaiser and Bo
strom, 1982; Lyons, 1985], others claim Sensing 
to be a dominant characteristic [Smith, 1989; Te
ague, 1998; Capretz, 2003].  Sensing dimension 
is also found to be predictive of computer profic
iency [Evans and Simkin, 1989]. With regard to 
Judging vs. Perceiving dimension, some studies
 suggest IS personnel to be predominantly 
Judging type [Lyons, 1985; Smith, 1989; T
eague, 1998] while others indicate no dominant 
characteristic on this dimension [Kaiser and Bostrom, 1982; Sitton and Chmelir, 1984].  It is 
unclear whether the conflicting results among these 
studies reflect a change in the profile of IS 
personnel over time.  With regard to combi
nation of dimensions, programmers tend to be 
predominantly Introverted and Thinking types 
[Bush and Schkade, 1985; Lyons, 1985; Teague, 
1998]. Systems analysts, on the other hand, while
 being predominantly Thinking types tend to 
include both Introverts and Extroverts [Lyons, 19
85].  It is also reported that people with NT and 
SJ profiles make the best programmers [Hardiman, 1997; Teague, 1998].  
INDIVIDUAL AND NON-JUNGIAN INSTRUMENTS 
Non-Jungian instruments used by IS researchers 
include the Minnesota Multi-Phasic Inventory 
(MMPI) [Barnes, 1975], the Strong Vocational Inte
rest Bank (SVIB) [Mayer and Stalnaker, 1968; 
Barnes, 1975], the Sixteen Personality Factor Test
 (16PF) [Larkin, 1983; Moore, 1991], and the 
Five Factor Model (FFM) [Clark et al., 2003].  
Studies that used non-Jungi
an instruments suggest 
that IS personnel are conscient
ious and persistent, self-assured and self-confident, cool and 
reserved, assertive and dominant, adaptable and tr
usting, and are good at abstract thinking 
[Larkin, 1983]. Programmers are categorized as
 defensive [Barnes, 1975] and conservative 
[Moore, 1991].  They share interests with pe
rsons engaged in scientific and professional 
occupations [Mayer and Stalnaker, 1968] and 
with persons whose vocations include 
mathematics, nature, and music 
[Barnes, 1975].  Their interests differ from those engaged in 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 62 
occupations associated with gregariousness such 
as public speaking or politics [Barnes, 1975].  
Their personality profiles are more similar to that 
of chemical engineers, electricians, and airline 
pilots, but are very different from that of 
professors, writers, and 
farmers [Larkin, 1983].  
Exceptional IT professionals tend to be extroverts
, while exceptional IT students in terms of GPA 
tend to be introverts.  Both groups however t
end to be conscientious [Clark et al., 2003].   
IS managers were found to be less warm and 
outgoing, more aggressive and assertive, less 
adventurous, less trusting and accept
ing of conditions, more self-sufficient and resourceful, more 
impulsive and more tense than other business 
executives [Moore, 1991]. They do not share 
characteristics traditionally associated 
with management, but have profiles similar to 
programmers and systems analysts.  This could be 
explained by the fact that IS managers tend 
to rise from the ranks of programmers/analysts
 [Moore, 1991].  However, unlike programmers 
who are generally cool and reserved, they 
are outgoing and warm. Information Systems 
managers are also found to be em
otionally stable, socially bold 
and venturesome, experimenting 
and liberal, and self-sufficient [Larkin, 1983].  
TEAM Research on IS teams has almost exclusively re
lied on the Jungian typology.  A significant finding 
in this research stream emphasizes the value of diversity in team composition as a predictor of 
success.  Inclusion of Feeling types to supplement
 Thinking types in the project team is found to 
be critical for the success of programmer team
s [Kaiser and Bostrom, 1982; White, 1984a].  
Heterogeneous teams with diverse cognitive disp
ositions have been found to employ more open 
and varied approaches to problem solving compared to homogeneous teams [Rutherfoord, 2001].  

Heterogeneity is found to be a useful team ch
aracteristic while solving unstructured tasks, 
whereas homogeneity in team composition is desi
rable for structured tasks [White, 1984b].  Team 
members with complementary cognitive profiles have been found to make up for one another™s 

limitations, thus further reinforcing the importa
nce of diversity in the context of IS teams 
[Shneiderman, 1980].  
The study of personality of IS personnel in the pa
st has yielded valuable insights regarding the 
personality and cognitive profiles that offer a good fi
t with the roles and requirements of traditional 
software development. With the advent of agile 
software development methodologies, the roles 
and responsibilities of software developers are 
however undergoing rapid transformation. There 
is a need to take a fresh look at the personality 
profiles of IS personnel and their fit with the new 
roles and job descriptions in agile teams. While existing approaches such as MBTI could be used 
for this purpose, it is prudent to evaluate ne
w theoretical frameworks and instruments from 
personality psychology that might satisfy the require
ments better. In the next section, Five Factor 
Model of personality, which is t
he new consensual personality framework for cumulating research 
findings in personality research is briefly di
scussed and compared with the MBTI and Jungian 
approach. Its utility for researching personality 
in agile software development teams is then 
discussed. 
IV. FIVE-FACTOR MODEL OF PERSONALITY The Five Factor Model is a hierarchical organization of personality traits in terms of five basic 
dimensions: 
Neuroticism, Extraversion, Openness 
to Experience, Agreeableness, and 
Conscientiousness 
[McCrae and John, 1992].  
Neuroticism 
denotes
 level of personal adjustment 
and tolerance for stress. It represents the tendency 
to express negative emotions such as anger, 
guilt, fear, and sadness. Individuals that score 
low on this dimension exhibit higher emotional 
stability and are better prepared to cope with stressful situations.  
Extraversion
 measures the 
degree of sociability and gregariousness of a person.
  People scoring high on this dimension tend 
to be more outgoing and enjoy interacting with ot
hers.  On the other hand, those scoring low on 
Extraversion
 are apt to be reserved and introverted. 
Openness to Experience
 indicates being 
open to new ideas.  Individuals scoring high on this dimension show the tendencies of 
inquisitiveness and creativity.  Those with low scores on 
Openness
 are characterized as overly 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 63 
practical and show less sensitivity to others™ feelings.  
Agreeableness
 measures friendliness and 
degree of trust exhibited by individuals.  People hi
gh on this dimension tend to be trusting and 
cooperative, and are moved by
 others™ needs.  Finally, 
Conscientiousness
 measures the level of 
organization, commitment and persistence exhibited by
 individuals.  It is manifested in qualities 
such as dutifulness, self-discipline and goal orientation.  
The FFM has been well researched by personality 
psychologists and its dimensions have been 
found to demonstrate convergent and discrimi
nant validity across instruments and observers 
[McCrae and John, 1992].  These dimensions have also been shown to be stable over time and 
generalizable across cultures.  A number of FF
M-based instruments are available for use by 
researchers.  Some of the more popular ones
 are NEO-PI-R [Costa and McCrae, 1992b], the 
Five Factor Personality Inventory (FFPI) [Hendr
iks et al., 1999a; Hendriks et al., 1999b], the Big 
Five Questionnaire (BFQ) [Caprara et al., 1993], Structured Interview for the FFM (SIFFM) [Trull 
and Widiger, 1997], and the Five-Factor Nonver
bal Personality Questionnaire (FF- NPQ) 
[Paunonen et al., 2001].  De Raad and Perugini [De Raad and Perugini, 2002] offer an excellent 
overview of these and other instru
ments to measure FFM dimensions. 
V. FFM VS. MBTI 
This section compares FFM with the Jungian typology, as measured by MBTI, with regard to their 
appropriateness in studying software developer
s participating in agile development.   
EMOTIONAL STABILITY (NEUROTICISM) 
Agile teams are conceived as complex adaptive 
systems, wherein ﬁdecentralized, independent 
individuals interact in self-organizing ways, guided 
by a set of simple, generative rules, to create 
innovative emergent resultsﬂ [Highsmith and Co
ckburn, 2001]. Agile development advocates a 
minimalist management strategy [Orr, 2002]. It stre
sses generative rules rather than inclusive 
rules. While working in conditions guided by inclusive rules, teams look for rules and practices 

that are laid down a priori for every situation. 
Teams working with generative rules on the other 
hand, depend upon individuals and their creativity
 to solve problems as and when they arise 
[Highsmith and Cockburn, 2001]. Interaction and communication are integral to working in agile 

teams.  Neuroticism or lack of ‚Emotional Stability™ is a
ssociated with traits such as anxiety, hostility, 
depression, self-consciousness, 
vulnerability, and impulsiveness [McCrae and John, 1992]. Meta-
analytic studies demonstrate a positive correl
ation between Emotional stability of employees and 
their job performances in jobs that involve consid
erable interpersonal relationships [Mount et al., 
1998]. Emotional Stability of software developers 
would be an important factor affecting their 
effectiveness in such teams.
 In general, Emotional Stabilit
y is expected to be positively 
associated with group performance [Driskell et al
., 1987].  Research on small groups suggests 
that successful teams have members with hi
gher Emotional Stability compared to those in 
unsuccessful teams [Kichuk and Wiesner, 1997]. 
 The empirical evidence is still mixed and is 
actively being researched. Emotional Stability is
 thus an important factor of interest to 
researchers who wish to study agile teams.  Un
fortunately, this factor is not included in the 
Jungian typology and, ther
efore, cannot be measured directly by MBTI.  
EXTRAVERSION 
Agile development relies on collaborative teamwork and close interaction among team members.  
Team members frequently switch roles and an individual developer may be required to perform a 
wide array of tasks from analysis and design to
 coding and testing.  Software development, in the 
agile approach, becomes a socio-technical process.  This also entails dealing with diverse 
stakeholders who often have conflicting
 interests. In agile teams, a climate that facilitates social 
inquiry and cogeneration of knowledge through open and honest collaborative efforts has to be 

fostered. Extraversion, which underscores peopl
e orientation and external focus, could be an 
important factor influencing the success of agile teams.   
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 64 
Extraversion measures warmth, 
gregariousness, assertiveness, acti
vity, excitement seeking, and 
positive emotions.  It is known to be positively 
associated with employee performance in jobs that 
have a large social component [Barrick and Mount, 1991; Tett et al., 1991].  Traits such as being 
sociable, talkative, energetic, and assertive cont
ribute to enhanced performance in such jobs 
[Barrick and Mount, 1991].  Extraversion is found to
 be positively related to self-efficacy [Thomas 
et al., 1996; Kichuk and Wiesner, 1997], which in
fluences performance. Extraversion, measured 
by MBTI, is clearly related to this dimension 
but is measured as a dichotomous preference 
between Introversion and Extraversion. The quest
ion of psychological ‚types™, measured as 
dichotomous types in MBTI is contested by re
searchers for lack of clear proof of bimodal 
distribution of MBTI scores [Bess and Harvey, 2002]
.  Though the recent versions of MBTI adopt 
a continuous dimensional scoring system, its devel
opers still insist on using 
dichotomous types in 
making assessment decisions [Bess and Harvey, 20
02]. Therefore, in the context of agile teams, 
Extraversion in FFM measured as a trait dimensi
on is more acceptable in view of its continuous 
dimensional approach. 
 AGREEABLENESS Collaborative teamwork forms the very foundation of
 success of an agile team.  Decision-making 
in agile development devolves down to the team leve
l.  The agile team is jointly responsible for 
various key aspects of the project, including the 
features to be implemented in each iteration, 
timeline for implementation, and quality assurance.  A key requirement for effective collaboration 
is trust and goodwill among team members.  Joint code ownership is another key practice in agile 
development.  Unlike in the traditional approach, where an individual developer ‚owns™ the code 

that he/she writes, in agile development the t
eam owns the code.  Thus, every agile team 
member has the right as well 
as responsibility to maintain t
he code.  Complying with coding 
standards and making the code understandable to ot
her developers are essential requirements to 
facilitate joint ownership of code.  Similar to the collectivist organizational culture practiced by 
Japanese corporations [Hofstede and Bond, 19
88], agile methodology encourages collective 
accountability.  This requires the team member
s to subordinate personal goals to that of the 
overall team objective.  The Agreeableness dime
nsion of FFM includes personal qualities of an 
individual, such as, altruism, compliance, modesty, and trust.  Thus, Agreeableness is likely to be 
a good predictor of success in the 
context of agile development.   
Agreeableness is associated with being courteous, 
trusting, forgiving, cooperative, and tolerant.  
Small group research findings suggest that succes
sful teams are associated with higher levels of 
Agreeableness than unsuccessful teams [Kichuk and Wiesner, 1997].  Agreeableness has also 
been found to be a predictor of success in jobs 
involving interpersonal relationships [Barrick and 
Mount, 1991].  The Thinking-Feeling dimension of MBTI captures some aspects of 

Agreeableness such as tough versus tender-mindedness.  But it does not directly measure 
interpersonal aspects of Agreeableness such 
as trust, altruism, and cooperativeness [McCrae 
and Costa, 1989]. Hence, in agile development 
that puts considerable em
phasis on interpersonal 
relationships and collaborative decision-making, Agreeableness aspect of FFM is a more 
complete and appropriate dimension to study than Thinking-Feeling dimension of Jungian 
typology. CONSCIENTIOUSNESS The agile development approach relies on the 
notion that competent and motivated software 
developers collaborating in an emergent setting ar
e capable of achieving significantly higher 
levels of productivity and quality compared to th
ese individuals working independently in a more 
structured environment with well-
defined roles and res
ponsibilities.  The 
agile team operates 
under a small set of guidelines and is allowed to adapt to changing demands.  The transition to 

agile development, therefore, involves changing from
 a deterministic mindset to an emergent one.  
An absence of rules to deal with every possibl
e situation could be discomforting to those who 
prefer a more orderly work environment.   
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 65 
The Conscientiousness dimension of FFM m
easures competence, 
order, dutifulness, 
achievement striving, self-discipli
ne, and deliberation. Of the five factors, Conscientiousness is 
considered to be the most stable dispositio
n [Judge et al., 1999]. In management research 
Conscientiousness has been found to predict intrinsic and extrinsic career success [Judge et al., 

1999]. It has been consistently found to be related 
to higher job performance [Barrick and Mount, 
1991]. Competent, organized, goal oriented, and persistent individuals (those scoring high on 
Conscientiousness) are likely to perform well.  Conscientiousness is related to Judging 

preference of Jungian typology, as both measure orderliness and self-discipline. Judging 
individuals may be construed as high in Conscientiousness and perceiving types as low in 
Conscientiousness. However, Conscientiousness 
is also correlated to Thinking/Feeling and 
Sensing/Intuiting dimensions of MBTI [Furnham, 1996].  Other sub-dimensions of 
Conscientiousness such as competence, dutifuln
ess, achievement striving, self-discipline and 
deliberation would be highly valued dispositions in 
the context of agile teams.  It is also worth 
noting that agile methodologies place a high premium on the levels of competence of software 
developers.  Thus, the Conscientiousness dimensi
on of FFM is likely to be a better predictor of 
performance in the context of agile development 
compared to the Judging-Perceiving dimension 
of the Jungian typology. 
OPENNESS TO EXPERIENCE 
An agile team comprises persons with diverse 
skill sets, exposing team 
members to a wide range 
of views and personalities.  Also, agile devel
opment encourages developers to be creative in 
finding solutions to abstract problems.  The reliance on generative rules to guide day-to-day 

operations places added emphasis on creativity, abilit
y, and motivation to learn.  A person with a 
high score on openness is likely to perform better in an agile team.  However clear empirical 
evidence is still lacking as researchers have used
 the factor less frequently in teams [Peeters, 
2006].  Openness to Experience is a measure of a person™s aptitude to explore new ideas.  It signifies 
being creative, introspective, inquisitive, and att
entive to inner feelings. Openness to Experience 
is found to be highly correlated to cognitive abilit
y, possibly indicating that
 it is capturing both 
ability to learn and motivation to learn [Barrick and Mount, 1991].  It is a good indicator of 
argumentativeness [Blickle, 1995; Bono et al., 2002] and performance on tasks requiring 

creativity or ability to deal with abstract probl
ems [Driskell et al., 1987; Kichuk and Wiesner, 
1997].  Intuition in the Jungian typology is related to
 the Openness dimension of FFM, as both are 
predictors of creativity.  Although Sensing/In
tuiting dimensions of MBTI and Openness to 
Experience of FFM are both related to taking in information, the contrast between Sensing and 

Intuiting types in MBTI does not capture the 
essence of openness. While Sensing and Intuiting 
people differ in the type of information they pr
efer, open individuals differ in the quantity of 
information they prefer over less open indivi
duals [McCrae and Costa, 1989]. In agile teams there 
is a need for team members to be receptive to la
rge amount of new information.  Minimal upfront 
design, as practiced in agile development, and 
the change readiness demanded by such practice 
require successful agile team members to scor
e high on openness to experience. The Sensing 
dimension of MBTI indicating a perceptual preference
 for hard facts does not map directly to the 
requirements of agile methodologies. Thus Op
enness to Experience of FFM is a more 
appropriate dimension to study agile software devel
opment than Intuition preference in Jungian 
typology. The Jungian typology and MBTI hav
e served researchers well in st
udying personality dimensions 
of IS personnel.  With the advent of agile me
thodologies, software development has become a 
socio-technical phenomenon.  While individual competence, in terms of technical knowledge, 
application domain knowledge, and experience, 
continues to be a necessary condition of 
success, it is no more 
sufficient to predict success in the 
new environment.  The ability of the 
software developer to work effectively in a team, to communicate and collaborate in an emergent 
environment, to subordinate individual goals to te
am objectives, and to share responsibilities as 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 66 
well as rewards with team members are critical 
determinants of success in this environment.  
Researchers interested in studying personalities of
 agile team members and their influence on 
successful software development are likely to 
benefit by using FFM, which covers a wider 
spectrum of personality dimensions that
 are relevant in this context.   
FFM-based instruments such as NEO-PI(R) [Costa and McCrae, 1992b]  have superior 
psychometric properties in terms of construct and predictive validity than MBTI [Furnham, 1996]. 
Unlike MBTI, which gives only a global picture of
 the four dimensions, FFM based instruments 
such as NEO-PI(R) provide comprehensive informat
ion on the sub-dimensions of the factors.  For 
individuals scoring the same over
all scores on a trait, differences could still be identified and 
examined among the sub-traits. It is also worth ment
ioning that FFM is the framework of choice in 
personality psychology to cumulate research fi
ndings [Digman, 1990; Co
sta and McCrae, 1992a; 
McCrae and John, 1992]. Thus, adoption of the FFM approach and related instruments will also 
help IS researchers to draw on the stream of research on personality psychology.  This will enrich 
the research on agile development.  In the following section we discuss how FFM may be helpful 
in investigating conflict in agile teams by pr
esenting related research from the fields of 
management and group research.
 VI. FFM AND AGILE TEAMS Software development requir
es effective collaboration among pe
rsons with diverse skill sets and 
from different backgrounds.  For example, a development team is likely to include technical 
professionals such as systems analysts, progr
ammers, and database and network designers.  
This team has to collaborate with end-users from various functional units and organizational 

levels in order to develop and deploy an informat
ion system.  Even though teams play a key role 
in the development of information systems, very
 few research studies have attempted to 
understand the software development team [Trimmer et al., 2002].   
The diversity of skills and background among team members is a potential cause of conflict in a 
software development team [Trimmer et al., 2002].  Further, the roles and expectations of 
individual team members need not always be aligned
 with each other.  For instance, the goals 
and expectations of systems analysts
 could be in direct conflict 
with those of end-users [Newman 
and Robey, 1992].  Similarly, the quality assuranc
e engineer often has an adversarial relationship 
with developers [Cohen et al., 2004].  Hence, 
the software development process is inherently 
prone to conflicts.   
The clear demarcation of roles and responsibilit
ies laid down in the traditional plan driven 
software development process, to some exten
t, helps minimize the scope of conflicts and 
contains its adverse effects.  Unfortunately, t
he nature of teamwork in agile methodologies calls 
for additional demands on the teams and its members and is likely to create additional stress, a 

potential source of conflict.  In agile development, self-organizing teams with embedded 
customers are vested with much higher respon
sibility and decision-making powers. Simple and 
generative design, minimal documentation, cont
inuous collaboration involved in developing code 
to functionalities prioritized by the customer repr
esentative, testing, refactoring, and frequent code 
releases all entail a highly stimulated and charged team environment. Practices such as pair 
programming, as in XP, also call for greater understanding among team members.   
While low to moderate levels of conflict may contribute to enhancing the performance of an agile 
team, high levels of conflict are likely to be detri
mental to team effectiveness [Domino et al., 
2003].  The abilities of team members to cope with conflict depend on their personalities [Trimmer 

et al., 2002].  Knowledge, skills, abilities, and ex
perience of members are the factors traditionally 
considered in forming software development teams. 
 Due to the elevated risk of conflicts in agile 
teams, the personalities of team members may be an additional factor to be considered while 

creating successful agile teams. 
 Unfortunately, very little research data are available to guide 
managers in scheduling successful agile teams ba
sed on the personalities of team members.  
Investigating the personality profiles of both succ
essful, and not so successful, teams within the 
organization would be a logical first step. With cumulative evidence, organizations could fine-tune 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 67 
their team-scheduling criteria.  This stream of 
research will immensely benefit from using the 
FFM.   Two measurement approaches may be used for meas
uring personality traits of team members, 
elevation and variability. Elevation of a trai
t involves measuring the aggregated or average 
individual scores within an IS project team. Imp
licit in this approach is the assumption that the 
high score of a team member on a particular trai
t would compensate for the low score of another 
team member. Elevation may also be measured as 
the proportion of high scoring individuals in a 
team or as the highest or lowest trait level in
 a team. This is based on the notion that a single 
individual could significantly affect a group [Barrick et al., 1998]. Variability indicates the 
homogeneity or heterogeneity of a particular trait in a team and is measured as the variance or 

standard deviation [Peeters, 2006]. Popular team 
outcome measures include supervisor/observer 
ratings or objective determination of quantity and
 quality of team productivity, team member 
satisfaction, and team viability. Team viability capt
ures the ability of a team to continue to perform 
as a unit [Barrick et al., 1998]. Personality traits of individuals are of interest in 
organizations both for their effect on individual job 
performance and on team processes/outcomes. While there have been several meta-analyses 
relating the big five personality dimensions a
nd individual job performance [Barrick and Mount, 
1991; Tett et al., 1991], the research on team composition in terms of personality traits and team 

performance is still in its nascenc
e. The effect of personality com
position of agile teams on team 
outcomes may be researched as an input-output approach using the big five dimensions.  Some 
of the research evidence generated using th
is approach from manag
ement and small group 
research is briefly presented here along with implications for agile teams. The findings should 
however be treated as tentative requiring empirical 
confirmation in the agile context as the effect 
of personality on the team processes and outco
mes is highly dependent upon the team task.  
Neuroticism (or its converse Emotional Stability) is
 an important factor in the team context. Low 
levels of Neuroticism is related to cooperation 
and relaxed team atmospher
e [Barrick et al., 1998], 
improved coordination, and stability within team [Neuman et al., 1999], task cohesion [Van 

Vianen and De Dreu, 2001] and team performance [Barrick et al., 1998; Kichuk and Weisner, 
1998]. A recent meta analysis however failed to s
upport the positive relationship of Emotional 
Stability with team performance [Peeters, 2006]. Vari
ability in this trait may not be conducive to 
team working as even one emotionally unst
able member could impair team performance by 
affecting cohesion and cooperation within team
 [Barrick et al., 1998; Neuman et al., 1999; Van 
Vianen and De Dreu, 2001]. However, evidence has 
been mixed in this regard with some studies 
finding support for such an effect [Neuman and Wright, 1999] while other studies reporting a 
positive effect of variability of Neuroticism 
on team performance [Mohammed and Angell, 2003]. 
Future research should help clarify the role 
of this important trait on team outcomes. 
Extraversion of team members is considered impor
tant for facilitating so
cial interactions of 
teamwork  as Extraverts stim
ulate discussion [Mohammed and An
gell, 2003] and create a climate 
for free expression [Barry and Stewart, 1997]. Too m
any extraverts in a team could however be 
harmful, as extraverts like teamwork primarily for t
he social interaction it affords. As extraverts 
tend to dominate, there could be team conflict. H
ence elevation of Extraversion in a team is 
expected to have a U-shaped relationship with in
termediate levels considered optimal for team 
performance [Barry and Stewart, 1997]. Variability of Extraver
sion is found to be positively related 
to performance [Neuman et al., 1999] though a rece
nt meta analysis could not substantiate this 
finding [Peeters, 2006]. Agile teams with moderate 
elevation of Extraversion with a mixture of 
Extroverts and Introverts could be a good co
mbination for optimal team performance.  
Agreeableness is an important personality trait 
particularly in the team
 context. Elevation in 
Agreeableness is expected to promote interpersonal attraction [Neuman and Wright, 1999], 
cooperation [Barrick et al., 1998; Neuman and Wright, 1999], open communication [Neuman and 
Wright, 1999], group cohesion [Barrick et al., 1998
], task cohesion, compliance with team goals 
[Van Vianen and De Dreu, 2001] and team perfor
mance [Barrick et al., 1998; Neuman and 
Wright, 1999;]. Variability in Agreea
bleness in teams is however c
onsidered detrimental to team 
performance [Peeters, 2006] as the presence
 of even one disagreeable team member could 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 68 
disrupt cooperation [Barrick et al., 1998]. In ag
ile teams presence of agreeable team members 
who are not very different from each other on 
this trait would be highly desirable.     
Conscientiousness is found to be an important predictor of individual job performance [Barrick 
and Mount, 1991]. In teams, elevation in Consci
entiousness promotes perseverance towards 
team goal completion [Neuman and Wright, 1999; Van Vianen and De Dreu, 2001], focus on and 
commitment to the task [Barry and Stewart, 1997]
 and team performance [Barrick et al., 1998; 
Neuman et al., 1999; Neuman and Wright, 1999; Van Vianen and De Dreu, 2001]. Lack of this 

trait may lead to social loafing [Neuman et al., 1999; Mohammed and Angell, 2003] while its 
variability in a team is expected to lower team 
performance [Barrick et al., 1998; Kichuk, 1999] as 
members high on this trait may detest loafing by low conscientious members. Conscientiousness 

is a positive personal trait for any work situations including agile teams.   
Openness to Experience is used less frequently by
 researchers in teams. Researchers expect a 
positive relationship between elevation of this 
trait and team performance, but the research 
results so far have been mixed [Neuman et al., 
1999; Van Vianen and De Dreu, 2001]. Also no 
clear benefits have been reported by any
 of the studies for either homogeneity or heterogeneity of 
this trait [Peeters, 2006].  
VII FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS 
Studying the effect of personality traits on agile te
am outcomes using an input-output approach is 
a logical first step to gain preliminary insights.  
As we gain a better understanding of the impact of 
personality on agile team performance, research
ers may use the input-process-output approach 
to get deeper insights about the intervening proces
ses, as personality impacts team processes to 
a greater extent than team outcomes.
  Some process variables of interest in this regard include 
conflict [Trimmer et al., 2002], cohesion [Zaccaro, 1991; Barrick et al., 1998], collaboration 
[Vinokur-Kaplan, 1995], commitment, backing up behavior [Porter, 2005], communication, social 

integration [Smith et al., 1994], group potency
 [de Jong et al., 2005], team-member exchange 
[Seers et al., 1995], and interpersonal affect [Barry and Stewart, 1997].  
As two individuals who score similarly on an FFM tr
ait may differ substantially on some of its sub-
traits, examining the differences in the effect
s of these sub-traits on team processes and 
outcomes is one possible research
 extension to the factor level studies.  For example, 
Agreeableness has sub-traits of Straightforw
ardness, Altruism, Compliance, Modesty, and 
Tender-Mindedness. Any seeming discrepancies in t
he relationships at the factor levels could 
possibly be traced to differences at the level of
 sub-traits.  Examining the interaction effects 
between factors is another logical extension.  Thou
gh such interactions offer great promise, the 
complexity inherent in such studies could be trul
y daunting.  Another interesting avenue to pursue 
is to design different measures for team leve
l trait measurement to supplement the existing 
measures of elevation and variability. 
As an illustration of current research in the 
FFM domain, we showcase a recent exemplary 
dissertation on personality composition of desi
gn teams by Miranda Peeters [Peeters, 2006].  
This study included a meta-analysis on the effect of
 elevation and variability of FFM traits on team performance.  The results of this meta-analysis suggest that elevation in Agreeableness and 
Conscientiousness positively relates to performance while variability in these traits negatively 

affects performance.  The moderating effect of 
the type of team (students versus professionals) 
on the trait-performance relationship was also 
separately examined.  The results show that 
performance of student teams is negatively 
impacted by both elevation and variability of 
Openness to Experience, while performance of 
professional teams is impacted negatively by only 
variability of this trait.  To capture the design proc
esses in multidisciplinar
y product design teams, 
a Design Behavior Questionnaire for Teams 
(DBQT) was designed and validated. DBQT 
measures twelve sub-categories of design 
behaviors and groups them under three broad 
categories of design creation, design planning and 
design cooperation.  The study also examined 
the differences in the effect of personality traits 
of team members in two different phases of the 
design process, that is, the concept phase and th
e elaboration phase.  Results suggest that 
elevation in Agreeableness mainly affects design processes in the concept phase (involving 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 69 
information gathering) while Conscientiousness a
ffects design processes in
 the elaboration phase 
(involving detailing and developing the design).  
VIII. CONCLUSION 
The need to deliver high-quality software in a cost
-effective and timely manner has ushered in a 
new breed of methods called agile or lightwei
ght methodologies. These methodologies place a 
premium on people and their collaboration to foster creativity and rely less on rigid processes.   
Proponents of agile methodologies claim that these methodologies not only deliver high quality 

software within time and budget, but also that the development process contributes to higher 
satisfaction among developers.  As we know fr
om group research, the effectiveness of a team 
depends, among other factors, on 
the personalities of the team members.  The abilities of 
individuals to collaborate effectively on pr
oblem solving tasks are influenced by their 
personalities.  Researchers interested in study
ing agile teams and their effectiveness need to 
understand how to evaluate the personalities of 
agile team members.  The fact that most 
programmers and many analysts are little accustomed to sustained collaborative efforts makes it 
all the more necessary for managers to appreciat
e the implications of personalities of IS 
personnel on their performance as agile team members. 
This paper reviewed the extant research on co
gnitive dispositions and personalities of IS 
developers to foster our understanding of this re
search stream.  It showed that scant attention 
has been paid to the issue of personality in softw
are development teams.  This finding is not 
surprising considering the fact that software deve
lopment is perceived to be an individual effort.  
This perception, however, is changing with the 
advent of agile methodologies.  The review also 
found that MBTI is the instrument of choice amo
ng researchers in this stream of research.   
Our analysis of the Jungian typology vis-à-vis t
he FFM, in the context of
 studying agile software 
teams, demonstrates that FFM provides a more 
comprehensive measure of personality. We also 
present FFM related research from management 
and discuss its implications on studying agile 
teams.  Though agile software development teams is 
the focus of interest in this paper, we feel 
that FFM could be the framework of choice to st
udy personality of IS personnel in the context of 
other contemporary IS phenomena where interperso
nal dynamics and personality variables are of 
interest.  IS team success, effectiveness of virt
ual software teams, user ac
ceptance of technology 
are some IS research areas that
 could potentially benefit from 
the adoption of FFM.  Use of FFM 
by IS researchers will also open 
up the opportunity to draw on the findings of a large and growing 
body of research on personality psychology that relies on FFM.  
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors thank Professor David Paradice for his insightful comments on an earlier version of 
this manuscript.  We are also thankful to t
he Associate Editor, whose comments significantly 
enhanced the quality of the manuscript.   
REFERENCES 
Ambler, S. W. (2004). 
The Object Primer: Agile Model-Driven Development with UML 2
, Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, p. 572. 
Bariff, M. L. and E. J. Lusk (1977). "Cogniti
ve and Personality Tests 
for the Design of 
Management Information Systems", 
Management Science
, (23)8, pp. 820-829. 
Barnes, P. (1975). Programmer Paranoia Revisited, 
Thirteenth Annual SIG/CPR Conference
, Toronto, Canada
, pp. 114-131. 
Barrick, M. R. and M. K. Mount (1991). "The Big-Five Personality Dimensions and Job-
Performance: a Meta-Analysis", 
Personnel Psychology
, (44)1, pp. 1-26. 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 70 
Barrick, M. R., et al. (1998). "Relating Member
 Ability and Personality to Work-Team Processes 
and Team Effectiveness", 
Journal of Applied Psychology
, (83)3, pp. 377-391. 
Barry, B. and G. L. Stewart (1997). "Compositi
on, Process, and Performance in Self-Managed 
Groups : The Role of Personality", 
Journal of Applied Psychology
, (82)1, pp. 62-78. 
Beck, K. (1999). "Embracing Change with Extreme Programming", 
IEEE Computer
, (32)10, pp. 
70-77. 
Beck, K., et al. (2001) "Manifesto for Agile Software Development", 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org
 (Current Dec 20, 2004). 
Benbasat, I. and R. N. Taylor (1978). "The Impact 
of Cognitive Styles on Information System 
Design", 
MIS Quarterly
, (2)2, pp. 43-54. 
Benbasat, I. and I. Vessey (1980). "Progra
mmer and Analyst Time/Cost Estimation", 
MIS Quarterly
, (4)2, pp. 31-43. 
Bess, T. L. and R. J. Harvey (2002). "Bimodal
 Score Distributions and the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator: Fact or Artifact?" 
Journal of Personality Assessment
, (78)1, pp. 176-186. 
Blickle, G. (1995). "Conceptualiz
ation and Measurement of Argumentativeness: A Decade Later", 
Psychological Reports
, (77), pp. 99-110. 
Boehm, B. and R. Turner (2004). 
Balancing Agility and Discipline: A Guide to the Perplexed
, Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley, p. 266. 
Bono, J. E., et al. (2002). "The Role of Pe
rsonality in Task and Relationship Conflict", 
Journal of 
Personality
, (70)2, pp. 311-344. 
Bostrom, R. P. and K. M. Kaiser (1981). Perso
nality Differences within Systems Project Teams: 
Implications for Designing Solving Centers, 
Eighteenth Annual Computer Personnel 
Research Conference
, Washington D.C.
, pp. 248-285. 
Bush, C. M. and L. L. Schkade (1985). 
"In Search of the Perfect Programmer", 
Datamation, (31)1, 
pp. 128-132. 
Caprara, G. V., et al. (1993). "The Big 5 Questionnaire - A New Questionnaire to Assess the 5 
Factor Model", 
Personality and Individual Differences
, (15)3, pp. 281-288. 
Capretz, L. F. (2003). "Personalit
y Types in Software Engineering", 
International Journal of 
Human-Computer Studies
, (58)2, pp. 207-214. 
Chrysler, E. (1978). "Some Basic Determinants of Computer Programming Productivity", 
Communications of the ACM
, (21)6, pp. 472-483. Clark, J. G., D. B. Walz and 
J. L. Wynekoop (2003). "Identifying 
Exceptional Application Software 
Developers: A Comparison of Students and Professionals", 
Communications of the 
Association for Information Systems
, (11)2, pp. 137-155. 
Cockburn, A. (2000). Characteri
zing People as Non-Linear, First Order Components in Software 
Development, 
4th International Multi-Conference on 
Systems, Cybernetics and Informatics
, Orlando, FL
. Cockburn, A. and J. Highsmith (2
001). "Agile Software Development 2: The People Factor", 
IEEE 
Computer
, (34)11, pp. 131-133. 
Cohen, C. F., et al. (2004). "Managing Conflict in Software Testing", 
Communications of the 
ACM, (47)1, pp. 76-80. 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 71 
Costa, P. T. and R. R. McCrae (1992a).
 "Four Ways Five Factors are Basic", 
Personality and 
Individual Differences
, (13)6, pp. 653-665. 
Costa, P. T. and R. R. McCrae (1992b). 
Revised NEO Personality Inventory and Five-Factor 
Inventory Professional Manual
, Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. 
Day, D. V. and S. B. Silverman (1989). "Per
sonality and Job Performance: Evidence of 
Incremental Validity", 
Personnel Psychology
, (42), pp. 25-36. 
de Jong, A., K. de Ruyter and M. Wetzels (2
005). "Antecedents and Consequences of Group 
Potency: A Study of Self-Managing Service Teams." 
Management Science
, (51)11, pp. 1610-
1625. De Raad, B. and M. Perugini, (eds.) (2002). Big 
Five Assessment, Ashland, OH: Hogrefe & Huber 
Publishers. Digman, J. M. (1990). "Personality Structur
e - Emergence of the Five-Factor Model", 
Annual 
Review of Psychology
, (41), pp. 417-440. 
Domino, M. A., et al. (2003). Conflict in Collaborative Software Development, 
ACM SIGCPR Conference
, Philadelphia, PA
, pp. 44-51. 
Driskell, J. E., R. Hogan and E. Salas (1987) 
"Personality and Group Performance" in Hendrick, 
C. (ed.) 
Group Processes and Inter-group Relations
, Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications,
 pp. 91-113. 
Erickson, J., K. Lyytinen and K. Siau (2005). "Agile Modeling, Agile Software Development, and 
Extreme Programming", 
Journal of Database Management
, (16)4, pp. 88-100. 
Evans, G. E. and M. G. Simkin (1989). "What
 Best Predicts Computer Proficiency?" 
Communications of the ACM
, (32)11, pp. 1322-1327. 
Furnham, A. (1996). "The Big Five versus the Big Four: The Relationship Between the Myers-
Briggs Type Indicator (MBTI) and NEO-PI Five Factor Model of Personality", 
Personality and 
Individual Differences
, (21)2, pp. 303-307. 
Gist, M. E., E. A. Locke and M. S. Taylor (1
987). "Organizational Behavior: Group Structure, 
Process, and Effectiveness", 
Journal of Management
, (13)2, pp. 237-257. 
Hackman, J. R. and C. G. Morris (1975) "Gro
up Tasks, Group Interaction Process and Group 
Performance Outcomes: A Review and Proposed 
Integration" in Berkowitz, L. (ed.) 
Advances 
in Experimental Social Psychology
, New York: Academic Press, (8),
 pp. 45-99. 
Hardiman, L. T. (1997). "Persona
lity Types and Software Engineers", 
IEEE Computer, (30)10, pp. 
10. Hendriks, A. A. J., W. K. B. Hofstee and B. De Raad (1999a). 
The Five Factor Personality 
Inventory: Professional Manual
, Lisse: Swets Test Publishers. 
Hendriks, A. A. J., W. K. B. Hofstee and B.
 De Raad (1999b). "The Five-Factor Personality 
Inventory (FFPI)", 
Personality and Individual Differences
, (27)2, pp. 307-325. 
Highsmith, J. (2002). 
Agile Software Development Ecosystems
, Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Highsmith, J. and A. Cockburn 
(2001). "Agile Software Development 1: The Business of 
Innovation", IEEE Computer, (34)9, pp. 120-127. 
Hofstede, G. and M. H. Bond (1988). "The C
onfucius Connection - From Cultural Roots to 
Economic-Growth", 
Organizational Dynamics
, (16)4, pp. 5-21. 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 72 
Hogan, R. C. and D. W. Champag
ne (1980) "Personal Style Invent
ory" in Pfeiffer, J.W. and 
Jones, J.E. (eds.) 
The 1980 Annual Handbook for Group Facilitators
, La Jolla, CA: University 
Associates.,
 pp. 89-99. 
Hogan, R. T. (1991) "Personality and Personalit
y Measurement." in Dunnette, M.D. and Hough, 
L.M. (eds.) 
Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology
, Mountain View, CA: 
Consulting Psychologists Press, Inc, 2nd ed.,
 pp. 873-919. 
Judge, T. A., et al. (1999). "The Big Five Personality Traits, General Mental Ability, and Career 
Success Across the Life Span", 
Personnel Psychology
, (52)3, pp. 621-652. 
Kaiser, K. M. and R. P. Bostrom (1982). "Persona
lity Characteristics of MIS Project Teams: An 
Empirical Study and Action-Research Design", 
MIS Quarterly
, (6)4, pp. 43-60. 
Keirsey, D. (1984). 
Please Understand Me: Character & Temperament Types
, Del Mar, CA: 
Prometheus Nemesis. 
Kichuk, S. L. (1999). "The Effect of General 
Cognitive Ability, Teamwork KSA's, and the "Big 
Five" Personality Factors on the Performance of
 Engineering Design Teams: Implications for 
the Selection of Teams", 
Dissertation Abstracts International
, (59)8-A, pp. 3077. 
Kichuk, S. L. and W. H. Weisner (1998). "Work Teams: Selecting Members for Optimal 
Performance", 
Canadian Psychology
, (39)1-2, pp. 23-32. 
Kichuk, S. L. and W. H. Wiesner (1997). "T
he Big Five Personality Factors and Team 
Performance: Implications for Select
ing Successful Product Design Teams", 
Journal of 
Engineering and Technology Management
, (14)3-4, pp. 195-221. 
Larkin, J. E. (1983). "The Psyc
hology of DP Professionals: Two Vi
ews; A Career Planning Tool", 
Computerworld
, (17), pp. 6-15. 
Larman, C. (2004). 
Agile & Iterative Development. A Manager's Guide
: Addison-Wesley Pearson 
Education. 
Lyons, M. (1985). "The DP Psyche", 
Datamation, (31), pp. 103-110. 
Mason, R. O. and I. I. Mitroff (1973). "A Program For Research on Management Information 
Systems." 
Management Science
, (19)5, pp. 475-487. 
Mawhinney, C. H. and A. L. Lederer (1988). "V
alidation of a Jungian Instrument for MIS 
Research", 
ACM SIGCPR Computer Personnel
, (11)3, pp. 2-9. Mayer, D. B. and A. W. Stalnaker (1968). Sele
ction and Evaluation of Computer Personnel - The 
Research History of SIG/CPR, 
23rd ACM Conference
, pp. 657-670. 
McCrae, R. R. and P. T. Costa (1989). "Reinterpr
eting the Myers-Briggs Type Indicator from the 
Perspective of the Five Fa
ctor Model of Personality", 
Journal of Personality
, (57)1, pp. 17-40. 
McCrae, R. R. and O. P. John (1992). "An In
troduction to the Five-Factor Model and its 
Applications", 
Journal of Personality
, (60)2, pp. 175-215. 
Moad, J. (1994). "Psych. Tests 
for MIS Staff: Is This Nuts?" 
Datamation, (40)13, pp. 27-29. 
Mohammed, S. and L. C. Angell (2003). "Personalit
y Heterogeneity in Teams: Which Differences 
Make a Difference for Team Performance?" 
Small Group Research
, (34)6, pp. 651-677. Moore, J. E. (1991). Personality Characterist
ics of Information Sy
stems Professionals, 
Conference on SIGCPR
, Athens, Georgia
, pp. 140-155. 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 73 
Mount, M. K., M. R. Barrick and G. L. Stewar
t (1998). "Five-Factor Model of Personality and 
Performance in Jobs Involving Interpersonal Interactions", 
Human Performance
, (11)2-3, pp. 
145-165. Myers, I. B., et al. (1998). 
Manual: A Guide to the Development and Use of the Myers-Briggs 
Type Indicator
, Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press. 
Nerur, S., R. Mahapatra and G. Mangalaraj 
(2005). "Challenges of Migrating to Agile 
Methodologies." 
Communications of the ACM
, (48)5, pp. 73-78. 
Neuman, G. A., S. H. Wagner and N. D. Christ
iansen (1999). "The Relationship Between Work-
Team Personality Composition and the Job Performance of Teams", 
Group & Organization 
Management
, (24)1, pp. 28. 
Neuman, G. A. and J. Wright (1999). "Team Effe
ctiveness: Beyond Skills and Cognitive Ability", 
Journal of Applied Psychology
, (84)3, pp. 376-389. 
Newman, M. and D. Robey (1992). "A Social Pr
ocess Model of User-Analyst Relationships", 
MIS Quarterly
, (16)2, pp. 249-266. 
Orr, K. (2002). "CMM Versus Agile Developm
ent: Religious Wars and Software Development", 
Agile Project Management Advisory Service
, (3)7, pp. 29. Paunonen, S. V., M. C. Ashton and 
D. N. Jackson (2001). "Nonverbal 
Assessment of the Big Five 
Personality Factors", European Journal of Personality
, (15)1, pp. 3-18. 
Peeters, M. (2006). 
Design Teams and Personality: Effects of Team Composition on Processes 
and Effectiveness
, unpublished doctoral dissertation, Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, 
Eindhoven, Netherlands, p. 161. 
Porter, C. O. L. H. (2005). "Goal Orientation:
 Effects on Backing Up Behavior, Performance, 
Efficacy, and Commitment in Teams." 
Journal of Applied Psychology
, (90)4, pp. 811-818. 
Rasch, R. H. and H. L. Tosi (1
992). "Factors Affecting Software Developers' Performance: An 
Integrated Approach", 
MIS Quarterly
, (16)3, pp. 395-413. 
Ridgeway, C. L. (1983). 
The Dynamics of Small Groups
, New York: St. Martin's. 
Rutherfoord, R. H. (2001). Using Personality 
Inventories to Help Fo
rm Teams for Software 
Engineering Class Projects, 
6th Annual Conference on Innovation and Technology in 
Computer Science Education (ITICSE)
, Canterbury, U.K.
, pp. 73-76. Seers, A., M. M. Petty and J. F. Cashman 
(1995). "Team-Member Exchange Under Team and 
Traditional Management." 
Group & Organization Management
, (20)1, pp. 18. 
Shneiderman, B. (1980). 
Software Psychology: Human Factors in Computer and Information 
Systems
, Cambridge, MA: Winthrop Publishers Inc. 
Sitton, S. and G. Chmelir (1984). "T
he Intuitive Computer Programmer", 
Datamation, (30), pp. 137-141. Smith, D. C. (1989). "The Personality of 
the Systems Analyst: An Investigation", 
ACM SIGCPR Computer Personnel
, (12)2, pp. 12-14. 
Smith, K. G., et al. (1994). "Top Management Team Demography and Process: The Role of 
Social Integration and Communication." 
Administrative Science Quarterly
, (39)3, pp. 412-438. 
Teague, J. (1998). Personality Type, Career Prefer
ence and Implications for Computer Science 
Recruitment and Teaching, 
Third Australasian Conference on Computer Science Education
, Australia
, The University of Queensland,
 pp. 155-163. 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 74 
Tett, R. P., D. N. Jackson and M.
 Rothstein (1991). "Personality 
Measures as Predictors of Job 
Performance: A Meta-Analytic Review", 
Personnel Psychology
, (44), pp. 703-742. 
Thomas, P., K. S. Moore and K. S. Scott (1996
). "The Relationship Between Self-Efficacy for 
Participating in Self-Managed Work Groups an
d the Big-Five Personality Dimensions", 
Journal of Occupational Behavior
, (17)4, pp. 349-362. 
Trimmer, K. J., M. A. Domino and J. E. Blant
on (2002). "The Impact of Personality Diversity on 
Conflict in ISD Teams", 
Journal of Computer Information Systems
, pp. 7-14. 
Trull, T. J. and T.
 A. Widiger (1997). 
Structured Interview for the Five-Factor Model of Personality
, Odessa, FL: Psychological Assessment Resources. 
Turk, D., R. France and B. Rumpe (2005). "Ass
umptions Underlying Agile Software-Development 
Processes", 
Journal of Database Management
, (16)4, pp. 62-87. 
Van Vianen, A. E. M. and C. K. W.
 De Dreu (2001). "Personality in Teams: Its Relationship to 
Social Cohesion, Task Cohesi
on, and Team Performance." 
European Journal of Work & 
Organizational Psychology
, (10)2, pp. 97-120. 
Vinokur-Kaplan, D. (1995). "Treatment Teams That 
Work (and Those That Don't): An Application 
of Hackman's Group Effectiveness Model to Interd
isciplinary Teams in Psychiatric Hospitals." 
Journal of Applied Behavioral Science
, (31)3, pp. 303-327. 
Volkema, R. J. and R. H. Gorman (1998). "The 
Influence of Cognitive-Based Group Composition 
on Decision-Making Process and Outcome", 
Journal of Management
, (35)1, pp. 105-121. 
White, K. B. (1984a). "MIS Project Teams: An 
Investigation of Cognitive Style Implications", 
MIS Quarterly
, (8)2, pp. 95-101. 
White, K. B. (1984b). "A Preliminary Investigat
ion of Information Systems Team Structures", 
Information & Management
, (7)6, pp. 331-335. 
Zaccaro, S. J. (1991). "Nonequivalent Associat
ions Between Forms of Cohesiveness and Group-
Related Outcomes: Evidence for Multidimensionality." 
Journal of Social Psychology
, (131)3, 
pp. 387-399. 
Zmud, R. W. (1979). "Individual Differences and MIS 
Success: A Review of Empirical Literature", 
Management Science
, (25)10, pp. 966-979. 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
VenuGopal Balijepally
 is Assistant Professor of MIS at t
he Prairie View A&M University, Texas. 
He received his Ph.D. in Information Systems from
 the University of Texas at Arlington and Post 
Graduate Diploma in Management (MBA) from t
he Management Development Institute, Gurgaon, 
India. His current research in
terests include software development, social networks, knowledge 
management, and research methodologies. His research publications appear in the 
Communications of the ACM
 and in various conference proceedings such as the 
AMCIS, HICSS
 and the DSI.   RadhaKanta Mahapatra 
is Associate Professor of Informat
ion Systems at the University of 
Texas at Arlington. He holds a Ph.D. in Inform
ation Systems from Texas A&M University. His 
research interests include software development methodologies, knowledge management, data 
mining, web-based end-user training, and IT management. His research publications appear in 
such journals as 
MIS Quarterly
, Communications of the ACM
, Decision Support Systems
, Information & Management
, and Journal of Database Management
. He received the 
Distinguished Research Publication Award 
and the 
Distinguished Professional Publication Award 
from the College of Business Administration of
 the University of Texas at Arlington. 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 18, 2006), 55-75 75 
Sridhar Nerur 
is Assistant Professor of Information Sy
stems at the University of Texas at 
Arlington. He received his PhD from the University
 of Texas at Arlington. His research interests 
include software development, citation analysis, r
euse, maintenance, and philosophical aspects 
of systems development. He has published in 
the MIS Quarterly, Communications of the ACM, 
Communications of the AIS, Information Sy
stems Management, Information Management & 
Computer Security
, and in various conference proceedings. He is an Associate Editor of the 
European Journal of Information Systems.
  Copyright © 2006 by the Association for Information 
Systems. Permission to make digital or hard 
copies of all or part of this work for personal or cla
ssroom use is granted without 
fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for pr
ofit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and full citation 
on the first page. Copyright for components of this work owned by others than the Association for 
Information Systems must be honored. Abstracting with credi
t is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires 
prior specific permission and/or fee. Request permission 
to publish from: AIS Administrative
 Office, P.O. Box 2712 Atlanta, GA, 
30301-2712 Attn: Reprints or via e-
mail from  ais@aisnet.org
    .  ISSN: 1529-3181
                                    
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 
Joey F. George 
Florida State University 
AIS SENIOR EDITORIAL BOARD 
Jane Webster 
Vice President Publications  
Queen™s University 
Joey F. George 
Editor, CAIS                                
Florida State University 
Kalle Lyytinen 
Editor, JAIS Case Western Reserve University 
Edward A. Stohr 
Editor-at-Large Stevens Inst. of Technology 
Blake Ives                                
Editor, Electronic Publications  
University of Houston 
Paul Gray 
Founding Editor, CAIS 
Claremont Graduate University 
CAIS ADVISORY BOARD   
Gordon Davis 

University of Minnesota 
 Ken Kraemer Univ. of Calif. at Irvine M. Lynne Markus  
Bentley College 
Richard Mason 
Southern Methodist Univ.   
Jay Nunamaker                    
University of Arizona 
Henk Sol 
Delft  University 
Ralph Sprague 
University of Hawaii 
Hugh J. Watson University of Georgia  
CAIS SENIOR EDITORS  
Steve Alter U. of San Francisco 
Chris Holland 
Manchester Bus. School 
Jerry Luftman 
Stevens Inst.of Technology 
CAIS EDITORIAL BOARD   
Erran Carmel 

American University 
Fred Davis Uof Arkansas, Fayetteville 
Gurpreet Dhillon 
Virginia Commonwealth U 
Evan Duggan 
U of Alabama 
Ali Farhoomand University of Hong Kong 
Jane Fedorowicz 
Bentley College 
 Robert L.  Glass Computing Trends 
Sy Goodman  
Ga. Inst.  of Technology 
Ake Gronlund 
University of Umea 
Ruth Guthrie California State Univ. 
Alan Hevner 
Univ. of South Florida 
Juhani Iivari 
Univ. of Oulu K.D. Joshi Washington St Univ. 
Michel Kalika 
U. of Paris Dauphine 
Jae-Nam Lee 
Korea University 
Claudia Loebbecke 
University of Cologne 
Sal March Vanderbilt University 
Don McCubbrey  
University of Denver 
Michael Myers 
University of Auckland 
Dan Power  
University of No. Iowa 
Kelley Rainer 
Auburn University 
Paul Tallon 
Boston College 
Thompson Teo 
Natl. U. of Singapore 
Craig Tyran 
W Washington Univ. 
Upkar Varshney  
Georgia State Univ. 
Chelley Vician 
Michigan Tech Univ. 
Doug Vogel  
City Univ. of Hong Kong 
Rolf Wigand  
U. Arkansas, Little Rock 
Vance Wilson 

U. Wisconsin, Milwaukee 
Peter Wolcott U. of Nebraska-Omaha 
Ping Zhang 
Syracuse University 
 DEPARTMENTS 
Global Diffusion of the Internet.  Editors: Peter Wolcott and Sy Goodman 
Information Technology and Systems.  
Editors: Alan Hevner and Sal March  
Papers in French 
Editor: Michel Kalika 
Information Systems and Healthcare 
Editor: Vance Wilson  
ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL                                                                              
Eph McLean  

AIS, Executive Director 

Georgia State University 
Reagan Ramsower 
Publisher, CAIS 

Baylor University 
Chris Furner CAIS Managing Editor 

Florida State Univ. 
Cheri Paradice 
CAIS Copyeditor 

Tallahassee, FL 
   