 Opening up of the Software Industry: 
The Case of SAP
  Ali Farhoomand 
Professor, School of Business, University of Hong Kong 
Director, Asia Case Research Centre, University of Hong Kong 
ali@business.hku.hk 
  Abstract 
 With globalisation, outsourcing, changing 
regulations and rapid technological innovations, 
companies are forced to embrace more agile business 
architecture.  This in turn calls for enterprise 

applications that are based on open standards, simple 

to implement, and easy to modify and upgrade.  In 

response to these structural changes in the market and 
customer demands, and facing fierce competition in a 
saturated market, SAP had to rethink its strategic 

position. This case discusses how SAP transformed 

itself by turning its proprietary software products to an 

open development and integration platform so that 

customers could modify them to suit their specific 

needs.  The implications of this new strategy for 
software industry as a whole are discussed. 
 1. Introduction 
 Companies in 2000s were increasingly challenged 
to devise and implement new business models in order 
to adapt to the changing economic landscape. This 
entailed putting in place enterprise applications that 

were open-source, simple to implement and easy to 

integrate within and without the organizational bounds. 

Because traditional enterprise resource planning (ERP) 
systems were generally complex, proprietary and 
difficult to install, ERP systems providers had to 

reposition themselves strategically. SAP, the leading 

company in this space, faced this challenge by 

transforming itself from a closed source software 

developer to an open source software integrator. By 

opening up its proprietary software products as an open 
development and integration platform, SAP would 
allow its customers to modify their ERPs to suit their 

specific needs. This new strategy, however, would 

fundamentally affect the Company™s business 
architecture. In other words, SAP had to rethink the 
totality of how it would define its value proposition, 

identify and target its customers, deploy its resources, 

configure its business processes, manage its alliances, 
and develop and maintain its profit and growth 

engines.  
 2. Brief history of SAP 
 SAP was founded in 1972 by several former IBM 
software engineers. Led by Hasso Plattner, the 
company started its business in Walldorf, a small town 
outside Frankfurt, Germany. SAP was the vanguard of 
developing application systems which aimed to 
automate the entire enterprise operations rather than 

focusing on individual business functions. Such 

application packages were later referred to as 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems in the 

software market. Many large businesses were changed 

by this new breed of software that seamlessly 

integrated all the vital information flowing through 

companies. 
In 1973, SAP launched its first major product, R/1, 
an instantaneous accounting transactions processing 
system. Six years later, SAP successfully developed 
R/2, the successor to R/1. The mainframe software 

package was able to link external databases and 

communications systems. In the late 1980s, SAP went 

public. Around the same time, Plattner began to create 

the next version of the software package that would be 

able to work in the decentralised computing 

environment. In 1992, as sales of its R/2 mainframe 

software began to slow down, SAP introduced R/3, the 

client/serverŒbased ERP system. In 1998, SAP was 

listed on the New York Stock Exchange (NYSE). In 
the same year, Henning Kagermann, a former 
academic in theoretical physics and a veteran executive 

of the software company, was named co-chairman 

along with Plattner. This also marked the pinnacle of 

the German software company in the 1990s, as it was 

considered by many as a second Microsoft [1]. 
 3. The revolution in the back-office 
 Before ERP, companies spent a fortune on tailor-
made application systems to support their back-office 
functions such as distribution, accounting, human 
 resources (HR) and manufacturing. Companies spent 
millions of dollars to integrate their systems, eg, 

building highly customised interfaces between 
application systems and their individual databases, and 
frequent patching and data cleanup to ensure data 

integrity and consistency. It was ERP that came to 
change how large companies™ business operated in the 
1990s. 
ERP was a successor to materials requirement 
planning (MRP) systems, which were designed to 
automate and manage production scheduling, including 

ordering the appropriate materials. In the 1980s, with 

the introduction of ERPs, separate MRP systems were 

no longer required, as their main features and functions 

were incorporated in this new breed of enterprise 
application. ERP could support a broad range of 
activities in businesses, including product planning, 

parts purchasing, maintaining inventories, interacting 
with suppliers, providing customer service and tracking 
orders. ERP could also include application modules for 

the finance and HR aspects of a business. 
Building a single software program that served the 
multiple needs of various departments was a 

tremendous challenge, as each department often had its 

own IT system designed specifically to address its 

needs. ERP did just thatŠit combined all the diverse 

needs of an enterprise™s departments together into a 

single, integrated software program that operated on a 

single database. Thus, the various departments could 
share information and communicate with each other 
more easily. Such an integrated approach could yield a 

tremendous payback if the software was correctly 

installed.  
In the pre-ERP era, after a customer issued an order, 
the details of an order were often entered and re-

entered into different departmental IT systems. As 

there were multiple data entry and re-entry steps 

required to capture an order™s details into different IT 

systems, errors were often rife. Meanwhile, it was 

difficult to truly know what the status of the order was 

at any given point in time. For instance, the finance 
department could not get into the warehouse™s IT 
systems to see whether the item had been shipped or 

not. 
With ERP, there was no longer a need for stand-
alone systems in finance, HR, manufacturing and 

warehousing. Now a single unified application made 

up of various modules could replace all the old stand-

alone systems. The modules were tightly integrated 

and finance could now look into the warehouse to 

check if an order had been shipped.  
Many companies would need months, or even 
years, to implement the entire ERP package with a 

process that often involved five to six times the 

original cost of the software. These often included the 
costs of hiring external consultants to conduct large 
scale reengineering in a number of business processes 

and organisation structures, and to facilitate the 
implementation of such changes within an enterprise.  
 4. Impact of ERP on enterprises 
 BASF Aktiengesellschaft was one of the successful 
SAP implementation stories. As a German-based 

chemical company and a long-time customer of SAP 
since the 1980s, the company had more than 82,000 

employees worldwide and 
sales of US$45 billion in 
2004. The chemical company leveraged SAP to form a 
core platform to link up various functions of the 
company, from finance to procurement, and from 
production to warehousing and inventory. After more 

than two decades, with substantial savings and added 

values, BASF continued to invest in SAP to 

standardise the processes of all divisions within the 

enterprise [2]. 
Although an ERP system was designed to be an off-
the-shelf package, companies often found the system 

overly complex to install and run. In particular, ERPs 

often changed how people worked and how businesses 
were run. For instance, Dell Computer attempted to 
implement the SAP R/3 system to support its 

manufacturing operations in 1994, and had to abandon 

the project in 1996. Terry Kelley, Chief Information 

Officer at Dell, commented: ﬁSAP was too monolithic 

to be altered for changing business needs – Over the 

two years we were working with SAP, our business 

model changed from a worldwide focus to a segmented 

regional focus. [3]ﬂ 
There were many other leading corporations besides 
Dell that also took on SAP projects and quit in the 

middle of their implementation phase. Some were able 
to exit without much financial setback. Others were not 
so lucky. For instance, Kmart attempted to implement 

a SAP system in the 1990s, but it had to write off the 

US$130 mill
ion project that never got off the ground 
[4]. 
In addition to the overall impact on a company™s 
business model, overlooking its process and people 

aspects in implementing a SAP project could also be 

devastating. In 1997, Nestle USA, the US$8.1 billion 

subsidiary of the Swiss consumer goods giant, 

embarked on a project to install SAP™s ERP system to 
centralise several of its divisions. The company rushed 
to install the software to meet the Y2K deadline, 

ignoring those that were affected by the new processes 

as well as the organisational structures embedded in 

the SAP system. Subsequently, users rebelled, morale 

sank and employee turnover increased. In June 2000, 

Nestle USA halted the project and restarted from 
 scratch. By the time it was 
completed in 2003, the total 
time the project took was six years and the cost had 
escalated to US$210 million. Nestle USA claimed, 
however, that the project was worth the effort, as it 
saved the company US$325 million. 
Based on their implementation experiences, a 
number of consultants suggested that the only way to 

reap full benefits of the software was to submit to SAP 

by making minimal changes on the software. 
Nonetheless, Thomas Davenport, a professor at Boston 

University, warned that companies might lose their 

distinct characters and competitive advantages by 

moulding themselves into the models defined by SAP 

[5]. To address such issues, some companies adopted a 

hybrid strategy by customising the ERP software at the 
code level. However, such an approach often posed a 
high risk of maintaining and upgrading the 

modifications, particularly while incorporating the 
changes with new releases of the software packages. 
Instead of taking an ERP package in its entirety, 
some companies adopted a best-of-breed approach, in 
which separate software packages (modules from 

major ERP vendors or products from niche software 

makers) were selected for each process or function and 

then pieced together using custom-bu
ilt interfaces. 
According to a survey conducted by Harvard Business 

School (HBS), 60% of the respondents indicated their 

companies had adopted this particular approach. A 

successful case in point was Dell Computer [3]. In 
1997, a year after abandoning the SAP project, Dell 
assembled its own ERP system by selecting specific 

functionalities from a wide range of packages, 

including i2 Technologies (for materials management), 

Oracle (for order management), and Glovia (for 

manufacturing such as inventory control and 

warehouse management).  

 5. Downfall of the ERP market 
 By 1999, the ERP market was losing its glamour. 
SAP™s major competitors, like PeopleSoft, were in 
disarray. SAP™s share price plummeted for the first 
time since its initial public offering in the US in 1998. 

This was partly owing to the high failure rate (over 

50%) in ERP implementations, according to a survey 

conducted by HBS. Although the definition of failure 
was arguable, it mainly referred to the user acceptance 
of process and organisation changes, projects going 
over budget, time delays, lack of appropriate skills, and 

technical failure.  
Besides the negative implementation experiences, 
customers found that most ERP vendors (and their 

products) were misaligned with the new technical and 
business requirements under the networked 
environment based on the internet. In terms of the 
technical requirements, SAP was slow to make its 

software web enabled. The company was confident 

that its R/3 product could cope with any form of 

distributed computing introduced by the internet and 

hence it (and many other ERP vendors) was reluctant 
to adapt the web-based computing architecture. 
Moreover, as the original design of ERP systems was 

aimed to improve only the internal operations of an 

enterprise, typical ERP software lacked the capabilities 

to link up companies, suppliers and customers 

operating in an inter-connected environment. In terms 

of the business requirements, the changing model of 

the business of enterprise applications software was 

challenged by an alternative offered by web 

computing. Traditionally, ERP vendors assumed that a 

small proportion of the workforce (around 10% of the 

workforce in a large global company) would access the 
application. Hence, the licence fees were often set at a 
high level. With the arrival of the internet and web 

computing, however, a different approach was made 

possible. Applications could reside on servers and be 

accessible to anyone through a browser running on any 

web-enabled device. In light of this change, a volume 

pricing model was now preferable to the high licence 

fee model. 
For these reasons, traditional ERP players were 
inadequate to help companies become e-businesses. 

Customers were forced to source various components 
from a number of software players, integrate the 
disparate software products and form links to the ERP 

systems. These component software makers included 
Ariba and Commerce One for procurement; IBM for e-

commerce platform; and Siebel and Onyx for sales and 

front-office functions. As some industry analysts 

described, this was almost like having a second 

ﬁbackboneﬂ on top of the current ERP system and IT 
infrastructure. This so-called enterprise application 

integration (EAI) took up half of the time and 

resources of many corporate IT departments [6]. 
SAP decided to catch up with all the changes in the 
e-business era. In late 1999, SAP launched a web-
based version of its flagship product, called 

mySAP.com. It aimed to become a full-fledged, 

business-to-business portal that would support online 

transactions and other services arising in the networked 
economy. To strengthen its e-business capabilities, 

SAP invested in Commerce One through its US 

subsidiary, SAP Markets, to obtain a minority stake of 

the e-procurement software company. In 2001, SAP 

acquired enterprise portal software provider Top Tier 

Software, and renamed it SAP Portals. Meanwhile, 
SAP raised its Commerce One ownership stake to 
around 20%. 
 In the early 2000s, the IT industry experienced the 
worst economic downturn in history triggered by the 
burst of the dotcom bubble. Although its revenues 
grew remarkably from 1997 to 2000, SAP began to 
suffer from a lack of revenue gain and a decrease in net 

income in 2001 and 2002 [see Figure 1 and 2]. Facing 
these industry-wide difficulties, SAP improved its 
products by integrating key offerings from its 

subsidiaries, SAP Portals and SAP Markets, into its 
mySAP product. As a number of newly founded 

software companies collapsed during the economic 

downturn, customers once again turned to established 

software vendors that offered integrated and 

sustainable products. These new requirements certainly 

played to SAP™s traditional strengths.  
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Figure 1. SAP™s revenue between 1997-2002  
(Euro million)
1.     
   
   
  
 
 Figure 2. SAP™s net income between 1997-2002 
(Euro million)
2.   6. Industry dynamics after the dotcom 
crash 
 After three years of declining technology sales [see 
Figure 3], the global IT industry returned to growth in 
2003 and the outlook seemed positive. According to a 
study conducted by McKinsey & Co. in 2004 on IT 
                                                       
 1 Source: Adopted from SAP™s annual report from 2001 to 2002. 
2 Source: Adopted from SAP™s annual report from 2001 to 2002. 
spending trends, chief information officers (CIOs) 
from the Fortune 500 companies said they would 

increase their IT budgets. Nonetheless, they would 
spend money quite differently. CIOs expected to get 
more out of their technology investments. Companies 

were more concerned about the value of IT and 
enforced stringent rules and guidelines for IT spending. 
For instance, procurement departments became more 

involved in the IT purchasing process. Many were 
applying formal bidding mechanisms that required 

vendors to go through a competitive process in getting 

the complex deals. In addition, CEOs became more 

demanding in the return on investment (ROI) on new 

technology spending. As such, CIOs were now 

required to develop stronger business cases to support 
their investments, and to tie the overall performance of 
IT to their personal performance measures. 

Subsequently, the growth of overall IT spending was 
expected to be more modest from 2003 onwards 
(around 4% to 6%). This was far below the double-

digit figures of the heydays in the 1990s [7] [8] [9] 

[10]. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
 
   
 
 Figure 3. Aggregate capital expenditure of US 
companies on IT (US$ Billion), adopted from [7]. 
 The IT industry was also considered to be in the 
middle of an eight-year period of ﬁtechnology 
digestionﬂ, explained below. Hence, senior managers 
were reluctant to make any major technology 

investment. According to Forrester Research, 

investment in IT had continued to increase in the 60 

years since 1956. In the US, the ratio of IT investment 

to gross domestic product (GDP) increased from 1% in 
the mid-20
th century to more than 4% at the beginning 
of the 21
st century. However, such growth was not 
always constant. In fact, it was characterised by 
periods (eight to ten years) of fast growth followed by 
equally long periods of slow or negative growth. Based 
01000
2000
3000
4000
5000
6000

7000
8000
199719981999200020012002
Revenue
0100
200
300
400
500

600
700
199719981999200020012002
Net Income
130147166188 159 1541997199819992000 2001 2002130147166188 159 1541997199819992000 2001 2002130147166188 159 1541997199819992000 2001 2002First annual decline since 1958 
 on previous historical data, three growth periods were 
identified in the IT industry corresponding to the 

introduction of new technologies [see Figure 3]. The 
first period saw the introduction of mainframe 
computing between the mid-1950s and mid-1960s. The 

second period introduced personal computing from the 
mid-1970s to the mid-1980s. The third period 
introduced network computing between the early 

1990s and the early 2000s. In these periods, companies 
invested in new technologies often on faith and without 

strong links to ROI measurements. Consequently, 

companies went many years before fully exploiting the 

technologies. During these ﬁtechnology digestionﬂ 

periods, companies often focused on changing the 

relevant business processes and the corresponding 
organisational structures to lower spending on new 
technologies. These spending lags were also noted by 

researchers from MIT™s Centre for eBusiness. Based 
on large-scale statistical results, they cited that 
companies often implemented new technologies years 

before they could get value from them. This was 

particularly true in terms of infrastructural investments 

[11]. 

 6.1. New trends and structural changes in the 
software industry 
 Software spending was expected to recover and 
reach US$325 billion by
 2008. The growth
 rate of the 
market was expected to be between 3% and 7% 
annually. In general, the software market was 

categorised into the following two groups: system 

software (a layer of software that operated between IT 

hardware and application software and accessed only 
by IT staff such as system administrators) and 

application software (operated by business users in 
their respective functions or processes) 
[7][10][12][13]. 
In the short term, software spending would be 
driven by systems software (eg, systems management, 

storage, database and security). Systems management 
software would mainly be purchased to monitor and 
manage distributed computing resources such as PCs. 

The purchase of storage and database software was 

driven by the increasing demand for data storage 

capacity owing to Sarbanes-Oxley
3 compliance and 
increasing needs of customer data. Lastly, security 
applications would aim to mitigate risks such as data 
leakage in the networked environment [13]. 
                                                       
 3 The Sarbanes-Oxley (SOX) Act administered by the Securities and 
Exchange Commission in the US was devised to regulate corporate 
financial records by defining the type of financial information that 
must be recorded and reported. 
With regard to the spending on application 
software, companies were expected to look for specific 
point solutions (eg, business intelligence, portals, 
enterprise content management and collaboration) to 
enhance the effectiveness of their business processes. 

Consequently, the sale of traditional enterprise 
application packages (eg, customer relationship 
management (CRM), enterprise resource planning 

(ERP) and supply chain management (SCM) systems 
developed by players such as SAP and Oracle) was 

expected to be slow. This slowing down would be a 

result of the massive organisational impact that the 

implementation of these enterprise software packages 

had in the 1990s and early 2000s. Moreover, CRM, 

ERP and SCM applications were challenged by 
increasingly complex integration issues. Historically, 
these enterprise applications were stitched together via 

some loose interfaces. As many of these enterprise 
software packages were developed by using 
proprietary codes, they became highly incompatible 

with each other if developed by different vendors. 

Companies were therefore not able to leverage these 

application packages as a holistic solution for their 

enterprises. 
As a result, purchases in relation to the integration 
of the various enterprise applications were expected to 

rise. In particular, as the concept of service-oriented 

architecture (SOA) Œ an approach that emphasised 

code reuse and business modelling Œ would take hold 
in enterprise computing in the long term, associated 
technologies such as Web services would become the 

main drivers of software spending. As Web services 

would form an open-system platform, it would enable 

the diverse application software systems to be melded 

into a holistic solution. This new trend would then 

allow enterprise software vendors to adopt a more 

integrated approach and would give them an extended 

scope of offerings. In turn, these vendors were 

expected to transform themselves from mere product 

vendors to comprehensive solution providers [14]. 
Besides building software that would be easily 
integrated with other vendors™ products, industry 

players were expected to introduce software-as-a-

service, particularly for the small- and medium-sized 

businesses. Under this new arrangement, end users 

would not have to deal with the complexities and costs 

of on-site implementation of the enterprise software 

packages. All the technologies would be run off-site by 

the vendors and the end user would only need to pay as 

they used. As users would no longer own the software, 

software companies would be impacted by the 

reduction in sales of their software licenses. 
 6.1.1. Service-oriented architecture and web 
services. 
Customers constantly looked for ways to 
 modify and upgrade their enterprise applications to 
complement their changing business needs.  To address 

this issue, the SOA concept began to take hold as a 
conceptual framework to develop and integrate 
applications. The concept was an evolution of 

distributed computing based on the loosely coupled 
design paradigm. With this architecture (ie, its 
specification), developers could package business 

logics and functions as Web services consumable 
across different environments. All Web services could 

then be connected with each other through the internet 

(the common communication backbone). Developers 

could then build applications by coupling one or more 

of these services without knowing the underlying 

implementation details of the services.  
Computing environments were increasingly 
heterogeneous across diverse operating systems, 

applications and infrastructure. In addition, many 
applications were tightly integrated with business 
processes. Hence, it would be nearly impossible for an 

enterprise to build a new homogenous infrastructure 

from scratch. By leveraging SOA and Web services, 

companies could develop new applications (without 

concerning the selected platforms as long as they met 

the pre-defined SOA and Web services specifications) 

to address new business requirements, and could 

thereby continue to leverage their current investments 

in applications and infrastructure. In this way, 

companies could develop and modify their application 
systems within a much shorter timeframe. Moreover, a 
number of Web services modules were expected to be 

pre-packaged so that companies could purchase them 

off the shelf to reduce their internal coding efforts. 

Major IT players including Microsoft, IBM, SAP and 

Oracle had already jumped onto the SOA and Web 

services bandwagon. 
Although SOA and Web services were taking hold 
rapidly, there was no universal starting point for 

implementing the architecture and technology. Hence, 

companies would need to carefully consider their 

initial needs as well as future potentials, in order to 
determine the appropriate SOA and Web services 
platforms to avoid a lock-in.  

 
6.1.2. Pay-As-You-Go application services. 
Because 
of the over-purchase of IT during the dotcom boom, 

companies now wanted to access the latest software 

packages without large up-front capital investments. In 

addition, small and mid-size businesses often wanted 

to acquire world-class application packages without the 

high investments in hardware, software and supporting 

staff. In view of these new customer requirements, a 
number of industry players were expected to introduce 
a new pay-as-you-use model by delivering software as 

services. This approach was based on the concept of 
utility computing, which was defined as the provision 
of services wherein a service provider made computing 

resources (eg, applications) and infrastructure 
management available to the customers on need basis. 
This service provisioning approach was analogous to 

other utility services (eg, electrical power, water) that 
aimed to meet the fluctuating needs of customers, and 
charged for the resources based on usage. 
Software-based services were first introduced in the 
dotcom boom through the application services 
providers (ASPs). These providers managed and 

distributed application services to customers across a 

wide area network from a central data centre. In 

essence, ASPs were a way for companies to outsource 

some or all aspects of their application needs. 
However, the ASP model was not fully exploited. In 
2002, with the introductio
n of utility computing, 
software companies re-explored the potential of this 
service provisioning model. Pay-as-you-go computing 
services could be broadly categorised as ﬁhostedﬂ and 

ﬁon-demandﬂ services. Hosted services indicated an 

arrangement wherein customers outsourced their 

hardware but purchased licences from the software 

vendors. Customers would pay for the usage of their 

hardware on a need basis. With on-demand services, 

customers outsourced both their hardware and software 

to a third party. Customers would therefore pay for 

both application services and hardware usage on a need 

basis. Players such as Siebel and Salesforce.com Inc. 
were actively promoting their sales force automation 
and CRM products, delivered as on-demand service 

offerings, by providing the application service through 

the internet with monthly billing cycles. Traditional 

ERP vendors such as Oracle were beginning to sell 

their products as hosted service offerings by selling the 

software licence on a one-off arrangement, but 

charging the hardware usage on a need basis. 
Enterprise applications delivered as pay-as-you-go 
services were attractive alternatives. This model 

allowed customers to significantly reduce the total cost 

of ownership of enterprise applications (ie, the up-front 
investment in hardware, software, services and 
supporting staff, and ongoing maintenance costs), to 

increase flexibility and responsiveness to the changes 

in their business models, to switch easily to other 

vendors without significant attachment, and to provide 

updates centrally without deploying an army of 

consultants to install new releases periodically.  
Nonetheless, in order to deliver such services, 
enterprise applications vendors would need to either 

partner with someone who could provide scalable 

hardware and network connections, or invest in 
building their own supporting infrastructure. 
Moreover, as companies were not required to buy the 

licences of the applications software under this service 
 provisioning model, the sales of software would likely 
be impacted. Hence, software vendors would need to 

carefully calculate the pricing models and ensure the 
sustainability of the services. 
 7. SAP™s new strategic position and 
business design 
 As companies modified and upgraded their 
enterprise applications more frequently, the software 
had to be simple to implement. Additionally, 
customers could no longer wait for software updates 

available only in a rigid schedule. Besides the changing 

market conditions and customer requirements, the 

growth rates of the enterprise applications market had 

been saturated, particularly among large multinational 
companies. Major vendors were consolidated into a 

handful of players. Moreover, the market growth had 

significantly decreased since the end of the dotcom 

boom. Enterprise applications players were required to 
expand into new functional areas and industries. To 
anticipate the shifts in industry dynamics in the 21
st century, Chairman and CEO of SAP, Henning 
Kagermann, led the company to pursue a new business 
strategy. This strategy had fundamentally altered 
SAP™s existing business design, ie, the totality of how 

SAP would define its functional coverage; select its 

industry focuses and market segments; develop 

targeted product offerings; and configure its resources 
to support the new design [15]. 

 7.1. Expansion of functional coverage 
 As the market leader in the fast-saturating ERP 
market, SAP enjoyed a steady stream of recurring 
licensing and service revenue provided by its huge 
installed base. Under increasing pressure from its 

investors to pursue new areas of growth, SAP 

leveraged its prominent position in the traditional ERP 

market, and expanded into related new areas including 
CRM, PLM and SCM. The expansion of the product 
lines had particularly intensified the competition 

between SAP and its archrival Oracle. 

 7.2. Deepening industry knowledge 
 Following Oracle™s acquisition of its ERP rival 
PeopleSoft, SAP acquired TomorrowNow, a 
PeopleSoft support firm, in an effort to lure customers 
away from Oracle. In early 2005, SAP agreed to 
acquire retail software specialist Retek, but it was 

eventually outbid by Oracle. In mid-2005, SAP 

acquired Lighthammer Software Development Corp., a 

manufacturing software maker, to bridge the gap 
between its back-office applications and shop-floor 
production systems. Although the costs associated with 

these acquisitions were relatively small, such moves 

symbolised the growth challenges facing global 

enterprise applications companies. As the market of 

enterprise applications was saturated, the players began 
to look for ways to attract new customers. In order to 
penetrate various niche markets and meet the specific 

needs of these smaller customers, enterprise 

applications vendors needed to source niche software 

products in more targeted segments, such as retailing 

or banking, to complement their existing cross-industry 

products. By providing customers with functionality 

specific to their industry, SAP hoped to lure new 

customers and get them locked into the SAP product 

family. 

 7.3. Penetration of mid-market 
 Although SAP™s reputation was based on serving 
the world™s largest enterprises in the Fortune Global 
100 list, in actuality two-thirds of the software 
company™s business was contributed by small and mid-

size customers (defined as those with annual revenues 

of US$600 million or less) [
16]. To strengthen its 
position in this mid-market, SAP released two scaled-
down versions of its ERP product designed specifically 
for small and mid-sized businesses, as well as the 
complementary software development tools and 

services. These two solutions were mySAP All-in-One 

and SAP Business One. Besides the lower-priced 

products, SAP was in the process of rolling out pay-as-

you-go offerings in 2005. The first of such offerings 
would be a CRM offering combining elements of both 
hosted and on-demand computing to win small and 

mid-size customers with an attractive pricing model 

[17]. 

 7.4. Development of new flagship product 
offering 
 In 2001, SAP acquired a technology start-up in 
Silicon Valley called TopTier Software and hired its 
CEO, Shai Agassi, as the chief of corporate product 
development. The dynamic executive subsequently led 
one of the most daring corporate campaigns in SAP™s 
33-year-old historyŠto open up the proprietary 

software through its new technology, namely 

NetWeaver.  
In view of the increasingly heterogeneous nature of 
the computing environment, SAP determined to 
address the IT industry integration issue. After putting 

in more than US$1 billion in research and 

development, SAP introduced NetWeaverŠan open 
 platform that allowed applications to be developed and 
accessed as Web services. This new technology was 

designed to link up various applications (packaged as 
Web services) running on different systems, from 
legacy mainframes to internet-enabled devices and 

enterprise applications. By leveraging NetWeaver, 
SAP was able to break up its software products into 
open and modular pieces. Customers could then pick 

and choose the specific SAP Web services modules 
that met their own needs. Moreover, customers could 

add in modules developed by other companies as long 

as these products met the specifications of the 

NetWeaver framework. As a result, customers could 

more rapidly create and modify their own applications, 

improve the overall fit of the applications, and reduce 
the associated development costs incurred. 
Since the software products would be broken into 
smaller chunks, SAP could change the mode of 
delivering new features and functions for their 
products. Rather than waiting for massive releases to 

take place periodically (minor releases could take 

months and major releases years), the Web services 

approach would allow constant updates of the software 

products.  
With this new engineering approach, SAP had 
solicited tremendous customer support. In 2003, SAP 

began to release the early version of NetWeaver as free 

bundled software in order to bridge SAP and non-SAP 

software programs by reducing the need for building 
customised links. The full version of the software was 
scheduled to be launched in 2007. By mid-2005, more 

than 1,300 customers had already tested NetWeaver 

and some of them were highly satisfied with the 

product and would welcome the opportunity to 

recommend the product to future buyers.  
Although NetWeaver had not contributed to SAP™s 
revenues yet, if it were able to maintain this 

momentum and succeed, the technology could 

transform the development approach of business 

applications in the coming future. By leveraging the 

universally accepted platform, thousands of individual 
developers could develop specialised modules that 
would serve highly targeted industry segments, 

traditionally too fragmented to be addressed with the 

old one-size-fits-all approach. This was particularly 

important for SAP in penetrating the millions of new 

small- and medium-sized enterprise customers around 

the world. 
 7.5. Configuration of resources 
 In order to realise its platform strategy based on 
NetWeaver, SAP was required to foster a new 
ecosystem. In the past, SAP mainly relied on its 
internal programmers (mostly residing in Walldorf, 
Germany) to develop its products. With the new 

NetWeaver platform, the software company would 

need to change from being an industry introvert that 

focused on its supreme engineering capabilities to an 

extrovert that could attract tens of thousands of 
individual developers in joining the virtual 
development network. To address such dramatic shifts, 

SAP lured George Paolini in early 2005. Paolini was 

the executive who successfully marketed the Java 

programming language for Sun Microsystems Inc., and 

who was brought in build the developer networks and 

communities. As of mid-
2005, there were already 
132,000 individuals who formed part of the online 

network. Besides building the virtual taskforce, SAP 

also recruited about 200 top managers from 

competitors such as Oracle, BEA Systems and Siebel 

Systems to join the company. 
 8. Looking ahead 
 With NetWeaver as the centre of SAP™s new 
strategy, the software giant was ready to leverage its 
engineering excellence and to embark on a new path of 
growth. Nonetheless, the new pricing structure of 
SAP™s products based on the NetWeaver technology 

was yet to be disclosed to the public. Besides, the 

entirely revamped product line would not be available 

until 2007. Potentially, with the new modular 
approach, customers would source less from SAP and 

increase purchases from other players as long as these 

products were able to connect with the NetWeaver 

platform. Moreover, as many existing partners were 

also developing their own rival programs on Web 

services, NetWeaver would take SAP into new 
battlegrounds and force the company to compete with 
some of its most trusted partners including IBM and 
Microsoft. Consequently, this could jeopardise the 

existing relationships and reduce future business 

opportunities brought by these partners. 
The most prominent threat to SAP would be from 
its archrival Oracle. Following its shopping spree in 

company acquisitions, including PeopleSoft and Siebel 

Systems, Oracle was in a much better position to put 

SAP on the defensive. In particular, if its existing 

applications and database software would successfully 

combine with the features and functions brought by the 
newly acquired companies, Oracle could offer the most 
comprehensive and integrated enterprise computing 

platform to be found in the industry. 
Battles over acquisitions and invasions of new 
markets made by SAP, Oracle, Microsoft and IBM 

marked the dawn of the platform war in the enterprise 

software industry. Most customers would likely switch 
 to (or remain with) one of the four platforms provided 
by these major software makers. For SAP, however, 

the immediate challenge was to convince the software 
developers and systems integrators around the world to 
work on its NetWeaver platform. As of mid-2005, 

there were 150 third-party programs already built for 
NetWeaver, and the number would exceed 
500 in 
2006, according to SAP. Nonetheless, the strengths of 
the German software company had been in its hardcore 
engineering. The question remained whether SAP 

would have the charm to attract the global army of 

independent developers in supporting its platform 

strategy.  

 9. References 
 [1] J. Lower, ﬁSAP Aktiengesellschaftﬂ, 
Hoover™s Company 
Information
, Hoover™s Inc., Austin TX. 
 [2] L. Sullivan, ﬁERPzillaﬂ, 
InformationWeek
,  http://www.informationweek.com/showArticle.jhtml?articleI
D=165700832
, July 11
th 2005. 
 [3] T. Stein, ﬁDell Takes ‚Best-Of-Breed™ Approach In ERP 

Strategyﬂ, 
InformationWeek
, May 11
th 1998. 
 
[4] B. Worthen, ﬁNestlé™s ERP Odysseyﬂ, 
CIO Magazine
, http://www.cio.com/archive/05
1502/nestle.html
, May 15
th 2002. 

 
[5] ﬁSAP™s Rising in New Yorkﬂ, 
The Economist
, June 30
th 1998. 

 
[6] ﬁERP RIP?ﬂ, 
The Economist
, June 24
th 1999. 
 [7] K.B. Davis, A.S. Rath and B.L. Scanlon, ﬁHow IT 
Spending Is Changingﬂ, 
McKinsey Quarterly
, 2004 Special 
Edition. 

 
[8] ﬁIT Spending Growth to Slowﬂ, 
Red Herring
, August 1
st 2005. 
 [9] D. Nystedt, ﬁIDC Lowers 2005 Global IT Spending 

Growth Forecastsﬂ, 
Computerworld
, May 4
th 2005. 
 
[10] A. Bartels, 
IT Spending Outlook: 2004 to 2008 and 
Beyond
, Forrester Research Inc., Cambridge MA, 2004. 
 [11] Brynjolfsson, E. and Hitt, L., 
Beyond the Productivity 
Paradox
, Centre for eBusiness, MIT, Cambridge MA, 1998. 
 [12] ﬁSoftware: Expect the Giants to Stay Sluggishﬂ, 

Business Week
, January 10
th 2005. 
 [13] ﬁThe Leaky Corporationﬂ, 
The Economist
, June 23
rd 2005. 
 [14] Heng, S., 
Software Houses: Changing from Product 
Vendors into Solution Providers
, Deutsche Bank Research, 
Frankfurt, 2005. 
 
[15] Slywortzky, A.J., 
Value Migration
, Harvard Business 
School Press, Boston, 1996. 

 [16] SAP, 
SAP Annual Report 2004
, SAP AG, Walldorf, 
Germany, 2005. 
 
[17] J. Blau ﬁSAP Promises New Type of Hosted CRM 

Serviceﬂ, 
Computerworld
, August 12
th 2005. 
     