 Communications of the Association for Information Systems!135˛%51$'Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking itto the Next LevelJohn W. SatzingerSouthwest Missouri State University/46'&6Dinesh BatraFlorida International University#53'&6Heikki TopiBentley College51205.':'&61..1&&+5+1013-5*>4'.#+40'134<+#5'3+16)*1630#.%53+$3#3ˇ˜'˙'%%'25'1//60+%#5+10441%+#50(13/#5:45'/65*13+;'&/+0+453#5%53+$3#3ˇ˜'˙/#5.'#4105#%5'.+$3#340'13)˚'%1//'0&'+5#5+10˜#5;+0)'31#53#4*12+'+--0#.:4+'4+633+%6.6/#-+0'9'7'.Communications of the Association for Information Systems1.357#+.#$5*>4'.#+40'1314 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 483 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
  ANALYSIS AND DESIGN IN THE IS CURRICULUM: 
TAKING IT TO THE NEXT LEVEL 
 John W. Satzinger 
Missouri State University 
 Dinesh Batra 

Florida International University 
DineshBatra@business.fiu.edu
  
Heikki Topi 
Bentley College 
ABSTRACT 
Recent surveys of methodologies and techniques
 currently used in organizations for developing 
information systems indicate significant trends t
hat call for a revision of the Information Systems 
(IS) Systems Analysis and De
sign (SA&D) course to define w
hat methodologies, techniques, 
models, and tools need to be taught. Several c
ourse-related and environ
ment governed trends 
seem to impact the coverage, including the growi
ng popularity of object-oriented techniques, the 
shortening of the life cycle and the emergence of
 the iterative approach, the increasing adoption 
of the agile approach, the rising importance of
 UML, the outsourcing trend leading to global 
distribution of SA&D work, and the rate of chan
ge in the technical and 
business environments. 
The scope of the SA&D course ha
s increased. Yet, most MIS d
egree programs have just one 
SA&D course. The typical SA&D instructor faces a nu
mber of difficult questions when trying to fit 
the much larger range of topics into a single 
course. A panel at the Americas Conference on 
Information Systems (AMCIS) 2007 
conference evaluated how the trends impact the coverage of 
the SA&D course and made recommendations on 
how these trends can be addressed. Based on 
the panel discussion, this paper tackles the many 
challenges of teaching analysis and design in 
the IS curriculum and taking it to the next level.   
Keywords: 
Systems analysis, systems design, system
s methodologies, systems techniques, IS 
teaching 
I. INTRODUCTION 
The majority of system failures can be attri
buted to problems that arise during the systems 
analysis and design phases [Iivari, Parsons, and 
Hevner, 2005].  One of the most significant 
changes to the information systems (IS) field 
in recent years has involved system development 
methodologies and system development practices [B
ajaj et al, 2005].  Object-oriented techniques 
and technologies have made significant inroads into business systems development [Johnson, 

2002; Mahapatra, Nerur, and Slinkman, 2005], which 
has required rethinking many aspects of 
analysis and design. Additionally, methodologies based on the use of the Unified Modeling 
Language (UML) have emerged as dominant modeling approaches for analysis and design now 
that UML has been accepted as 
a standard by the Object Mana
gement Group (OMG) [Kobryn, 
1999; Batra, 2008]. Another important trend has been 
toward the use of adaptive, iterative life 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 484 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
cycle models to deal with the complexity of sy
stems development, in place of the predictive 
waterfall model [Larman, 2005]. These changes have required rethinking much of what has been 
traditionally taught in systems 
analysis and design (SA&D) cour
ses in the IS curriculum.  
Other trends affecting system development involve project management, technology, and 
sourcing options that affect 
how and where key SA&D concepts
 and techniques are taught. For 
example, agile development as a general ap
proach [Larman, 2004] and specific agile 
development methodologies, such as eXtreme Pr
ogramming [Beck, 2000], Scrum [Schwaber and 
Beedle, 2002], and Crystal [Cockburn, 2005], present challenges and opportunities when 
deciding how to manage a development project in
 SA&D. Web technologies and service oriented 
architecture (SOA) greatly impac
t how system design is approach
ed in SA&D courses, including 
designing security and 
controls.  For many years now, SA&D 
instructors have struggled to deal 
with addressing issues related to software package selection and implementation, including 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) solutions [Ragowsky, Somers, and Adams, 2005]. At the 
same time, the variety of sourcing models fo
r systems development have complicated managing 
the development process and supporting the projec
t team [Cullen and Willcocks, 2003]. Teams 
and team members are increasingly geographically distributed, multicultural, and multi-lingual 
[Olson and Olson, 2003]. At the same time, the 
rate of change in the business and technical 
environments continues to increase [Reeves
, 1999], adding even more pressure to SA&D 
instructors to be sure they are teaching up to dat
e and effective tools and techniques.       
A panel session at the Americas Conference on 
Information Systems (AMCIS) 2007 conference 
at Keystone, Colorado, was motivated by the 
need to examine the systems analysis and design 
component in the IS curriculum to discuss wh
at methodologies, techniques, models, and tools 
need to be taught in the IS Systems Analysis and Design course. A number of issues seemed 
pertinent. How does one fit the structured, the iter
ative, and the agile approaches in one course?  
Should the life cycle notion be t
aught as iteration to reap the ad
vantages of the structured and 
iterative approaches? Can agile principles be incl
uded in the same course even though there are 
some fundamental differences with the structured 
and the iterative?  Is it time to drop data flow 
diagram (DFD™s)? Should use cases be the basic 
approach to the specification of functional 
requirements?  Can use cases be employed in a structured approach? Can data modeling be 
used along with object-oriented techniques?  How many UML diagrams need to be covered?  

How do we reconcile object-oriented development 
with relational systems?  Should the focus of 
the course be toward web-enabled systems or is the web yet another implementation platform? 
Given the outsourcing environment, how much design and implementation should be covered as 
compared to requirements specification, analysis
, and project management? What is the role of 
business process modeling and 
design in SA&D? Can SA&D be 
taught effectively without 
considering the details of technical design? Should an IS program consider a second course in 
SA&D to fit the topics?  Or, should the SA&D instru
ctor coordinate with the instructor who teaches 
the project management (PM) course, which can 
incorporate the management principles of the 
adaptive versus predictive and t
he disciplined versus agile approaches to development?  
The panel attempted to address such questions
.  It was attended by about 50 people, who 
actively participated in the discussion. The interest
 in such systems analysis and design topics is 
corroborated by trends such as a steady increase 
in membership and activities by Association for 
Information Systems Special Interest Group on Sy
stems Analysis & Design (AIS SIGSAND), an 
active European SIGSAND chapter, and interest in other regions in the world to open similar 

chapters.      
This paper surveys the topics addressed at t
he AMCIS 2007 panel. First, recent research is 
reviewed that demonstrates the complex and diverse st
ate of practice that makes it difficult to 
define the current requirements for an effective 
SA&D course. The effect of past and proposed 
curriculum models on the SA&D co
urse is then discussed. Nex
t, in order to discuss the SA&D 
course systematically, four fundamental chan
ges affecting analysis and design and the SA&D 
course are identified and discussed. Specific
 questions and issues under each fundamental 
change are raised. Additionally, there are some c
ontroversial issues in academe that potentially 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 485 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
affect the ability of IS resear
chers to properly teach the SA&D co
urse. Finally, we make specific 
recommendations for improving t
eaching practices in SA&D.   
II. STATE OF PRACTICE A recent survey of methodologies [Lang, 2006]
 currently used in organizations for developing 
web-based systems shows that the notion of me
thodology in the traditional systematic sense 
seems to have been largely displaced by hybrid aggregations of techniques and other method 
fragments. These aggregations and fragments ar
e selected on the basis of usefulness and 
purposefully blended within the overarching framew
ork of an in-house development process.  The 
survey reported that the 
use of methods is 23% for hybrid, 22%
 for structured, 15% for agile, 14% 
around tools, 13% for iterative/incremental, 
and 8% for object-oriented,
 among others (see Table 
1).  Note that the adoption of object-oriented 
development is low because models and techniques 
involving UML are not standalone methodologies.  
It might be better to view object-orientation in 
the realm of techniques. 
Table 1. Use of various methodologies in practice (Lang, 2006) 
METHODOLOGY
 ADOPTION Hybrid, customized, in-house 23% 
Traditional ﬁlegacyﬂ, Waterfall 22% 
Agile development methods  15% 
Tools based (
e.g. PHP, J2EE, InterDev
) 14% Incremental (
e.g., RUP, Spiral) 13% Object-oriented (
e.g. OOAD, UML)
 8% 
Ad Hoc 8% 
Human Factors Engineering methods  5% 
Technique-driven (e.g., 
Storyboarding)
  6% 
Specialized for Web/hypermedia  5% 
 The use of models/techniques is 95% for flowchar
ts, 74% for entity relationships models, 72% for 
use case diagrams, 62% for class diagrams, and 
50% for state machine diagrams, among others 
(see Table 2).  Dobing and Parsons [2008] show similar practices with class, use case, and 

sequence as the most used among the UML diagrams.  It appears likely that the use case and 
class diagrams are employed beyond 
the iterative and object-oriented approaches, and the entity 
relationship model is used beyond the structur
ed approach.  The overall trend is toward 
employing techniques normally associated with
 object-oriented development (e.g., use case, 
class, and state machine diagrams) while retain
ing certain key from legacy techniques (e.g., 
entity relationship and flowcharts). 
III. CONSTRAINTS OF IS
 CURRICULUM MODELS 
Some of the key factors affecting the SA&D
 course are the IS 
curriculum models at 
undergraduate and graduate levels [Gorgone et al., 2002; Gorgone et al., 2006].  IS 2002, the 
undergraduate model curriculum, is highly prescriptive
 in nature and offers little choice for schools 
adopting it. The curriculum consists
 of 10 required courses and no 
electives. SA&D has, however, a significant role within this model curriculum
: various aspects of systems analysis and design are 
covered in four courses included in the curricu
lum, and the IS 2002 document [Gorgone et al., 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 486 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
2002] goes as far as stating that Information 
Systems is equal to Technology-enabled Business 
Development (including Systems Analysis and Design, Business Process Design, Systems 
Implementation, and IS Project Management).  
Table 2. Use of various models and techniques in practice [Lang, 2006] 
MODEL/TECHNIQUE ADOPTION 
Screen prototypes / Mockups  97% 
Flowcharts  95% 
2-D site mapping techniques  91% 
Storyboards  85% 
Entity-Relationship Diagrams  74% 
Use Case Diagrams  72% 
Object-Oriented Class Diagrams  62% 
3-D site mapping techniques  52% 
Statecharts  50% 
 IS 2002.7 Analysis and Logical Design is a trad
itional SA&D course that
 focuses on the early 
stages of the systems development 
life cycle. In addition, IS 2002 
includes two ﬁPhysical Design 
and Implementationﬂ courses (IS 2002.8 Physical 
Design and Implementation with DBMS and IS 
2002.9 Physical Design and Implementation in Emerging Environments) and the capstone IS 
2002.10 on Project Management and Practice. IS 2002.
8, .9, and .10 all include elements that are 
within the broad umbrella of SA&D, particularly if
 we take the ﬁD[esign]ﬂ in SA&D seriously. Some 
of the topics in IS 2002.8 include ﬁstructured an
d object design approaches,ﬂ ﬁdesign tools,ﬂ and 
ﬁdatabase implementation including user interfaces and re
ports,ﬂ all topics associated with SA&D. 
In 2002.9, relevant topics are ﬁstructured, event
-driven, and object-oriented application design,ﬂ 
ﬁtesting,ﬂ ﬁsoftware quality assurance,ﬂ and ﬁmulti
-tiered architectures and client independent 
design.ﬂ Finally, the topics in IS 2002.10 incl
ude ﬁmanaging the system life cycle,ﬂ ﬁrequirements 
determination,ﬂ ﬁdesign,ﬂ ﬁproject tracking, metric
s, and system performanc
e evaluation.ﬂ Clearly, 
IS 2002 acknowledges that SA&D is 
in the very core of the Info
rmation Systems 
profession and 
has characteristics that demonstrate this in a very concrete way. 
However, the trends listed at the beginning of 
this article suggest that IS 2002 needs to be 
revised. The key ideas of the curriculum were developed in the mid-1990s, and thus, the time 
elapsed since alone is a strong enough reason to review the curriculum. Both the technical and 
the business environments have changed dramatically
 since the core architecture of IS 2002 was 
developed, including fundamental changes such as
 the ubiquitous connectivity offered by the 
Internet, the emergence of the Web as a platform for communication and applications, the highly 

widespread use of ERP systems as the found
ation for organizational information systems 
solutions, and the transformation of the nature of
 IS/IT work to a fully global and distributed 
model. The trends provide an opportunity for the In
formation Systems community to rethink and 
potentially redefine its identity Œ at
 least for the external constituencies, the field is defined at least 
as much through what we teach as it is throug
h our research output. A new model curriculum is 
clearly needed. 
A joint Association for Computing Machinery (ACM)/
AIS project to revise the Information Systems 
undergraduate model curriculum was launched in early 2007, and the first round of results of the 
committee™s work were discussed and made availa
ble to the public at the AMCIS 2007 meeting 
[Topi et al, 2007]. One of the key changes included in 
the current proposal is the separation of the 
core of the curriculum from electives, with t
he recognition that the core concepts and skills in 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 487 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
information systems may be integrated in a meani
ngful way with concepts and skills in a number 
of technology specialties and domain areas. In addi
tion, the proposal acknowledges that even the 
core concepts and skills are not covered at the same level of detail in all programs. 
From the perspective of the current discussion, a 
key question, of course, is the role of SA&D in 
the revision. The positive news is that SA&D is
 included in the propose
d core together with 
Foundations of Information Systems, Data & Info
rmation, IT Infrastructure, Project Management, 
and Application Development (see Table 3, also available at 
http://blogsandwikis.bentley.edu/ 
iscurriculum/index.php/New_Curriculum_Structure_and_Content
).  Note that the dark circles in 
the table represent significant coverage, while t
he light circles represent
 some coverage. There 
have been virtually no critical voices sugges
ting that SA&D should not 
be part of the core. 
Because of the change in the natur
e of the curriculum, 
the extent to which SA&D will be covered 
is not prescribed at the same level of detail as it 
was in the previous curriculum. At the same time, 
a school that wants to develop a 
program that has a very stro
ng emphasis on SA&D can do that 
and still stay within the boundaries of the model cu
rriculum. It is unlikely that the model curriculum 
will specify at a detailed level a 
specific approach to teaching SA&
D in terms of 
either pedagogy 
or content. For example, it is likely to stay 
indifferent regarding the selection between object-
oriented or structured approac
hes to SA&D or the choice betwe
en different modeling grammars. 
Table 3: SA&D within the proposed IS cu
rriculum draft representation Fall 2007. 
 IV. FOUR FUNDAMENTAL CH
ANGES AFFECTING TEACHING SYSTEMS ANALYSIS AND 
DESIGN Given the state of current practice and constr
aints on the IS curriculum, four fundamental 
changes affecting the practice 
and teaching of SA&D were propos
ed by the panel as a framework 
for discussing the SA&D course. 
Although there is some overlap 
and some additional issues that 
might fall outside of this framework, most of the key questions listed earlier fall within the 

framework. The four fundamental changes include:   
 The Change from Structured to Object Oriented Models/Techniques 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 488 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
 The Change from Waterfall (Predictive)
 to Iterative (Adaptive) Life Cycles 
 The Change from Formal, Disciplined Process to a more Agile Process 
 The Change from Internal SA&D Proces
ses to Globally Dist
ributed, Outsourced 
Processes. 
THE CHANGE FROM STRUCTURED TO OBJECT ORIENTED MODELS/ TECHNIQUES 
Although not specifically object-or
iented, use cases are often iden
tified with SA&D courses that 
cover UML and the object-oriented approach to analysis and design [Dobing and Parsons, 2008]. 
Covering use cases is often done at the expense 
of the time used for data flow diagrams (DFD™s) 
and the data dictionary. The panelists proposed 
that use cases are effective for capturing 
functional requirements, although other requirem
ents such as usability, reliability, performance, 
and security (the URPS in FURPS; see Larman, 
2005) also need to be documented.  A key 
question raised by the audience was whether func
tional decomposition can be taught effectively 
with use cases. Data flow diagrams provide a cl
ear hierarchical decomposition that, even if not 
used in practice, can be an effective approach to
 teaching decomposition. 
Another use case topic 
is the emphasis on use case diagrams versus use case descriptions. Teaching use case 
diagrams without use case descriptions provides li
ttle benefit, in the same way as using use case 
diagrams without the descriptions
 provides few benefits in the systems development process.  
Use case descriptions, written using one of the popular templates (e.g., Cockburn [2001]), 
document important information regarding the inte
raction between the system and its users that 
can be used throughout development but is not provided by DFD™s and supporting 

documentation.  In a use case driven project, 
use cases provide the f
oundation for functional 
requirements and, through those, for user interfac
e design, for implementation, for testing, for 
training, and for deployment. The panelists argued for eliminating DFDs in favor of use cases and 

UML activity diagrams for both traditional st
ructured development and for OO development, 
although several members of the audience found DFD™s still useful and important. It was 
commonly accepted that use cases are not in an
y specific way restricted to object-oriented 
analysis and design, even though their widesp
read use originated from the communities 
advocating object-oriented SA&D. 
The emergence of the Unified Modeling Language [Kobryn 1999, 2004] as the dominant grammar 
for modeling diagrams also raises a series of questions about teaching SA&D. The panelists 
proposed that instructors do not have much choice 
but to cover UML: it has become an essential 
component of any IS professional™s toolset. A wi
dely recognized problem is the complexity of 
UML [Siau, Erickson, and Lee, 2005; Siau and 
Loo, 2006]. The specification includes thirteen 
diagrams each with many options and potential 
levels of detail. Surveys on practice have 
generally concluded that the class diagram, the 
use case diagram (together with the narrative 
description), and the sequence diagram can serve 
as key system modeling artifacts. Not every 
variation and detail of each model is necessary. 
The key point is to show how models fit together 
and how models evolve from requirements to design to implementation while maintaining the 
conceptual consistency. 
One key issue is the use of entity relationship diagrams (ERD) and domain model class diagrams 
to model the same system concepts. The 
panelists agreed these diagrams can be used 
interchangeably, and because of the importance of
 the ERD to database analysts, today™s SA&D 
student should be familiar with both. Students shoul
d also learn that the same diagram grammar 
can be used for multiple purposes: the UML class diagram can be used for representing both a 
high-level domain model and a very detailed system design description, or the UML sequence 
diagram can be used for modeling both detailed user-system interaction and the communication 

sequences between the internal objects. UML can be used at various levels of detail and 
abstraction.  In his popular book, Martin Fowler
 [2004] identified three po
ssible modes of applying 
UML in software development: sketch, blueprint, and programming language.   
The audience was asked whether they had one or two courses available for covering SA&D in 
their undergraduate program
s. Many were limited to one course
. Some with two courses covered 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 489 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
a traditional approach in the first course and an OO approach in the second course. Some were 
forced to cover elements of both in one course. A few covered just OO in the one available 
course, and some covered just traditional SA&D 
in the one available course. Several covered 
introductory and then advanced OO SA&D over two co
urses. A key question to ask is whether it 
is desirable to cover both traditional and OO approaches in a curriculum. The panel agreed that in 
the recent past, covering both in some mix was desirable, with more and more emphasis on OO 
over time. But now it was clear that a use ca
se driven approach coupled with UML and OO 
design was the best option. Audience comments 
addressed local realities faced when company 
recruiters wanted more traditional background. 
Others commented that the job market overall 
expected the latest models and techniques. Perhap
s teaching some histor
ical context describing 
traditional models and techniques might be enough for many instructors and programs.     
THE CHANGE FROM WATERFALL (PREDICTI
VE) TO ITERATIVE (ADAPTIVE) LIFE 
CYCLES Another key change is the move from using a predi
ctive, waterfall approach to the SDLC to the 
newer adaptive, iterative approach to the SDLC. 
The panelists agreed that the question of which 
approach to use is dependent on the nature of th
e project. The predictive, waterfall SDLC has 
always been effective for projects that 
have well-defined require
ments, well-understood 
technology, and low overall risk. Scope, require
ments, technology, required tasks, and staffing 
levels are predictable enough to allow the project to be planned out in advance [Boehm and 
Turner, 2003]. Many IS system development projects are still planned and managed this way. 
Often team members plan and report the project as t
hough it is waterfall, but in reality they define 
work tasks and deliverables with overlap and 
iteration. However, many (perhaps most) 
development projects today have vague and changing
 requirements, new less stable technology, 
and diverse staff members with varying experience. 
In addition, most current projects are built on 
the top of existing application and technology infr
astructure currently in use, often utilizing 
enterprise systems or other packaged systems 
as part of the systems architecture. These 
projects require more flexibility in planning and management. Iterative SDLCs provide for 

embracing change and adapting to change once the project is underway.  
As with traditional versus OO, it is not clear 
the current SA&D course c
an cover both predictive 
and adaptive in one course. If that is the case, wh
ich one should be emphasized? For teaching, it 
makes sense to cover planning concepts, analysis/requirements concepts, design concepts, and 
implementation concepts sequentially while simu
ltaneously identifying them as conceptually 
separate activities that can and often are perfor
med iteratively. Audience members suggested it 
might be better to start with the predictive approach 
and then also discuss the reality of iteration. 
Others suggested that teaching an adaptive meth
odology from the start is a better solution, 
including the life cycles from the Unified Proc
ess (UP) [Bergstrom and Raberg, 2004; Satzinger 
and Jackson, 2003] and even agile development su
ch as eXtreme Programming (XP) [Beck, 
2000], and Scrum [Schwaber and Beedle, 2002]. The panelists raised the question of whether 

teaching one life cycle for large projects (perhaps 
the traditional SDLC or the iterative UP) and a 
different life cycle for small projects was a good 
approach. Again, those 
with only one available 
SA&D course saw no clear solution. Finally, 
the panelists suggested 
a project management 
course, separate from the SA&D 
course, might cover the predicti
ve approach generally and as it 
applies to some system development projects. Additionally, package selection and ERP projects 
might fit into a project management course and be focused on predictive SDLCs.  
The panel proposed that the Unif
ied Process (UP) life cycle model might be a good model to use 
when teaching SA&D because it can reduce comple
xity by separating the life cycle phases from 
the development and support disciplines. The UP
 Phases shown in Figure 1Šinception, 
elaboration, construction, and transitionŠcan be used to explain project planning and 
management checkpoints. The UP Disciplines 
can be used to teach the models, tools, and 
techniques used throughout the development pr
oject. Separation of the two helps students 
understand the disciplines as activities that can 
be combined in a number of different ways into 
development processes. Once the iterative UP lif
e cycle is understood, the disciplines can be 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 490 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
discussed in depth sequentially even though they ar
e typically used iteratively. Several audience 
members objected to the UP life cycle as being ov
erly complex and difficult to explain, arguing 
against the panelist™s position. Perhaps much like OO concepts and techniques were confusing 
and complex to experienced developers years ago, 
the UP life cycle and separate disciplines are 
confusing and complex to experienced developers 
and many IS instructors at this point. The 
paradox of apparent complexity 
for a framework thought to reduce complexity reveals some 
important researchable issues. 
 Figure 1. The Unified Process Life Cycle Model
 (courtesy of Thompson Course Technology) 
The panelists concluded that the UP life cycle can 
be used in a predictive project or an adaptive 
project, even though iterations ar
e explicitly included in the model. As such, one project can be 
planned out more completely in advance, even if th
e primary use of the UP model is for adaptive 
projects. The panelists also proposed that the UP lif
e cycle can be used in a project that does not 
follow the details of the Unified Process methodology.       
THE CHANGE FROM FORMAL, DISCIPLINE
D PROCESS TO A MORE AGILE PROCESS 
Related to the question about the choice betw
een predictive (waterfall) and adaptive (iterative) 
processes is the question about the impact of 
the recent popularity of agile development 
methods, such as eXtreme Programming (XP) [B
eck, 2000] and Scrum [Schwaber and Beedle, 
2002]. These and similar methodologies, while different from each other, have many 
characteristics in common: brief iterations wi
th frequent releases, focus on functioning code, 
developing tests before code, de-emphasizing documentation as a mechanism for 
communication within the project, close cooperat
ion between the project team and its customers, 
and strong emphasis on continuo
us customer feedback.  
The panel discussed the impact of applying agile principles within SA&D courses and, 
specifically, for SA&D project wo
rk. In a truly agile approach, m
any of the cornerstones of 
traditional SA&D courses are either put aside or
 significantly de-emphasized. The SDLC concept 
is very different in the agile environment, which 
has a large number of small iterations and strong 
emphasis on developing functional code. Many 
developers following agile practices do not use a 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 491 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
stage or phase concept for organizing their work, 
and they would detest using the term SDLC to 
describe their work. Therefore, integrating traditi
onal stage-based SDLC principles with a genuine 
agile approach can be challenging. Whatever 
choices are made regarding the role of agile 
development, it is important that the different 
approaches are not mixed in a way that prevents 
the students from understa
nding their true nature. 
The agile methods philosophically downplay 
the importance of comprehensive and detailed 
models. This creates an interesting challenge for those faculty members for whom modeling is in 

the very center of not only SA&D but the entire fi
eld of Information System
s. The Agile Manifesto 
(http://agilemanifesto.org/principles.html
) states that ﬁSimplicity Œ the art of maximizing the 
amount of work not done Œ is essentialﬂ and 
ﬁWorking software is the primary measure of 
progress.ﬂ These two principles combined would lead one to believe that agile approaches 
include no modeling work at all. This is not, howev
er, the case; instead, in the agile world, models 
are often used in the ﬁsketchﬂ mode, are not pe
rfected beyond their use as a communication tool, 
and are, in many cases, not 
updated unless the update is necessar
y for a specific purpose.  
Moving to an agile approach in an SA&D course would not take away the need for covering 

modeling techniques and languages (such as UM
L), but their centrality in the development 
process could potentially be reduced 
significantly. Scott Ambler states this principle as follows: 
ﬁ–a good rule of thumb to ensure that you™re tr
aveling light [one of his Agile Modeling principles] 
is that you shouldn™t create a model 
or document until you actually need itﬂ 
(http://www.agilemodeling.com/
essays/agileModelingXP.htm
).  There are, however, pedagogically interesting approa
ches that integrate agile principles with the 
fundamental approach underlying the Unified Proc
ess. The panelists have found Craig Larman™s 
Agile UP [Larman, 2005] an interesting and pedag
ogically useful approach that maintains the 
integration between UML artifacts and the concep
tual integrity of the models throughout the 
project lifecycle while emphasizing the importanc
e of keeping the project agile and light. Larman 
directly recommends that we should ﬁmodel a
nd apply the UML for the smaller percentage of 
unusual, difficult, tricky parts of the design spaceﬂ instead of applying it to all of software design. 

Based on our experience, Larman™s approach may be one of the better ways to include both UP 
and agile thinking in the same course. Figure 2 includes a schematic representation of how a 
limited set of UML artifacts can be effectively 
integrated in Larman™s version of Agile UP. 
The panel did not address
 the question whether or not a singl
e SA&D course could successfully 
be built around agile principles using a pure ag
ile approach. It appears that while it might be 
possible to do, it is probably not pedagogically wise
 because for most students,
 it is important that 
they gain skills in developing integrated models using a widely used modeling grammar (such as 
UML). Using an approach that combines agile princi
ples with a subset of UP (such as Larman™s 
Agile UP) might, however, offer an interesting opport
unity to bring together different perspectives. 
THE CHANGE FROM INTERNAL SA&D PROCESSES TO GLOBALLY DISTRIBUTED, OUTSOURCED PROCESSES Since the discussion on the first three trends took most of the time allocated to the panel session, 
the panelists were not able to get into any depth on the remaining issue of distributed 
development and outsourcing.  It seemed that the at
tendees have not even started thinking about 
how to address this trend.  So, we present our opi
nion of the issues involved, and whether these 
can be covered in an SA&D course. 
Suppose a US-based IS company embarks on a 
systems development project and decides to 
outsource the coding and testing aspects to a 
company in India.  Given that there will be 
temporal, geographical, language, and cultural differe
nces between the two countries, it is evident 
that project management can become more complex.  What kinds of problems do cultural 

differences create and how can we resolve them?  
Given that the time zone difference between 
the client and the vendor site is 10-12 hours, wh
at are the requirements for maintaining effective 
communication?  Are all sites following the same methodology, or are their different mindsets?  

How can changes requested by customers be trans
mitted by the outsourcing client to the 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 492 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
vendors? How can common problems with the accura
cy of specifications be avoided in an 
environment in which written specifications 
are often the primary method of communication? 
These issues raise the question:
 should the project management issues of outsourced projects 
be included in the systems analysis and design course? 
  Figure 2. Conceptual connections between modeling 
artifacts in Larman™s Agile Unified Process 
The global aspects of systems development need to
 be addressed in some course, but based on 
the breadth of the issues already slated to t
he SA&D course, we recommend that it is not the 
likely candidate for covering outsourcing issues.  
Certainly, students need to learn the capabilities 
of companies in key vendor countries.  They
 also need to examine an abbreviated contract 
between the client and the vendor company.  Al
though most students are aware that coding is 
commonly outsourced, the distribution of other lif
e cycle activities among the client and the 
vendors is rarely discussed.  For example, can te
sting be outsourced?  Can certain kind of design 
be outsourced? Can certain elements of analysis be
 outsourced?  These issues are complex, and 
it does not seem that these can be co
vered in a regular SA&D course.   An interesting side effect is that global di
stributed development can run counter to agile 
development [Batra, 2007].  For example, agile pr
inciples recommend face-to-face meetings and 
tacit understanding among team members; these 
requirements are not practical in distributed 
development.  Agile principles prescribe sati
sfying customer requirements that are even 
requested very late in the project, while distributed development is governed by well-documented 
contracts.  In summary, the SA&D course is not 
geared to handle the complex issues that arise in 
a distributed development environment. 
V. ELEPHANTS IN THE ROOM The panel wanted to raise three questions regardi
ng our collective capabilities and resources that 
potentially have the status of the pr
overbial elephant in the room.  The first question is related to 
the number of IS faculty members who have st
rong enough software development capabilities to 
teach systems design.  The second question relate
s to the difficulty in teaching agile methods 
without focusing on coding. The third question is
 the seemingly inherent conflict between the 
increasing publishing pressures that are present at
 all universities at this point and the faculty 
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 493 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
members™ need to stay technically up-to-date in
 order to be able to address all aspects of an 
iterative life cycle. First, the ﬂDﬂ in SA&D refers to design, and alt
hough design can refer to activities at various 
levels, ultimately ﬁdesignﬂ in SA&D
 has to include the internal de
sign of software solutions, such 
as the object/class structure and object responsi
bility design in object-oriented design. These 
design activities are neither technically trivial no
r something that can be ignored.  No reliable 
statistics known to us are available, but anec
dotal evidence suggests that many IS faculty 
members teaching SA&D co
urses are not comfortable with actu
al software design issues Œ in 
many SA&D textbooks, ﬁdesignﬂ in
cludes only user interface and 
database design,
 and it appears 
that in many cases, faculty members are comfor
table only with these two aspects of design.  
Second, iterative lifecycle models (including UP, 
but particularly the agile models) by definition 
include coding as one of the core activities during all iterations.  The role of coding is valued even 
in projects based on the structur
ed approach (Kohli and Gupta, 2002)
. Therefore, it is improbable 
to teach the iterative approach a
nd particularly apply it to a pr
oject unless the instructor has 
sufficient capabilities not only in modeling but also in guiding students™ coding work at a high 

professional level. Again, evidenc
e is scarce, but anecdotally, it 
appears that many IS professors 
are intentionally staying away from
 activities close to the actual creation of a software artifact. If 
that is the case, it is not clear to us how
 one can effectively move between different SA&D 
activities as specified by the iterative models,
 particularly because learning from an actual 
functional software artifact is a critically impor
tant part of any iterativ
e model (whether UP-based 
or a pure agile model). 
Third, teaching any approach to 
SA&D that includes the creation of 
a functional artifact requires 
that the faculty member teaching the course is ca
pable of supervising all 
parts of the process and 
guiding the students also in the process of ac
tually creating the ar
tifact. Do our reward 
mechanisms and promotion and tenure processe
s sufficiently acknowledge the fact that 
maintaining one™s capabilities in 
software development is a highly 
time-consuming activity, which 
is not necessarily compatible wi
th the type of research expected 
by the journals with the highest 
stature in our field? Is it, in practice, a feasible
 idea to expect a faculty member to publish at the 
highest level and teach SA&D course
s using approaches 
that include softwar
e design in its true 
sense and with a strong focus on a functional software artifact? 
It is very important that we acknow
ledge possible limitations of our field if they are a reality. If IS 
faculty members are not being trained in design and
 technical architecture of software solutions, 
and if it is not possible for an average IS facu
lty member to maintain his or her technical 
capabilities while producing scholar
ly output at an acceptable le
vel, maybe we should limit our 
focus on SA&D activities that do not address aspe
cts of the design of the software solution. If, 
however, we believe that the ﬁDﬂ in SA&D is impor
tant, we have to both ensure that all faculty 
members teaching SA&D courses hav
e a sufficient proficiency in des
ign and that the time spent 
to maintains one™s proficiency in this area is recognized.  The affected SA&D faculty need to 

inform their chairpersons about this challenge, 
but we doubt an exception will easily be made.  
However, some of the other IS areas (e.g., in
formation security, data communications, data 
mining) are likely to face similar issues, and we hope the increased awareness of the issue may 

lead to an acceptable solution. 
VI. CONCLUSIONS 
This paper discussed the need to
 reexamine the SA&D course in the IS curriculum to better 
address the trends affecting analysis and design.
 One of the clearest messages from the 
audience at the end of the panel was the need 
to identify and focus on the core immutable 
principles and skills of SA&D. Th
ere was not enough time to disc
over whether or
 not there was 
consensus among the audience members regarding the nature of these principles or skills, but 
there was a clear call for us as a field to identif
y these and advocate them as the core intellectual 
content of the SA&D course(s).   
 Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 494 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
We are prepared to make ten specific recommendations based on our analyses and on the input 
from the panel participants. Although there is 
still room for debate, each member of the IS 
community involved with teachi
ng SA&D or coordinating the curriculum with the SA&D course 
should consider these recommendations:   
1. Only include traditional structured analysis techniques (e.g., data flow diagrams) for 
historical context if desired, but not in any 
depth. Instead, establish use case modeling as 
the new functional requirements standard.  
2. Focus on UML as the primary modeling grammar. 
3. Cover only a subset of UML in the SA&D course. Activity diagrams, use case 
descriptions and diagrams, class diagrams, and sequence diagrams are typically 

sufficient. 
4. Help students understand how a modeling grammar (such as UML class diagrams) can 
be used for multiple purposes. For example, UML class diagrams can be used for 
modeling both the problem domain and the inte
rnal structure of the software solution. 
5. Use the core Unified Proce
ss life cycle model (including the separation of Disciplines and 
Phases) or a variant as the organizing framework for SA&D concepts. Use this 
framework to help students understand that 
the disciplines can be configured into a 
variety of different processes. 
6. Cover agile values and principles in the course, but don™t use radical versions as the 
philosophy underlying the course project.  
7. Emphasize the internal consistency of the modeling artifacts, showing, for example, how 
a use case is designed using a sequence diagram and a sequence diagram establishes 
the methods added to the class diagrams.   
8. If possible, integrate the SA&D course 
closely with a software project management 
course with a global focus. Assign the issues
 related to distributed development in the 
project management course. 
9. Acknowledge the fact that the design of t
he internal structure of software is a complex 
activity that requires in-depth understanding of software development.  
10. As an academic field, we have to hel
p department chairs and deans understand that 
teaching SA&D with an approach that includes
 design and implementation is difficult and 
very resource intensive. 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 
The authors wish to thank the participants at
 the AMCIS 2007 Panel for their interest and 
contributions to the discussion and to this paper.  
REFERENCES 
Bajaj, A., Batra, D., Hevner, A
., Parsons, J., and Siau, K. (2005) 
ﬁSystems Analysis and Design: 
Should we be researching what we are teaching,ﬂ 
Communications of the AIS
, Volume 15, 
pp. 478-493. 
Bergstrom, S. and Raberg, L. (2004). 
Adopting the Rational Unified Process
.  Boston, MA: 
Pearson Education.  
Batra, D. (2007) ﬁModified Agile
 Practices for Outsourced Software Projects,ﬂ forthcoming in the 
Communications of the ACM
. Batra, D. (2008) ﬁUnified Modeling Language (U
ML) Topics:  The Past, the Problems, and the 
Prospects,ﬂ forthcoming in the 
Journal of Database Management
.  Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 495 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
Beck, K. (2000). 
Extreme programming explained: Embrace change
. Reading, MA: Addison-
Wesley. 
Boehm, B. W., & Turner, R. (2003). 
Balancing agility and discipline: A guide for the perplexed
. Boston: Addison-Wesley. 
Cockburn, A. (2001). 
Writing effective use cases
. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Cockburn, A. (2005). 
Crystal clear: A human-powered methodology for small teams
. Boston: 
Addison-Wesley. 
Cullen, S. and Wilcocks, L. (2003). 
Intelligent IT Sourcing: Eight Building Blocks to Success
. Burlington, MA: Elsevier Butterworth-Heinemann. 
Dobing, B. & Parsons, J. (2008). ﬁDimensions of
 UML diagram use: A survey of practitioners,ﬂ 
Journal of Database Management
, 19(1) (forthcoming).  
Fowler, M. (2004). 
UML Distilled: A Brief Guide to the Standard Object Modeling Language
 (3rd 
ed.). Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Gorgone, J. T., Gordon B. Davis, Joseph S. Va
lacich, Heikki Topi, David L. Feinstein, and 
Herbert E. Longnecker. (2002). ﬁIS 2002 Model Curriculum and Guidelines for Undergraduate 

Degree Programs in Information Systems,ﬂ 
The Data Base for Adva
nces in Information 
Systems
, Volume 34, Number 1, pp. 1-52. 
Gorgone, J. T., P. Gray, T. Stohr, Joseph S. 
Valacich, and R.T. Wigand. (2006). ﬁMSIS 2006: 
Model Curriculum and Guidelines for Graduate 
Degree Program in Information Systems,ﬂ 
Communications of the AIS
, Volume 17,  pp. 1-56. Iivari, J., Parsons, J., and Hevner, A.R. (2005)
 ﬁResearch in Information Systems Analysis and 
Design: Introduction to the Special Theme Papers,ﬂ  
Communications of the AIS
, Volume 16,  
810-813. Johnson, R. (2002) ﬁObject-Oriented Systems Development: A Review of Empirical Research,ﬂ 
Communications of the AIS
, Volume 8, 65-81. Kobryn, C. (1999) ﬁUML 2001: A standardization odyssey,ﬂ 
Communications of the ACM, 42
(10), 
29-37. 
Kobryn, C. (2004). ﬁUML 3.0 and the future of modeling,ﬂ 
Software & Systems Modeling, 3
(1), 4-
8. Kohli, R. and J.R.D. Gupta (200
2). ﬁEffectiveness of the Systems A
nalysis and Design Education: 
An Exploratory Study,ﬂ Journal of End User Computing
, 14(3), 16-31. 
Lang, M. (2006). ﬁNew branches, old roots: A 
study of methods and techniques in Web / 
hypermedia systems design,ﬂ 
Information Systems Management,
 23(3), 62-74. 
Larman, C. (2004) 
Agile & Iterative Development: A Manager™s Guide
, Boston, MA: Addison-
Wesley. 
Larman, C. (2005). 
Applying UML and Patterns: An Introduct
ion to Object-Oriented Analysis and 
Design and Iterative Development
 (3rd ed.). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall PTR. 
Mahapatra, R., Nerur, S., and Slinkman, C. (
2005) ﬁTeaching Systems Analysis and Design Œ A 
Case for the Object Oriented Approach,ﬂ 
Communications of the AIS
, Volume 16,  848-859 Olson, J. S., & Olson, G. M. 
(2003). ﬁCulture surprises in remote software development teams,ﬂ 
ACM Queue, 1(9), 52-59.  Communications of the Association for Info
rmation Systems (Volume 20, 2007) 483-496 496 
Analysis and Design in the IS Curriculum: Taking it to 
the Next Level by J.W. Satzinger, D. Batra & H. Topi 
Ragowsky, A., Somers, T.M., and Adams, D.A. 
(2005) ﬁAssessing the Value Provided by ERP 
Applications through Organizational Activties,ﬂ 
Communications of the AIS
, Volume 16,  381-
406. Reeves, W. W. (1999). 
Learner-Centered Design: A Cognitive View of Managing Complexity in 
Product, Information, and Environmental Design
. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Satzinger, J.W. and Jackson, R.B. (2003) ﬁMaki
ng the Transition from OO Analysis to OO Design 
with the Unified Process,ﬂ 
Communications of the AIS
, Volume 12, 659-683. 
Schwaber, K., & Beedle, M. (2002). 
Agile software development with scrum
. Upper Saddle River, 
NJ: Prentice Hall. 
Siau, K., Erickson, J., & Lee, L. Y. (2005). ﬁTheor
etical vs. Practical complexity: The case of 
UML,ﬂ Journal of Database Management, 16
(3), 40-57. 
Siau, K. & Loo, P.-P. (2006). ﬁIdentif
ying difficulties in learning UML,ﬂ 
Information Systems 
Management, 23
(3), 43-51. 
 Topi, H., Valacich, J., Nunamaker, J., Sipior
, J. (2007) ﬁUndergraduate Information Systems 
Model Curriculum Revision: Rethinking the Approach and the Process,ﬂ 
Proceedings of the 
AMCIS 2007, Keystone, Colorado. 
ABOUT THE AUTHORS 
John W. Satzinger
 is Professor of Computer Information 
Systems at Missouri State University. 
He is co-author of five system development
 book titles published by Thomson Course 
Technology, including 
Systems Analysis and Design in a Changing World, 4th Edition
 (2007) and 
Object-Oriented Analysis and Design with the Unified Process 
(2005). He has also published 
numerous articles about analysis and design and hu
man-computer interaction in journals such as 
Information Systems Research
, Journal of MIS
, Database, and 
Communications of the AIS
.  Dinesh Batra
 is a Knight-Ridder Research Professor of MIS in the College of Business 
Administration at the Florida International 
University. He is a co-author of the book 
Object-
Oriented Systems Analysis and Design 
published by Pearson Prentice-Hall. His publications have 
appeared in
 Communications of the ACM, Management 
Science, Journal of MIS, European 
Journal of Information Systems, Communications 
of the AIS, International Journal of Human 
Computer Studies, Computers and Operations
 Research, Data Base, Information and 
Management, Journal of Database Management, Decision Support Systems, Requirements 
Engineering Journal, 
and others. He has served as the Pr
esident of the AIS SIG on Systems 
Analysis and Design. 
Heikki Topi
 is Associate Dean of Graduate and Exec
utive Programs at Bentley College. His 
research has been published in journals such as 
European Journal of Information 
Systems, 
JASIST
, Information Processing & Management
, International Journal of Human-Computer 
Studies, Journal of Database Management
, Small Group Research
, and others. He has been 
actively involved in national computing curricul
um development and evaluation efforts (including 
IS2002 and 
CC2005 Overview Report
), and he is a member of the ACM Education Board and co-
chair of the current IS curriculum revision project. 
Copyright © 2007 by the Association for Information 
Systems. Permission to make digital or hard 
copies of all or part of this work for personal or cla
ssroom use is granted without 
fee provided that copies are 
not made or distributed for pr
ofit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and full citation 
on the first page. Copyright for components of this work owned by others than the Association for 
Information Systems must be honored. Abstracting with credi
t is permitted. To copy otherwise, to republish, 
to post on servers, or to redistribute to lists requires 
prior specific permission and/or fee. Request permission 
to publish from: AIS Administrative
 Office, P.O. Box 2712 Atlanta, GA, 
30301-2712 Attn: Reprints or via e-
mail from  ais@aisnet.org
     . ISSN: 1529-3181
                                    
EDITOR-IN-CHIEF 
Joey F. George 
Florida State University 
AIS SENIOR EDITORIAL BOARD 
Guy Fitzgerald 
Vice President Publications  
Brunel University 
Joey F. George 
Editor, CAIS                                
Florida State University 
Kalle Lyytinen 
Editor, JAIS Case Western Reserve University 
Edward A. Stohr 
Editor-at-Large Stevens Inst. of Technology 
Blake Ives                                
Editor, Electronic Publications  
University of Houston 
Paul Gray 
Founding Editor, CAIS 
Claremont Graduate University 
CAIS ADVISORY BOARD   
Gordon Davis 
University of Minnesota 
 Ken Kraemer Univ. of Calif. at Irvine M. Lynne Markus  
Bentley College 
Richard Mason 
Southern Methodist Univ.   
Jay Nunamaker                    
University of Arizona 
Henk Sol 
Delft  University 
Ralph Sprague 
University of Hawaii 
Hugh J. Watson University of Georgia  
CAIS SENIOR EDITORS  
Steve Alter 
U. of San Francisco 
Jane Fedorowicz 
Bentley College 
Chris Holland 
Manchester Bus. School 
Jerry Luftman 
Stevens Inst. of Tech. 
CAIS EDITORIAL BOARD   
Michel Avital 
Univ of Amsterdam 
Erran Carmel 
American University 
Fred Davis Uof Arkansas, Fayetteville 
Gurpreet Dhillon 
Virginia Commonwealth U 
Evan Duggan 
Univ of the West Indies 
Ali Farhoomand University of Hong Kong 
 Robert L.  Glass Computing Trends 
Sy Goodman  
Ga. Inst.  of Technology 
Ake Gronlund 
University of Umea 
Ruth Guthrie California State Univ. 
Alan Hevner 
Univ. of South Florida 
Juhani Iivari 
Univ. of Oulu K.D. Joshi Washington St Univ. 
Michel Kalika 
U. of Paris Dauphine 
Jae-Nam Lee 
Korea University 
Claudia Loebbecke 
University of Cologne 
Paul Benjamin Lowry 
Brigham Young Univ. 
Sal March Vanderbilt University 
Don McCubbrey  
University of Denver 
Michael Myers 
University of Auckland 
Fred Niederman 
St. Louis University 
Shan Ling Pan 
Natl. U. of Singapore 
Kelley Rainer 
Auburn University 
Paul Tallon 
Boston College 
Thompson Teo 
Natl. U. of Singapore 
Craig Tyran 
W Washington Univ. 
Chelley Vician 
Michigan Tech Univ. 
Rolf Wigand  
U. Arkansas, Little Rock 
Vance Wilson 
University of Toledo 
Peter Wolcott U. of Nebraska-Omaha 
Ping Zhang 
Syracuse University 
 DEPARTMENTS 
Global Diffusion of the Internet.  Editors: Peter Wolcott and Sy Goodman 
Information Technology and Systems.  
Editors: Alan Hevner and Sal March  
Papers in French 
Editor: Michel Kalika 
Information Systems and Healthcare 
Editor: Vance Wilson  
ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL                                                                              
Eph McLean  
AIS, Executive Director 
Georgia State University 
Chris Furner CAIS Managing Editor 
Florida State Univ. 
Copyediting by Carlisle 
Publishing Services 
  