 MAPPING SOCIAL NETWORK TO SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE TO 

DETECT STRUCTURE CLASHES IN AGILE SOFTWARE 

DEVELOPMENT 
Chintan Amrit, University of Twente, P.O. Box 217, 
7500 AE, Enschede, Netherlands, 
c.amrit@utwente.nl 
Jos van Hillegersberg, University of Twente, P.O. B
ox 217, 7500 AE, Enschede, Netherlands, 
j.vanHillegersberg@utwente.nl 
Abstract  
Software development is rarely an individual effort
 and generally involves teams of developers 
collaborating together in order to generate reliabl
e code. Such collaborations require proper 
communication and regular coordination among the te
am members. In addition, coordination is 
required to sort out problems due to technical depe
ndencies that exist when components of one part of 
the architecture requires services or data input fr
om components of another part of the architecture. 
The dynamic allocation of the different tasks to pe
ople results in various socio-technical structure 
clashes (STSCs
).
 These STSCs become more pronounced in an Agile Sof
tware Development 
environment and managerial intervention is constant
ly required to alleviate problems due to STSCs. 
In this paper we provide a method to detect these S
TSCs in a longitudinal fashion with the help of a 
tool that we are developing. We test this method in
 a case study of a software company and
 show how 
such structure clashes can be detected by analyzing
 the social network (along with the betweenness 
centrality index) in relation to the task dependenc
ies due to the software architecture.  
 Keywords: Agile Software Development, Social Networ
k, Software Architecture. 
 1 INTRODUCTION 
 Coordination is an important part of the software 
development process. Traditional approaches to 
coordinating software development have focussed on 
development of new and enhanced tools, 
modularisation (both technical and managerial), for
mal procedures involving tools and documents to 
control communication among personnel (Kraut and St
reeter 1995; Crowston 1997; Andres and Zmud 
2001). However, such coordination mechanisms don™t 
work in an agile software development 
environment that encourages very short development 
and delivery cycles. Small Companies tend to 
prefer informal communication among team members an
d customers over more formal approaches to 
coordination. In such a scenario it is essential to
 see to it that the necessary communication takes 
place. One way to see this is through identifying t
he dependencies that drive communication. In our 
research we have observed that the technological de
pendencies drive the need for coordination.  
The technological artefacts not only represent the 
essential constraints and needs but also represent 
social practice by reflecting the working arrangeme
nts, division of labour etc. This discussion were 
broached by Melvin Conway (1965) in what has come t
o be known as Conways's law (Conway 1968). 
While Conway showed that the structure of the code 
should mirror the structure of the team that 
designed it, Parnas recognized that the process of 
decomposing the software into smaller pieces was 
not only a technical division but also a division o
f labour among the individuals (Parnas 1972). 
 In our research we refer to the clash between the 
social and technical dependencies as socio-technica
l 
structure clashes (hereafter referred to as STSC), 
that deals with the social dependencies that are 
lacking and coordination problems due to technical 
dependencies between the software components 
 that the developers are working on them (Amrit, Hil
legersberg et al. 2004; de Souza, Redmiles et al. 
2004).    

 
 There is very little literature available that dir
ectly addresses the problem of detection of STSCs. 
Most 
of the literature focuses on the problem at the lev
el of software requirements, design and 
implementation. Coplien and Schmidt (1995) describe
 the problem (pattern no. 15) asﬂ preserving 
architectural vision through implementationﬂ (Copli
en and Schmidt 1995). The solution that they 
suggest is that architects should also participate 
in the implementation process. Though this solution
 
sounds simple, it is not a solution to the coordina
tion problems that arise when there is a gap betwee
n 
the designed and the implemented process model. Ano
ther related solution at level of software is by 
Murphy, Notkin and Sullivan (2001). They develop an
 approach that helps the engineer use a high-
level model of the structure of an existing softwar
e system as a lens through which to see the system™
s 
source code. The tool they design computes a softwa
re-reflexion model that shows where the 
engineer™s high-level model agrees with and where i
t differs from a model of the source(Murphy, 
Notkin et al. 2001). This approach of using a softw
are reflexion model is good for addressing the gap 
between design and implementation at the software l
evel but it fails to address the problems in the 
social side. For example, task allocation problems 
that could further lead to delays at the software 
process level are not addressed.  

The concept of a Design Structure Matrix (Eppinger 
2001) tries to highlight the inherent structure of 
a 
design by examining the dependencies that exist bet
ween its component elements in a symmetric 
matrix. Recent studies using the Design Structure M
atrix (DSM) provide insights into the relation 
between product architecture and organizational str
ucture. Sosa et al. (2004) show instances of 
misalignment between design and team interactions a
re more likely to occur across organizational and 
system boundaries (Sosa, Eppinger et al. 2004). The
 focus of the DSM method is on the task matrix, 
so the actual social network (Wasserman and Faust 1
994) of the employees is ignored. 
 
de Souza et al. (2004) suggest that Application Pro
gram Interfaces (APIs) rather than act as a means 
for better collaboration actually constrains possib
le collaboration. They also argue that the source-c
ode 
of the software can act as an important resource to
 identify social dependencies. As dependencies 
between software modules can suggest social relatio
ns that need to be built among software 
developers in order to facilitate the integration p
rocess. Wagstrom and Herbsleb (2006) describe an 
automated system which can be used to identify futu
re modes of interaction and coordination based on 
analyzing the software code from the Central Versio
ning System (CVS). 
By looking only at the source code (de Souza, Redmi
les et al. 2004; Wagstrom and Herbsleb 2006), 
one can at best predict what future coordination sh
ould be like but not locate actual coordination 
problems. 

In our research we try to find real communication p
roblems by actually analyzing the social network 
of the developers and comparing it with the softwar
e architecture. We have devised a technique to 
detect STSCs by mapping Social Networks on the Soft
ware Architecture. By analyzing the social 
network in relation to the task dependencies due to
 the software architecture, we can derive 
conclusions on STSCs. Further we show how just by t
he examination of the social network, one can 
identify some STSCs, through a study of the network
™s betweenness centrality. We outline this 
technique in a case study of a software company cal
led MENDIX. We do this with a help of a 
software tool we have developed called TESNA that c
an display different socio technical networks 
and their dependencies. 

 
The rest of the paper is structured as follows; sec
tion 2 describes what we mean by STSCs, section 3 
describes the research site and the methods that we
 have used to conduct our research, section 4 
describes the system architecture of the software p
roject under study, section 5 explains the 
betweenness centrality and describes the feedback f
rom the CTO, section 6 contains the discussion 
and section 7 the conclusion and future work. 
  
  Figure 1.  Planned Software Process refactoring usi
ng Socio-Technical Structure Clashes 
 2 SOCIO-TECHNICAL STRUCTURE CLASHES 
An STSC occurs when there exists a Process Pattern 
that indicates that the social network of the 
software development team does not match the techni
cal dependencies within the software 
architecture under development  

These STSCs are thus indicative of coordination pro
blems in a software development organization.
 Some of these problems (or STSCs) concerning develo
pment activities have been tackled by Coplien 
et al. and are called Process Patterns (Coplien 199
4; Coplien and Harrison 2004). 
However, research done by Coplien et al suffers fro
m the following problems: 
· these patterns are hard to implement  
· there is very little research on their empirical va
lidation 
  The reason why the patterns are hard to implement 
is that the problems addressed by the patterns are 
hard to detect, as purely manual techniques are lab
our intensive. A regular detection of STSCs 
becomes more essential in an Agile Software Develop
ment environment where it™s very easy to lose 
oversight of the development process. Manager inter
vention becomes essential in such an agile 
environment in order to keep the development proces
s in check  
Figure 1 represents the focus of this paper, which 
is to provide a Method based on our tool called 
TESNA (TEchnical and Social Network Analysis) that 
can improve the planned software process. 
STSCs are based on Process Patterns and represent t
he coordination problems in the social network 
when the dependencies in the technical architecture
 are not met. The Method consists of several steps.
 
First, input from the Social Network as well as the
 Software Architecture is taken, and the tool 
TESNA provides a visual description of the networks
 and metrics, based on Process Patterns. The next 
step of the method lies in the detection of STSCs w
ith the help of the visualizations that can help th
e 
manager in reengineering the informal design proces
s model in order to improve project planning (Fig. 
1). Currently the tool supports both manual (qualit
ative) as well as automatic (quantitative) detectio
n 
of STSCs, but for the purpose of this case study we
 used qualitative STSC detection methods for 
reasons described in section 4. For the purpose of 
this paper we selected two process patterns, one 
based on what has come to be known as Conway™s Law 
(Conway 1968), and the other based on 
betweenness centrality (Hossain, Wu et al. 2006). 

 3 RESEARCH SITE AND METHODS 
The research methodology used is one of Design Scie
nce Research (Hevner, March et al. 2004), we 
design a tool called TESNA (short for TEchnical  an
d Social Network Analysis) and use it through 
case study (Li, Zhou et al. 2005) in a software dev
elopment company.  The different steps as described
 
by Hevner et.al. (Hevner, March et al. 2004) were c
arried out and as explained in section 5 the 
evaluation was done with the help of the feedback f
rom the CTO of the software company. 
Our case study was conducted in a software company 
called MENDIX, who are developing a large 
middleware product. The company MENDIX is one of th
e fastest growing companies in The 
Netherlands and are listed FEM Magazine as one of t
he top 25 brilliant software start-ups in The 
Netherlands (Bueters 2006 ). One version of the mid
dleware product was already released at the time 
of the study.  

The reason behind choosing this case was that MENDI
X followed an agile software development 
methodology, we were interested in whether a small 
company like MENDIX has STSCs and if we 
could detect them.  

The system architecture consists of a client system
, a Work flow server and a Modelling server (Fig 
2.). The project staff included 15 full time person
nel; 8 full time developers, 2 project leaders, 2 
project managers, 2 sales people and one system adm
inistrator. The personnel were divided into 3 
teams, with 3 developers, one project leader and on
e project manager for the client system, 3 
developers for the Modelling Server and 3 developer
s and one project manger for the workflow server.  
The data was collected in fall 2006 over a period o
f 3 months, though participant observation, 
interviews and gathering work related documents. Am
ong the documents observed were the chat logs, 
which were stored in XML format. The logs of chat t
ranscripts for 4 weeks, each week evenly 
distributed in the 3 month period, were analysed wi
th the help our software tool, TESNA. 
All the main developers, project leaders and projec
t mangers were interviewed. Among the questions 
asked in the interview were; who they discuss work 
related subjects with (advice, discussion and work 
flow), how much data was exchanged per communicatio
n, and, what the mode of communication was. 
It was ascertained that almost all technical commun
ication was done through online chat. This was 
because they had a dedicated Jabber chat server (Ad
ams and Adams 2001) running for the company 
 (which eliminated wastage of time due to external c
hats), and it was considered more efficient than 
face to face communication for the developers. The 
primary ties in the social networks analysed from 
the chat log corresponded with those that the inter
viewees had themselves provided. Further, through 
participant observation of the software developers 
(in 6 separate visits lasting a day each) it was 
ascertained that almost all technical communication
 was through the online chat. 
The data was analysed and then discussed with the C
TO of the company, who doubled as a project 
manager (Roald in Fig 2.). With the help of our sof
tware tool TESNA, the social networks for four 
different weeks (each with cumulative chat data ove
r the period of a week) of only the developers and 
project leads/mangers were constructed. The chat re
cords were parsed and displayed as social 
networks by TESNA with the chat ids, as labels for 
our nodes in the social network. Though most of 
the first names corresponded with their actual firs
t names, the only exception was Max whose name is 
listed as mnemisj.  

The tool TESNA is currently capable of analysing an
d displaying the dependencies in the software call 
graphs (the software is read from the Concurrent Ve
rsioning System, or CVS), it can also display the 
authorship information of the software modules (als
o read from the CVS) and for the social side of the
 software development it can construct and analyse s
oftware metrics from XML logs of chat messages 
(the chat server being Jabber). The tool can also d
isplay the different metrics of the social network 
over a period of time. We used this option to analy
se the betweenness centrality of the social network
s 
over the period under study. 

We took the data back to the CTO once it was displa
yed and analysed. In this way we could ascertain 
whether our technique was really useful to the CTO.
 4 TECHNICAL SOFTWARE ARCHITECTURE  
  Most of the literature on socio technical depende
ncies (de Souza, Redmiles et al. 2004; Wagstrom 
and Herbsleb 2006) focuses on gathering the depende
ncies from the recently modified source code 
(from CVS). We tried this approach by analysing the
 source code of the company MENDIX with the 
help of our tool. We realised that as the company i
s small most of the dependencies in each section of
 
the architecture (client, xml server, and modeller 
server) were satisfied by the communication among 
the developers working on them. Also, knowledge of 
the technology used in the particular platform 
(Java, JavaScript or Delphi) was an essential prere
quisite for a developer to be working in that part 
of 
the project. Due to this fundamental skill requirem
ent we noticed that developers seldom worked on 
projects or changed code other than their own assig
ned part of the Architecture. As each developer 
worked in only specific parts of the code, and arch
itecture, there were workflow dependencies 
between the colleagues due to the architecture. The
 dependencies due to the XML input and output 
between the client/server and the servers couldn™t 
be detected by only analysing the call graph and 
function call dependencies (Valverde, Cancho et al.
 2002). Thus, we realised that a quantitative 
analysis of the source code of the software product
 isn™t very helpful in analysing the dependencies f
or 
a small corporate company like MENDIX.  

  We analysed the Socio-technical Structure clashes
 between the actual social network of the 
employees involved in developed and the technical a
rtefacts that they develop with the help of the 
software architecture. The software architecture of
 the software product produced at MENDIX along 
with the task allocation of the software developers
 and project leads of MENDIX is represented by Fig 
2. This diagram gives a sense of the dependencies a
s a result of task allocations related to the Softw
are 
Architecture of the system. The XML interchange ind
icates that there exists an input and output 
dependency between the Server, the XML server and t
he Client System. 
The cumulative chat logs were analysed over a perio
d of a week and converted into a social network 
of the developers and project leaders with the help
 of our tool (we use JUNG to display and calculate 
metrics (Madadhain, Fisher et al. 2005)). The socia
l network (Wasserman and Faust 1994) was 
represented with labels, and the strength of each l
ink was determined by the number of chat messages 
 exchanged. The black links were drawn for the maxim
um number of chat messages exchanged, and 
dotted links if the number of chat messages was les
s than half of the maximum that week.  The system 
architecture was then superimposed on the social ne
tworks in order to ease the detection of STSCs. 
We also calculated the degree and betweenness centr
ality (Freeman 1977) of the nodes and plotted a 
graph showing its variation over the 3 month period
. The resultant diagram was shown to the CTO for 
his input. 

  Figure 2.  The Software Architecture along with the
 task responsibilities 
  
5 CENTRALITY AND CTO FEEDBACK 
Centrality index gives us an idea of the potential 
importance, influence and prominence of an actor in
 
a network (Freeman 1978). Betweenness refers to the
 frequency with which a node falls between pairs 
of other nodes in the network. In other words, betw
eenness centrality is a measure of,  ﬁ
the degree that 
each stands between others, passes messages and the
reby gains a sense of importance in contributing 
to a solution, .. , the greater the betweenness, th
e greater his or her sense of participation and 
potency
ﬂ (Freeman 1977). In terms of coordination, between
ness maybe the most appropriate measure 
of centrality as it provides a measure of the influ
ential control of each node (employee) on the whole
 
networks (Scott 2000). This is the reason we used b
etweenness centrality to analyse potential STSCs. 
During our interview of the CTO we asked the CTO to
 grade 15 different Process Patterns  (from 
Coplien™s paper (Coplien 1994)), in a scale of 1 to
 10. The highest grade he gave was for Conways 
law pattern (Conway 1968), in his words 

 ﬁ
it is very important that the organization of the c
ompany is according to the architecture and I want 
all the developers to communicate to resolve their 
problems
ﬂ. 
  So, the CTO was quite pleased when we showed our t
ool which maps the social networks to the 
software architecture of his company™s product. 

When asked how he would expect the social network o
f the developers and project leads in his 
company to look, the CTO said 

ﬁI would expect Vladimir, Jonathan and Michiel to be
 central, as they are the Gurus in the work they 
do.. 

and no one knows the functioning of the server, xml
  server and the client better than them
ﬂ 
The social network from week I (Fig 3.) was interes
ting as the CTO immediately spotted a STSC, 
which was the missing link between Jonathan and Jud
a, both of whom are developers for the XML 
server (Fig2.). The CTO found a puzzling link was b
etween Mathieu and Johan, which he later 
realized was because they had to do a presentation 
together that week. 
  Figure 3. The social network mapped onto the Softwa
re Architecture for week I 
The CTO found the social network from week II (Fig 
4.) more reasonable than week I, even though 
there was no connection to Johan (who was away doin
g field studies). The three central players were 
Jasper, Michiel and Jonathan which was what he had 
expected according to the tasks and results in 
that week. He found that there was little communica
tion with Derkjan (who is the project manager for 
the client part of the architecture Fig 2.), which 
he found strange as there was some trouble with the
 
client that week.  

   Figure 4.  The social Network mapped onto the Softw
are Architecture for week II 
Week III (Fig 5.) was interesting as many of the em
ployees were on vacation, and the CTO was 
interested in how the employees communicated. There
 was no communication between Jasper and 
Michiel, as Jasper was supposed to work on the Clie
nt that week. This could be an indication of a 
potential problem (or STSC). Also, the CTO found th
e fact that Mnemisj (Max) was central quite 
surprising.  

In week IV the fact that Michiel was not communicat
ing was surprising as the deadlines were near and 
it would have been important that he spoke with his
 fellow client developers. The reason behind 
Panayu and Mathieu (having high out-degree) being c
entral was that there was a product shipment on 
week IV which caused the project leaders to play a 
more central role. The strong link between 
Jonathan and Mathieu was quite strange according to
 the CTO as they wouldn™t have the need to 
communicate on technical problems. The fact that Br
uce had a central role seemed quite strange to the 
CTO, while the CTO was quite surprised that Derkjan
 wasn™t communicating much in the week with 
the shipment deadline. 
6 DISCUSSION 
The change in the betweenness centrality index (Fre
eman 1977)  over the 3 month period can give us 
an idea of how the most important employee (or the 
employee who handles most of the 
communication) in the network changes depending on 
the tasks at hand. On observing Fig 7, we see 
that the employees who are important to each part o
f the software architecture (or the gurus as CTO 
called them) namely, Jonathan, Michiel and Vladimir
 were very central during the period around the 
first week. This period, we realize was exclusively
 for software development where their expertise was
 
very much (as the CTO named them as the experts in 
their domain) in demand by fellow developers 
and project leaders. However, as the project moves 
towards delivery of the product we find the core 
 developers taking a more passive role in the networ
k while the non-core developers like Jasper, Bruce 
and Max (mnemisj) as well as the system integration
 experts take a more central role. This can be 
explained by the fact that a greater amount of inte
gration and front end work is required near the 
delivery deadline. 

  Figure 5.  The social Network mapped onto the Softw
are Architecture for week III 
We also notice that the project leaders and manager
s (Panayu and Derkjan) assume a more central role 
when the project is nearer to the deadline for deli
very to the customer (week IV). This movement to a 
more central role is required by the project leader
s and managers in order to be able to control all t
he 
possible contingencies that might crop up near the 
delivery time. This display of the variation of 
betweenness centrality index of the social network 
can also help a Manager in recognizing STSCs 
relevant to different stages in the agile software 
process. When a person is too central for the wrong
 
reasons, i.e. when a developer is taking responsibi
lity to communicate with the rest of the team, then
 
such a scenario could be a cause for a structure cl
ash. For example, the CTO was surprised that Max 
(mnemisj) had a central role in the week III when n
ot much work was required at the client side, he 
was also surprised that Bruce was central in week I
V.  There is also cause for concern (potential 
STSC) when two employees working on (or managing) t
he same part of the architecture (that is being 
modified) are not communicating with each other, fo
r example Michiel and Derkjan were not 
communicating in any of the weeks under observation
. 
 7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK 
Agile software development can prove to be very dif
ficult to manage in the wake of constantly 
changing requirements and short planning horizons. 
In such a scenario it™s very difficult and labour 
intensive for the project manager to keep track of 
communication problems, or STSCs (Wagstrom and 
Herbsleb 2006). Identifying the problem areas relat
ed to STSCs can particularly prove difficult when 
multiple people are responsible for various tasks a
nd when the task requirements keep changing in an 
agile software development environment 

  Figure 6.  The social Network mapped onto the Softw
are Architecture for week IV 
We have tried to show how we can reduce this manage
ment overhead by our technique of identifying 
structure clashes through the analysis of the socia
l network in relation to the task dependencies due 
to 
the software architecture. 

 By mapping the social networks onto the software a
rchitecture we not only see how the developers 
and project leaders communicate but also their task
 responsibilities arising from the software 
architecture. Further, we also calculate the betwee
nness centrality to identify who the most important
 
person is, from the network point of view (Freeman 
1977; Freeman 1978; Hossain, Wu et al. 2006). 
The display of the change in the betweenness centra
lity can give us an indication of how the most 
important person in the network changes with the ch
ange in task focus, and gives us another 
opportunity to identify STSCs.  We think this techn
ique is useful for the project manager who aims to 
improve the designed project plan (Fig 2.) and help
s him/her facilitate the necessary communication.  
 Though one would expect to find STSCs in large soft
ware projects, we were surprised with the 
presence of STSCs even in a small company like MEND
IX. This was further reiterated by the fact that 
the CTO wanted our tool in order to better manage t
he development process.  
  Figure 7.  The change in the betweenness centrality
 over the four weeks 
We realise that not all software companies would al
most exclusively use chat as used in Mendix. In 
order to overcome this difficulty we plan to keep a
 track of e-mails (where allowed) as well as 
meetings and also get feedback on ego-networks with
 the help of a questionnaire. 
 In future, we plan to detect technical dependencie
s at different levels, for example at the code leve
l 
(de Souza, Redmiles et al. 2004; Wagstrom and Herbs
leb 2006), those at the level of the architecture 
and those at the level of work flow (Ven, Delbecq e
t al. 1976). Through the investigation of different
 
dependencies we can gain insight into different pos
sible STSCs. Dependencies due to the code 
structure we have found are more applicable to larg
e software development organizations. We plan to 
conduct further case studies to study the presence 
of STSCs in large software development 
organizations. We have also started to investigate 
open source software development, to see the 
differences between corporate STSCs and Free/Libre 
open source STSCs. 
 References 
Adams, D. J. and D. J. Adams (2001). Programming Ja
bber: Extending Xml Messaging, O'Reilly 
Associates, Inc. 
Amrit, C., J. Hillegersberg, et al. (2004). A Socia
l Network approach to Software Development. In 
CSCW'04 Workshop on Social Networks. 
Andres, H. P. and R. W. Zmud (2001). "A Contingency
 Approach to Software Project Coordination." 
Journal of Management Information Systems Vol. 18(I
ssue 3): p41. 
Bueters, P. (2006 ). Tech 25: Tech is back. FEM Bus
iness. 
Conway, M. (1968). How do Committees Invent. Datama
tion. 14: 28-31. 
 Coplien, J., O (1994). A Development Process Genera
tive Pattern Language. Proceedings of PLoP/94. 
Monticello, Il.: 1--33. 
Coplien, J., O. and N. Harrison, B.  (2004). Organi
zational Patterns of Agile Software Development. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ, USA. 
Coplien, J. O. and D. C. Schmidt (1995). Pattern la
nguages of program design. New York, NY, USA. 
Crowston, K. (1997). "A Coordination Theory Approac
h to Organizational Process Design." 
Organization Science 8(2): 157-175. 
de Souza, C., R. B., D. Redmiles, et al. (2004). So
metimes you need to see through walls: a field stud
y 
of application programming interfaces. CSCW '04: Pr
oceedings of the 2004 ACM conference on 
Computer supported cooperative work. New York, NY, 
USA: 63--71. 
Eppinger, S. D. (2001). "Innovation at the Speed of
 Information." Harvard Business Review Vol. 
79(1): 149-158. 
Freeman, L. C. (1977). "A Set of Measures of Centra
lity Based on Betweenness." Sociometry 40(1): 
35-41. 
Freeman, L. C. (1978). "Centrality in social networ
ks conceptual clarification." Social Networks 1(3):
 
215-239. 
Hevner, A., R., S. March, T., et al. (2004). Design
 Science in Information Systems Research. MIS 
Quarterly. 28. 
Hossain, L., A. Wu, et al. (2006). Actor centrality
 correlates to project based coordination. 
Proceedings of the 2006 20th anniversary conference
 on Computer supported cooperative work. 
Banff, Alberta, Canada, ACM Press. 
Kraut, R., E.  and L. Streeter, A. (1995). Coordina
tion in software development. Commun. ACM. New 
York, NY, USA. 38: 69--81. 
Li, B., Y. Zhou, et al. (2005). Matrix-based compon
ent dependence representation and its applications 
in software quality assurance. ACM SIGPLAN Notices.
 New York, NY, USA. 40: 29--36. 
Madadhain, J. O., D. Fisher, et al. (2005). The JUN
G (Java Universal Network/Graph) Framework. 
Technical Report UCI-ICS 03-17 University of Califo
rnia, Irvine. 
Murphy, G., C. , D. Notkin, et al. (2001). Software
 Reflexion Models: Bridging the Gap between 
Design and Implementation. IEEE Trans. Softw. Eng. 
Piscataway, NJ, USA. 27: 364-380. 
Parnas, D. L. (1972). On the criteria to be used in
 decomposing systems into modules. Commun. 
ACM. New York, NY, USA. 15: 1053--1058. 
Scott, J. (2000). Social Network Analysis: a handbo
ok, Sage Publications Inc. 
Sosa, M. E., S. D. Eppinger, et al. (2004). "The Mi
salignment of Product Architecture and 
Organizational Structure in Complex Product Develop
ment." J Manage. Sci. 50(12): 1674-1689. 
Valverde, S., R. F. Cancho, et al. (2002). Scale-fr
ee networks from optimal design. Europhys. Lett. 17
, 
avenue du Hoggar - Parc d'Activités de Courtaboeuf 
- BP 112 - F-91944 Les Ulis Cedex A - 
France. 60: 512-517. 
Ven, A. H. V. D., A. L. Delbecq, et al. (1976). "De
terminants of Coordination Modes within 
Organizations." American Sociological Review 41(2):
 322-338. 
Wagstrom, P. and J. Herbsleb, D. (2006). Dependency
 forecasting in the distributed agile organization.
 
Commun. ACM. New York, NY, USA. 49: 55--56. 
Wasserman, S. and K. Faust (1994). Social Network A
nalysis: methods and applications, Cambridge 
University Press. 
 
 