 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Brunel UniversityUniversity of South FloridaBrunel UniversityECIS 2004 Proceedings. CHANGE MANAGEMENT: TH
E CONTRIBUTION OF PERSONAL CONSTRUCT THEORY (PCT) 
Brooks, Laurence, Department of Information Systems and Computing, Brunel University, 
UK, laurence.brooks@brunel.ac.uk 
Davis, Christopher J.*, College of Business, Univ
ersity of South Florida St Petersburg, USA, 
davisc@stpt.usf.edu 
Lycett, Mark, Department of Information Systems and Computing, Brunel University, UK, 
mark.lycett@brunel.ac.uk 
Abstract
 This paper explores the use of two complementary approaches, each stemming from Personal 
Construct Theory (PCT), to investigate the interdependence of organizations and information systems. 
Two techniques - Repertory Grid Analysis (RGA) and Cognitive Mapping (CM) - are used to 

investigate the dynamics of this interaction. Changing business models and information technologies 

were investigated in two distinct work settings: the 
techniques contributed substantial insight into the 
role of information systems in each case. Our ana
lysis shows that the techniques have matured to a 
stage where they provide a basis for improved understanding of the organizational complexities 
related to information technologies. The techniques focus on the social construction of meaning by 
articulating and interpreting the discourse that surrounds the development, implementation and use of 

information technology in organizations. The re
search to date has articulated and improved 
awareness of the issues and concerns that surr
ound IT. Despite the differing contexts and work 
processes, our findings in each case suggest that this has made managers more conceptually agile, 
leading to improved integration of organisational processes and technology in each case. The 
complementarity of the findings from the two settings 
and their analytic generalisability is explored in 
the concluding sections of the paper where we identif
y a promising avenue for 
extending this research 
into the complex relationship between information systems and organizations using PCT. 
Keywords: Social construction of meaning; shared understanding; methodological complementarity; 
managerial agility. 
  
    
     1 INTRODUCTION 
This research explores the importance of the social
 construction of meaning within the communities of 
discourse (Orr 1996) that surround information technology and organizational management. 
Organisational discourse is central to the communicati
on of concepts and ideas that enable individuals 
and groups to (a) make sense of the world in which they work and (b) understand the changes to work 
brought about by information systems. Recent work, such as that by Orlikowski and Barley (2001), 
highlight the advantages of focusing research on wo
rk processes rather than
 on either information 
technology or the organisation itself. Such a focus 
was adopted in this research enabling us to explore 
the mutuality of the influences of (information)
 technology and organisations on one another. 
The rationale for looking at organisational discourse in this manner arises from Scarbrough and 
Corbett™s (1992) observations about the nature a
nd ephemerality of dialogue during organisational 
change. They suggest that technological change, such as that involving information systems, involves 
the participants in a complicated and extended dialogue. Further, they argue that the dialogue is 
affected by two criteria, both of which are of part
icular significance to information systems. Firstly, 
the level (detail) of design activity ranges widely during the evolution of an information system. 
Secondly, and perhaps consequentially, responsibility for activity surrounding the information system 
is shared between a number of individuals: such sharing could be simultaneous or sequential, 
following project phases for instance. Scarbrough and Corbett (1992) compare these dynamics to 

electrical circuits: although in place throughout th
e evolution of the project, changing responsibilities 
and work assignments mean that the circuits are constantly re-wired as new channels of 
communication supersede existing ones in their importance. 
Mediating between these circuits of power and desi
gn is what Scarbrough and Corbett (1992) call the 
‚meaning circuit™. It is here that the discour
se about information systems and technology and 
organisation is articulated and negotiated. The social construction of meaning that takes place as 
technology and organisation simultaneously evolve or unfold over time provides the locus in which 
the significance of the issues and concerns faced by
 those involved can be interpreted. Uncovering this 
‚meaning circuit™, however, is not a trivial task Œ pr
oviding one reason for the ‚requirements™ focus in 
information systems development for example. Cons
equently, this research 
uses two organisational 
case studies to examine ways in which the ‚meaning
 circuit™ may be investigated. Two investigative 
techniques Œ Repertory Grid Analysis (RGA) and 
Cognitive mapping (CM) - are used to address the 
problem of providing a forum or a medium for the exchange of ideas and concerns between the 
technology and organizational communities. Although not directly comparable in terms of the work 
they undertake, the organisations studied faced sim
ilar difficulties in articulating and addressing the 
issues surrounding the management of their large-
scale information systems 
(on which organisations 
are increasingly dependent).  
The paper explores the capacity of RGA and CM 
to enhance understanding and appreciation of the 
impacts of information systems on work. The concludi
ng sections explore the nature of the constructs 
elicited by the two techniques, each
 of which was used in a specific
 work context. We note some 
representational similarity that su
ggests the existence of higher level ‚super-constructs™. Although the 
specific research findings are dire
ctly relevant to their respective c
ontext, this research suggests that 
the complementarity of the RGA and CM techniques
 can contribute substantially to researchers™, 
users™ and managers™ understanding of the issues 
surrounding the design, implementation and use of 
information systems. The super-constructs represen
t shared cognitive schemata of the organizational 
complexities related to information technologies a
nd the work processes that they support. Iterative 
use of the techniques and constructs over time enable
d the participants in th
e research to identify, 
clarify and prioritise the issues that affected thei
r work as they prepared for or undertook changes 
brought about by the introduction of information systems. 
Many of these changes were planned and well prepared 
for: others were not. Not all the impacts of an 
information system can be anticipated. Such unanticip
ated impacts give rise to issues and concerns 
that, although perhaps significant to the workers con
cerned, are frequently difficult for them or their 
 organizational managers to explain. As the studies show, the techniques used in this research enabled 
these emergent concerns to be articulated and 
discussed within both the user and managerial 
communities. The techniques provide powerful support fo
r the process of learning
: participants in this 
research frequently reported that their understa
nding of their work and its relation to both the 
information systems they used and the wider ente
rprise of the organization had increased. This 
suggests that shared cognitive schemata are an 
important contributor to both organizational and 
information systems development and effectiveness. 
The use of RGA to articulate constructs surrounding a large scale forensic information system is 
described in Section 3. Section 4 reports the use of CM to investigate the change processes 
experienced by information systems specialists in 
a large financial institution. Section 5 discusses 
some of the findings from the research, highlighting 
the similarity of the research outcomes despite the 
disparity of the work settings. The conclusion proposes
 further research to explore the extent to which 
super-constructs provide the basis for comparison of the impacts of information systems in other 
organizational contexts. These discussions are preceded by a brief overview of the theoretical 
foundation of RGA and CM, Personal Construct Theory. 
2 PERSONAL CONSTRUCT THEORY 
Repertory Grid Analysis (RGA) and Cognitive Mappi
ng (CM) have a common theoretical foundation 
in Personal Construct Theory (PCT) (Kelly 1955a; Kelly 1955b). PCT was originally developed for 

use in Psychology, principally in therapeutic contex
ts. Three key assertions are seen to underlie PCT: 
that people make sense of their world through contrast
 and similarity; that people seek to explain their 
world (why is it so? what made it so?); and that people seek to understand the significance of their 
world by organising concepts hierarchically. In th
e traditional application of PCT, individuals are 
asked to express their view of the world in terms 
of constructs, each having 
a positive and negative 
pole (expressing the concept and its perceived oppo
site). The relationship be
tween the constructs is 
then evaluated through an exhaustive paired or three-way comparison to develop what are known as 
Repertory Grids. Equally the relationships between th
e constructs may be reflected in a more visual 
approach, as developed in a related technique kn
own as CM. The techniques are described in more 
detail in Sections 3 and 4, respectively. 
Both RGA and CM can be used inductively to investig
ate situations where the nature and significance 
of the issues is not known in advance. Give
n that some information systems™ impacts are 
unanticipated, the techniques provide a major advantage over questionnaires and similar research 
instruments that rely solely on pre-defined inve
stigatory criteria. Equally, the strength of PCT™s 
theoretical base and the structure provided by the 
RGA and CM techniques contrast with the more 
unstructured and debated nature of emergent tech
niques, such as Grounded Theory. The following 
sections explain the use of RGA and CM in the wo
rk setting. Later sections
 explore the nature and 
significance of the research process and findings, 
returning to discuss the theoretical foundation of 
PCT as the basis for future research efforts. 
3 NAFIS AND REPERTORY GRID ANALYSIS 
The National Automated Fingerprint Information 
System (NAFIS) is a large-scale distributed 
information system which became operational in all 43 police forces in England and Wales in July 

2001. RGA was one of four techniques (the others
 were observation, interview and document analysis) 
used to assess the impacts of NAFIS on the proces
s and organisation of fingerprint work. The NAFIS 
database, located in west London, holds the na
tional fingerprint collection of some 50 million 
fingerprint images. It also holds a database of out
standing (latent) finger marks from crime scenes. 
NAFIS interfaces directly with the Police National Computer (PNC) that holds descriptive 
(alphanumeric) data about convicted offenders. To
gether, the alphanumeric data held on PNC and the 
corresponding fingerprint images (called ‚ten-print
s™) held on NAFIS comprise the National Criminal 
Justice Record System (NCJRS). 
 NAFIS uses Automated Fingerprint Recognition 
(AFR) protocols to provide a comprehensive 
information system supporting two distinct processes 
(i) the verification of the identity of individuals 
arrested and (ii) the identification of those responsi
ble for crime. Historically, identity verification (i) 
has been the responsibility of the National Identif
ication Service (NIS) at New Scotland Yard in 
London, whereas identification of (l
atent) marks left at the scene of a crime (ii) has been a local 
(police force) responsibility. NAFIS bought these two 
processes together: since each process depends 
on the comparison of fingerprint images, NAFIS re
moves the need for both national (to support (i) 
above) and local (to support (ii) above) collections. 
The devolution of the ten-print verification process 
to the 43 forces bought with it responsibilities previous
ly held by staff at the NIS. Although the ten-
print process was familiar to provincial fingerprint 
officers, its management and resource implications 
were not.  
RGA was used in the research to
 articulate the tacit 
knowledge of fingerprint workers in order 
interpret the issues and concerns that faced them and their colleagues as NAFIS was introduced into 
operational use. RGA provided a content-free data ga
thering medium to facilitate conversations with 
fingerprint staff. This engagement with the finger
print community allowed the negotiation of shared 
meaning and the inter-subjectivity of the issues an
d concerns surrounding the use of NAFIS. During 
the course of the study, 56 RGA analyses
 were carried out with 24 participants. 
The initial phase of each RGA analysis followed the conventional pattern (as described by Fransella et 
al. 1971). Each participant was asked, ﬁWhat ta
sks are involved in fingerprint identification?ﬂ 
Participants™ responses were verbal descriptions of
 their experience of fingerprint work, which were 
recorded. These task descriptors included both cu
rrent manual tasks and tasks supported by NAFIS. 
Typically, participants named tasks in the sequence of
 their execution: the completeness of the list was 
intuitively clear to the participant. When a compre
hensive list of tasks had been compiled, they were 
differentiated by a process called tr
iadic elicitation. The task list was 
presented to the participant three 
tasks at a time. For each group of three (triad) the 
participant explained which 
task, if any, differed 
from the other two and how it did so. Participants also explained what made the non-differentiated 
tasks similar (see Thomas et al. 1985, for a full disc
ussion). In this way, the task list enabled the 
development of a series of bi-polar constructs, unique
 to each participant, capable of differentiating the 
tasks. The task descriptions provided the column headings and the bi-polar constructs the headings for 
the two ‚poles™ of the rows in the repertory grid. Pa
rticipants then rated each task in turn against the 
constructs using a 5 point Likert scale. The example in Figure 1 shows the task descriptors or elements 
as column headings and the constructs used to differ
entiate them as labels at the end of each row. The 
numbers indicate the ratings applied to each of the element and construct combinations. 
Each completed grid was analysed on-site using a two dimensional cluster analysis that re-ordered 
both the task elements (columns) and construc
ts (rows) according to the correspondence of their 
numeric ratings to re-order the rows and colu
mns. The example in Figure 2 shows how this 
correspondence was indicated by a series of crows feet, similar in appearance to a decision tree, to the 
right of the grid.  
No further statistical analysis of the data was ca
rried out at this time. The re-ordered grid was 
presented to the participant, who was asked to explain what the clusters meant in the context of their 

work. This process, called talkback (Thomas et al. 
1985), diverges significantly from the conventional 
statistical analysis of Repertory Grid data used, fo
r instance, by Hunter (1997). Here, RGA provided a 
conversational technology (Thomas et al. 1985): it was used as a medium for the organisational 
discourse, enabling participants to articulate their ex
perience of fingerprint work and the values that 
they used to judge it. 
Each analysis, or conversation, st
arted from scratch with the same 
question. Most participants took 
part in three analyses during the three year study.
 During the talkback phase, the spaced-focused grid 
was annotated to indicate the meaning attributed to the clusters. Additionally, following the second  
   Figure 1  A ‚raw™ repertory grid 
  Figure 2  A re-ordered repertory grid 
after two-dimensional cluster analysis 
 and third RGA analyses, participants were asked to compare the most recent grid with the previous 
grid(s). This provided a substan
tial extension of the talkback protocol, enabling change in both 
working practices and interpretations of those change
s to be monitored and discussed as utilisation and 
understanding of NAFIS increased. 
In these analyses, the participants were responsible 
for interpretation of the repertory grid and the data 
that it contained. The RGA process gave rise to subs
tantial learning at a number of levels. Individual 
participants increased the repertoire of language
 used to describe and explain their work: many 
remarked that they had not thought of or would have
 described fingerprint work ‚in that way™ before. 
This is an example of what Thomas and Harri-Augs
tein (1985) call self-organised learning. The value 
of RGA to this study did not lie either in the quan
tity or quality of the numeric data contained in the 
grids, nor in the rigour or reliability of the st
atistical protocols underpinning the FOCUS analysis. 
Rather, the value of RGA arose from the dialogue that it supported and the articulation of a number of 
super-constructs or ‚work motifs™. Nine work motifs we
re identified during this phase of the research: 
they are listed and described more fully by Davi
s (2004). The work motifs are representations of 
cognitive schemata shared by 
the research participants.  
The super constructs that arose from this inductiv
e RGA used language that was mutually understood 
within the fingerprint and wider 
police communities. This quality proved highly useful in enabling 
organizational managers to understand and appreciat
e the concerns of the fingerprint workers as the 
impacts of NAFIS ‚unfolded™ in the work setting. 
Observational and intervie
w work following the use 
of RGA showed that the super-constructs helped
 to inform managerial decision making and to 
optimize the process and organi
zation of fingerprint work. 
In addition to this valuable practical outcome,
 our use of RGA shows how the interpretation of 
empirical field study data can be enriched by retrospective comparison within the work context. This 
suggests that in addition to providing the basis for learning and organizational development, the data 
could be combined with those from other sources, such as interviews, observation and CM, to provide 
complimentary perspectives of the situation under study. 
4 UKFI AND COGNITIVE MAPPING 
Technology Group (TG) is the division of a large 
UK Financial Institution (UKFI), which has evolved 
from a building society to a financial group of 10 
strategic business units that service both corporate 
and personal banking and investment needs. TG is
 responsible for the development, implementation 
and day-to-day operations of information system
s of business-to-customer (B2C) and business-to-
business (B2B) business streams. TG consists of a
bout 90 information systems specialists distributed 
in three locations within the UK, handling the information systems of the financial institution 
nationally, including its web 
and call centre services.  
Despite the group™s diversification, Retail Banking is 
still the core business unit of the group. It serves 
approximately 15 million customers through appr
oximately 714 branches, 3,180 ATMs. The group 
launched E-banking in May 2000, aiming to provid
e access to customer services through internet, 
telephone, digital TV and WAP mobile phones. Th
e centrality of Retail Banking for the financial 
health of the group, along with its reliance on Inform
ation Systems, triggered the need for this study.  
This study focuses on the relatio
nship between TG and the Retail Ba
nking business unit. The aim was 
to facilitate Information Systems development and 
implementation for Retail banking by improving 
collaboration. The primary objective was to uncove
r the root causes of existing barriers to 
collaboration and define a solutions space that
 would enable negotiation and action taking.  
During the course of the study, over 30 semi-structu
red interviews were held with board and top-level 
managers within TG and the Retail
 business. Within this context CM
 was used to a) interpret and 
represent individual perspectives of those involved in the study in order to b) synthesise in a group 

representation an inter-subjective view of corporat
e reality. This inter-subjective view aimed to 
highlight the differences an
d similarities of individual perspectives
 and issues and concerns discussed.  
 CM was originally developed by Eden (1983) as a technique for use in strategic decision making in 
organisations. It adopts Kelly™s concept of constructs, but uses them in a much less rigid way than 

RGA (see Section 3). Constructs are identified from
 the statements individuals use in describing a 
situation during an interview and are represented as brief phrases in natural language. Sometimes the 
negative pole will be given, but often it is assumed 
to be implicit. Rather than carry out the Repertory 
Grid comparison, the links between constructs are identified from the chain of argument employed in 
describing the situation. The relationship between 
constructs is assumed 
to take the form of 
explanations and consequences as shown in Figure 
3. The relationship may be positive (i.e. construct 
A reinforces construct B) or negative (construct A 
operates in the opposite direction to construct B - 
reinforcing the negative pole), or connotative (imp
lying a relationship between the constructs, but of 
unknown or neutral effect). 
  Figure 3 Basic mapping convention for repres
enting relationships between constructs 
The product of a CM exercise is therefore a map (in 
the style of a directed network) made up of nodes 
(consisting of phrases used by the individual to desc
ribe the situation) and arcs (links identified from 
the individual™s description of the situation). Discu
ssing it with the interviewee validates the structure 
and content of the map. 
The mapping is initially carried out with pencil
 and paper during a normal interview. The large 
number of constructs generated in a one hour interv
iew (100 or more) often results in a very ﬁmessyﬂ 
picture/map being generated. This then needs to be ﬁtidied-upﬂ both for analysis and feedback to the 
interviewee. As part of this tidying process th
e map can be transferred to a specific computer 
application (Decision ExplorerŽ), which has been developed to operationalise cognitive mapping. It 
enables much easier handling of large numbers of co
nstructs and introduces a much higher degree of 
flexibility in manipulation of the maps. 
Following this tidying of the map, the information is then presented back to the interviewee for 
amendment, and/or confirmation that it is an approp
riate representation of their viewpoint (an example 
is shown in Figure 4). Rather than working with the 
whole map, particular chains of argument can be 
separated out and are much easier to examine. At 
this point there is wide scope for negotiation over 
the content and structure of the map, using the ph
ysical map (whether working directly with the 
software or on printed output) as the negotiative 
object. As noted in Section 3, the mapping process 
(including the feedback to the interviewees) allows
 for learning to occur, in that the process of 
reflecting on work practices, and deciphering thei
r rationale, allowed for insights by the individual 
participants that might not otherwise have been made. 
Having established some agreement over the basic outline for the map, the next step is to begin to 
make use of it. In practical terms maps of more than about 30 concepts are too difficult to deal with as 

a whole and Decision ExplorerŽ includes analytical
 routines which can aid the identification of: 
clustering of concepts, the beginnings and ends of 
chains of arguments (often described as assertions 
and goals), constructs which have many others associ
ated with them (described as issues), or which 
are branching points in a chain of argument (option points). This analysis can help to guide in the 
validation and interpretation of the map. 
A BC A is an explanation for B
C is a consequence of B
 (Answers the question:
How to do something?
Why do it?)
(Answers the question:
 So what?)
  Figure 4  Example of section of a co
gnitive map used in a feedback session 
In its application in strategic decision making, 
cognitive mapping can be used as part of a more 
general method known as Strategic Options Development and Analysis (SODA). In this approach 
different stakeholders whose views have been indi
vidually mapped are brought together in a meeting 
(a SODA workshop). The individual maps are comp
ared and a collective map is negotiated which 
seeks to merge those of the individuals. Where th
ere is uncertainty or different views about the 
meaning of constructs this can be examined in th
e individual maps and debated amongst the meeting 
participants. By retaining elements of the origin
al (individual) maps in the collective map, the 
stakeholders™ sense of ownership of the group viewpoint is encouraged. By providing a rich 
representation of individual viewpoints the similariti
es and differences between different stakeholders 
can be studied and debated. Apart from the process 
and affective benefits of such negotiation, the 
collective map can serve as an agenda for strategic action by identifying shared goals, problems and 
options. 
Cognitive mapping is an established technique in strategic consultancy (Eden et al. 2001), but it has 
not been widely applied in the Information Systems 
field. It may be argued,
 however, to have many 
characteristics which would commend it for use in
 information systems development (Brooks and 
Jones 1996). These include,  
 simple to use / non-intrusive - pen and paper recording during ‚normal™ interview; 
 easily comprehensible - uses interviewees own words; 
 emphasis on negotiation of viewpoints - validation 
of maps allows explor
ation/clarification of 
viewpoints and explicit de
bate in group sessions; 
 computer-based support - therefore it may be more acceptable/interesting to IS professionals. 
The study within UKFI used interviews, based on a 
three-section interview schedule, that aimed to 
explore perceptions of i) the curren
t situation and intervie
wees™ experience with 
TG or Retail Banking, 
ii) issues of collaboration betw
een the two groups and definition 
of a potential solutions space and 
 finally iii) relationship management and attitudes 
towards it. Each interview lasted between 20 
minutes and one hour and was tape-recorded and transcribed. 
Cognitive mapping was used as analytical, rather than data collection, technique. Mapping was carried 
out based on the interview transcripts. Individuals™ 
own words were used to form the map constructs, 
as much as possible. Each map consisted of 100-300 constructs depending on the interview duration, 
along with the detail and conciseness of individuals™ discourse. Maps were ﬁtidied-upﬂ using Decision 
ExplorerŽ, in order to present a more orderly repr
esentation. In addition it was possible to derive a 
‚stripped™ set version of each map, in which the essen
tial part of the map could be viewed, as a type of 
summary of the wider picture. Given the amount of information contained in each map, this enabled 
insights to more easily be drawn, and the wide
r set of issues to more easily be identified. 
Following the tidying of individual maps, a coll
ective map was created by aggregating and linking 
individual maps based on common themes to highlight similarities (see Figure 5). Linking was based 
on researchers™ reflecti
ons regarding commonalties across diffe
rent maps. These links were denoted 
with a different notation to highlight the type of imposed link. This map was presented to 
representatives of the organisation for identifying shared goals, problems and options. Used in 
conjunction with other analysis techniques this can be used to set the agenda for strategic action. 
 Figure 5  Schematic representation of bridging links to produce an aggregate map. 
The value of presenting the aggregate cognitive ma
p to UKFI company repres
entatives arose from its 
conciseness in representing and maintaining the mult
iplicity of individual pers
pectives. This provides 
the basis for further exploration of conflicting issues surrounding the process of Information Systems 

Development within UKFI. As noted already, the 
main aim for this study was to investigate the 
different perspectives held by TG and Retail Ba
nking, in order to identify and remove possible 
barriers. The result of the map analysis was a set 
of 6 ‚goal™ concepts and 16 ‚key issue™ concepts. 
These were then translated into five main probl
em areas and used in the feedback to the main 
members of UKFI. 
Bridge 
Map 3 segment
Map 2 segment
Map n segment
Map 1 segment
Bridge 
Bridge 
Bridge 
  Collaboration: issues include inconsistent ways of
 working, entangled organisational structure and 
‚over-the-wall™ mentality between  
 Communication: across the business/TG ‚gap™, for example, the range of communications issues 
that do not occur in a clear/timely manner. 
 Focus: need for a clear focus and delivery of 
business priorities between Retail Banking and TG. 
 Recognition: issues related to the recognition of 
TG contribution and inequa
lity of status within 
the company. 
 Trust: underlying mistrust between aspects of the business. 
As with the RGA and NAFIS, these problems areas are expressed in language that is compatible with 
the UKFI context, and could be used as points of discussion and to bridge understanding between the 
diverse areas of the business. 
5 DISCUSSION 
 Although the contexts in which they were used duri
ng this stage of the research were quite different, 
the outcomes of the RGA and CM pr
ocesses were similar in terms of
 the nature and utility of the 
constructs that they identified. Cropper et al 
(1990) compare RGA and CM directly. They highlight 
that while both techniques are well suited to the ar
ticulation and exploration of constructs used to 
explain organisational change, CM has an advantage over RGA since the latter lacks what they call a 
propositional structure. Pidd (1996) also compares
 the techniques, highlighting the ability of CM to 
help people understand and interpret other people™s 
view of reality. Use of the talkback protocol 
enabled RGA to make a similar contribution. Consequently, each technique provided similarly deep 
insights into issues and concerns that emerge
d in their respective organisational contexts. 
The crucial point here is that, despite their disp
arity, the organisational contexts studied shared 
elements common to many IS, particularly that of 
organisations (and the people that constitute them) 
feeling that the ‚technology™ is in the driving seat, an
d that they are in danger of losing control over the 
situation. In the case of NAFIS, the changes in 
the organisation were seen as being driven by the 
resource changes brought about by the ability of the technology to do what could not have been done 
before (ie. the combination of the verification/identification processes). In the case of UKFI, the 

scenario was more disperse
d, with the general feeling of separa
tion between the TG and the Retail 
Bank, resulting in a lack of communication and shared common goals. While no specific technology 
was involved here, it is a more generalised versio
n of the NAFIS scenario, whereby, the perception 
that the technology and hence the technology group (T
G) were driving the organisation. In the same 
way that the RGA allowed the police participants 
to re-conceptualize the role and usefulness of 
NAFIS, the introduction of a Relationship Manager role in UKFI was beginning to increase 

understanding between the TG (information systems) people and the user communities they served. In 

each case, the research outcomes increased underst
anding of the contextually specific issues by 
supporting the development of shared cognitive sc
hemata that facilitated discussion, explanation and 
action. In this way both RGA and CM, using their Pe
rsonal Construct roots, were tapping into the 
subtleties of individual perception, and the problems encountered when these emerge into the intra-
group and inter-group contexts. Whereas RGA is co
nstrained and well bounded, CM is more open and 
free flowing. However both produce representations of the more sensitive aspects of the complex 
organisational settings. As such the complementarity 
of the two PCT approaches
 provides insights that 
are often difficult to otherwis
e uncover, and more importantly to clearly demonstrate to the 
appropriate stakeholder groups. 
6 CONCLUSION 
In addition to sharing a common theoretical foundation, it can be argued that CM and RGA produce 
complementary outcomes, since both support the 
natural flow of the individual and collective 
narrative. Each also allowed the narrative to be pr
esented in a diagrammatic form (as shown in Figures 
2 and 4) and enabled the modelled constructs to info
rm later phases of the organisational discourse. 
Whereas RGA enables a smaller set of constructs to be exhaustively explored and elaborated, CM 
 allows the wider view (scenario) to be represente
d and multiple perspectives to be drawn together. 
Without pre-determining content, these techniques 
effectively exploit the theoretic foundation of PCT 
to provide a common basis for the representation 
of a structure or schema of constructs. The 
techniques articulated and facilitated the use 
of language and terms that provided a shared 
understanding between the business and technology communities. 
Thomas and Harri-Augstein™s (1985) analysis protoc
ols support the use of RGA as a content-free data 
gathering medium. This quality is particularly us
eful for the investigation of the organisational 
discourse surrounding information systems since many of the impacts of IS are not and cannot be 
known in advance or anticipated. Equally, CM allo
ws for the free flow of ideas from the interviews, 
during the data gathering experiences, to be represented and analysed and so used to inform bridging 
of the IT-Business ‚gap™. 
Although the outcomes of the CM and RGA proces
ses differ substantially in their appearance and 
presentation, it is our view that their common foundation in personal construct theory suggests a 
substantial opportunity to explore their compleme
ntarity. We anticipate the ability to develop a 
conceptual model as a framework for the analysis 
of cognitive schema and shared understanding in 
future phases of our rese
arch. We also anticipate that the availability and use of such a model will 
increase awareness of issues that concern both organisational and technology communities and, 
perhaps most importantly, enable the conceptual ag
ility of organisational managers to be improved. 
This, we would argue, is an e
ssential prerequisite for the organizational agility vaunted by the 
suppliers of contemporary information technologies such as component based systems. 
References 
Brooks, L., and Jones, M. ﬁCSCW and Requirem
ent Analysis: Requirements as Cooperation/ 
Requirements for Collaboration,ﬂ in: CSCW 
Requirements and Evaluation
, P. Thomas (ed.), 
Springer Verlag, 1996, pp10-20.ﬂ 
Cropper, S., Eden, C., and F, A. ﬁKeeping Sense of Accounts Using Computer-Based Cognitive 
Maps,ﬂ 
Social Science Computer Review
 (8:3), Fall 1990, pp 345-366. 
Davis, C., and Hufnagel, E. ﬁImplementing Information Systems to Support Knowledge Work: an 
exploration of Work Motifs,ﬂ European Conference
 on Information Systems, Turku, Finland, 2004. 
Eden, C., and Ackerman, F. 
Making Strategy: The Journey of Strategic Management
 Sage, London, 
2001. 
Eden, C., Jones, S., and Sims, D. 
Messing about in problems: an informal structured approach to their 
identification and management
 Pergamon, Oxford, 1983, pp. xiii,124p. 
Fransella, F., and Bannister, D. 
A Manual for Repertory Grid Technique
 Academic Press, London, 
1971. 
Hunter, M.G. ﬁThe Use of Rep Grids to Gather Interview Data About Information Systems Analysts,ﬂ 
Information Systems Journal
 (7:1) 1997, pp 67-81. 
Kelly, G. 
The Psychology of Personal Constructs
, Volume 1: A Theory of Personality
 Norton & Co, 
New York, 1955a. 
Kelly, G. 
The Psychology of Personal Constructs, Volume 2: Clinical Diagnosis and Psychotherapy
 Norton & Co, New York, 1955b. 
Orlikowski, W., and Barley, S. ﬁTechnology and Institutions: What Can Research on Information 
Technology and Research on Organizations Learn from Each Other?,ﬂ 
MIS Quarterly
 (25:2), June 
2001, pp 145-165. 
Orr, J. 
Talking About Machines
 Cornell University Press, New York, 1996. 
Pidd, M. 
Tools for Thinking
 John Wiley and Sons, Chichester, 1996. 
Scarbrough, H., and Corbett, J.M. 
Technology and organization : power, meaning and design
 Routledge, London, 1992, pp. xiii,178 p. 
Thomas, L., and Harri-Augstein, E.S. 
Self Organised Learning - Foundations of a Conversational 
Science of Psychology
 Routledge and Kegan Paul, London, 1985.
 