  Provided by the author(s) and NUI Galway in accordance with publisher policies. Please cite the publishedversion when available.Downloaded 2016-11-29T08:30:59Z Some rights reserved. For more information, please see the item record link above. TitleA case study of risk management in agile systems developmentAuthor(s)Coyle, Sharon; Conboy, KieranPublicationDate2009-06-08PublicationInformationCoyle S, Conboy K (2009) A case study of risk management inagile systems development. In 17th European Conference onInformation Systems (Newell S, Whitley EA, Pouloudi N,Wareham J, Mathiassen L eds.), 2567-2578, Verona, Italy.Item recordhttp://hdl.handle.net/10379/1392 A CASE STUDY OF RISK
 MANAGEMENT IN AGILE
 SYSTEMS 
DEVELOPMENT
 Coyle, Sharon, Centre for Innovation and Structural Change, J.E. Cairnes Graduate School of Business & Economics, National University of Ireland, Galway (NUIG), Ireland sharon.coyle@nuigalway.ie  Conboy, Kieran, Centre for Innovation and Structural Change, J.E. Cairnes Graduate School of Business & Economics, National University of Ireland, Galway (NUIG), Ireland kieran.conboy@nuigalway.ie  Abstract
 A principal objective of agile development methods is to reduce risk thereby resulting in more 
successful and effective information systems. However, while there is an extensive body of academic 
literatu
re on risk management, very little research has attempted to rigorously apply this as a lens to 
study risk management in agile development projects. The purpose of this research was to ascertain 
the extent to which risk management practices are incorporate
d into agile development projects. A 
case study was conducted involving a change management consultancy firm whose main business 
involved the deployment of agile approaches. The study found that while there is a perception that risk 
management practices ar
e not carried out in agile environments, the extent to which risk management 
is conducted on these projects is in some cases just as substantial to that carried out on traditional 
projects. In fact, in this case it appeared that the teams were more rigorou
s in their risk management 
than is often the case.
   1 INTRODUCTION
 In ISD, the rapidly growing use of agile methods shows the urgency of organisations to adapt to 
change at a more speedy and efficient pace where practitioners have Òdeveloped methodologie
s and 
practices to embrace, rather than reject higher rates of changeÓ (Williams and Cockburn, 2003). 
Many 
agile methods have emerged in recent years to address this issue e.g. 
eXtreme Programming (XP)
 (Beck, 1999)
, the 
Dynamic Sy
stems Development Method (DSDM)
 (Stapleton, 1997)
, Scrum
 (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002)
, Crystal
 (Cockburn, 2001)
, Agile modelling
 (Ambler, 2002)
, Feature 
Driven Design (FDD)
 (Coad, de Luca et al., 1999)
, and 
Lean Software Development (LSD)
 (Poppendieck, 2001)
, along 
with variants of each e.g
. XP-Lite
 (Aveling,
 2004)
. Agile methods are 
known for their use of iterative development, active user involvement and their acknowledgement of 
the need to incorporate changing system requirements and Òfocus on generating early releases of 
working products using mostly coll
aborative techniquesÓ (Reifer 2002). This is a stark contrast to the 
traditional model for systems development which promotes Òelicitation and freezing of requirements 
in advanceÓ (Fitzgerald 2000) with no overlap between project phases of analysis, design
 and 
implementation (Walters, Broady et al. 1994). 
 A principal objective of agile methods is to reduce well
-known risks associated with common ISD 
project failures by for example,
 accepting that requirements will change.
 The first Òtruly agile methodÓ 
(Ab
rahamsson, Warsta et al. 2003)
 is known as the 
Dynamic Systems Development Method
 (DSDM
) which promotes the idea that Ò
instead of fixing the amount of functionality in a product and then 
adjusting time and resources to reach that functionality, it is prefe
rred to fix time and resources and 
then adjust the amount of functionality accordinglyÓ 
(Abrahamsson, Warsta et al. 
2003).
 This 
highlights the element of flexibility in DSDM with regard to adjusting system functionality where 
system requirements are open t
o change. 
However, n
o matter what the nature of change, there will 
always be associated risks involved be it either a systems development change or a business 
operational change.
 1.1
 Motivation For Research 
 The idea of being proactive to change is becoming in
creasingly important across all industries due to 
an increase in project failures. There are infinite
 examples across the literature
 of project failures and 
media reports of  Òmajor engineering and development projects running late or exceeding their 
budgetÓ 
(Coppendale 1995)
. Risk management has been described as the Òacti
vity of identifying and 
controlling undesired project outcomes proactivelyÓ 
(Smith and Merritt 2002)
. One of the main 
reasons highlighted for the increasing failure in software proj
ects is that
 Òmanagers are not taking 
prudent measures to assess and manage the risks involvedÓ in their projects 
(Keil, Cule et al. 1998)
. According to Smith and Merritt 
(2002)
, a lack of proactiveness with regard to risk management is one 
of the main reasons for project delays, increased project running costs and/or eventual
 project failures.
  While there is extensive literature on 
risk management, research in relation to risk management in 
agile ISD projects is non
-existent. This is surprising considering how quickly agile methods are being 
adopted in ISD. Many books on agile methods Òhave remarkably little to say about how a 
develo
pment team determines the risks it faces, prioritises them or takes action to negate their effectsÓ 
(Smith and Pichler 2005). Essentially, agile methods must Òtailor conventional risk management 
approaches meant for years
-long projects into a risk driven a
gile iteration lasting only seven to thirty 
daysÓ (Smith and Pichler 2005). How agile projects go about doing this remains unknown.
 The primary objective of this research was thus to develop a better understanding of risk management 
practices in agile ISD 
projects and the level of formality with which these practices are executed. 
Specifically, this research focuses on three main elements of risk management, namely risk 
identification, estimation and evaluation. 
  2 THEORETICAL BACKGROU
ND In an ISD context, Ba
rry Boehm highlighted the concept of managing risks and giving them priority as 
far back as 1988. Ten years later, Hall 
(1998)
 described Boehm as being Òthe father of software risk 
management.Ó Boehm proposed a move away from the ÔstagedÕ SDLC (Systems Development 
Lifecycle) to a more iterative or incremental process and this proposed concept 
in software 
development is an attempt to lower project risks 
(Powell and Klein 1996)
. BoehmÕs aim was to 
eliminate any software difficulties or risks mainly by deriving Òrisk
-driven documentsÓ and 
Òincorporating prototyping as a risk
-reduction optionÓ 
(Boehm 1988)
. It resulted in what was called 
the ÔSpiral ModelÕ that essentiall
y created Òa risk
-driven approach to the software process rather than a 
primarily document
-driven or code
-driven processÓ (Boehm 1988).
 Many authors highlight distinct approaches and frameworks for dealing with 
risk management
. The 
approaches used can be f
ormal or informal. In an informal environment Òmuch risk identification is 
undertaken by managers and associated staff without any aiding techniques: they rely solely on 
experience, intellect and imagination to generate a comprehensive risk listÓ (Powell a
nd Klein 1996). 
Formal approaches include methods such as brainstorming or Delphi techniques, which can involve 
numerous stakeholders. In the literature, there is no universally accepted approach to 
risk 
management
. This however, is a reason
able and unders
tandable finding
 in that the process of 
risk 
management 
will differ across various industries and projects. As Raz, Shenhar et al. 
(2002)
 state Òone 
cannot expect that a single, universal risk management process and its supporting
 set of tools and 
techniques would be applicable to all types of projectsÓ and Òjust as there are different types of 
projects, we should expect to see different kinds of risk management practice.Ó 
 Risk management
 fundamentals however remain the same and a
re consistent across disciplines. The 
literature shows similar emphasis on the most important activities in 
risk management
 namely, those 
identified by Rowe 
(1977)
 and Charette 
(1990)
 - the early practitioners of risk management 
- who 
outline the three main elemen
ts of risk a
ssessment
 as (i) Risk Identification, (ii) Risk Estimation and 
(iii) Risk Evaluation.
 2.1
 Risk Identification
 Risk identification
 is the reduction of descriptive uncertaint
y (Rowe 1977)
 which involves Òsurveying 
the range of potential threatsÓ 
(Charette 1990)
. This element of risk assessment involves detecting 
issues which could jeopardise or threaten the success of a project 
(Coppendale 1995; Grey
 1995)
. Chapman 
(1998)
 states that Òthe 
risk identification
 and assessment stages have the largest impact on 
the accuracy of any risk assessment.Ó As a result, 
risk identification
 is the most important stage of the 
risk management
 proc
ess. O
f particular importance to ISD is the 
early identification of risks
 where 
Òidentifying and dealing with risks early in development lessens long
-term costs and helps prevent 
software disastersÓ 
(Boehm 1991)
. Many software disasters could have been avoided by early 
identification of any high
-risk aspects 
(Boehm 1991)
. It is imperative to understand that Òthe 
identification 
of risks carries on throughout the life of a projectÓ 
(Grey 1995)
. In other words, 
risk 
identification
 is an ongoing, 
continuous
 process that requires regular
 screening and monitoring.
 An important aspect of risk identification is categorising the risks organisations encounter. According 
to Coppendale (1995), Òdepending on the size and the complexity of the project there might be 
between five and fifteenÓ categ
ories of risk. Categories attempt to group certain types of risk under a 
particular heading and in doing so Òcan help you find global risks that can be solved togetherÓ 
(Williams, Walker et al. 1997). Two dominant ways of categorising sources of risk have 
been 
identified by Frame (2002). The first way of categorising risk is by function. Schwalbe (2000) 
identifies these functional categories as Market, Financial and Technological. For example, market 
risk may be a failure of user
-acceptability of a product.
 The second approach is to categorise risk as 
internal or external. For the purposes of this research, it was the authorÕs opinion that an analysis of 
 the literature in relation to internal and external sources of risk would provide a broader examination 
of the risk identification process. 
 There are many sources of risk, some of which include senior management, the client or customer, the 
project team, organisation of the project itself and finally laws and standards which directly impact the 
projec
t (Mant
el, Meredith et al. 2001). 
These sources can be placed into their respective categories as 
being either internal or external risk
 as follows:
   Risk Category
  Internal
 External
 Senior Management
 Acts of Nature
 Project Team & Man
agement
 The Client
 Sources of 
Project Risk
 Organisation of the Project
 Laws and Standards
   Table 1: 
 Categories and Sources of Project Risk
 The two most dominant sources of internal risk identified across the literature are Senior/Project 
Management and Project Team. The domi
nating external source of risk is the client. All of these were 
collectively identified by Mantel, Meredith et al. 
(2001)
 and are represented in the above table. 
 Every source of risk can have numerous risk factors. A risk factor is Òa condition th
at forms a serious 
threat to the completion of an IT projectÓ (Keil, Cule et al. 1998). Some internal risk factors include 
project conflict and resource boundaries, which can be linked to sources of project team and senior 
management risk respectively. The
re are an infinite number of risk factors (even if one was to analyse 
just one industry) and a study of all these was beyond the scope of this research. The following table 
however, shows some of the most dominant risk factors identified by Wiegers (1998),
 who categories 
these factors by sector:
  Project Sector
 Risk Factor
 % Of Projects at Risk
 MIS
 Creeping User Requirements
 80  Excessive Schedule Pressure
 65  Low Quality
 60  Cost Overruns
 55  Inadequate Configuration Control
 50 Commercial
 Inadequate 
User Documentation
 70  Low User Satisfaction
 55  Excessive time to market
 50  Harmful competitive actions
 45  Litigation expense
 30  Table 2: Most common risk factors for various project types (Wiegers 1998)
  On analysing the table, some direct link b
etween sources and risk factors is evident. For example, the 
sources of ÔmanagementÕ risk or Ôorganisation of the project itselfÕ could be linked to the risk factor of 
Ôinadequate configuration controlÕ due to a flaw in the projectÕs arrangement and organi
sation. 
However, the most interesting correlation is that of the ten risk factors listed in Table 2, at least six of 
these can be linked to the client as a source of project risk. 
 Finally, a dominating feature in recent literature deserves recognition whe
re there is strong support 
among authors that an actual Ôsource of riskÕ can provide a Ôsource of opportunity.Õ Chapman and 
Ward 
(1997)
 state Òit is only once risk is seen as a good thing people begin to look for opportunities.Ó 
Very few people would acknowledge ÔopportunityÕ as being a facet 
of risk as naturally there are 
negative connotations associated with risk. Hillson 
(2001)
 however, states Òthe decision to encompass 
both 
opportunities
 and threats within a single definition of risk is a clear statement of intent, 
recognising that both are equally
 important influences over project success, and both need managing 
 proactively.Ó In a general sense the above ideas represent something we all know and understand 
about risk and the nature of taking gambles 
Ð people and organisations usually undertake risk
s with the 
aim of benefiting from potential 
opportunities
 (Schwalbe 2000)
. Taki
ng on any form of risk can be a 
daunting task but as DeMarco & Lister 
(2003)
 state, Òif a project has no risks, donÕt do it.Ó
 2.2
 Risk Estimation
 At this stage it is hoped that the project team have identified all potential risks and they can now move 
on to estimating those risks. Risk estimation is t
he reduction of measurement uncertainty (Rowe 1977) 
where Òthe values of the variables describing the system are determined, the various consequences of 
an event occurring are identifiedÓ and finally, Òthe magnitude of the risk is determinedÓ (Charette 
1990). According to Charette (1989) Òthe basic difficulty in estimating software engineering risks is 
that most prospective project risk estimates being made are uniqueÓ because there are so few 
comparable projects which were conducted in the past. This aspec
t of estimation is extremely 
applicable in ISD environments where there are many generic risk occurrences but very few instances 
of projects operating under similar circumstances. Therefore, future estimates will undoubtedly be 
different.
 Risk estimation a
ttempts to estimate Òthe chance (or probability) of potential lossÓ as well as Òthe 
exposure to potential loss i.e. the consequences or magnitude of the identified risksÓ (Charette 1989). 
The chance of potential loss is essentially the process of attaching
 a probability of occurrence to any 
identified risk. As Hall (1998) states Òestimation is the appraisal of risk probability and consequence.Ó 
Probability is categorized as being greater than zero and less than one hundred while consequence is 
decided relat
ive to cost, schedule and technical goals (Hall 1998). If an event is certain to occur it has 
a probability of exactly one (McManus 2004) or one hundred percent. Calculating the probability of 
occurrence of a risk factor means calculating Òthe likelihood t
hat this risk will actually happenÓ 
(McManus 2004). According to McManus (2004) probability data should be used to compute the risk. 
When no actually data on probabilities exist, estimates by individuals most familiar with the project, 
its risk factors and
 overall problems are a good substitute (Mantel, Meredith et al. 2001).
 According to Frame (2002) and Hall (1998) addressing the consequences of risk factors can be carried 
out in two ways 
Ð either by qualitative or quantitative risk analysis. Qualitative 
data involves 
subjective units such as ÔhighÕ, ÔlowÕ or ÔcriticalÕ while quantitative data uses numerical units such as 
ÔworkdaysÕ, Ôstaff monthsÕ or Ômonetary unitsÕ (Smith and Merritt 2002). Informally, the literature 
reveals that qualitative analysis is
 based on subjective risk estimation while quantitative analysis is 
based on objective risk estimation. For example, Mantel, Meredith et al. (2001) outline how 
approaches that are qualitative in nature include Òsubjective assessments based on experience or
 intuitionÓ while quantitative approaches are Òbases on mathematical and statistical techniquesÓ which 
are objective in nature. 
 2.3
 Risk Evaluation
 Risk evaluation is an ambiguous term. Many authors use it to describe the process of evaluating the 
entire risk
 management approach while others use it to encapsulate the ideas of risk response. For 
example, Marchewka (2003) states how Òevaluation should consider the entire risk management 
process.Ó Charette and Rowe however, outline how risk evaluation is the fina
l stage of the risk 
assessment process where Òresponses to the risks are anticipatedÓ (Charette 1990). The latter 
perspective is the stance to which this research has taken. According to Rowe (1977), risk evaluation 
involves Òrisk aversive action, which ca
n result in risk reduction or risk acceptance.Ó Risk aversive 
action is essentially any mission that is undertaken to control a risk (Rowe 1977). At a glance, the 
purpose of risk evaluation is to amalgamate the results of the risk estimation phase (Chapman
 and 
Ward 1997) and then decide the best action(s) to take. This means that risk evaluation requires input 
from numerous stakeholders including senior management Òin proactive reduction of riskÓ signifying 
 the importance of risk action either before a proj
ect commences or long before a risk becomes 
uncontrollable (Thomsett 1993).
 According to Charette (1989) risk evaluation consists of the following three steps:
 ¥ Establish the ÔacceptableÕ level of risk
 ¥ Understand how the various risks interact (which may pr
ovide a single referral point for the 
project)
 ¥ Determine the action that needs to be taken with the project in relation to these risks
 The acceptable level of a risk will depend on Òindividual propensity to take risksÓ (Rowe 1977), which 
lies in the hands 
of the project manager and as a result is difficult to specify. By avoiding any risk 
action however, we are eliminating any proactive risk management. This means that if the risk occurs, 
reactive approaches will be applied such as contingency planning (Fra
me 2002). Secondly, interacting 
the various risks to provide a single referral point to the project is a worthwhile exercise as Òrisks tend 
to be interrelated with a lot of overlap existing between categoriesÓ (McManus 2004). This can make 
the risk evaluat
ion process more efficient as risk responses can be Ògrouped according to their 
intended effect on the risk being treatedÓ (Hillson 2001). Finally, actions that need to be taken will be 
in the form of risk mitigation, risk avoidance, risk acceptance and ri
sk transfer which are the response 
options available (Chapman and Ward 1997).
 2.4
 Incorporating Risk Management into Agile ISD
 According to Remenyi (1999) traditional IS developments initially set out to avoid or reduce the 
changes to a system which is regarde
d as a huge fallacy and now Òthe only way forward to a higher 
degree of success is to identify potential changes as early as possible and to lay down suitable plans 
for coping with them.Ó This involves carrying out proactive risk management. In ISD some of
 the 
most dominant risk reduction techniques include prototyping, benchmarking or surveying (Boehm 
1991) where managers tend to carry out risk action alternatives on an ad hoc basis (Powell and Klein 
1996). According to Powell and Klein (1996), Òprototypin
g and incremental development is often used 
to reduce project risks, for example by developing knowledge, by breaking the project into digestible 
bits, by reducing time between specification and delivery and by reducing the impact of change 
requests.Ó Thes
e concepts have triggered a new wave of development approaches, the most notable of 
these being agile methods.
 The growing prevalence of agile methods has been increasingly documented with the use of such 
methods as XP, SCRUM, Crystal and DSDM. Organisatio
ns are using these methods primarily to 
assist them in responding to change more rapidly and as risk management is a proactive change 
mechanism, it makes sense that these two practices should be associated with one another in agile ISD 
literature. There ar
e several agile methods and a detailed analysis of all these methods was beyond the 
scope of this research. However, in order to put agile methods into context for the reader, the author 
will give a brief overview of one of these methods, namely, the Dynam
ic Systems Development 
Method (DSDM). The author has chosen this as an example as it is considered to be the first Òtruly 
agile software development methodÓ (Abrahamsson, Warsta et al. 2003). It is also a worthy example 
to use because the method not only f
ocuses on systems development from a coding or technical 
perspective but also places emphasis on higher
-level business perspectives.
 2.5
 Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM)
 According to Abrahamsson, Warsta et al. (2003) the main idea behind DSDM Òis that
 instead of fixing 
the amount of functionality in a product and then adjusting time and resources to reach that 
functionality, it is preferred to fix time and resources and then adjust the amount of functionality 
accordingly.Ó The DSDM Consortium advocates
 that because each organisation is different none of its 
practices are detailed and the method itself provides complete support over the entire life
-cycle phase 
(Abrahamsson, Warsta et al. 2003). DSDM phases are made up of a functional prototype iteration,
 design prototype iteration followed by actual implementation with each iteration stage identifying, 
 agreeing, creating and reviewing the prototypes (Beynon
-Davies and Williams 2003). However before 
any iteration begins, a project will always start with a 
feasibility and business study. This highlights 
that that the method is not just focused on technical deliverables but it remembers to place importance 
on business aspects where the business should always be the driver of technological developments.
 DSDM h
as an active community and is developed and used mainly by its Consortium members and 
although the method is fully available, access to white papers which outline the specific use of the 
method is limited to such members (Abrahamsson, Salo et al. 2002). Th
erefore, the extent to which 
DSDM incorporates risk management in practice is unknown. Empirical evidence of the method is 
enclosed in such white papers, which are not publicly available. 
 For the purpose of this research, a member of the DSDM Consortium w
ho participated in this study, 
kindly provided the researcher access to information regarding DSDMÕs fundamental principles for 
conducting risk management. Without access to these white papers the researcher would not have been 
able to document the followi
ng information in relation to risk management in DSDM whereby its 
principles are primarily built around the following concepts: 
 Suitability Risk List 
! Risk Identification 
! Risk Log update 
! Monitor 
! Alert 
! Assess
 All risk management practices conducte
d in DSDM projects are driven by the processes outlined 
above. The suitability risk list determines at the outset how compatible a particular project is for the 
use of DSDM and outlines its associated risks. The suitability list is analysed as part of the 
first formal 
risk management activity. A risk log is then created, maintained and updated throughout the life of the 
project (DSDM Consortium 2002
-2006). It is well known that agile methods like DSDM were mainly 
introduced to help combat common ISD project
 failures, which revolved around time or cost overruns, 
or a failure to meet business needs. This is also clear from what the DSDM Consortium (2002
-2006) 
has stated whereby Òsystems that meet the needs of the business are delivered through the incremental 
and iterative approach with its continuous feedback from usersÓ while Òcost and time overruns are 
avoided by the use of timeboxes.Ó
 As a result many would propose that methods like DSDM would not need to incorporate a high degree 
of risk management into th
eir processes because the very reason for their existence is to reduce 
common risks associated with these well
-known project failures. However, it appears from this 
literature research from the DSDM Consortium, that DSDM itself gives no less consideration 
to risk 
management than what has been documented for traditional projects. The extent, understanding and 
application to which these procedures are applied however, required greater investigation that took the 
form of a case study analysis detailed in the f
ollowing sections. 
 3 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY
 This research utilised a single case study to analyse the present levels of risk identification, estimation 
and evaluation in the well
-known agile method, DSDM. The case study focused on an Irish change 
management c
onsultancy firm that utilise DSDM in their commitment to delivering client value. All 
participants in the study also had extensive experience using traditional systems development 
methodologies and could therefore make accurate comparisons between the prac
tice of risk 
management on both agile and traditional systems development projects. 
 A qualitative research approach was chosen for this study because of its greater exploratory nature and 
therefore its applicability to this research domain because it focu
ses Òon gaining familiarity with the 
subject areaÓ and gains Òinsights for more rigorous investigation at a later stageÓ (Collis and Hussey 
2003). This was essential in light of this study because there is very little research conducted in the 
area of risk
 management in agile ISD. The researcherÕs aim was to fully understand, determine and 
describe the existing situation of risk management in agile ISD, which goes beyond purely scientific 
restricting research. Therefore an interpretive stance was taken.
  3.1
 Dat
a Collection
 There were a variety of options available for collecting research information in this study however due 
to the fact that there was little pre
-existing theory on the phenomena being studied (Bonoma 1985) and 
as the researcher needed to focus on
 a qualitative methodology, the data collection technique needed to 
Òemphasise meanings and experiences related to the phenomenaÓ under investigation (Collis and 
Hussey 2003). As such, for the purpose of conducting primary research the author decided to us
e semi
-structured, personal one
-to-one interviews, which were carried out with the company founder 
and managing director as well as four of its key consultants and analysts. Each interview had a 
duration of approximately one hour. The researcher felt that 
in choosing this approach it ensured 
maximum quality and reliability of data as all interviews were tape
-recorded and therefore allowed for 
subsequent accurate analysis of the data. The semi
-structured interviews ensured that the researcher 
maintained cont
rol over each interview, without discouraging the discussion of any valuable, 
additional information.
 3.2
 Company Background
 The company involved in this case study was an Irish change management consulting firm with 
operations throughout Ireland. It focuses o
n delivering technologies to clients through the utilisation of 
DSDM. The managing director has over twenty five years experience of project management and has 
participated in many change
-management initiatives varying from traditional techniques to agile 
development techniques. The dominating feature of this company was its great success and confidence 
in utilising and deploying the ideas of agile development to deliver client value. In 2006, the company 
were also one of the 1666 members of the global Agil
e Alliance. 
 4 FINDINGS AND ANALYSI
S The company involved in this study is an active member of the DSDM Consortium and conformed to 
the principles of risk management outlined by the Consortium, which was discussed previously in 
section two. Each interviewee 
expressed how the practice of managing risk can never be curtailed 
whether the project is agile or traditional based. In fact, one of the consultants interviewed emphasised 
how in their experience there is a greater level of exposure of the importance of m
anaging risk on agile 
projects due to high
-level stakeholder involvement and collaboration. Strong emphasis on stakeholder 
collaboration improves the degree of managing risk in agile methods such as DSDM. The managing 
director explicitly stated:
 ÒTechnique
s of agile methods themselves are about reducing the risks of project failures and no 
matter what the nature of the agile method, a risk management framework will always be in placeÓ
 This interviewee also expressed how in their experience, due to the turbu
lent nature of business 
environments that Òrisk management has become progressively better because of project environments 
and the large amount of project failures.Ó Therefore, risk management procedures are gradually being 
considered with greater importan
ce in ISD, regardless of the method being agile
-based or otherwise. 
Such statements are important to consider for the remaining findings relating to risk identification, 
estimation and evaluation as all participants in this research have transitioned from 
traditional roles to 
agile but the extent to which their experience of risk management has progressed is relative to the 
progression of risk management in project environments over time. An experienced workshop 
facilitator and consultant with the company n
oted how they bring DSDM risk management practices 
into traditional project environments, which reinforce any risk methodologies already in place by the 
client. As stated by this interviewee, because risk management is incorporated into DSDM Òit 
highlights
 the need for it even when the client does not have a strict risk management methodology.Ó
  4.1
 Risk Identification 
in DSDM
 It became evident from all interviews that risk identification is an integral part of the risk management 
process for the successful comp
letion of a DSDM project. The interviewees generally spoke about 
three main aspects of their risk identification process, which revolved around an early suitability filter; 
ongoing workshops and risk log updates. Their comments showed strong association wi
th the formal 
practices outlined in section two. One interviewee explained that before commencing a project, the 
suitability filter aims to identify how appropriate DSDM is for a proposed project. The very existence 
of this suitability filter is a strong i
ndication that DSDM clearly recognises the potential for associated 
risks when using the method on incompatible projects. Furthermore the managing director noted how 
even in a scoping workshop they Òtry and very quickly identify risks from all stakeholder 
perspectivesÓ and later they would conduct more Òformal risk assessment, which may be part of 
another workshop.Ó This conveys how risks are considered with importance even at the very early 
stages of DSDM projects.
 As indicated in section two, continuous r
isk identification is an important aspect throughout a projectÕs 
life cycle. Interview participants predominantly referred to the risk log as their main medium for 
continuous monitoring and updating of risks. Again, one interviewee working as an analyst ex
plained 
how Òrisks would be reviewed on a weekly or fortnightly basis in conjunction with status reports that 
are carried out. WhatÕs outstanding on the risk log would be included in the status report.Ó The 
researcher was given access to one of the organis
ations risk logs which contained a risk number, 
category, description, colour code (for high, medium or low risks), assignment of risk, date, proposed 
action and follow
-up control.
 In section two, client risk involving scope creep was documented as being t
he main source of project 
risk across literature. This however, was not the main finding in this research where all interviewees 
strongly declared how ÒresourcingÓ would be their most dominant risk across projects. In particular, 
obtaining and retaining ke
y personnel in a given project is the single biggest risk across all projects 
encountered in this case study where a key consultant stated how Òresourcing availability is the classic 
risk we encounter because there are so many competing projects in operati
on across the organisation.Ó 
This risk is associated with the project team risk documented in section two. With regard to 
overcoming client risk, this consultant stated how:
 ÒIn a DSDM project you actually manage scope creep. There are specific DSDM techni
ques such as 
prioritisation of requirements and timeboxing, which helps you to manage it. Within each timebox you 
set the scope upfront and agree that youÕre not going to go outside the breadth of what you have at 
that point.Ó
 In terms of risk categorisati
on, the literature revealed two main ways of categorising risks 
Ð either by 
function or as being internal or external (section two). The findings in this study revealed that in 
DSDM risks are typically categorised according to function and Òaccording to th
e project team stream 
that owns the risk because effectively this is how the risk gets allocated and it determines who has 
ownership of the risk.Ó 
 Finally, in section two the author discussed a relatively new feature in literature, which promoted 
aspects 
of opportunity in risk identification whereby a source of risk can often be a source of 
opportunity. When all respondents were questioned about this they expressed how they would never 
associate risk with opportunity in this way. However, when discussing t
his with the managing director 
a very interesting concept was put forward whereby:
 ÒRisk management is really another way of identifying a business requirement. You can take a risk 
approach to develop more business requirements because mitigation of a risk
 is something that you 
actually have to do to develop the product so it becomes part of requirements.Ó
 The researcher found this to be a very interesting and valid viewpoint in that if the resolution of an 
identified risk results in an additional needed re
quirement, a project might easily find itself embracing 
 an opportunity by fulfilling this requirement. However, based on this intervieweeÕs experience these 
requirements are more often a necessary feature required to make the project work instead of an 
inn
ovative idea bringing about opportunity.
 4.2
 Risk Estimation in DSDM
 The DSDM Consortium (1999
-2003) outlines how the Ôlevel of riskÕ is equal to the likelihood of its 
occurrence multiplied by the severity of impact, which supports literature in relation to ri
sk estimation. 
The process was also evident in this case study where risks would be prioritised on this basis. An 
experienced workshop facilitator stated how their Òmain mechanism for prioritising risks would use a 
probability by impact approach.Ó In contr
ast however, the managing director stated that they would 
prioritise a risk relative to the prioritised requirement to which the risk effects. The researcher 
concluded that while some respondents referred to the main concepts of risk estimation, the nature
 to 
which they believe risks are prioritised was extremely dependent on each intervieweeÕs project role 
and experience. For example, the most junior team member stated how they would Òprioritise risks 
and identify which are actual show
-stoppers but estimat
ing risk probabilities or allocating percentages 
to the impact on a project is something I havenÕt had experience of.Ó Finally, the approach adopted for 
risk estimation in this case study showed that both quantitative and qualitative estimation techniques 
are used and are project dependent and vary from client to client. 
 4.3
 Risk Evaluation in DSDM
 A general consensus emerged in this study in that it is not considered feasible to carry out action for 
all risks because as a leading consultant stated Òit just wo
uldnÕt be practical and in some cases this 
may be more expensive to the project than what it would have to endure if the risk actually occurred.Ó 
However, all respondents agreed on one important point when discussing responsive actions and this 
involved th
e importance of responding to the highest prioritised risks in the same manner as they 
would respond to the prioritised Ômust
-haveÕ requirements in specific timeboxes. The researcher noted 
something important about this level of clarity in that the princip
les set down by the Consortium for 
requirements prioritisation and timeboxing have been made applicable to the approaches taken for 
managing and responding to risks.  As one interviewee stated:
 ÒProcedures or actions would not be carried out for all identi
fied risks but only those which have the 
appropriate priority in the same way as a Ôshould
-haveÕ requirement would not be an immediate 
necessity as would a Ômust
-haveÕ requirement. When actions are taken however, they may include risk 
reduction, transfer o
r contingency planning.Ó
 5 CONCLUSIONS & FURTHE
R RESEARCH
 This research was based on the concept of managing risk where the researcher sought to discover the 
extent of risk management practices in agile ISD projects utilising DSDM. This analysis involved a 
decomposition of the primary elements of risk management namely risk identification, estimation and 
evaluation. An analysis of the literature revealed little evidence on the extent of use of risk 
management practices in agile methods. However, it is widely 
recognised that agile methods 
themselves were introduced to combat well
-known risks associated with ISD project failures such as 
scope creep, cost overruns and schedule pressures. Their use of incremental development and active 
user involvement is an attem
pt to combat such risks. 
 Nevertheless, the findings of this research shows that the extent to which risk management is 
conducted in DSDM is in no way inferior to that carried out on traditional projects. In fact, DSDM 
shows a strong presence of risk manag
ement activities and in some instances shows more rigour for 
managing risk that what has been documented for traditional projects. The DSDM Consortium have 
specified the need for formal risk management procedures involving the use of an early suitability 
filter for example, which specifies project fit with DSDM as well as ongoing use of a formal risk log. 
 In addition, the research participants involved in this study showed a clear appreciation for the 
importance of managing risk on projects outlining how th
e insistence which DSDM places on 
stakeholder collaboration has a huge impact on risk management as it promotes the formal 
management of business risks, improves overall awareness of risk management among the project 
team, increases the number of risks ide
ntified throughout the project and ensures logical ownership of 
risks.
 While the research produced many interesting findings there is much scope for further research as 
follows:
  ¥ Given the diversity with which methods are adopted across organizations, a la
rge
-scale quantitative 
study may identify more generalisable themes regarding the adoption and deployment of risk 
management practices across a large number of projects.
 ¥ The case adopted in this research focused solely on one agile method, namely DSDM. Giv
en the 
diversity that exists across the agile method family, there is a need to examine the extent to which 
risk management is facilitated by other methods. 
 ¥ A final potential area for further research may be a comparison between the existing state of risk
 management in agile project environments and traditional project environments. This form of 
research may produce interesting findings in relation to risk management maturity over time.
 References
 Abrahamsson, P., J. Warsta, et al. (2003). 
New Directions o
n Agile Methods: A Comparative 
Analysis.
 Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Software Engineering
. IEEE 
Computer Society
, 244
-254 Abrahamsso
n, P., O. Salo, et al. (2002). 
Agile Software Development Methods: Review and Analysis,
 VTT Publicat
ions
 Ambler, S. W. (2002). Agile Modeling: Best Practices for the Unified Process and Extreme 
Programming. New York, John Wiley & Sons.
 Aveling, B. (2004). XP Lite Considered Harmful? Extreme Programming and Agile Processes in 
Software Engineering. J. Ecks
tein and H. Baumeister. Berlin, Germany, Springer.
 Beck, K. (1999). 
Extreme Programming Explained. Reading, MA, Addison Wesley.
 Beynon
-Davies
, P. and M.D. Williams (2003).
 The Diffusion of Information Systems Development 
Methods, Journal of Strategic Infor
mation Systems
, 12(1), 
29-46 Boehm, B. W. (1988). 
A Spiral Model of Software Development and Enhancement
, IEEE Computer
, 21(5), 61
-75 Boehm, B. W. (1991). 
Software Risk Management: Principles and Practices
, IEEE Software
 8(1), 32
-41 Bonoma, T., (1985). 
Cas
e Research in Marketing: Opportunities, Problems and a Process
, Journal of 
Marketing Research
, 22(2),
 199
-208 Chapman, C. and S. Ward (1997). Project Risk Management: Processes, Techniques and Insights, 
John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 Chapman, R. J. (1998). 
The Eff
ectiveness of Working Group Risk Identification and Assessment 
Techniques
, International Journal of Project Management
, 16(6), 333
-343 Charette, R. N. (1989). 
Software Engineering Risk Analysis and Management, 
Multiscience Press
 Charette, R. N. (1990). 
App
lications Strategies for Risk Analysis,
 Multiscience Press Inc.
 Coad, P., J. de Luca, et al. (1999). 
Java Modelling in C
olor
, Englewood Cliffs, NJ, Prentice Hall.
 Cockburn, A. (2001). 
Crystal Clear: A human
-powered software development methodology for smal
l teams
, Reading, MA, Addison
-Wesley.
 Collis, J. and R. Hussey (2003). 
Business Research
, Palgrave  Macmillian.
 Coppendale, J. (1995). 
Manage Risk in Product and Process Development and Avoid Unpleasant 
Surprises
, Engineering Management Journal
, 5(1), 35
-38  DeM
arco, T. and T. Lister (2003). 
Risk Management during Requirements
, IEEE Software
, 20(5), 99
-101 DeMarco, T. and T. Lister (2003). 
Waltzing with Bears: Managing Risk on Software Projects
, Dorset 
House Publishing Co.
 DSDM Consortium Manual Version 4.2 
(2002
-2006). 
Risk Management
. DSDM Consortium White Paper (1999
-2003). 
Risk Management
. Fitzgerald, B. (2000). 
Systems Development Methodologies: The problem of tenses
. Information 
Technology and People
, 13(3), 174
-185 Frame, J. D. (2002). The New Project 
Management: Tools for an Age of Rapid Change, Complexity, 
and Other Business Realities, Jossey
-Bass; A Wiley Company.
 Fuerer, R. and K. Chaharbaghi (1996). 
Competitive Environments, Dynamic Strategy Development 
Capabilities and Business Performance.
 Benchm
arking for Quality Management and Technology
, 3(3), 32
-49 Grey, S. (1995). Practical Risk Assessment for Project Management, John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 Hall, E. M. (1998). 
Managing Risk: Methods for Software Systems Development
, Addison Wesley.
 Hillson, D. (20
01). 
Extending the Risk Process to Manage Opportunities
, Fourth European Project 
Management Conference, PMI Europe 2001, London, UK.
 Keil, M., P. E. Cule, 
et al. (1998). 
A Framework for Identifying Software Project Risks,
 Communications of the ACM
, 41(11),
 76
-83 Mantel, S. J., J. R. Meredith, et al. (2001). 
Project Management in Practice
, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 Marchewka, J. T. (2003). 
Information Technology Project Management: Providing Measurable 
Organisational Value, 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc.
 McManus, J. 
(2004). 
Risk Management in Software Development Projects,
 Elsevier Butterwor
th-Heinemann.
 Poppendieck,
 M. (2001). Lean Programming, 
Software Development Magazine
 9(5),
 71
-75. Powell, P. L. and J. H. Klein (1996). 
Risk Management for Information Systems Dev
elopment
, Journal of Information Technology
, 11(4), 309
-319 Raz, T.,
 A. J. Shenhar, et al. (2002). 
Risk Management, Project Success and Technological 
Uncertainty
, R&D Management
, 32(2), 101
-109 Reifer, D. (2002). 
How good are agile methods?
 IEEE Software
, 19(4), 16
-18 Rowe, W. D. (1977). 
An Anatomy of Risk,
 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.
 Remenyi, D. (1999). 
Stop IT Project Failures through Risk Management
, Butterworth
-Heinemann.
 Schwaber, K. and M. Beedle (2002)
. Agile 
Software Development with Scrum,
 Upper Saddle 
River, 
NJ, Prentice
-Hall.
 Schwalbe, K. (2000). 
Information Technology Project Management,
 Course Technology, Thomson 
Learning.
 Smith, P. G. and G. M. Merritt (2002). 
Proactive Risk Management: Controlling Uncertainty in 
Product Development
, Productivity Pr
ess.
 Smith, P. and R. Pichler (2005). 
Agile Risks/Agile Rewards
. Software Development
, 13(4), 50
-53 Stapleton, J. (1997). 
DSDM: Dynamic Systems Development Method
, Harlow, England, Addison 
Wesley.
 Thomsett, R. (1993). Third Wave Project Management: A Handb
ook for Managing the Complex 
Information Systems for the 1990s, Prentice
-Hall Inc.
 Walters, S.A., J.E. Broady et al. (1994). 
A Review of Information Systems Development 
Methodologies.
 Library Management,
 15(6), 5
-19  Wiegers, K. E. (1998). 
Know Your Enemy:
 Software Risk Management
, Software Development
, 6(10),
 38
-42 Williams, L. and A. Cockburn (2003). 
Agile Software Development: It's about Feedback and Change
, IEEE Computer Society
, 36(6), 39
-43 Williams, R. C., J. A. Walker, et al. (
1997). 
Putting Risk Ma
nagement into Practice
, IEEE Software,
 14(3), 75
-81 