 IDENTIFYING LEAN SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT VALUES 
Lane, Michael T., LERO
1 - The Irish Centre for Software Engineering, University of Limerick, 
Limerick, Ireland, michael.lane@ul.ie 
Fitzgerald, Brian, LERO
1 - The Irish Centre for Software Engineering, University of Limerick, 
Limerick, Ireland, brian.fitzgerald@ul.ie 
Ågerfalk, Pär J.
, Department of Information Science, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden, 
par.agerfalk@im.uu.se 
Abstract 
Agile software development (ASD) has emerged as a practice-led initiative which offers great promise in 
improving software productivity. However some confusion exists as to its relationship with Lean Software 
Development (LSD). Some treat LSD as more or less synonymous with ASD whereas others view LSD as 
a different concept. The definition and positioning of LSD relative to ASD is important as it gets to the 

heart of software development as craft versus science debate. The purpose of this paper is to identify core 
LSD values that ‚define™ LSD much as the agile manifesto values unified and defined so-called 
"lightweight methods" for ASD. We posit that LSD is more management philosophy than method and 
illuminate this through a genealogical analysis of the origins of LSD. We identify principles from various 
sources on the application of lean thinking in different domains. Synthesizing these principles we derive a 

candidate set of lean values that characterise LSD. Although immediately valuable to practitioners 
seeking to apply lean values in agile projects, future research will use this value-set to assess elements of 

"lean thinking" in the practices and principles of various agile methods so as to facilitate optimal 
applicability of these methods in a lean context. 
Keywords: Lean software development, Agile software development, Lean thinking, Lean values. 
1 This work was supported, in part, by Science Foundation Ireland grant 10/CE/I1855 to Lero - the Irish Software Engineering 
Research Centre (www.lero.ie) 
 1 Introduction 
Agile software development is an umbrella term used
 to identify "lightweight" methods. Many such 
methods emerged to counteract the perceived weaknes
ses of approaches that were based on the traditiona
l 
systems development lifecycle or "Waterfall" model.
 These "lightweight" methods sought to avoid 
wasteful activities in software development. For ex
ample, waterfall phases decry backtracking thus 
enabling the growth of small issues into major rewo
rk items that could be resolved by iterative end-
customer reviews of individually completed features
(Highsmith, 2002). Research is ongoing to determine
 
the effectiveness of these methods(Abrahamsson et a
l., 2009). 
One particular "lightweight" method was named "Lean
 development" (LD) (Cohen et al., 2004, Charette, 
2003, Highsmith, 2002). This is considered a top-do
wn strategic approach to software development in 
contrast to other agile methods(Highsmith, 2002). T
he application of lean thinking to software 
development approaches was also reported under the 
labels: "lean hardware/software development" (Hou, 
1995) and "lean software development"(Middleton, 19
95, Middleton, 2001, Middleton et al., 2005, 
Middleton and Joyce, 2011, Raman, 1998, Poppendieck
 and Poppendieck, 2003). This paper uses the 
term lean software development (LSD) as an umbrella
 term to refer to methods that claim to apply lean 
thinking. Analysis of agile software development re
search, indicates that very few research efforts ha
ve 
been made into LSD (Dingsoyr et al., 2008). Confusi
on exists about whether LSD should be considered 
an agile method or a different form of development 
that has a close relationship to the concept of agi
le 
development. Various agile methods recommend practi
ces and techniques that support lean thinking 
(Hibbs et al., 2009, Poppendieck and Poppendieck, 2
003). Windholtz in (Middleton and Sutton, 2005) 
presents empirical research to support his view tha
t one of the most widely adopted agile methods, 
extreme programming (XP), embraces lean thinking. H
owever, the aforementioned confusion is evident 
in a separate contribution from Middleton and Sutto
n (2005) which proposes that XP emulates craft work
 
rather than lean production. However they note that
 XP has got potential to become more effective, 
especially if it incorporates strategic "top-down" 
thinking and domain orientation. Fowler (2008) 
maintains that development teams should not conside
r whether to perform Agile software development or 
Lean software development. Instead they should aim 
to apply lean thinking in their implementation of a
n 
agile method - "developers should not do agile
 or 
lean - they should do agile
 and 
lean
".
 The view is taken 
here that LSD is not one of the agile methods - it 
is a broader concept that considers software 
development from an overall business perspective an
d as such, may inform the construction, adaptation 
and application of software methods. 

The purpose of this paper is to induce a set of hig
her-order values that underpin lean principles and 
practices. An exploration of the origins of lean co
ncepts and their application in different domains 
identifies a series of principles reported in the l
iterature on the lean paradigm. An hermeneutic 
interpretive process is followed to synthesize a co
mpilation of these principles into a set of lean va
lues 
that can be leveraged to explore the relationship b
etween LSD and ASD and contribute to the resolution
 
of the aforementioned confusion around these two ap
proaches. Such an effort is of imminent importance 
to both practice and academic research. An increase
 in the conceptual understanding of LSD is clearly 
required to facilitate rigorous research in the are
a. Understanding the relationship between LSD and A
SD 
is also required in order to successfully employ ﬁa
gile
 and 
leanﬂ as suggested by Fowler (2008). Finally, 
opportunities for further research that may leverag
e the lean value set are described and potential 
applications of the set in industry settings are pr
oposed.  
2 Research Method 
In his work on learning organizations, Senge (1990)
 described practices as the activities that practit
ioners 
perform whereas principles are the "guiding ideas a
nd insights" that inform them on the rationale behi
nd 
 the activities that they select and implement. This
 paper proposes to extend this two-tier perspective
 to 
embrace the concept of "values" Œ the latter being 
more broad abstract beliefs which govern principles
 
(Figure 1). The three-tier values-principles-practi
ces model is evident in the Agile Manifesto(Fowler 
and 
Highsmith, 2001). It outlines a set of values to re
present the broad abstract beliefs of the signatori
es. 
These values are then supported by a set of princip
les that offer guidelines to assist in the concrete
 
application of the values. These principles are the
n applied by practices of actual agile methods.  
  Figure 1. Three-tier representation (see Table 2 fo
r the complete set of values) 
Ambler (2002) describes a method-specific use of th
is model. He frames his description of the Agile 
Modelling (AM) method from a top-down perspective b
y presenting a set of high-level values that 
represent the fundamental concepts that govern the 
method. These values are supported by a set of 
principles that relate the values to their more con
crete application in software development. Finally,
 he 
proposes a set of practices that may be performed t
o follow the direction of the principles. In keepin
g with 
Karlsson & Ågerfalk (2009) this three-tier model is
 mapped onto the method rationale framework of 
Ågerfalk & Fitzgerald (2006), which is then used as
 a tool to understand the conceptual linkages betwe
en 
values, goals (principles) and method fragments (pr
actices).  
As stated above, a result of this paper is a set of
 higher-order values that underpin lean principles 
and 
practices. A bottom-up approach is taken to identif
y a candidate set of values. Experiences and opinio
ns 
of various authors are analysed in order to clarify
 and understand the different sets of lean principl
es that 
these authors recommend as necessary to guide lean 
thinking in different situations. These lean princi
ples 
are synthesized into a set of values intended to ab
stract the beliefs and intentions of the principles
. 
The identification of a representative set of comme
ntators on lean thinking was approached from a 
genealogical perspective. The main sources of infor
mation related to the earliest application of lean 
thinking (operations management), were lean trainin
g courses and Ohno(1988). The next phase was to 
generalize lean operations. Womack and Jones (2003)
 served as a launching pad to conduct citation 
searches for relevant papers, websites, books and c
onference proceedings. These searches were 
influenced by interest in the application of lean t
hinking to software development. Inconsistencies in
 
reporting Charette's lean development method highli
ghted confusion about the relationship between lean
 
and agile in software development and motivated a r
eview of his work in project management and lean 
thinking. The proposal that Scrum and Lean were two
 separate approaches to address complex adaptive 
systems(Sutherland, 2008) prompted investigation in
to product development. Finally, the software focus
 
directed the search to review sources related to th
e term "lean software development". 
Analysis of the above sources revealed several sets
 of lean principles. These principles were analysed
 in 
an iterative fashion in order to induce a set of va
lues. As expected, overlaps were encountered as asp
ects 
of different values are addressed in many of the pr
inciples. It was decided to consider what value was
 






˘


ˇ
ˆ˙ˇ



˝ˇ˝ˇ


˛
˘ˇ
˝˚
ˇ
 most prevalent in each principle and to assign the 
principle to that value. This is considered reasona
ble as 
the motive was not to build an exact mapping of pri
nciples to values, but rather to use the principles
 as a 
basis to help uncover a representative set of lean 
values. The analysis reviewed the sources of each 
principle to fully understand the meaning of the pr
inciple in the context of the paper in which it was
 
presented. A description of each principle was crea
ted and this enabled an initial definition of each 
value 
being addressed. The iterative synthesis of the val
ues involved both convergence from narrow to broad 
(as similar values were grouped to a higher-order v
alue) and in some cases divergence from high-level 
to 
specific. Further details on this process are prese
nted in section 4.  
Clearly there are limitations with this approach. T
he initial literature review is not easily generali
zed or 
replicable. The identification of values was subjec
t to the bias of the authors™ beliefs and experienc
es. 
However, it is hoped that these beliefs and experie
nces are grounded in an appreciation of software 
engineering research and application and that the p
roposed value set resonates with members of these 
communities. This research is not intended to prese
nt the definitive set of lean software development 
values. It is intended to present a candidate set t
hat may be used to facilitate further research into
 the 
relationship between agile software development and
 lean software development.  
3 Evolution of Lean Software Development 
Methodology (or the study of methods) has proposed 
that software methods can be viewed as formalized 
approaches created in clinical environments and in 
many cases, subsequently tailored to become both 
situational methods to suit certain environments an
d methods-in-action adapted as a result of the infl
uence 
of various forces in a particular development situa
tion. Many methods have been based upon a higher-
order construct of problem-solving known as the sys
tems development lifecycle or colloquially "the 
waterfall model". (Fitzgerald et al., 2002).  

As stated earlier, this paper proposes that LSD sho
uld also be viewed as a broad concept that informs 
the 
construction, adaptation and application of many me
thods: a management philosophy that has evolved 
from different domains including operations managem
ent, product development, project management and 
software development. This section reviews research
 into the application of lean thinking in these 
domains. In the interest of brevity, it is not feas
ible to describe every principle identified. Howeve
r, to 
support descriptions of the reported opinions of se
lected commentators from each domain, a selection o
f 
principles are described in the context that they h
ave been proposed by the original source. To supple
ment 
this narrative and support further inquiry, each so
urce is mapped to a codified list of its associated
 
principles (Table 1). Each principle referred to in
 the following sections is supported by its associa
ted 
table 1 code e.g. O
n 
refers to principle 
n of Ohno (1988); SB
n 
refers to Spear and Bowen (1999). 
3.1 Influence of operations management on LSD 
The Toyota Production System (TPS) is often cited a
s one of the key catalysts to the worldwide interes
t in 
lean approaches to different disciplines. Many TPS 
concepts have been practiced by manufacturers 
worldwide (Spear and Bowen, 1999). This system evol
ved within the manufacturing environment of 
Toyota in response to the challenges facing the com
pany to be cost-effective and adaptive in order to 
initiate and sustain a competitive advantage in the
 automotive sector(Hibbs et al., 2009, Coplien and 
Bjornvig, 2010, Ohno, 1988, Holweg, 2007).  

Many early developments such as parts interchangeab
ility, work standardization and divison of labour l
ed 
to the industrial revolution in which craft workers
 were replaced by mass production. The US automotiv
e 
  Operations Management 
Ohno(1988) 
O1:
 Continual emphasis on waste reduction; 
O2:
 Flow; 
O3:
 Built-in quality; 
O4:
 Respect for people; 
O5:
 Caution in slow-growth environment; 
O6:
 Production levelling; 
O7:
 Autonomation; 
O8:
 Respond to needs; 
O9
: Cost reduction 
Spear and 

Bowen (1999)  
SB1:
 Detailed specification of every task; 
SB2:
 Unambiguous communication procedures between emplo
yees; 
SB3:
 Single pathway for every product; 
SB4:
 Strict adherence to scientific method for improvem
ents 
Womack & 

Jones (2003) 
W1:
 Value; 
W2
: Value Stream; 
W3:
 Flow; 
W4:
 Pull; 
W5:
 Perfection 
Product Development 
Reinertsen and 

Shaeffer (2005) 
R1:
 Batch size reduction; 
R2:
 Tolerate necessary variability; 
R3:
 Maintain flow; 
R4:
 Pull; 
R5:
 Fast powerful feedback loops; 
R6:
 Avoid over-reliance on 
requirements; 
R7:
 Invest in flexibility; 
R8:
 Achieve adequate failure rates; 
R9:
 Understand economics of waste; 
R10:
 Avoid sub-optimization 
Liker and 

Morgan (2006) 
L1:
 Establish customer-defined value to separate value
 added from waste; 
L2:
 Maximize design space(explore alternatives); 
L3:
 Levelled process flow; 
L4:
 Rigorous standardization; 
L5:
 Chief Engineer system; 
L6:
 Balance functional and cross-functional expertise;
 
L7:
 Develop engineering competence; 
L8:
 Integrate suppliers; 
L9:
 Continuous improvement; 
L10:
 Build culture of relentless improvement; 
L11:
 Adapt technology to fit people and process; 
L12:
 Simple visual communication to align organization;
 
L13:
 Support standardization and learning with powerful
 tools. 
Project Management 
Charette (2003) 
C1:
 Customer satisfaction; Best value for money; 
C2:
 Active customer participation; 
C3:
 Team effort; 
C4:
 Everything can change; 
C5:
 Domain solutions; 
C6:
 Avoid duplication; 
C7:
 80% solution now preferable; 
C8:
 Minimalism; 
C9:
 Needs determine technology; 
C10:
 Measure product growth in features; 
C11:
 Use lean appropriately; 
C12:
 Worker devlopment
 Lean Software Development 
Hou(1995) 
H1: 
Defined; 
H2:
 Configuration Management, 
H3:
 User Involvment, 
H4:
 Transparent, 
H5:
 Tailorable, 
H6:
 Rapid Development, 
H7:
 Scalable, 
H8:
 Defect-free, 
H9:
 Continuous improvement, 
H10:
 Manufacturability, 
H11:
 Supportability, 
H12:
 Scalable architecture, 
H13:
 Hardware/software codesign 
Middleton(2001) 
M1:
 Continual improvement; 
M2:
 Empowered workers; 
M3:
 Defect prevention; 
M4:
 Visual quality measures; 
M5:
 Automatic quality measurement 
devices(often self-developed) 
Poppindieck & 

Poppindieck 

(2003) 
P1:
 waste elimination; 
P2:
 learning amplification; 
P3:
 deferment of decisions; 
P4:
 optimal speed of delivery; 
P5:
 team empowerment; 
P6:
 integrity 
construction; 
P7:
 systems thinking 
Middleton, 

Flaxel & 

Cookson (2005) 
MF1:
 Small iterations; 
MF2:
 Requirements elicitation; 
MF3:
 Requirements chunking to support resource allocati
on; 
MF4:
 Units of work to enable Takt 
time establishment; 
MF5:
 Low distance between collaborators; 
MF6:
 Consistent roles, work practices; 
MF7:
 Defect prevention; 
MF8:
 Feedback on 
productivity & errors; 
MF9:
 Impartial data collection; 
MF10:
 Multi-disciplinary teams; 
Middleton & 

Joyce (2011) 
MJ1:
 Levels of WIP; 
MJ2:
 Pull work only when needed; 
MJ3:
 Level out workload; 
MJ4:
 Stop to fix problems; 
MJ5:
 Continuous improvement; 
MJ6:
 Make process visible; 
MJ7:
 Ensure technology serves people & process;  
Table 1: Lean principles from various sectors/authors
 industry was revolutionized by these concepts leadi
ng to its dominance of the sector world-wide. By 
1945, the Toyota Motor company launched a programme
 to "catch up with America". Severe constraints 
including a small home market, limited land availab
ility, skills shortages and limited funds for capit
al 
invesment motivated Toyota to seek more innovative 
production mechanisms to mass production 
approaches in order to pursue their goal. (Ohno, 19
88). The TPS was built upon proven operations 
management techniques, quality concepts, analyses o
f innovations adopted by other industry sectors and
 
continuous learning and refinement as a result of t
he introduction of various initiatives intended to 
reduce 
waste and increase value to the customer. Ohno (198
8) challenges the use of large batch production in 
the 
pursuit of economies of scale, stating that large b
atches both increase waste (such as defects) and in
hibit 
product diversity(Holweg, 2007). Waste reduction (O
1)
2 is a key principle of the TPS. Seven major 
sources of waste are identified: transportation, ov
erproduction, over processing, defects, inventory, 
motion and waiting. Levelling customer demand (O6) 
is key to enabling the transformational flow of 
parts through the supply chain. The Just-in-time (J
IT) method is used to enable flow (O2). This demand
s 
that a part is produced at the time it is needed. I
t requires upstream activities that have rapid set-
up 
systems in order to respond to demand and downstrea
m activities to have levelled their schedules to 
enable predictable flow. Ohno (1988) notes that the
 arrival of just enough inventory just in time enab
les 
waste reduction, promotes consistency and reduces t
he chances of employees being overburdened by 
workloads. For these reasons, the principle of flow
 is emphasised by many authors. Built-in-quality (0
3) 
refers to the concepts of mistake-proofing in order
 to prevent the occurrence of defects. A related 
principle specifically called out from the works of
 Ohno(1988) is "autonomation" (07) which refers to 
the 
"intelligent machine" (suspends work and alerts ope
rators upon detection of an adverse quality event) 
to 
promote quality. An example of the application of t
his concept in software development would be a buil
d 
verification test that reacts to any test failures 
by automatically stopping the build and waiting for
 
developer intervention. Cost reduction (O9) demands
 that selling price is dictated by the market - not
 on a 
cost plus basis (Selling price = profit - cost). Ot
her principles highlighted by Ohno include the 
empowerment of workers(04), awareness that high-gro
wth success criteria (such as mass production) do 
not apply in slow-growth economies (05) and awarene
ss that all improvement initiatives should be a 
response to a clear opportunity or need (O8). Spear
 and Bowen (1999) investigates the difficulties of 
TPS 
replication encountered by organizations worldwide,
 despite Toyota's willingness to offer open access 
to 
their manufacturing systems. They postulate that th
is difficulty emanates from imitators placing an 
excessive focus on the practises of the TPS and not
 enough emphasis on the overall implementation of t
he 
system. They propose that the implementation of TPS
 can be defined as the compliance to four rules: 
detailed specification of every task (SB1); unambig
uous communication procedures between employees 
(SB2); a single pathway for every product or servic
e (SB3); strict adherence to the use of the scienti
fic 
method in pursuing improvements(SB4). This leads to
 an organization equipped to pursue continuous 
learning. The TPS promotes the encapsulation of wor
k so that modifications to an area do not lead to 
unintended adverse consequences in other parts of t
he system. Liker and Morgan (2006) note that this 
continual pursuit of innovation at the "gemba" or p
lace of action had a consequence that the overall 
system was not formally documented for many years. 

Womack and Jones (2003) synopsize their interpretat
ion of the TPS and additional lean research into fi
ve 
principles: value, value stream, flow, pull and per
fection. Value (W1) could be considered customer-
defined satisfaction with an information system or 
product features. Value stream (W2) refers to the 
mapping of every step from initial transformation o
f raw materials to delivery of final product in ord
er to 
identify and tackle value and waste. Steps in a sof
tware method could be analysed to identify value ad
ded, 
non value-added and necessary non-value added activ
ities being performed in a software project. Flow 
(W3) refers to the establishment of a process of va
lue-adding activities resulting in the delivery of 
a 
                                             
 2 Space constraints preclude a full explanation of e
ach principle. Principles are keyed to the referenc
ed work as follows: O
n 
refers 
to Ohno (1988); SB
n 
refers to Spear and Bowen (1999). See Table 1 for c
omplete set of principles. 

Must remove from 
submission - there is no table 1 
 product or value. Flow in operations management pro
motes the reduction of batch sizes in order to have
 a 
product flow through production out to a customer. 
The analogy for software is a feature. Middleton 
(2005, 2011) acknowledges the difficulty of establi
shing a "standard feature" and proposes the use of 
feature sets or "minimum marketable features" to de
liver value. Pull (W4) refers to the establishment 
of 
production to react to customer demand. The process
 begins with the final customer being synchronized 
with product completion. No upstream work is delive
red until the immediate succeeding downstream 
operation signals a need (via Kanban). (Ohno, 1988)
. Hibbs et al. (2009 p.113) presents the applicatio
n of 
pull in Scrum. Perfection (W5) relates to the conti
nual improvement of standard work. 
3.2 Influence of Product development on LSD 
Liker and Morgan (2006) explain that lean principle
s extend beyond the manufacturing production 
department. Many industries have adopted different 
techniques from the TPS practices. They propose tha
t 
lean adoption in a non-repetitive environment such 
as services would be better served by using the 
experiences of the Toyota Product Development syste
m (TPPD). Studies of this system are synthesized 
into a generic lean product development framework o
f management principles that address three areas: 
process, people and tools/technology. Process think
ing promotes a complete understanding of what value
 
is from the customer's perspective (L1), strong up-
front design to ensure the correct plan is followed
 (L2), 
effective levelling of planned activities (L3) and 
establishment and adherence to standard processes (
L4). 
People management fosters a culture of empowerment 
and technical and domain expertise (L6, L7) that 
enables workers (including suppliers (L8) to contin
ually improve both the product and the process. 
Tools/technology management insists that tools must
 be tailored (L11) to address the problem. Tools 
must be used to support communications at all level
s and must be leveraged to support standardization 
and continual learning within the organization (L12
, L13). An overarching characteristic of the TPPD i
s 
the promotion of continual learning by the workforc
e(L9). The application of certain lean techniques i
n 
order to remove some waste from a particular task i
s secondary to an organization gaining momentum in 
the empowerment of its workforce to constantly purs
ue continual improvement (L10) and evolve new 
standard activities that form the basis for future 
waste reduction initiatives. Liker's interpretation
 of TPPD 
is consistent with recommendations on the applicati
on of total quality management to software 
development: innovative approaches to customer care
, continual process improvement, judicious use of 
tools and technologies and strong awareness of huma
n factors(Kan et al., 1994).  
Reinertsen and Shaeffer (2005) also emphasize the d
ifference between product development and 
manufacturing activities. Process variability, sequ
ence, volatile requirements and attitudes to risk 
influence the manner in which lean principles are a
ddressed in a research and development environment.
 
Whereas variability in a repetitive environment is 
to be avoided, this is not the case in a non-repeti
tive 
situation. In R&D, variability is desirable in cert
ain circumstances and is to be removed in others (R
2). 
Manufacturing adds value to items in a sequential m
anner. R&D adds value to an intangible asset: 
information. As such, this value addition can occur
 to the same information in different places at the
 same 
time, thus necessitating consideration on how the p
otential parallel addition of value can be exploite
d. 
R&D deals with moving targets as market needs and t
echnology capabilities evolve - it must embrace 
uncertainty (R6) in order to innovate whereas manuf
acturing aims to enhance productivity by operating 
under stable constraints. However, despite the afor
ementioned differences between manufacturing and 
R&D, they propose that certain lean principles disc
overed by the manufacturing sector can be applied t
o 
product development. Reduction in batch sizes equat
es to addressing smaller "batches" of information 
(R1). This can be interpreted as reducing project s
ize. Variability of expected work and task duration
s are 
an outcome of risk-taking which is critical to inno
vation (R8). Enabling workers to be multi-functiona
l 
(R7) promotes a "pull" strategy to deal with task v
ariability and also encourages the maintenance of f
low 
(R3) rather than a predictive planning approach whi
ch can often be foiled by latent requirements.  
The main difference between lean product developmen
t (LPD) and traditional product development is the 
focus on customer value provision at each process s
tage. LPD processes are not well defined in the 

That should be 2009 - 
change in submission 

This word is missing 
from submission 
 literature - it is left to organizations to impleme
nt processes to address the LPD philosophies. LPD 
embraces long-term thinking and encourages sustaina
ble development processes that enable an 
organization to manage changing customer needs and 
market conditions. (von Wurtemberg et al., 2011)  
3.3 Influence of Project Management on LSD. 
Project management consists of a series of overlapp
ing processes or activities that address the needs 
of 
nine knowledge areas including "risk management".(P
MI, 2008). Koskela and Howell (2002) asserts that 
such a view of project management is based upon the
 production theory of transformation and does not 
address other production theories such as flow and 
value. Charette (1996) contends that risk managemen
t 
should be considered a central tenet of software pr
oject management rather than just one of a number o
f 
different areas to be managed. He bases this propos
al on the proposition that the complexity of softwa
re 
systems makes them unsuitable for the traditional o
r scientific problem-solving approach to their 
resolution. The dearth of reliable information in s
oftware projects makes them notoriously difficult t
o 
predict and this has led to many notable project ov
erruns. Risk management has been the vehicle used t
o 
try and improve software project management control
. He promotes the concept of "risk-
entrepreneurship", proposing that organizations nee
d to move from a negative defensive view of risk to
 
also embrace positive risks (opportunities). Charet
te (1996) promotes the "joint approach" that leads 
to 
both top-down and bottom-up views of risks in order
 to incorporate both the detailed technical and 
external environmental (strategic) aspects of an op
portunity or threat. This requires strong leadershi
p and 
an awareness of the relationship between an informa
tion system under construction and the environment 
in which it is to be used. The Lean Development (LD
) agile method supports the application of this 
approach(Highsmith, 2002, Charette, 2003). It is a 
top-down strategic approach that proposes a 
management philosophy rather than practices and tec
hniques. Just as Kichoro Toyoda
3 set the "impossible 
goal" to his workforce to catch up with the US auto
motive giants in three years, Charette (2003) sets 
a 
goal that LD should enable teams to establish and s
ustain massive productivity gains: 66% less cost, 
duration and defects than similar projects performe
d by a CMM level 3 software development team using 
 other approaches. This is consistent with the view 
that in order to make a successful and sustainable 
transition to lean, it is important to provoke "kai
kaku" or radical improvement by setting extremely 
challenging goals (Middleton and Sutton, 2005). LD 
supports the extension of information technology 
work into the business, thus increasing the ability
 to provide value to the customer (C1). It is a tac
tic 
employed to evolve a "change tolerant" organization
 (C4) that is capable of predicting the needs of th
e 
market. It requires collaboration between customers
, marketing, business management, project 
management and software developers(C2, C3). LD may 
be summarized as a method that evokes a 
strategic focus, encompassing the concept of risk e
ntrepreneurship, leveraging the principles and less
ons 
of lean production and employing stretch goals to m
otivate its adoption(Highsmith, 2002). 
3.4 Influence of Software Development on LSD 
During the 1990's, various reports were published o
n different initiatives that applied lean concepts 
to 
software development approaches. Hou (1995) evaluat
ed different approaches in order to propose a lean 
hardware/software method for the development of emb
edded systems used by the U.S. military. Different 
criteria were proposed and used to evaluate a serie
s of existing approaches that included spiral proce
sses, 
incremental approaches and the clean room engineeri
ng method. These criteria were generated from 
process research, lean product development concepts
 and hardware systems design considerations. Clean 
room engineering places a strong emphasis on defect
 prevention(H9), focussing on the root cause of a 
defect's presence in a system and promoting the cor
rection of the development process so that such a 
                                             
 3 The surname of the owner of Toyota Motor Company i
s sometimes referred to as "Toyota". 
 cause is removed into the future. The removal of wa
ste appears to be synonymous with the concept of 
lean and the presence of defects is one of the more
 visible elements of waste in a software applicatio
n. 
Middleton (2001) describes five principles of lean 
manufacturing relevant to software development, 
emphasizing the importance of defect prevention (M3
). He explains that system specifications may be 
considered work-in-progress and as such constitute 
a risk of waste. In software development this waste
 
can manifest itself in a defect that could have bee
n quickly resolved during analysis and specificatio
n 
creation but could require much greater effort if u
ncovered at a later stage in development. He descri
bes 
reports of defect prevention practices using checkl
ists and root cause analysis. Although the timeline
 of 
this experiment was very short, a subsequent two-ye
ar investigation of LSD describes how various lean 
principles were leveraged in order to resolve a sys
temic problem of ongoing delays caused by defect 
resolution following code completion(Middleton et a
l., 2005).  Principles applied by the team included
: 
continuous-flow processing (small iterations of ful
ly tested functionality) (MF1); customer-defined va
lue 
(intense emphasis on requirements elicitation) (MF2
); design structure matrix to enable flow (estimati
on 
and chunking of requirements using function point a
nalysis to support resource allocation to work) 
(MF3); Takt time (Grouping of requirements into "un
its of work" so that a takt time could be calculate
d 
and used to assess team productivity rate) (MF4); L
inked processes (distance reduction between 
collaborators and related processes) (MF5); Standar
dised procedures (consistency of roles, work practi
ces 
etc. to facilitate resource allocation) (MF6); Elim
inate rework (defect prevention using root-cause 
analysis (MF7); scope management enhanced by increa
sed focus on customer needs and context) (MF7); 
Posting results (feedback on productivity thus prom
oting continual learning) (M4, MF8); Data driven 
decisions (impartial data collection thus avoiding 
delays due to meetings and disagreements) (MF9); 
Minimize inventory (decompose product components in
to stories of 3-5 features of 3-5 units of work to 
be tackled separately by multi-disciplinary teams (
developers/QA/Marketing)) (MF10). After 2 years of 
applying these principles a review of the organizat
ion reported substantial improvements. A more recen
t 
12 month study (Oct 2008-Oct 2009) conducted by (Mi
ddleton and Joyce, 2011) proposes that the 
application of lean principles and practices are co
ntext dependent and not subject to a "cookbook" typ
e 
approach across companies and industries. A notable
 observation from this study is that the concept of
 a 
consistent software development unit of work is ver
y difficult to establish. The concept of takt time 
used 
to pace and control the production process was roug
hly simulated by using minimum market features 
which resulted in concise cohesive iterations of so
ftware development. These iterations, supported by 
daily meetings, created small feedback loops that p
rovided momentum and control of the process (R5). 
This interpretation is consistent with the concept 
of "self-reinforcing virtuous cycles" (Charette, 20
03), 
"punctuated equilibrium" (Sutherland, 2008) and fas
t powerful feedback loops (Reinertsen, 2005). 
An influential contribution to the growing body of 
knowledge on LSD was made by Poppendieck and 
Poppendieck (2003) in their proposal and analysis o
f a set of lean principles to support LSD. The 
emphasis on this work was to provide an application
 framework of twenty two practices that could enabl
e 
practitioners to realize lean values. The principle
s proposed were: waste elimination; learning 
amplification; deferment of decisions; optimal spee
d of delivery; team empowerment; integrity 
construction and systems thinking. (Poppendieck and
 Poppendieck, 2007) expanded the nature of their 
earlier tactical software-centric work to incorpora
te the impact of the broader lifecycle required to 
incorporate strategic considerations espoused by le
an thinking. Table 1 presents a codified list of th
e lean 
principles put forward by the various authors revie
wed in this section. 
4  Findings and Conclusions 
This paper reports on a set of LSD values (table 2)
 induced from principles identified in lean literat
ure 
across various domains. The principle sets presente
d in table 1 are used to propose an underlying valu
e 
being addressed by each principle. Each iteration o
f the analysis process resulted in related values b
eing 

WHAT!! Change this 
to M3. 
 Value 
Description 
Principles 
Continuous 

Improvement 
Visible feedback on productivity. Reviews to propag
ate learning to wider organizations. Apply rigorous
 standardization to 
establish agreed baselines for improvement. Activel
y seek and manage obstacles through agreed processe
s, such as root cause 
analysis. Promote organizational learning and a cul
ture of relentless improvement. Use simple powerful
 tools. 
H9,MF1,M1,MJ1,MJ5,L4,L9,L10,

L13,W5,P7,SB4 
Business 

environment 

awareness  
Be aware of why you are doing work. Ensure it adds 
value to your situation. Future-proof your approach
 to work against 
changing market conditions. Consider domain solutio
ns rather than restricting product to one market se
ctor. Don't force lean 
approach where inappropriate to business needs. Don
't optimize locally to the detriment of other aspec
ts of the business. 
H5,05,08,C6,C12,R10 
 
Customer 

value 
Ensure customer defines value. Seek out user needs,
 not just requirements. Early delivery of value. En
able future needs 
(maintainability). Enable efficient deployment of p
roduct features. Provide value for money. 
H3,H6,H10,H11,H12,H13,H14,MF

1,MF2,MF10,L1,W1,W4,09,C1,C2

,C3,C8,P4 
Data driven 

decisions  
Impartial data collection to drive decision making 
and reduce cost of meetings and disagreements. Rigo
rous scientific 
approach to continuous improvement.  
MF9 
Effective 

collaboration 
Reduce distance between collaborators and processes
. Simple visual measures of productivity and qualit
y. Balance functional 
expertise with cross-functional integration. Promot
e teamwork. Integrate suppliers. Unambiguous commun
ication procedures. 
M4,MF5,MJ6,L6,L8,L12,C4,P2,SB

2 
Effective 

process 
Easily understood method. Enable clear comprehensio
n of method-in-action. Clear mechanisms for resourc
e allocation 
including consistent roles, names, work practices. 
Ability to assess team productivity rate. Central e
xpert to integrate overall 
development ("Chief Engineer"). Scalable approach. 
Clear product development roadmaps. Fast powerful f
eedback loops to 
build momentum. 
H1,H4,H7,MF3,MF4,MF6,L5,R5,S

B1,SB3 
Effective use 

of technology 
Technology must serve a particular need. Configurat
ion management systems and quality measurement devi
ces are examples 
of key facilities. Pursue autonomation by using tec
hnology to enable workers to effectively adjust sys
tem when necessary. 
H2,M5,MJ7,L11,07,C10 
Embrace 

change 
Defer commitment to scope. Encapsulate features and
 consider all options carefully. Facilitate emergin
g requirements. 
C5,P3,R6 
Flow of value 
Stabilize development process to enable levelled fl
ow of value - manage necessary variability. Smooth 
demand from users. 
Pull value from users through lifecycle. Apply mini
malism (scope items, teams, documents). Allocate re
sources only when 
needed. 
MJ2,MJ3,L3,W3,O2,O6,C9,R1,R2,

R3,R4 
Person focus 
Empower individuals and teams. Promote continual wo
rker development. Invest in multi-skilling and prom
ote attitude to 
participate in multiple roles. 
M2,O4,C13,P5,R7 
Product 

excellence 
Promote strong design culture to avoid premature co
nvergence on incorrect solution. Prototype differen
t options to derive best 
approach. Deliver functionality in change-tolerant 
form. Build quality in through practices of jidoka 
and poka-yoke. Promote 
deep specialized knowledge of product and process. 
Promote a culture of excellence. 
L2,L7,C11,P6,R8 
Remove waste 
Promote systematic defect prevention. Eliminate rew
ork through emphasis on customer needs. Holistic fo
cus on quality that 
motivates the refactoring of legacy code to improve
 general product. Identify silos of waste present i
n value stream and 
improve processes. Promote reusability where approp
riate. Take cognisance of the fact that waste can h
ave different forms in 
different projects/work situations. 
H8,M3,MF7,MJ4,W2,01,03,C7,P1,

R9 
Table 2: Synthesized lean values
 synthesized into higher-order values. An example of
 this approach was the emergence and 
establishment of the value "Effective project manag
ement" as underpinning a number of principles. A 
subsequent iteration resulted in this value being s
ubsumed into a broader value: "Effective process". 
The synthesis process was not always one of converg
ence. A final run-through of the values led to the 
identification of the value "Flow of value". This h
ad been part of the value "Effective process" but i
t 
became clear that many researchers had singled out 
"flow" as a special consideration in lean thinking 
and therefore was deemed of sufficient relevance to
 merit consideration as a specific lean value. The 
proposed set of LSD values is presented in table 2.
 Linkage between values and their associated 
principles is shown through the principle codes. 

Synthesis of the LSD values reveals an interesting 
dichotomy of two overarching values that address 
an external and internal focus respectively: delive
ry of customer-defined value and reduction of waste
. 
The identification, development and delivery of cus
tomer-defined value is a core value that influences
 
engagement with market forces and is supported by a
 culture of excellence that emphasizes design-
oriented processes in order to avoid premature agre
ement on solutions and promote the development 
of  change-tolerant flexible systems ("product exce
llence","embrace change" and "business 
environment awareness"). The highest-order internal
ly-oriented LSD value ("waste reduction") is 
supported by the promotion of flow-based demand-dri
ven development that exposes process defects. 
Focus on people supports effective collaboration an
d empowerment to continuously improve and 
further reduce or remove any wasteful activities (s
uch as the production of unused artefacts). 
As stated in section 2, limitations of this work in
clude author bias and replication difficulties. 
However, the proposed LSD value set is not intended
 to be exhaustive and is open to extension. It is 
intended to support further research and is an impo
rtant step in addressing confusion around this 
software development approach. For example, (Wang, 
2011) highlights the need for analysis into the 
relationship between agile and lean practices. A ba
se set of LSD values could serve to anchor such 
research efforts. A specific research study using L
SD values will be
 facilitated by leveraging the 
method rationale analysis framework (Agerfalk and F
itzgerald, 2006) as a lens to relate practices and 
goals of Scrum to values contained in the LSD value
 set. The common lineage of Scrum and LSD 
(Sutherland, 2008) suggests this particular agile m
ethod is a good candidate method for initial 
exploration into the relationship between ASD and L
SD. This research approach could also be used to 
relate other ASD methods to LSD and enhance general
 understanding of the relationship between 
these two paradigms. At a more general level, resea
rch using the LSD value set could be extended to 
investigate the relationship between LSD and any so
ftware development method. From an industrial 
perspective, the LSD value set may also be applied 
to software development projects in order to 
uncover insights into the "leanness" of a particula
r approach or "method-in-action". This is particula
rly 
important in light of Fowler™s (2008) suggestion th
at developers should focus on lean and agile, not 
either in isolation. 
References 
Abrahamsson, P., Conboy, K. & Wang, X. (2009). `Lot
s done, more to do': the current state of agile 
systems development research. 
European Journal of Information Systems,
 18
, 281-284. 
Agerfalk, P. J. & Fitzgerald, B. (2006). Exploring 
the concept of Method Rationale: A Conceptual 
Tool for Method Tailoring. 
In:
 SIAU, K. (ed.) 
Advanced Topics in Database Research.
 Hershey, 
PA: Idea Group. 
Ambler, S. (2002). 
Agile Modeling: Effective Practices for eXtreme Pro
gramming and the Unified 
Process, 
New York, Wiley. 
Charette, R. N. (1996). The mechanics of managing I
T risk (Reprinted from Software Management, 
December 1993). 
Journal of Information Technology,
 11
, 373-378. 
Charette, R. N. (2003). Challenging the Fundamental
 Notions of Software Development. Available: 
http://www.itmpi.org/assets/base/images/itmpi/priva
terooms/robertcharette/ChallengingtheFunda
mentalNotions.pdf [Accessed 03 Oct. 2011]. 
Cohen, D., Lindvall, M. & Costa, P. (2004). An intr
oduction to agile methods. 
Advances in 
Computers, Advances in Software Engineering,
 62
, 2-67. 
 Coplien, J. O. & Bjornvig, G. (2010). 
Lean Architecture for Agile Software Development,
 UK, Wiley. 
Dingsoyr, T., Dyba, T. & Abrahamsson, P. A Prelimin
ary Roadmap for Empirical Research on Agile 
Software Development. Agile, (2008). AGILE '08. Con
ference, 4-8 Aug. 2008 2008. 83-94. 
Fitzgerald, B., Russo, N. L. & Stolterman, E. (2002
). 
Information Systems Development: Methods in 
Action, 
Berkshire, UK, McGraw-Hill Education Technology. 
Fowler, M. (2008). 
AgileVersus Lean 
[Online]. http://martinfowler.com/bliki/AgileVersus
Lean.html 
Fowler, M. & Highsmith, J. (2001). The Agile Manife
sto. 
Software Development,
 9
, 28-32. 
Hibbs, C., Jewett, S. & Sullivan, M. (2009). 
The art of lean software development: A practical a
nd 
incremental approach., 
CA, O'Reilly Media. 
Highsmith, J. (2002). 
Agile Software Development Ecosystems
, Addison-Wesley. 
Holweg, M. (2007). The genealogy of lean production
. 
Jnl of Operations Management,
 25
, 420-437. 
Hou, A. C. (1995). Toward Lean Hardware/Software Sy
stem Development: An Evaluation of Selected 
Complex Electronic System Development Methodologies
. Cambridge: MIT. 
Kan, S. H., Basili, V. R. & Shapiro, L. N. (1994). 
Software quality: An overview from the perspective 
of total quality management. 
IBM Systems Journal,
 33
, 4-19. 
Karlsson, F. & Agerfalk P. J. (2009). Exploring agi
le values in method configuration. 
European 
Journal of Information Systems,
 18
, 300-316.
 Koskela, L. & Howell, G. The underlying theory of p
roject management is obsolete. PMI Research 
Conference, June 2002 Seattle, Washington. Project 
Management Institute, 293-302. 
Lang, M and Fitzgerald, B (2005) Hypermedia systems
 development practice, 
IEEE Software
, 20 (2) 
Liker, J. K. & Morgan, J. M. (2006). The Toyota Way
 in Services: The Case of Lean Product 
Development. 
Academy of Management Perspectives,
 20
, 5-20. 
Middleton, P. (1995). Maintenance management: From 
product to process. 
Journal of Software 
Maintenance: Research and Practice,
 7
, 63-73. 
Middleton, P. (2001). Lean software development. 
Software Quality Journal,
 9
, 241-252. 
Middleton, P., Flaxel, A. & Cookson, A. 2005. Lean 
Software Management Case Study:  
In:
 BAUMEISTER, H., MARCHESI, M. & HOLCOMBE, M. (eds.).
 Springer / Heidelberg. 
Middleton, P. & Joyce, D. (2011). Lean Software Man
agement: BBC Worldwide Case Study. 
Engineering Management, IEEE Transactions on,
 PP
, 1-13. 
Middleton, P. & Sutton, J. (2005). 
Lean Software Strategies - Proven techniques for ma
nagers and 
developers, 
New York, Productivity Press. 
Ohno, T. (1988). 
The Toyota Production System: Beyond Large-Scale Pr
oduction, 
Portland Press. 
PMI (2008). 
A Guide To The Project Management Body Of Knowledge
 (PMBOK Guides)
, Project 
Management Institute. 
Poppendieck, M. & Poppendieck, T. (2003). 
Lean Software Development Œ An Agile Toolkit for 
Software Development Managers, 
Boston Addison-Wesley. 
Poppendieck, M. & Poppendieck, T. (2007). 
Implementing Lean Software Development: From 
Concept to Cash
, Addison
Wesley. 
Raman, S. Lean software development: is it feasible
? Digital Avionics Systems Conference, 1998. 
Proc., 17th DASC. The AIAA/IEEE/SAE, 31 Oct-7 Nov 1
998 1998. C13/1-C13/8 vol.1. 
Reinertsen, D. (2005). Journey to lean: Making oper
ational change stick. 
Journal of Product 
Innovation Management,
 22
, 539-U2. 
Reinertsen, D. & Shaeffer, L. (2005). Making R&D Le
an. 
Research Technology Mgt,
 48
, 51-7. 
Senge, P. M. (1990). 
The Fifth Discipline, 
New York, Doubleday. 
Spear, S. & Bowen, H. (1999). Decoding the DNA of t
he Toyota Production System. 
Harvard 
Business Review
, 96-106. 
Sutherland, J. (2008). 
The First Scrum: Was it Scrum or Lean? 
[Online]. Available: 
http://scrum.jeffsutherland.com/2007/11/is-it-scrum
-or-lean.html [Accessed 21 Sep 2011]. 
von Wurtemberg, L. M., Lillieskold, J. & Ericsson, 
E. Abstract model of LPD: A critical review of the 
Lean Product Development concept. Technology Manage
ment in the Energy Smart World 
(PICMET), 2011 Proceedings of PICMET '11:, July 31 
2011-Aug. 4 2011 2011. 1-7. 
Wang, X. The Combination of Agile and Lean in Softw
are Development: An Experience Report 
Analysis. AGILE Conference (AGILE), 2011, 7-13 Aug.
 2011 2011. 1-9. 
Womack, J. P. & Jones, D. T. (2003). 
Lean Thinking: Banish Waste and Create Wealth in Yo
ur 
Corporation, 
New York, NY, Free Press. 
