 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)THE INTERPRETATION ANDLEGITIMIZATION OF VALUES IN AGILE'SORGANIZING VISIONCarl LawrenceUniversity of OuluPilar RodriguezUniversity of OuluECIS 2012 Proceedings. THE INTERPRETATION AND LEGITIMIZATION OF 
VALUES IN AGILE™S ORGANIZING VISION 
Lawrence, Carl, Department of Information Processing Science, University
 of Oulu, Oulu, 
Finland, 
Carl.Lawrence@oulu.fi
 Rodriguez, Pilar, Department of Information Processing Science University
 of Oulu, Oulu, 
Finland, 
Pilar.Rodriguez@oulu.fi
  
Abstract 

The growing popularity of Agile methods motivates our interest in it
s value foundations, publicized in 
information technology (IT) community discourse. IT community discourses
 provide key functions of 
interpretation, legitimization and mobilization. Conceptualized as organizing visio
ns, these community 
discourses provide knowledge about how an IT innovation, such as Agile, should 
be applied in the 
organization. The strong orientation towards values in Agile methods has
 its foundation in the Agile 
Manifesto. Previous research into the impact of values on the adoption and 
diffusion of IT innovations 
expose its importance to software development methods. Using the L
asswell value framework, this 
paper investigates how values in the organizing vision of Agile ar
e interpreted and legitimized by 
contributors to its community discourse. The findings propose that Agil
e™s value patterns, which are 
represented by values wealth, enlightenment, skill and power, are 
a combination of its value 
foundations and practical business needs. The similarities of the 
values patterns found across Agile 
contributors also show that these values are part of an early-institut
ionalized element of its organizing 
vision. The similarities and nature of the values also represent a moral legiti
macy strategy.  
Keywords: Agile, Organizing Vision, Culture, Lasswell Value Theory, Content A
nalysis. 
  1 Introduction 
Agile™s popularity has given us a reason to investigate espou
sed values in information systems (IS) 
community discourse on software development methodologies (SDM). Although 
there are a wide 
variety of approaches under the umbrella term ﬁ
Agile Methods
ﬂ, they are all a product of the espoused 
values in the Agile Manifesto (Beck et al. 2001). According 
to the Agile Manifesto four values 
constitute the core of these methodologies: 1) Individuals and inte
ractions over processes and tools; 2) 
Working software over comprehensive documentation; 3) Customer coll
aboration over contract 
negotiation; and 4) Responding to change over following a plan.  Along
 with the twelve principles 
they complete a value orientation initiated by the Agile M
anifesto.  These explicit values are not easily 
translated into an accepted value framework, thus research int
o the role of espoused values in Agile™s 
community discourse is needed to understand its potential implications f
or adoption and diffusion. 
Research in information systems (IS) has already studied the impac
t of IS community discourse on the 
adoption and diffusion of innovations (Baskerville & Myers, 2009; Ramil
ler & Swanson, 2003; E. 
Burton Swanson & Ramiller, 1997; Wang & Ramiller, 2009). The prolife
ration of technology and 
business media outlets, such as Businessweek, eWeek and Computerwor
ld on buzz worthy topics like 
Agile is in itself an indication of its importance to the IS c
ommunity. Understanding the nature of IT 
innovation discourse, its structure and development, has prompted the
oretical development by key 
scholars. Swanson and Ramiller (1997) theorized that community discours
es on IS innovations portray 
a cohesive vision that is formed and developed over time as an o
rganizing vision. At the heart of the 
theory are collective visions that are institutionalized through 
the processes of interpretation, 
legitimization and mobilization. Research has shown that while part
icipants in an organizing vision 
have diverse backgrounds, their interest in the success of the IS
 innovation brings them together to 
form collective discourse. Innovators with IT engage with thi
s community discourse to learn about an 
IT innovation™s potential applications in their organization (Wa
ng and Swanson 2007). The vision in 
turn shapes how the IS innovation would be adopted and diffused. Founded on 
institutional theory, 
organizing vision describes trans-organizational phenomenon that invol
ves complex interactions 
among diverse contributors who collaborate to form a collective visio
n (Swanson and Ramiller 1997).  
Using organizing vision as our theoretical framework to concept
ualize the community discourse on 
Agile, this paper will answer the question 
how have Agile values been interpreted and legitimized in 
the IS community discourse by its contributors
? The theory of organizing vision provides the 
theoretical foundations guiding our data collection and analysis. T
he Agile manifesto does not provide 
an analytical framework by which to extracted values objective
ly, however it is useful for later critical 
comparison. To analyse values in media we combine computer-supported cont
ent analysis with the 
Lasswell value dictionary, developed from his value theory. U
sing this method value patterns are 
identified in two samples of discourse from Agile™s organizing 
vision. The results reveal value 
patterns across the two samples that represent interpreted e
spoused values by Agile contributors. They 
further show that Agile™s contributor values are a combination of
 the founding values of the Agile 
methodology and traditional business values. Additionally strong simil
arities between the value 
patterns and the nature of the values indicate a moral legitimacy s
trategy. 
We begin our investigation by first identifying the value fou
ndations of Agile Œthe motivation for our 
study. We then position values in the existing theory of organizing vi
sion by revisiting its institutional 
foundations. This is followed by a description of our research approach 
and method. The findings are 
then revealed and discussed in the context of the extant literature. 

2 Agile Values  
Agile methods have been well received by individual practitioner
s and IT organizations (Dybå and 
Dingsøyr 2008). Conboy (2009) provides a comprehensive definition of agi
lity in information systems 
development as ﬁthe ability of an ISD method to create change, 
or proactively, reactively, or 
 inherently embrace change in a timely manner, through its interna
l components and relationships with 
its environmentﬂ. Drawing its foundations from the Agile Manifest
o published some ten years ago, 
values have become a core part of Agile™s community discourse. 
The Agile Manifesto describes a 
collaborative agreement that includes values and principles
 to guide software development. The focus 
of Agile is on 
being 
agile, instead of 
doing 
it (Larman and Vodde 2009). Previous research on IS and 
culture proposes value compatibility as a key barrier to adoptio
n and diffusion of innovations (leidner 
& Kayworth, 2006), therefore, Agile™s value foundations provides an app
ropriate case for value 
research. 

Although the four values and twelve principles formalized by 
the Agile Manifesto are said to guide its 
development and use (Beck et al. 2001), studies have debated the p
rudence of legitimizing these 
values. For example, Boehm (2011) challenges the simplicity of the
 principles citing that 
ﬁtoday™s and 
tomorrow™s complex, interdependent, dynamic systems require richer pr
ocess principles than the 
simplistic principles in the Agile Manifestoﬂ
. From a broader perspective, the term 
agile culture
 includes values not yet precisely defined. Although there are some
 studies such as Chow and Cao 
(2008) that doubt the significant impact of organizational culture
 on the success of agile software 
projects, most studies recognize compatibilities and incompatibil
ities between agile methods and 
organizational culture as a key aspect that facilitates or hinder
s its adoption and diffusion.  
Iivari and Iivari (2011) represented enterprise agility as
 a developmental culture applying the 
Competing Values Model (CVM). Developmental culture emphasizes f
lexibility and change, but 
maintains a primary focus on the external environment through growth, r
esource acquisition, creativity 
and adaptation to the external environment (Denison and Spreitzer 1991). Al
so using the CVM, Strode 
et al. (2009) identified feedback and learning, trustfulness, coll
aborative and competent social 
interaction, collaborative management style, entrepreneurship, innov
ative and risk taking leadership, 
teamwork, empowered people, results oriented, loyalty, mutual trust 
and commitment as cultural 
factors that correlate significantly with agile methods. Mis
ra et al. (2009) conducted a survey based on 
an ex post facto study and identified corporate culture as an important success fa
ctor for adopting agile 
methodologies. Personal characteristics such as honesty, collabora
tive attitude, sense of responsibility 
and readiness to learn were also found to be important.  

Siakas and Siakas (2007) underlined that the agile approach should 
be considered as having a culture 
of its own. They claimed that democratic organizations, which hav
e horizontal hierarchy and 
emphasize flexibility and spontaneity, are more suitable for embr
acing agile culture. Similarly, 
Robinson and Sharp (2005) found that the adoption of XP is more problematic in a hierarchic
al culture 
than in one characterized by a collaborative environment. Also, in 
relation with XP, Tolfo and 
Wazlawich (2008) claimed that agile methods require that some cultur
al aspects already existent in the 
environment. They analysed six dimensions of the organizational cul
ture (innovation and risks, detail 
orientation, outcome orientation, people orientation, team orientation, a
ggressiveness and stability) 
finding favourable and unfavourable aspects in each dimension. Finall
y, Tolfo et al. (2009) applied 
Schein™s framework (Schein 1985) for representing the levels of an agi
le culture. 
The literature clearly supports culture as part of the underly
ing structure of Agile, including values, 
that has influenced its adoption and diffusion. Agile methods mai
nly focus on human aspects in order 
to improve productivity and effectiveness, thus cultural factors
 including values, beliefs and behavior 
will moderate productivity and effectiveness. This research st
ream however has not yet sought to 
understand how community discourses on Agile have expressed values Œa 
core cultural elementŒ and 
how values could potentially shape its adoption and diffusion. While the
 values portrayed in the Agile 
manifesto are said to be the foundations of Agile methods, we have y
et to understand how they are 
actually being represented in IT community discourse.  

3 Values in Organizing Vision 
The theory of organizing vision was introduced by Swanson and Ramill
er (1997) to address social 
cognition in the adoption and diffusion of IS innovations. They theorized t
hat IS community 
 discourses do not develop randomly, but are the products of loosely coupl
ed collaborations called 
organizing visions.  Organizing visions are comprised of inter-org
anizational communities of 
heterogeneous participants who have varying interests, but colle
ctively create and employ an 
organizing vision (E. Burton Swanson & Ramiller, 1997). Simply said i
t is a focal community idea 
about the application of an innovation.  

An organizing vision provides three functions, interpretation, legit
imatization and mobilization. 
Combined these functions shape how an IS innovation will be adopted and dif
fused. This shaping 
process begins with a social account Œ an interpretationŒ o
f the potential application of an IS 
innovation in the organization. This collective discourse then att
empts to legitimize its vision by 
linking it with contemporary business issues and established prac
tices. Finally organizing vision 
mobilizes market forces to develop and promote it throughout the c
ommunity (Ramiller & Swanson, 
2003). Values in organizing vision were not specially addressed in t
he initial development of the 
theory (Swanson and Ramiller 1997). However, the theory of organiz
ing vision is based on 
institutional theory, thus values are represented in its institu
tional foundations.  Institutions are a 
collection of values, norms, beliefs and taken-for-granted assumptions (Ba
rley and Tolbert 1997).  
We have previously stated the Agile has already acquired consi
derable attention in IS community 
discourse, thus Agile™s organizing vision has already been able 
to successfully mobilize the IT 
community. We are interested in understanding how Agile values hav
e been interpreted and 
legitimized in community discourse since, according to the theory 
of organizing vision, it is 
instrumental in shaping its adoption and diffusion.  

3.1 Interpretation in Organizing Vision 

The organizing vision of Agile has collectively produced an inte
rpretation of how Agile should be 
applied in the organization. This is not a static vision but on
e that is continuously changing. New 
contributors to the vision interpret and produce discourse base
d on previous interpretations (Ramiller 
and Swanson 2003). The vision of the innovation thus continues to propagate u
ntil it becomes wildly 
accepted (Swanson and Ramiller 1997). Once institutionalized the v
ision takes on ﬁrule-like statusﬂ. 
Cohesiveness in the interpretations arises from a ﬁfundamental s
haring of language and core 
meaningsﬂ that are negotiated and expressed in discourse (Swanson 
and Ramiller 1997). Values, 
forming the normative element of this vision, help to maintain the
 visions cohesiveness. These values 
along with other institutional elements travel across space and 
time. Values are transported using 
symbolic systems, of which media is a dominate form (Scott 2003).  

Symbolic systems are a type of schema where values, along wit
h other information, are encoded and 
decoded. The transmission of these elements has been used in theori
es of diffusion of innovation, 
organizational learning, management fads and fashion (Baskervill
e & Myers, 2009; Ramiller & 
Swanson, 2003; E. Burton Swanson & Ramiller, 1997; Wang & Ramiller
, 2009). Media such as IT 
and business magazines have been a focal area of study in symbolic 
systems as carriers of institutional 
elements. Values are normative elements that are encoded in m
edia and thus must be decoded by 
potential adaptors (Scott 2003). For institutional elements to be t
ransmitted they need to be encoded in 
discourse in a generalized form that allows for transmissi
on, to be later decoded by recipients in 
different contexts with different agendas. The encoded elem
ents in organizing vision represent how an 
IS innovation should be applied in the organization. The process of
 both encoding and decoding is a 
form of interpretation (Scott 2003).
 3.2 Moral Legitimacy   

Institutions consist of regulative, normative and cultural cogniti
ve elements that help ﬁbring about the 
stability of social lifeﬂ (Scott 2001, pg. 52). Institutional theor
ists emphasized that normative elements 
have a stabilizing influence on institutions. Normative element
s represent social beliefs, values, and 
norms that become internalized and imposed on others. Early institu
tional theorist saw shared norms 
and values as the basis of a ﬁstable social orderﬂ (Scott 2001, 
pg. 56). Researches propose that an 
 organizing vision is sustaining through its production of credibl
e discourse that contributes to its 
legitimacy and leads others to participate (Wang and Swanson 2008). 

Social norms and values rather than rules and authority reinf
orce these normative institutions. An 
organizing vision is not practically enforceable by strict ru
les and authority. Contributors to an 
organizing vision collectively grant legitimacy based on socia
lly constructed norms, values and beliefs 
(Kaganer et al. 2010). Institutional theory supports norms and values
 as having significant impact on 
decision-making and the development of formal structures (Barle
y and Tolbert 1997). Legitimacy in 
normative institutions is morally governed (Scott 2003; Kagane
r et al. 2010). Moral legitimacy in this 
context means a general assumption that the actions (including produce
d discourse) are desirable and 
appropriate (Kaganer et al. 2010). The social accounts of how Agile methods
 should be applied are the 
product of contributors to its vision, that have been interpreted and l
egitimize through normative 
means. 

4 Method 
Using content analysis we investigate how values in the orga
nizing vision of Agile have been 
interpreted and legitimized. Content analysis is a research m
ethod for making inferences from text 
using a set of procedures. The study of text can reveal ﬁcultura
l patterns of groups, institutions, or 
societiesﬂ (Weber 1980, pg. 10). Krippendorff (2004) promotes the use of c
ontent analysis to expose 
social realities that ﬁare too complex to be accessible othe
rwiseﬂ. Indicators of the presence and 
strength of normative elements vary by level of analysis 
and research has previously investigated 
normative systems as values (Scott 2001, pg. 56). The goal of cont
ent analysis research is to provide a 
systematic and objective description of the attributes of 
communication (Holsti 1969 pg. 127). In this 
study, we used data from two sources from Agile™s organizing v
ision in order to make inferences 
about the interpreted espouse values encoded the texts and the m
oral legitimacy strategy of its 
contributors. The design of our study is shown in Figure 1. 
 Figure 1.  Research design as suggested by Holsti (1969, pg. 30, 48) 

4.1 Sampling Strategy 

A key resource used by organizations and practitioners to learn 
and promote Agile are vendor-
sponsored whitepapers and articles found in IT and business magazine
s. These communications 
sources have various contributors such as consulting organizations, 
industry journalist, and IT experts. 
Previous research on institutional field level phenomenon has analy
sed commercial publications that 
represent organizing visions (Baskerville & Myers, 2009; Ram
iller & Swanson, 2003; E. Burton 
Swanson & Ramiller, 1997; Wang & Ramiller, 2009). Using a prestig
e sampling strategy we collected 
text data from these two sources. Using the Techrepublic.com re
search database we collected vendor-
sponsored whitepapers on Agile by contributors such as IBM, HP, 
Collabnet and Global Knowledge. 
Using the ESBCO database we collected business magazine arti
cles on Agile published by 
Businessweek, Informationweek, eWeek and CIO magazine. Organizat
ions and individuals wishing to 
 learn about IS innovations use these popular communication sources. 
To test our sampling adequacy 
we applied the split-half technique. We split each sample into tw
o sets and analyse them separately. 
The analysis provided the same results for each half sample i
ndicating significance of the categories in 
the datasets (Krippendorff 2004, pg. 124). For each source we select n=100 (200 total
) articles. 
4.2 Coding Strategy  

We selected to use a standard dictionary to code our text. The a
dvantage of using a standard dictionary 
is that the findings are more cumulative and can be compared acros
s data sources (Holsti 1969 pg. 
101). Our use of a standard dictionary was driven by the need for obj
ectivity when comparing values 
across different sources. Using a dictionary improves the quali
ty of the inferences derived from the 
text and helps to avoid bias (Holsti 1969, pg. 102). Standard diction
aries provide the details of words 
and meanings. The use of computerized dictionaries is advantages
 because they can be continually 
updated with new words that fit a wider cross section of fields
. Value dictionaries are the most wildly 
used in content analysis (Holsti 1969, pg. 108). We chose to use the Lass
well value dictionary because 
of its popularity and generic value framework (Namenwirth, 1968)
. Based on Lasswell™s value theory, 
the dictionary has eight (8) value categories; power, respect, r
ectitude, affection, well-being, wealth, 
skill, and enlightenment. A description of these value categori
es is presented in our findings, however 
a more detail description can also be found on the Harvard Unive
rsity website 
1. To code our text, we 
used the General Inquirer software program developed at Harvard 
University. Details of the structure 
of the dictionary can also be found in (Krippendorff 2004, pg. 104). 

4.3 Reliability and Validity  

Reliability and validity assessment in content analysis is
 similar to that of other research methods as it 
seeks to improve the integrity of the findings. Repeated meas
ures using the same procedures and 
measurement should produce the same result (Holsti 1969, pg. 135). Compute
r supported content 
analysis and the use of standard dictionaries significantly im
proves the reliability of content analysis 
studies. Dictionaries help with construct clarity and content a
nalysis software ensures objectivity and 
accuracy of the coding procedure. Category reliability depends o
n the researcher™s ability to develop 
categories that are representative in the text data (pg.136)
 and are supported by our use of a standard 
dictionary. Validity in content analysis is the extent the cate
gories measure what they are expected to 
measure (pg. 142). Our focus on values means the selection of a val
ue dictionary would provide 
appropriate categories for our analysis. 

5 Results  
Using the procedures described by Stone and associates
2, the full text of the vendor-sponsored white 
papers and IT and business magazine articles on Agile were analy
sed independently. The results of the 
analysis are displayed in 
figures 2 and 3
. The concept of values used here and by Lasswell relates to 
values as goal states. Lasswell asserted that his eight
 (8) value categories would exhaustively classify 
core values (Namenwirth 1973, Lasswell 1963). The use of content anal
ysis combined with the 
Lasswell value dictionary carries with it two assumptions (1)
 the differences in the frequencies of the 
value categories is an indication of the differential strengt
h; and (2) The strength of the value category 
measured is an appropriate measure of the relative priority of
 that value has in the total value schema 
of each and all documents. Three residual categories are not s
hown that contain n-type words, which 
are high frequency words with little semantic information, such
 as articles and conjunctions. 
Additionally un-definable words, which have no value implications, ar
e left out. Due to space 
restrictions tables showing the subcategories are not shown, howeve
r they are referred to them briefly 
in our findings. 

                                             
 1 http://www.wjh.harvard.edu/~inquirer/homecat.htm 
2 Philip J. Stone, et al, The General Inquirer: A Co
mputer Approach to Content Analysis (Cambridge, Mas
s., 1966) 
 5.1 Value Patterns  

Lasswell™s conceptualizations about core values are worth c
larification, as some of the concepts, 
particularly power require an explanation of his unique perspecti
ve. Lasswell divides values into two 
groups Œdeference values and welfare values. Welfare values i
nclude wealth, skill, enlightenment and 
well-being. They are desired values that represent basic needs
. To value wealth would, for example, 
mean to desire income, similarly skill Œprofession, enlightenme
nt Œknowledge, and well-being Œ
health. The deference value respect, for example, means that the
 individual or group desires status, 
honour, prestige or recognition. Rectitude refers to moral values 
such as virtue or goodness and 
affection refers to values of love and friendship (Lasswell 1963, pg. 56).  
 Figure 2.  Vendor-sponsored whitepapers on Agile (%)  

  Figure 3.  IT and business magazine articles on Agile (%) 

Power as a deference value is influence, particularly on t
he actions of others. Thus, power as a value 
means the individual or group desires being able to influence the a
ctions of others. Values in a group, 
means that the values are not just desired by the individual but t
hey are also desired for the group 
(Lasswell 1963, pg 57). In other words an individual who desires respect 
wants it for themselves but 
also for their group. We can now review the findings of both communica
tion sources to identify 
patterns, similarities or differences. 

5.1.1
 Strong Agile Values 
Both our data sources produced high frequencies for power, enlightenm
ent, wealth, and skill. The 
strongest value was enlightenment and was the strongest in both
 datasets. Differences in strength were 
however observed in the enlightenment (enltot) subcategories rela
ted to enlightenment gain (enlgain). 
The IT and business magazines showed that enlightenment gain 
(enlgain) was more frequently 
observed than in our vendor-supported whitepapers. The data showed that pow
er cooperation 











˘˘˘˘ˇ

ˆ˙˝ˆ˙˝ˇ

ˆˇˆˇ˛˚
RcTot 
ŒRectitude 
  (powcoop) was more significant in vendor-supported whitepapers than in 
IT and business magazines, 
also an inversion in strength related to power cooperation (powcoop) and oth
er words related to power 
(powoth). Otherwise strong values we observed for enlightenment, powe
r, wealth and skill in 
descending order.  

5.1.2
 Weak Agile Values 
Our weak values showed significantly lower frequencies in rel
ation to our strong values. Values, 
rectitude, respect, affection and well-being all showed significantly
 lower occurrences in both datasets. 
Respect (rsptot) however, was stronger in the IT and business ma
gazines than in the vendor-sponsored 
whitepapers and rectitude was stronger in the vendor-sponsored whitepa
pers than in the IT and 
business magazines. The subcategories did not show significant difference
s in weak values.  
6 Value Interpretations and Legitimization Strategy 
We have so far identified Agile™s value patterns from tw
o sources of its community discourse. The 
results show that contributors to Agile™s community discourse sh
are strong values related to 
enlightenment, power, and to a lesser degree wealth and skill. The
 patterns also show that value™s 
rectitude, respect, affection and well-being are weak in Agile
™ community discourse. The value 
patterns, vis-à-vis the combination of strong and weak values, 
represent how Agile values have been 
interpreted by its contributors. In the follow we compare these v
alues to the Agile Manifesto 
highlighting similarities and differences. The result of our c
omparison leads us to theorize that the 
interpreted values are part of a legitimization strategy target
ing the software industry. 
6.1 Interpretation of Agile Values 

Of the four strong values, enlightenment and skill correlate w
ith the values originally expressed in the 
Agile Manifesto and supported by research on Agile. The Agile 
Manifesto emphasizes ﬁ
Working 
software over comprehensive documentation
ﬂ. Agile relies on tacit knowledge that emphasizes less 
documentation. The Agile Manifesto also supports ﬁ
Continuous attention to technical excellence and 
good design enhances agility
ﬂ. Software development can be seen as a knowledge creation proces
s 
(Nonaka and Konno 1998). Unlike traditional manufacturing industry, where t
he most of the time is 
spent in a carefully planned sequence of actions where the human prese
nce is only required to service 
or operate these machines, in the software industry the entire 
product creation process fabricates a 
single copy of software. Competence and responsibility of indivi
duals are keys in this process (skill 
value) since new information, that requires new decisions, i
s continuously feeding-in. Valuing skill 
and enlightenment supports the view of software development as a creative indust
ry, where knowledge 
is of vital importance. Therefore enlightenment and skill are
 core values that could be interpreted as 
supporting the Agile Manifesto. 

Wealth, as a value expressing desire for income, and power, re
ferring to influence on the actions of 
others, are not considered explicit values in the Agile Manifes
to. However, everyone would 
acknowledge that the general purpose of Agile usage for software
 development is to derive economic 
value through improved flexibility and efficiency. We would also a
gree that influence over others 
(power) in an organizational context is necessary. Swanson and Rami
ller (1997) state that contributors 
to an organizing vision share a common interest in some commer
cial end. In our study, the vendor-
sponsors whitepapers are directly related to promoting the business
 consulting aspect. Participants 
such as IBM want to promote their consulting enterprise, while in our IT and busines
s magazines, such 
as eWeek, they want to promote readership. Strong values power 
and wealth represent desires of 
business enterprises, the main adopters of Agile methods.  

The similarities in the patterns across the two samples al
so tell us that the values are highly 
institutionalized and reinforced at a normative level. Agile is s
till considered to be in an early adoption 
 and diffusion phase, so we further theorize that these values ar
e part of the early-institutionalized 
elements of Agile™s organizing vision.
 6.2 Moral Legitimacy Strategy  

Our interpretation of values by Agile contributors show they have
 their own desires in addition to 
those provided by the Agile Manifesto. Contributors to an organiz
ing vision ﬁtell storiesﬂ that they 
have been ﬁmodify and embellishﬂ to promote their own vision (Swanson 
and Ramiller 1997). 
Contributors to Agile have encoded these values selectively to 
represent both the original values of 
Agile and commercial interests. The interpreted values 
espoused in our analysis are part of Agile™s 
organizing vision and thus are by design used to legitimize Agile
 in the IT community.  We theorize 
that these value patterns represent a moral legitimacy st
rategy. Moral Legitimacy represents the 
ﬁmoral norms and values prevalent within a particular social
 audienceﬂ (Kaganer et al 2010). The 
value patterns encoded in the organizing vision of Agile provid
e legitimizing accounts of Agile™s 
potential use in organizations by aligning their values to comm
on desires of its adaptors. Moral 
legitimacy is an attempt to support the desired values that w
ould be applicable to the Agile 
community.  

Wealth, power, skill and enlightenment were strongly represente
d. Through our value comparison 
with the Agile Manifesto we identified that values wealth a
nd power were not endemic to Agile but 
represented its practical commercial applications. Adaptor org
anizations would value wealth as 
representative of income and power as influence over their employee
s. Thus contributors to Agile use 
values to create social accounts that represent both business a
nd methodological interests. 
Organizations that access these content sources would like
ly view it as legitimate because it represents 
both the essence of Agile and their commercial goals. Swans
on and Ramiller (1997) propose that 
participants in organizing vision share a worldview that has a
 stable ideological foundation. Values in 
Agile™s organizing vision potentially provide this stable ideol
ogical foundation through its alignment 
with the socially accepted values of organizations.
 7 Discussion and Implications 
This paper set out to answer the question 
how have Agile values been interpreted and legitimized in 
the IS community discourse by its contributors?
 Our analysis of two sources from Agile™s community 
discourse revealed a value pattern that was similar acr
oss the contributors. The value interpretation of 
the contributors to Agile show common values of wealth, power, enlight
enment and skill.  These 
values have their foundations in the earlier discourses on Agile
, such as the Agile Manifesto, but also 
show evidence of practical organizational desires. This study reveals that
 values wealth and power, not 
explicitly included in the Agile Manifesto, are expressed as v
alues related to practical business needs 
in Agile™s community discourse.  

The duality in the value interpretation shows evidence of a mora
l legitimacy strategy that supports 
norms of software developers and organizations alike. More sim
ply, the value patterns represent 
desires of potential adaptors of Agile and business interest
s. Previous research on Agile and IT 
community discourse are both furthered by this study. The interpret
ed values espoused in our analysis 
complement the existing research on cultural values supporting the adop
tion and diffusion of Agile 
methods. This research also adds depth to the theory of organizing v
ision as we add value specific 
insights. We reflect in the following on relevant extant resear
ch and provide implications for research 
and practice. 

Although research on organizational culture and the deployment of a
gile methods is a nascent area in 
software development, some studies have identified values that
 we have aligned with Lasswell™s 
conceptualizations of enlightenment and skill as values impacti
ng the adoption and diffusion of agile 
methods. For example, capacity and readiness to learn are highli
ghted by authors Strode et al. (2009) 
and Mirsra et al. (2009). However, according to the results of ou
r study other values that have not 
 attracted the attention of agile researches such as power
 and wealth are part of the Agile™s community 
discourse. Moreover, our results reveal that frequencies for 
power (influence the action of others) are 
almost as strong as frequencies for enlightenment (knowledge) in 
both datasets; and frequencies for 
wealth (income) are even stronger than skill. Therefore, studies
 on how power and wealth are 
considered by agile adopters are needed to get a deeper understand
ing of how they influence the 
adoption and diffusion of these methods. 

Value research in IS innovation has proposed that value compat
ibility will impact the adoption, 
implementation and assimilation of IS innovations (Bunker, Kautz, & 
Nguyen, 2007; Iivari & 
Huisman, 2007; Ishman, Pegels, & Sanders, 2001; Krumbholz, Galliers, 
Coulianos, & Maiden, 2000), 
including Agile (Siakas and Siakas 2007). Research shows that v
alue conflict has a major impact on 
the adoption and diffusion of innovations (leidner & Kayworth, 2006). Orga
nizing vision contributes 
to the design and development of IS innovations and thus shared values 
would become infused in the 
artefact (Angela & Leiser, 2005; Pinch, 2008). For Agile, the
 community discourse is a representation 
of the artefact. The values in the organizing vision of Agile 
could thus be use to assess its 
compatibility. While some studies such as (Chow and Cao 2008) don™t perc
eive organizational culture 
as an impact factor in the success of agile software pro
jects, many studies focus on the interaction 
between the cultural context and the application of agile methods. Als
o research shows that IS 
innovations, through their adoption and use, alter the culture of the orga
nization. A potential area of 
research could investigate imposed values by agile methods on or
ganizations. It could also be possible 
however, for organizational leaders to create their own vision of
 Agile in their organization and infuse 
it with their own values.  

8 Conclusion  
This paper investigated values in the organizing vision of Agi
le. Our analysis proposed that the value 
patterns across contributors to the Agile method shared simil
ar values. We theorized that these 
interpretations show common values in their support of Agile in organizations.  T
hese values appear to 
have their foundations in earlier Agile discourse, such as the
 Agile manifesto, but also show evidence 
of practical organizational desires. The similarities and na
ture of the values also represent a moral 
legitimacy strategy supported by the theory of organizing vis
ion. The values espoused are mostly 
inline with its methodology and present opportunities for organizati
onal compatibility assessments. 
The paper proposes that values in organizing vision provide the founda
tion for interpretive flexibility 
by contributors and adaptors.  

We believe our research provides a contribution to understanding of 
the value structure of organizing 
vision. Content analysis studies of media are also naturally l
imited by the availability of published 
material. This study is limited by its selection of elite sa
mples and could be expanded to include 
greater comparisons of more sources and other IS innovations. Such 
as study would provide richer 
findings and allow for further explanation of values. A further lim
itation is the use of a standard 
dictionary for coding. While it provides better reliability 
their generality means main representative 
constructs may have been ignored. While our study is limited by it
s comparisons it is inline with other 
studies that has chosen prestige samples from popular publication ou
tlets (Wang and Ramiller, 2009; 
Gorgeon and Swanson 2011). The potential sources of organizing vision are
 numerous and alternative 
sources for study have been suggested, such as blogs and email lists.  

Further research should exploit value research, as it has become
 a key topic in the adoption of 
innovation and organizational transformation, particularly in a g
lobal context. Future studies could 
compare values across global outlets, over time and publications outl
ets to similar or diverse 
audiences. Particularly in the case of Agile, future studies ca
n investigate how these values are 
transposed into the adopting organization. Theories suggest that ov
er time an organizing vision would 
influence and potential change the cultural assumptions of adaptors
 through continue interaction and 
use (E. Burton Swanson & Ramiller, 1997). 
 References  

Angela, L., & Leiser, S. (2005). The social and political construction of technol
ogical frames. Eur. J. 
Inf. Syst., 14(1), 49-59.  
Baskerville, R. L., & Myers, M. D. (2009). Fashion waves in information system
s research and 
practice. MIS Q., 33(4), 647-662.  
Bunker, D., Kautz, K.-H., & Nguyen, A. L. T. (2007). Role of value compatibility in I
T adoption. 
Journal of Information Technology, 22(1), 69.  
Beck, K., Beedle, M., Van Bennekum, A., Cockburn, A., Cunningham, W., Fowler, M., Grenning, J., 
Highsmith, J., Hunt, A., Jeffries, R., Kern, J., Marick, B., Martin, R.C., Mellor, S., S
chwaber, K., 
Sutherland, J. & Thomas, D. (2001). Manifesto for agile software development. 
Available: 
http://www.agilemanifesto.org/  
Beck, K. & Andres, C. (2004) Extreme programming explained: embrace change (2nd Ed
ition). 
Boston: Addison-Wesley.  
Boehm, B. (2011). Towards richer process principles. International Confere
nce on Software and 
Systems Process, CSSP'11, pp. 234. 
Chow, T. & Cao, D. (2008). A survey study of critical success factors in agile sof
tware projects. The 
Journal of Systems and Software, 81, 961-971. 
Cohn, M. (2009). Succeeding with agile: software development using Scrum, 1st edit
ion, Addison-
Wesley Professional.  
Denison, D.R. & Spreitzer, G.M. (1991). Organizational culture and organizat
ional development: a 
competing values approach, R.W. Woodman, W.A. Pasmore Editions, Research in Organi
zational 
Change and Development, vol.5, JAI Press Ind., Greenwich, CT,1-21. 
DSDM (2006). Dynamic systems development method, Available: http://www.dsdm
.org/ Iivari, J., & 
Huisman, M. (2007). The Rellationship between Organizational Culture and the
 Deployment of 
Systems Development Methodologies MIS Quarterly, 31(1), 35. 
Dybå, T. & Dingsøyr,T. (2008). Empirical studies of agile software developme
nt: A systematic 
review. Inf. Softw. Technol. 50, 833-859.  
Iivari, J., & Huisman, M. (2007). The Rellationship between Organizational C
ulture and the 
Deployment of Systems Development Methodologies MIS Quarterly, 31(1), 35.  
Ishman, M. D., Pegels, C. C., & Sanders, L. G. (2001). Managerial information system 
success factors 
within the cultural context of North America and a former Soviet Republi
c. The Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, 10(4), 291-312. doi:Doi: 10.1016/s0963-8687(01)00055-5 
Krumbholz, M., Galliers, J., Coulianos, N., & Maiden, N. A. M. (2000). Implementing enterpr
ise 
resource planning packages in different corporate and national cultures
. Journal of Information 
Technology, 15(4), 267.  
leidner, D. E., & Kayworth, T. (2006). A Review of Culture in Information System
s Research: 
Towards a Theory of Information Technology Culture Conflict. MIS Quarterly
, 30(2), 357-399.  
Namenwirth, J. Z. (1968). The Lasswell value dictionary: s.n. 

Pinch, T. (2008). Technology and institutions: living in a material world. The
ory and Society, 37(5), 
461-483. doi:citeulike-article-id:3440325 
Ramiller, N. C., & Swanson, E. B. (2003). Organizing Visions for Information Technology
 and the 
I.S. Executive Response. Journal of Management Information Systems, 20(1), 13-
50.  
Iivari, J., & Iivari, N. (2011). The relationship between organizational c
ulture and the deployment of 
agile methods. Information and Software Technology, 52, 509-520. 
Ishman, M. D., Pegels, C. C., & Sanders, L. G. (2001). Managerial information system s
uccess factors 
within the cultural context of North America and a former Soviet Republ
ic. The Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, 10(4), 291-312. 
King, J., L., Gurbaxani, V., Kraemer, K. L., Mcfarlan, W. F., Raman, K. S., & Yap, C. S. (199
4). 
Institutional Factors in Information Technology Innovation. Information Sys
tems Research, 5(2), 
139-169. 
 Krumbholz, M., Galliers, J., Coulianos, N., & Maiden, N. A. M. (2000). Implementing enterpr
ise 
resource planning packages in different corporate and national cultures
. Journal of Information 
Technology, 15(4), 267. 
Larman, C. & Vodde, B. (2009). Scaling Lean & Agile development. Thinking and organizati
onal 
tools for large-scale Scrum. Addison-Wesley, USA. 
Leidner, D. E., & Kayworth, T. (2006). A Review of Culture in Information System
s Research: 
Towards a Theory of Information Technology Culture Conflict. MIS Quarterly, 3
0(2), 357-399. 
Lindgren, R., Andersson, M., & Henfridsson, O. (2008). Multi-contextuality in Boundary-S
panning 
practices. Information Systems Journal, 18(2008), 641. 
Misra, S. D., Kumar, V., & Kumar, U. (2009). Identifying some important success fa
ctors in adopting 
agile software development practices. The Journal os Systems and Sof
tware, 82, 1869-1890. 
Namenwirth, J. Z. (1968). The Lasswell value dictionary: s.n. 

Nonaka, I., Konno, N. (1998). The concept of "ba": building a foundation for knowledge creation. 
California Management Review 40(3), 40-54. 
Palmer, S. R. & Felsing, J. M. (2002). A Practical Guide to Feature-Driven Dev
elopment, The Coad 
Series, Prentice Hall PTR, February 2002.  
Pinch, T. (2008). Technology and institutions: living in a material world. The
ory and Society, 37(5), 
461-483. 
Ramiller, N. C., & Swanson, E. B. (2003). Organizing Visions for Information Technology
 and the 
I.S. Executive Response. Journal of Management Information Systems, 20(1), 13
-50. 
Robinson, H., & Sharp, H. (2005). Organizational culture and XP: three case studi
es. Proccedings of 
the Agile Development Conference (ADC-05). 
Schein, E.H. (1985) Organizational culture and leadership, Jossey-Basss, Sa
n Francisco, CA. 
Siakas, K., & Siakas, E. (2007) The agile professional culture: a source 
of agile quality. Softw. 
Process Improve. Pract, 12, 597-610. 
Strode, D., Huff, S., & Tretiakov, A. (2009) The impact of organizational culture on a
gile method use. 
Proceedings of the 42nd Hawaii International Conference on System Science
s. 
Swanson, B. (1994). Information systems innovation among organizations. Management
 Science, 
40(9), 1069-1092. 
Swanson, E. B., & Ramiller, N. C. (1997). The Organizing Vision in Information System
s Innovation. 
Organization Science, 8(5), 458-474. 
Swanson, E. B., & Ramiller, N. C. (2004). Innovating mindfully with information technology
. MIS 
Quarterly: Management Information Systems, 28(4), 553-583. 
Tolfo, C., & Wazlawich, R. (2008). The influence of organizational culture on 
the adoption of extreme 
programming. The Journal of Systems and Software, 81, 1955-1967. 
Tolfo, C., Wazlawich, R., Ferreira, M., & Forcellini, F. (2009) Softw. Process I
mprove. Pract. 
Wang, P., & Ramiller, N. C. (2009). Community Learning in Information Technology Innova
tion. 
MIS Quarterly, 33(4), 709. 
 
 