 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)ON THE NATURE OF SUPPLY CHAINMANAGEMENT PROJECTS AND HOW TOMANAGE THEMHenrik Johan Nyman†bo Akademi UniversityPiia Hirkman†bo Akademi UniversityECIS 2012 Proceedings. ON THE NATURE OF SUPPLY CHAIN MANAGEMENT 
PROJECTS AND HOW TO MANAGE THEM 
Nyman, Henrik J., Åbo Akademi University, Institute for Advanced Management Syste
ms 
Research, Joukahaisenkatu 3-5,  20520 Turku, Finland, henrik.j.nyman@abo.fi 
Hirkman, Piia, Åbo Akademi University, Turku Centre for Computer Science, 
Joukahaisenkatu 3-5,  20520 Turku, Finland, piia.hirkman@abo.fi 
 
Abstract 

This paper explores the nature of complexity in Supply Chain Managemen
t (SCM) projects. We find 
three aspects to be critical in SCM projects: SCM business proce
sses, information systems, and 
organizations (internal and external). We also argue that in essence
, SCM projects are complex, 
demonstrating structural complexity, uncertainty, and interdependence
 between elements, all in a 
unique context. With this analysis in mind, we look at how establi
shed project management 
methodologies are suited to manage SCM projects. Correspondingly, we inv
estigate the nature of 
agile project management methods and look at whether these are suitab
le in an SCM context. 
Secondary data on previous large-scale SCM projects are used to illustrate the nature o
f complexity in 
these projects and whether this could have had an effect on the outcome of the projec
t. 
Keywords: Supply Chain Management, Project Management, Complexity, Risk
 Management, Agile 
Project Management. 

  1 Introduction 
Many large-scale supply chain management (SCM) improvement ef
forts fail in reaching goals within 
the defined limits of scope, budget and time. This paper theorise
s on one possible, widespread reason 
for SCM project failure: the selection of the wrong projec
t management methodology. To analyze this, 
we will explore the nature of SCM projects and establish what t
ypes of complexities are associated 
with these. With these characteristics, we will look at w
hat type of project methodology is suited to 
manage SCM projects. For the purpose of this paper, we will f
ocus on manufacturing supply chains; 
even though many principles can certainly be applied in servi
ce supply chain, these are not directly 
investigated. Furthermore, our focus is on what we call ﬁlarge-s
caleﬂ SCM projects. These projects are 
typically in large organizations (+1000 employees) and cover many 
different parties in the supply 
chain. 

A search for the terms ‚logistics™ or ‚supply chain managem
ent™ and ‚project management™ in major 
databases reveals very few results that focus specifical
ly on this problem. Ayer (2009) dedicates his 
book ﬁSupply Chain Project Managementﬂ to this particular issue a
nd Krajewski et al. (2010) dedicate 
a chapter to project management in their book ﬁOperations Mana
gementﬂ. While these address the 
challenge of project management in an SCM context, they do not qu
estion the suitability of particular 
methods in this context. We wish to address this gap in research. 

Mentzer et al. (2001) define a supply chain (SC) as ﬁa set 
of three or more entities (organizations or 
individuals) directly involved in the upstream and downstream flows 
of products, services, finances, 
and/or information from a source to a customerﬂ. Common for many 
definitions of supply chain 
management
 is that they stress the need to integrate business processes
 across company boundaries to 
generate value for all parties in the supply chain (Lambert
 et al., 1998; Dam Jespersen and Skjoett 
Larsen, 2005). Given the definitions above, a few things become importa
nt: the need to manage 
business processes and related data, as well as the need for
 integration with supply chain partners, all 
in an effort to ensure timely and cost-efficient delivery of a product 
to a customer. 
This brings us to the question of what constitutes a typical SC
M project. Business processes are 
involved, and as we discuss processes directly catering for
 customer needs (one of the main goals for 
the enterprise), this usually covers a large part of the com
pany. Secondly, effective SCM would not be 
possible without a significant level of IT support to orchestrat
e logistics and to communicate with 
supply chain partners (Auramo et al., 2009). This can range from simpl
e solutions in a spreadsheet, 
printed out and faxed to a supplier, to highly sophisticated enterprise r
esource planning (ERP) systems 
combined with automated system-to-system (S2S) solutions. In addit
ion to internal complexities of 
SCM business processes and IT solutions, there is an external c
omponent to be managed. Quite often 
we see one focal company in the supply chain leading the supply chain 
development activities (Belaya 
and Hanf, 2009). This company leads the project, and despite often being 
able to exercise authority in 
the supply chain, it is still dependent on the capabilities o
f partners. For example, if a customer is 
unable to give any reliable insight to future demands or a supplier
 does not have means of 
communicating shipment data or supply availability (either due t
o missing IT support or lack of 
business processes), key data is missing for the focal compa
ny. Internal supply chain improvement 
efforts often turn into exercises where also partner organiz
ations are trained to perform better. In 
addition to customers and suppliers, other partners in the supply chain 
can also be heavily involved in 
the effort, such as outsourcing partners and 3
rd
 party logistics service providers (LSPs). 
The topic at hand presents us with multiple dimensions of interest
 in the information systems (IS) 
domain: the combination of IT and business processes, the organizationa
l dimension (internal and 
external), and project management practises to steer these e
fforts. The rest of this paper will examine 
SCM projects further from a project management perspective 
in an exploratory manner. In Sections 2 
and 3, we present the characteristics of such projects and chal
lenges in them based on existing 
literature. In a similar manner, we use literature to port
ray project management approaches in order to 
investigate the conceptual fit between these and SCM projects (
Sections 4 and 5).  Section 6 will look 
 at secondary data of large-scale SCM projects to provide exa
mples of the typical nature of these 
projects. The final section of the paper consists of concluding
 remarks and further research 
opportunities. 

2 The nature of SCM projects 
Bermudez (2002) states that supply chain business processes are 
difficult to comprehend as they cross 
many organizational silos and because few companies have multi-de
partment supply chain processes 
defined on a corporate level. While these separate organizations
 in the company certainly might co-
operate, there is still a lack of one entity overlooking all
 processes and data associated with supply 
chain operations unless you move high up in the corporate hierarc
hy. Mentzer et al. (2008, p. 40) 
conclude that typical SCM projects ﬁshould be assigned to a cross-
functional, firm-level manager 
(such as the COO)ﬂ (COO, Chief Operating Officer). Hence, wh
ile SCM improvement projects often 
strive towards increased visibility and co-operation this is d
ifficult to achieve as many business 
processes in many (quite often very independent) business units n
eed to be aligned. While a person 
such as the COO can act as a sponsor for the SCM project, this
 still leaves the operative decision 
making to each business unit separately. Our focus on ﬁlarge-sc
aleﬂ SCM projects also implies that we 
typically see a geographical spread of the organizations involv
ed in the project. This refers to both the 
internal organization and other (external) parties in the supply
 chain. Independent business units, 
geographical spread and lack of an appropriate overview of supply chain processes
 pose challenges for 
improving visibility and cooperation. 

Information systems have been used to overcome these challenges. At
 the same time, neither the IS 
employed nor the IS projects are simple. Thus SCM projects will 
be challenging also from an 
information systems perspective. Hsu et al. (2011) argue that I
S projects can be characterized as 
ﬁuniquely complexﬂ as they need to incorporate end-users, developer
s, and specialists from multiple 
domains. Bermudez (2002) refers to a study by AMR research saying 
that less than 15 percent of 
manufacturing companies have successfully implemented the inform
ation systems they have 
purchased from leading SC software providers. While this fig
ure has hopefully risen since 2002, it still 
adds weight to the fact that the IS dimension of SCM is difficu
lt to manage. Table 1 shows a 
comprehensive framework of information systems to support SCM (N
yman, 2012), providing an idea 
of the vast complexity of managing the supply chain from an IT per
spective. Data management in this 
context refers to ways of handling and analysing data for decision s
upport in SCM. Typical solutions 
in this category are materials requirement planning (MRP), ent
erprise resource planning (ERP), and 
advance planning and scheduling (APS) systems. Data exchange so
lutions help companies 
communicate with partners in the supply chain. These range from 
relatively simple solutions like e-
mail, to Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) or XML-based fram
eworks like RosettaNet that provide 
fully automated data exchange. The third category analysed was
 data tracking, again ranging from 
simple solutions like bar-codes to more advanced solutions like 
Radio Frequency Identification 
(RFID) tags.  

 
Table 1.  SCM information systems or equivalent (Nyman, 2012) 

Nyman™s (2012) conclusions indicate that the complexity of implementa
tion increases with more 
mature IT solutions. This is due to the more ﬁdemanding natureﬂ of t
he IT solutions themselves but 
also because of the dependency between the proposed categories. For
 example, mature solutions in 
data tracking will require mature data management solutions. As
 previously noted, there is also a clear 
link to the business process dimension. Auramo et al. (2005) conclude
 that to achieve strategic 
Solution Maturity
 Data Management
 Data Exchange
 Data Tracking 
MRP Fax Manual Inspection 
MRP II eMail, Partner Portals Barcodes 
ERP EDI . 
Low 
 
 High 
APS RosettaNet RFID 
 benefits for supply chain operations, ﬁthe use of IT has to be coupled 
with process redesignﬂ. 
Similarly, Sridharan et al. (2005) put forward that the choi
ce of technology is a secondary concern, 
understanding business processes and their dependencies comes firs
t. Thus interdependencies between 
various information technologies and processes increase complexity in SC
M. 
We have identified three distinct areas that demand attention 
in SCM projects. These are internal and 
external organizations, SCM business processes, and information sy
stems. It is important to recognize 
that these are not stand-alone elements in the SCM ﬁlandscapeﬂ
, there are no SCM business processes 
without organizational alignment (internal and external) and v
ice versa, nor are there any well-
functioning SCM IT solutions without business processes and vic
e versa. These are thus key 
interdependent factors influencing the nature of the SCM projects.   

3 The nature of complex projects  
According to Williams (2005), structural complexity and uncertaint
y are the dominant factors in 
studies on project complexity. Structural complexity refers 
to the size and number of elements in the 
project where elements are the particular organizations (in
ternal or external) taking part in the project, 
or the different tasks needed to be done in the project. The hi
gh number of organizations involved in 
the SCM project will contribute to structural complexity. Th
e number of tasks in the project can of 
course also be high. Uncertainty, on the other hand, refers to 
what the precise goals of the project 
should be or what the means of achieving these goals are (Willi
ams, 2005). Few projects are started 
without a goal, but the abstraction level in the project can be 
relatively high. For example, an SCM 
project might have as a goal to improve on-time delivery. This,
 however, is a high-level target that can 
be approached in many different ways: through faster production, optim
ized logistics routes, or 
inventory postponement, to mention a few. Once the way of achieving the target i
s selected, it is fair to 
argue that there are, for example, many ways of optimizing logi
stics routes. Thus project uncertainty 
in this context is a ﬁdouble-barrelledﬂ concept that can ref
er to either the lack of a specific vision, the 
lack of a specific path, or both.  

Vidal and Marle (2008) look at this in a similar way: projec
t size, variety, interdependence, and 
context contribute to project complexity. From our point of view, the in
terdependence and context are 
of particular interest. Interdependence is high when different pa
rts of the project have a big influence 
on other parts of the project. Furthermore, context refers to th
e fact that something done in a previous 
project might not necessarily work in new surroundings. Similar c
onclusions are mentioned by 
Söderlund (2004) who stresses the need for understanding the contextual dimension i
n projects and the 
fundamental differences across projects. Supply chains tend to 
demonstrate a high dependency 
between elements (be it processes or organizations) and they t
end to be unique in the sense that no 
particular supply chain is exactly the same as any other. Afte
r all, even if two companies manufacture 
exactly the same product, they most probably use slightly different
 suppliers or produce their goods in 
slightly different locations.  Another study mentions many of the
 same factors as above but also adds 
ﬁform of contractﬂ to the list (Müller and Turner, 2007). Given the 
fact that many companies are 
involved in SCM projects (ranging from software providers, suppl
iers, outsourcing partners, to LSPs), 
the contractual dimension of the project cannot be overlooked. Antv
ik and Sjöholm (2007, p. 14) list, 
among other things, the number of interfaces, organizational la
yers, geographic locations and 
interested parties as key factors contributing to project com
plexity. If the number of any of these 
factors is high, project complexity is correspondingly high. These 
conclusions are very similar to that 
of Vidal and Marle (2008). 

We can also examine this from the opposite side; what constitutes a non-complex pr
oject? Engineering 
and military endeavours have been credited with exemplifying the 
origins of project management 
(Bailey, 2005; Vidal and Marle, 2008). These types of organizations
 and projects are often 
characterized by tangible products, straightforward command and contr
ol structures and management 
hierarchy, a good balance between authority and responsibility, and obje
ctives that are well 
understood by most stakeholders (Bourne and Walker, 2005). Looking at thi
s from an SCM 
 perspective, the large number of internal and external stakehold
ers alone creates challenges in terms of  
ﬁstraightforward command and control structuresﬂ and ﬁobjectives 
that are well understood by most 
stakeholders.ﬂ 

Looking at the above, typical large-scale SCM projects often 
demonstrate structural complexity, 
uncertainty, and interdependence between elements, all in a unique con
text. While form of contract 
also contributes to complexity, we have opted to see that as
 a particular form of structural complexity 
and interdependence. All-in-all, SCM projects are complex.  

4 SCM projects and traditional project management 

methodologies 
For the purpose of this article, the standards promoted by organi
zations such as the US-based Project 
Management Institute and the United Kingdom's Association for Pro
ject Management are deemed as 
ﬁestablishedﬂ or ﬁtraditionalﬂ project management. A vital 
part of these standards is risk management 
(Kutsch and Hall, 2009). Risk management processes have been intr
oduced to either prevent or 
contain events pertaining to uncertainty (Geraldi et al., 2010). Kosk
ela and Howell (2002) go further 
in saying that traditional project management methodologies in 
fact 
assume
 low uncertainty. That is, 
risk management is actually a tool to achieve the underlying assumption of
 the methodology. 
Geraldi et al. (2010) have been looking at what constitutes a succ
essful response to unexpected (or 
undesired) events. So-called unknown-unknowns (events that were imposs
ible to foresee) are difficult 
or impossible to handle with risk management processes, yet these are fre
quently occurring in projects. 
We argue that complex projects, like SCM projects, are more l
ikely to demonstrate unknown-
unknowns because of their ﬁchaoticﬂ nature stemming from all the 
factors contributing to project 
complexity. Instead of a formal risk management process, ﬁsoft s
killsﬂ and competence in the project 
team are indicated as suitable response mechanisms. Furthermor
e, a high degree of freedom, 
communication with stakeholders, and behaviour (self-awareness, ab
ility to handle stress) are some of 
the appropriate measures to counter the negative effects of unc
ertainty. The alternative risk 
management put forward by Geraldi et al. (2010) show a striking si
milarity to what Martins and 
Terblanche (2003) consider as organizational traits that reso
nate with innovation. For example, 
freedom to make decisions, empowerment, mistake handling, risk tak
ing and open communication are 
indicated as influencing innovation (Martins and Terblance, 2003). 
The relationship between handling 
uncertainty in projects and the need for innovation requires furthe
r attention but the same 
organizational traits seem to be needed for both.    

In other words, risk management processes are a requirement for 
traditional project management (as 
the methodology assumes a low degree of uncertainty). However, SC
M projects seem to resonate 
poorly with traditional risk management due to the inherent p
roject complexity. Other measures are 
needed. 

Traditional project management methodologies also stress the ne
ed for planning in advance, even so 
that planning ahead becomes the essential management tool (Willi
ams, 2005). All possible events 
should be anticipated at the time of planning (Pich et al., 2002). Predet
ermined actions and activities 
work well as long as the assumptions, goals, and overall environment
 do not change from the time of 
planning to the time of execution (or go-live of the project). 
Where conditions are changing and 
uncertainty prevails, there is, however, increased criticism
 and awareness that traditional project 
management methodologies relying on proactive planning do not necess
arily offer the best fit for 
purpose (Geraldi, 2008). From what we have established so far, this
 might well be the case for large-
scale SCM projects.  

The so-called unknown-unknowns are one of the most difficult ﬁtypesﬂ
 of uncertainty in projects. 
Traditional risk management processes struggle with these ev
ents, and they are nearly impossible to 
plan for in advance. There is however a paradox in the fact th
at management tends to respond to high 
uncertainty with more control. In other words, more planning and stricte
r risk management is put in 
 place where entirely other measures are needed (Bourne and Walke
r, 2005). This can be labelled as a 
ﬁbureaucratization of chaosﬂ (Geraldi, 2008). Clearly, there is a
 need for a different approach to 
uncertainty in SCM projects. 

When looking at complex SCM projects, it seems the traditional a
pproach of planning ahead and 
management of risks should be replaced by more communication, competenc
e in SCM processes, 
information systems and methods, and freedom to innovate (Geraldi e
t al., 2010; Martins and 
Terblanche, 2003). When looking at the relationship between potential for
 innovation and traditional 
project management methodologies, there are several studies ind
icating that the opposite is true. Due 
to their deterministic nature, they actually act to stifle 
innovation (Bryde, 2003; Keegan and Turner, 
2002). Thinking about this from a purely practical point of view this
 becomes clear. If you plan in 
advance who is doing what and when, there is little room for the fle
xibility and freedom needed in 
large-scale SCM projects. 

In summary, we have established the nature of typical SCM pr
ojects and concluded that these type of 
efforts need a high degree of freedom and SCM competence, combined w
ith a host of ﬁsoft skillsﬂ in 
the project team. Traditional plan-ahead project management
 techniques and risk management 
processes such as the Project Management Institute™s PMBo
K (PMI, 2008) might not offer the 
necessary conditions for these endeavours to succeed. Probing for al
ternative, newer modes of project 
management, eyes turn to agile approaches that have been proposed 
to conform to the uncertainty and 
complexity of the project world (Williams, 2005). The following wil
l examine whether these methods 
provide a better fit-for purpose in large-scale SCM improvement effo
rts. 
5 SCM projects and agile project management methodolo
gies  
In the domain of software development, a group of methods jointly 
called agile methods have gained 
popularity as many have considered them to better suit changing 
business and technology worlds. The 
core of agility is in adaptability to changes and the r
eduction of the cost associated with these changes. 
This is done by ongoing planning throughout the software development proce
ss and by splitting the 
process into short iterations. Agility also demonstrates a s
hift in principles, such as focusing on people 
instead of on a process (Cockburn and Highsmith, 2001).  

In search for the characteristics of agility, Conboy (2009) use
d the concepts of flexibility and leanness 
to probe literature on management, manufacturing, and organizatio
nal behaviour. He saw the essence 
of agility not only in rapidly adapting to change but also crea
ting it and learning from it ﬁwhile 
contributing to perceived customer valueﬂ (Conboy, 2009, p. 340). This
 interest in and the use of 
agility in systems development reflects a similar tren
d in other areas: a shift from a mechanistic to a 
dynamic approach has been made also in organizational management
. The environment is seen as 
unpredictable, problems are seen as wicked, the goal of problem 
solving is responsiveness, and 
learning has become generative (Nerur and Balijepally, 2007). Thi
s has also affected the view on 
managing projects. For example, Augustine et al. (2005) sugges
ted an agile project management 
method based on projects as complex adaptive systems (nonlinea
r, open and dynamic, and interacting 
with their environment through uncontrollable inputs and outputs). In
 this view, project management 
consists only of some simple rules, such as small organic tea
ms, guiding vision, free and open access 
to information, that keep chaos away. Such an approach base
d on principles rather than control by 
step-by-step guidelines is descriptive for the agile minds
et.  
Although some of the more specific agile methods proposed in sys
tems development (such as Feature-
Driven Development and Scrum) already cover project manageme
nt aspects, these methods 
concentrate on the challenges of their domain, leaving many ques
tions critical to other project 
management needs unanswered (Abrahamsson et al., 2003). More rece
ntly, also general practically 
oriented descriptions to agile project management have been provi
ded (such as Wysocki, 2009, and 
Chin, 2004). To present agile project management as opposed to trad
itional, we refer to Wysocki 
(2009) who illustrates both agile and traditional approaches as p
roject lifecycle models that include the 
five basic project management phases (that Wysocki refers t
o as scope, plan, launch, monitor and 
 control, and close). However, where traditional approaches pr
oceed from start to finish, repeating the 
phases only once during a project, agile approaches make projects 
into a series of iterations, each of 
which containing all of the phases Œ possibly with the excepti
on of scope. In the agile life cycle 
models, the iterations are not predetermined as in the tra
ditional ones: changes are expected. Also, the 
client (internal or external) provides feedback at the end of 
each iteration. This feedback is input for 
the next iteration, providing opportunities for learning during the p
roject. In a way, the iterations 
transform a project from a full-body cast with no flexibilit
y into one with more functional joints that 
enable greater flexibility Œ and agility.  

In line with Söderlund (2004), also Wysocki (2009) is an advoca
te of using a project management 
approach that is based on the characteristics of the proj
ect and its context. The essence of his reasoning 
is that uncertainty of the project goal and solution together
 form the basis for choosing the project 
management approach. He prescribes traditional approaches for pro
jects where both the goal and the 
solution are clear, but SCM projects include uncertainties. S
ome of the uncertainties are related to the 
solution. As for the goal, SCM projects vary: SCM projects
 do have a stated goal even though its 
formulation may be abstract. An abstract goal that does not transla
te into detailed subgoals is, in fact, 
uncertain. For projects with a clear goal and an uncertain sol
ution, Wysocki (2009) recommends agile 
project management whereas for projects where both the goal a
nd the solution are highly uncertain, an 
extreme approach is suitable. Although these approaches have som
e common traits, the frequencies 
are different, as well as the size, inputs required, and output
s produced for iterations or salience of 
learning and discovery. For example, in the models Wysocki labels as ﬁagileﬂ, 
the scope of an iteration 
is not changed, but in the so-called ﬁextremeﬂ approaches each ite
ration starts from the beginning with 
(re-)defining the scope. However, it is the general idea that 
is of importance; where Wysocki (2009) 
differentiates between agile and extreme project life cyc
les, Chin (2004) states that agile project 
management focuses more on execution than on planning (decisions a
re supported during project 
execution instead of making them all at the beginning of the proje
ct).  
The whole idea of agile project management appears to stem fr
om similar criticism towards traditional 
project management methods as we have presented in our analysis of
 SCM projects. For example, 
Chin (2004) describes the unsuitability of traditional project ma
nagement methods to environments 
that ﬁexhibit internal and/or external uncertainty, may requ
ire some unique expertise, and possess a 
high level of urgencyﬂ (p. 3), similar to the descriptions co
ncerning the challenges of SCM projects. 
Even though a number of variations on ﬁnon-traditionalﬂ project ma
nagement (agile or extreme) can 
be identified Œ as the essence of agility is in flexibili
ty and adaptability Œ the same origins result in the 
same ﬁnon-traditionalﬂ core traits: reliance on people (and 
their competence), customer involvement, 
communication, prioritizing, frequent iterations to allow for cha
nge, and collaboration rather than 
control.  

Some of these characteristics would seem to comply well wi
th the demands of SCM projects. 
Allowing for changes provides for a higher degree of freedom in the
 face of uncertainty, and a greater 
involvement of the client increases communication that can all
eviate the complications raised by 
complexity. Additionally, the learning opportunities give room for inn
ovation. Also, agility relies on 
the competence of project members, instead of the bureaucrati
c approach that was deemed harmful for 
the success of SCM projects. Further, the improvisational nature
 of agility provides adaptable patterns 
(Leybourne, 2009) that can speed up the process of getting through the
 complexities of project life 
(instead of working in a total ad hoc mode). Relating Leybourne™
s argument to the idea of making 
decisions during execution, the improvisational approach supported by 
patterns is an approach to 
decision-making that sits well with the project management
 needs for complex SCM projects. A 
problem with an overall agile approach in SCM projects may
 be the interdependencies so typical for 
SCM. Agility strives for enabling flexibility through incre
mental work and minimal advance planning 
while the existence of many interdependent parts increases the 
pressure to plan. Although increased 
control may not be the way to cope with the intertwined SCM 
projects, the improvisational nature of a 
more agile mode may not be enough even if the patterns provided
 by the method can help in 
discerning interdependencies. 
 6 A look at previous large-scale SCM improvement effo
rts 
As a first continuation on this conceptual exercise, we looked int
o existing analyses of some 
problematic SCM projects in order to see if the grains of our reasoning could be f
ound in past projects. 
In this paper, three such projects are used as examples. The i
llustration is based solely on studies on 
large-scale SCM improvement efforts, published previously by othe
r researchers. The examples have 
been chosen based on the availability of documentation as well as ho
w known they are. Two of the 
cases, Nike and Hershey, are quite (in)famous and have gott
en a lot of attention in both popular and 
academic press (e.g., Buxbaum, 2001; Sridharan et al., 2005). The third
 one, ﬁGlobal beverages UKﬂ, 
has been described in conference proceedings (Brown, 2011).   

These projects have experienced major challenges. To exemplify t
raits, we illustrate the nature and the 
critical aspects of SCM projects in terms of SCM business
 processes, information systems, and 
organizations. Two of the characteristics of project comple
xity, structural complexity and 
interdependence, manifest themselves through the three critical 
aspects of SCM projects.  In addition, 
uncertainty (also an element of project complexity) is exhibite
d in the descriptions of scope in these 
examples, bringing together any possible lack of vision and/or path. W
e did not focus on the context 
aspect of project complexity in the illustration as the contex
t was stated per definition to be unique in 
SCM projects. A summary is presented in Table 2. Naturally, w
e cannot fully isolate the 
characteristics of SCM projects and the project complexities
 from the cases. Other interpretations for 
the reasons behind the failure in these projects are possible, i
f not likely, and it is not our purpose here 
to demonstrate causality but to exemplify traits. 

  Lack of scope  Organizational 
complexity  
SCM business process 

complexity  
IS complexity 
Global Bev. UK 
Yes Yes Yes - 
Nike and i2 
- - Yes Yes 
Hershey 
- Yes Yes Yes 
Table 2.  Summary of large-scale SCM project factors 

6.1 Global beverages UK  

ﬁGlobal beverages UKﬂ is a pseudonym for a UK subsidiary of a 
worldwide large alcoholic beverage 
manufacturer. The subsidiary belongs to the European business unit.
 The analysed case looks at the 
ﬁsocial and politicalﬂ implications of a project intended to 
reform the forecasting process in the 
subsidiary through the implementation of a new information system 
(Brown, 2011).  
The analysis presented by Brown (2011) gives us insights to the
 complexity characteristics of this 
particular case, in particular related to organizations 
and business processes. There is also uncertainty 
regarding the scope as there does not seem to be a clear jus
tification as to why a certain mode of 
working is to be implemented. Although the ultimate outcome a
nd result of the project remains 
somewhat ambiguously described in Brown's analysis (the project
 at Global Beverages UK was still in 
progress), it is easy to conclude that major challenges hav
e presented themselves. Insights to some of 
these challenges are illustrated and this gives us the opport
unity to consider alternative discourses to 
the approach taken by Global Beverages UK and its European
 parent company. 
The UK subsidiary has previously been relatively independent, now 
there is strive for more 
harmonized forecasting processes on a European level. Overlappi
ng functions should be eliminated. 
The overall, high-level focus in the European business unit i
s on cost reduction and the forecasting 
process is deemed to have a direct impact on expenditure (or 
more precisely the accuracy level of 
forecasts and any possible duplicate activities). On managem
ent level, there is reliance on statistical 
forecasting methods and it is believed that these will improve
 the process. Based on this, the SAP 
APO (Advanced Planner and Optimizer) solution has been sele
cted as the new IT solution to replace a 
 legacy system. With the new system (based on statistic
al forecasting methods), the business process, 
previously also relying on a qualitative dimension, should be a
dapted accordingly. There seems to be a 
level of uncertainty regarding the detailed scope of the pro
ject as well as the methods to achieve the 
objective. Despite the high-level targets being clear (
cost reduction through improved forecast 
accuracy and a standardized solution), there is a mismatc
h to lower level objectives on how to re-
design a largely qualitative process into a quantitative one
. The somewhat naive assumption that a new 
information system will bring about (or force) changes in t
he business processes is proven to be 
incorrect: frustrated end-users end up working with a new
 unregulated process that somehow 
combines the old ﬁjudgementﬂ process with the new statistical
 one (with, according to Brown, 
ﬁunknown consequencesﬂ). The article also raises the question whe
ther statistical methods really 
support the higher level objective of improved forecasting acc
uracy.  
The forecasting department in the subsidiary retain that mar
ket conditions (in the UK) are such that a 
particular (qualitative) process is needed for forecasting.
 Top management blames problems with 
implementing the new statistical forecasting process on se
lf-created particularities. Whether correct or 
not, this also illustrates the organizational complexities ass
ociated with streamlining operations across 
different divisions in a company (serving markets with dif
ferent needs). Also, a top management 
driven, forced implementation of a new information system to
 re-design a vital SCM process is going 
to be difficult. The freedom to innovate could have been a c
ritical step in achieving a process that fills 
the needs of various stakeholders. All in all, organizational 
complexities, business process modelling 
and uncertainty regarding detailed scope and tasks (how to red
esign operations) may not have been 
properly handled in the project.  

6.2 Nike and i2 

Nike, the international apparel manufacturer, started a ma
jor SCM project in the late nineties. The 
original budget for the effort was $400 million, but as often wi
th these types of efforts, the cost 
estimates did not hold and with the final stages of the pro
ject re-scheduled to 2006 (three years after 
the originally estimated completion of the transformation e
ffort), the costs estimates were at half a 
billion USD (Koch, 2004). The SCM software bought from i2 tec
hnologies and its implementation 
(which was a small part of the total SCM project that als
o included ERP and Customer Relationship 
Management, CRM, components) is the focus of this analysis. Wi
th revenues and earnings soaring in 
late 2000, Nike reaffirmed targets for the full fiscal 
year. It then came as a shock to investors when 
Nike had to revise projections a few months later. The rea
son for this was significant inventory 
shortages and inventory excess at the same time (for differe
nt products). Nike put the blame on a 
failed implementation of i2 software (and i2 blamed Nik
e for not following proper implementation 
procedure), but the reality is (again) slightly more complex 
(Sridharan et al., 2005; Konicki, 2001a; 
Konicki, 2001b). 

In terms of clarity of scope and goal of the project, there 
seems to have been a clear vision at Nike. 
Koch (2004) reports that there was a clear strategy to integ
rate ERP, CRM and APS systems across 
geographical areas and that despite the difficulties faced, t
his strategy was maintained (and ultimately 
apparently achieved). Also, clear targets were set in t
erms of manufacturing cycle times and other 
supply chain related metrics. This was to be achieved th
rough the reduction of fragmentation of for 
example order management systems. 

So what went wrong at Nike? There are several indications 
of lack of proper business process 
modelling and matching of this against IS capability (Wilso
n, 2001; Koch, 2004). Nike had a large 
number of products and variants, as well as data on these in sev
eral legacy systems, adding to the 
complexity of the task. Core business processes, in this ca
se demand management and factory 
production steering, needed to be modelled and harmonized. The choic
e of the SCM software did not 
correspond to the needs of the business and later on, when a cl
earer picture of what the desired 
business process should look like, the role of the i2 softwa
re was revised and certain functionality was 
moved over to the ERP solution. If the business process Œ th
at today relies on both predictive 
 algorithms and data on orders and invoices Œ would have been p
roperly designed from the start, many 
problems in the project might have been avoided.  

6.3 Hershey 

As a result of product line expansions and acquisitions, Hershey 
Foods Corporation had ended up 
offering over 3,300 different confectionery products, which their cus
tomers (retailers) wished to be 
delivered in increasingly sophisticated batches. In order to 
automate shipping and logistics functions 
between the retailers and the company™s 25 plants worldwide, a $11
2 million supply chain system 
project, described by Lovata (2002) and Sridharan et al. (2005), had 
been undertaken towards the end 
of the 1990™s. While the project included software from not
 one but three different vendors (ERP from 
SAP AG, CRM from Siebel Systems, and a logistics package
 from Manugistics), also hardware 
installations were to be made (including the mainframe, net
works hubs, servers, 5,000 workstations, 
and telecommunications installations), guaranteeing nothing but a 
complex system implementation 
effort. The company was also blamed for ignoring or downplaying
 the importance of the 
interdependencies related to the tight system-business process
 link and to the complexity of the 
company™s organizational structure. The new system concerned t
he work of 1,200 persons in sales and 
also other departments (in total, the company had 14,000 employees
), covering the whole sales 
process from order placement to final delivery: accounting, product
ion scheduling, purchasing raw 
materials, and placing products in trucks, for example (Lova
ta, 2002; Sridharan et al., 2005). The vast 
amount of transactions and the related business processes were not accoun
ted for properly. 
The system was implemented partly in a phased manner but muc
h of it can be characterized as ﬁbig 
bangﬂ. The first implementation took place in April 1998 and th
e last modules went live in July 1999 
(Lovata, 2002). According to Sridharan et al. (2005), implementing
 the whole system at once instead 
of a staged approach was Hershey™s key mistake; also Lov
ata (2002) criticizes the lead times in the 
project and the timing of the go-live. By and large, the 
project had a clear scope that was not changed; 
it was the schedule that changed.  

7 Conclusion  
The main focus in this paper has been on looking at the charac
teristics of SCM projects and to relate 
project management methodologies to the SCM context. We have est
ablished that three dimensions 
are central for SCM projects: SCM business processes, inf
ormation systems and organization (both 
internal and external). We have discussed how these play into t
he complexity of SCM projects. 
Criticism is put forward regarding the application of ﬁtradit
ionalﬂ plan-ahead methodologies combined 
with rigorous risk management processes in SCM projects. W
e argue that by the selecting a wrong 
methodology, you may stifle innovation and bring about bureaucra
tization that will have an adverse 
affect on the outcome. Further, we found agile methods (including e
xtreme project management) to 
show promise in that the elements of agility allow for the i
ntricacy of SCM projects. We also found 
that the agile approaches have drawbacks in the SCM context: th
ere are concerns regarding the 
management of SCM dependencies with an agile project methodology. A 
principle-based working 
method may not be enough for managing the interdependencies present in
 SCM projects. SCM 
projects are in many ways unique in their complexity 
 even to a larger degree than IS projects in 
particular or projects in general. We feel that ﬁtradi
tionalﬂ project management offers a poor fit-for-
purpose in the SCM context while agile project management approac
hes cater for the needs of SCM 
projects better. However, based on the analysis at hand, we c
annot deduce how SCM projects are best 
managed. 

The findings of this conceptual study bridge a gap in SCM/proje
ct management literature and provide 
a starting point for tackling a problematic issue. A conclusive
 answer to the question of how SCM 
projects exactly should be managed was, however, not provided. Consideri
ng the high relevance to 
practice of the topic, further studies are called for to l
ook into how real-world SCM projects are 
steered and what constitutes an appropriate approach in term
s of project methodology. Additionally, 
 the exact corollaries of the relationship between projec
t methodology and SCM project success 
demand detailed attention. In order to come closer to a ﬁbestﬂ pr
oject management approach for SCM 
projects, interviews are being conducted as an interpretive case 
study at the time of writing.  
Acknowledgements 

We gratefully acknowledge the financial support of the Finnis
h Funding Agency for Technology and 
Innovation (Tekes) (grant number: 40488/11), as well as the Marcus 
Wallenberg and Waldemar von 
Frenckell foundations. 

References  

Abrahamsson, P., Warsta, J., Siponen, M.T. and Ronkainen, J. (2003). New directions on agil
e 
methods: a comparative analysis. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conf
erence on Software 
Engineering (ICSE'03), p. 244, IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC.  
Antvik, S. and Sjöholm, H. (2007). Project Management and Methods. Projektkonsult H
åkan Sjöholm 
AB, Västerås, Sweden.  
Augustine, S., Payne, B., Sencindiver, F. and Woodcock, S. (2005). Agile project mana
gement: 
steering from the edges. Communications of the ACM, 48 (12), 85-89.  
Auramo, J., Kauremaa, J. and Tanskanen, K. (2005). Benefits of IT in supply chain ma
nagement: An 
explorative study of progressive companies. International Journal of Physi
cal Distribution Logistics 
Management, 35 (2), 82-100.  
Ayers, J.B. (2009). Supply Chain Project Management, 2nd Edition.
 Auerbach, Boca Raton, Fla. 
Bailey, G. (2005). Modern project management and the lessons from the study of 
the transformation of 
the British Expeditionary Force in the Great War. Management Decis
ion, 43 (1), 56-71.  
Belaya, V. and Hanf, J.H. (2009). The two sides of power in business-to-business r
elationships: 
implications for supply chain management. Marketing Review, 9 (4), 361-381.  
Bermudez, J. (2002). Supply chain management: more than just technology. Supply Chain 
Management Review, 6 (2), 15-16.  
Bourne, L. and Walker, D.H.T. (2005). The paradox of project control. Team Perform
ance 
Management, 11 (5/6), 157-178.  
Brown, C. (2011). Rationality and foolishness: Alternative forecasting syste
ms in a manufacturing 
firm.  In Proceedings of IFIP WG 8.2 Working Conference on Researching the Future i
n 
Information Systems (Chiasson, M., Henfridsson, O., Karsten, H. and DeGross, J.I
., Eds.), p. 77, 
IFIP Advances in Information and Communication Technology 356, Springer, Boston, MA.  
Bryde, D.J. (2003). Project management concepts, methods and application. Intern
ational Journal of 
Operations Production Management, 23 (7), 775-793.  
Buxbaum, P. (2001). News from the web-enabled world. Supply Chain Management Review, 5 (3)
, 
101.  
Chin, G. (2004). Agile Project Management: How to Succeed in the Face of Chang
ing Project 
Requirements. AMACOM, New York, NY.  
Cockburn, A. and Highsmith, J. (2001). Software development: the people factor. Com
puter, 34 (11), 
131133.  
Conboy, K. (2009). Agility from first principles: Reconstructing the concept 
of agility in information 
systems development. Information Systems Research, 20 (3), 329-354.  
Dam Jespersen, B. and Skjoett Larsen, T. (2005). Supply Chain Management: In The
ory and Practice. 
Copenhagen Business School Press, Copenhagen.  
Geraldi, J. (2008). The balance between order and chaos in multi-project fi
rms: a conceptual model. 
International Journal of Project Management, 26 (4), 348-356.  
Geraldi, J.G., Lee Kelley, L. and Kutsch, E. (2010). The Titanic sunk, so what? Pr
oject manager 
response to unexpected events. International Journal of Project Manag
ement, 28 (6), 547-558.  
 Hsu, J.S., Liang, T.P., Wu, S.P.J., Klein, G. and Jiang, J.J. (2011). Promoting the integr
ation of users 
and developers to achieve a collective mind through the screening of inform
ation system projects. 
International Journal of Project Management, 29 (5), 514-524.  
Keegan, A. and Turner, J.R. (2002). The management of innovation in project-based f
irms. Long 
Range Planning, 35 (4), 367-388.  
Koch, C.  (2004). Nike Rebounds: How (and why) Nike recovered from its supply chain di
saster. 
[online] Available at: <http://www.cio.com/article/print/32334>, Acces
sed: 22 November 2011.  
Konicki, S. (2001a). Lower profit at Nike blamed on i2 software. [online] Availab
le at: 
<http://www.informationweek.com/news/6505024>, Accessed: 22 November 2011.  
Konicki, S. (2001b). I2 says: "You too, Nike". [online] Available at: 
<http://www.informationweek.com/news/6505338>, Accessed: 22 November 2011.  
Koskela, L. and Howell, G. (2002). The theory of project management: explanatio
n to novel methods. 
In Proceedings of 10th Annual Conference on Lean Construction IGLC10 (Formoso, C.T. and 

Ballard, G., Eds.), Gramado, Brazil.  
Krajewski, L.J., Ritzman, L.P. and Malhotra, M.K. (2010). Operations manag
ement. Pearson Prentice 
Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ. 
Kutsch, E. and Hall, M. (2009). The rational choice of not applying project risk ma
nagement in 
information technology projects. Project Management Journal, 40 (3), 72-81.  
Lambert, D.M., Cooper, M.C. and Pagh, J.D. (1998). Supply Chain Management: Implementa
tion 
Issues and Research Opportunities. International Journal of Logistics Ma
nagement, 9 (2), 1-19.  
Leybourne, S.A. (2009). Improvisation and agile project management: a compara
tive consideration. 
International Journal of Managing Projects in Business, 2(4), 519-535. 
Lovata, L.M. (2002). Hershey Foods systems problems make for a scary Hallow
een. Journal of 
Accounting and Finance Research, 10 (4), 93-101.  
Martins, E.C. and Terblanche, F. (2003). Building organisational culture that s
timulates creativity and 
innovation. European Journal of Innovation Management, 6 (1), 64-74. 
Mentzer, J.T., DeWitt, W., Keebler, J.S., Soonhoong, M., Nix, N.W., Smith, C.D. and Zacharia
, Z.G. 
(2001). Defining supply chain management. Journal of Business Logistics, 22 (2), 
1-25.  
Mentzer, J.T., Stank, T.P. and Esper, T.L. (2008). Supply Chain Management and its r
elationship to 
logistics, marketing, production, and operations management. Journal of Busine
ss Logistics
,29 (1), 
31-46. 
Müller, R. and Turner, R.J. (2007). Matching the project manager's leaders
hip style to project type. 
International Journal of Project Management, 25 (1), 21-32.  
Nerur, S. and Balijepally, V. (2007). Theoretical reflections on agile dev
elopment methodologies. 
Communications of the ACM, 50 (3), 79-83.  
Nyman, H.J. (2012). An Exploratory Study of Supply Chain Management IT Solutions. In 
Proceedings of the 45th Annual Hawaii International Conference on Syste
m Sciences,
 Maui, USA, 
January 4-7. 
Pich, M.T., Loch, C.H. and de Meyer, A. (2002). On uncertainty, ambiguity, and complexity i
n project 
management. Management Science, 48 (8), 1008-1023.  
PMI (2008). A Guide to the Project Management Body of Knowledge: PMBOK Guide. 4
th Edition. 
Project Management Institute, Newton Square, PA.  
Söderlund, J. (2004). Building theories of project management: past research, 
questions for the future. 
International Journal of Project Management, 22 (3), 183-191.  
Sridharan, U.V., Caines, W.R. and Patterson, C.C. (2005). Implementation of supply c
hain 
management and its impact on the value of firms. Supply Chain Management, 10 (4), 313-318.  
Vidal, L. and Marle, F. (2008). Understanding project complexity: implicati
ons on project 
management. Kybernetes, 37 (8), 1094-1110.  
Williams, T. (2005). Assessing and moving on from the dominant project management di
scourse in 
the light of project overruns. IEEE Transactions on Engineering Manageme
nt, 52 (4), 497-508.  
Wilson, T. (2001). Nike's pain shows how hard B2B can be. InternetWeek, 852, 28.  

Wysocki, R.K. (2009). Effective Project Management: Traditional, Agi
le, Extreme. 5th Edition. 
Wiley, Indianapolis, IN. 
