 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Goethe University FrankfurtGoethe University FrankfurtGoethe University FrankfurtECIS 2012 Proceedings.  
 SENSING SOCIAL MEDIA FOR  
CORPORATE REPUTATION MANAGEMENT:  
A BUSINESS AGILITY PERSPECTIVE 
Seebach, Christoph, Goethe University Frankfurt, Chair of Business Administrati
on esp. 
Information Systems, Grüneburgplatz 1, 60323 Frankfurt (Main), Germany, 

cseebach@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de 
Beck, Roman, Goethe University Frankfurt, Chair of Business Administration esp. 
Information Systems, Grüneburgplatz 1, 60323 Frankfurt (Main), Germany, 

rbeck@wiwi.uni-frankfurt.de 
Denisova, Olga, Goethe University Frankfurt, Chair of Business Administr
ation esp. 
Information Systems, Grüneburgplatz 1, 60323 Frankfurt (Main), Germany, 

olga.denisova@gmx.de 
 
 
Abstract   

The concept of business agility reflects an organization™s need to de
velop sensing capabilities for 
being able to respond to changes in the business environment rapidly. Theref
ore, intelligent 
information systems are needed to support decision makers with accu
rate and timely information. 
Since corporate reputation is among the most valuable assets, organizations
 need efficient measuring 
techniques for being able to manage it. Recently, due to the advent of
 social media new reputational 
challenges have emerged for firms, since such technologies signi
ficantly increase the risk for being 
associated with negative issues. Therefore, organizations should utiliz
e there IT-systems for actively 
sensing social media content as a basis for a quick response to reputat
ional threats. Accordingly, we 
provide an empirical example on how firms might improve corporate
 reputation management through 
sensing social media. Specifically, we analyze a dataset of 271,207 messages
 about a large American 
Bank collected from the public microblogging platform Twitter. For
 our empirical investigation, we 
applied automated sentiment analysis and manual content analysis. Our res
ults demonstrate how 
social media might impact corporate reputation and what organizations 
can do to prepare themselves. 
Beyond corporate reputation management, analyzing social media content may 
be valuable for many 
other purposes to improve an organization™s sensing capabilities. 

Keywords: Business Agility, Reputation, Business Intelligence, Social
 Media, Twitter, Microblogging. 
   
 1 Introduction 
In today™s business environment, organizations are increasingly f
aced with unpredictable up- and 
downturns of demand, changing regulatory requirements, strong competit
ion, as well as technological 
advancements. In order to operate economically and to achieve compet
itive advantage, such turbulent 
conditions require firms to continuously adapt their capabilities (O
verby et al., 2006). Within 
literature, an organization™s ability to detect and adapt to 
such environmental changes in a rapid and 
effective manner is referred to by the concept of business agili
ty (Goldman et al., 1995). In short, the 
concept suggests firms to actively sense their environment f
or being able to rapidly respond to 
occurring changes and to achieve superior performance (Day, 1994; Sa
mbamurthy et al., 2003). 
Within the last couple of years the question of how information t
echnology (IT) might help in shaping 
a firm™s agility has gained more attention, since the source
s which might be sensed and the 
mechanisms for response become increasingly digitized due to ne
w technological developments 
(Sambamurthy et al., 2003). In this regard, several authors have cal
led for more research on the role of 
IT with respect to business agility (Dove, 2001; Overby et al., 20
06). Focusing on social media we 
respond to these calls by applying the concept to a new but rapidly emergi
ng area of research.   
Exploring new approaches for achieving business agility we thus anal
yze how IT might be used to 
enhance an organization™s sensing capabilities through analyzing soc
ial media content. Specifically we 
focus on the management of corporate reputation (CR) which is 
considered an intangible asset that can 
contribute to a competitive advantage in the marketplace (Bar
ney, 1991). Moreover achieving a bad 
reputation is a substantial risk for firms and may lead to 
loss of customers, suppliers, employees or 
investors (Fombrun and Shanley, 1990; Scott and Walsham, 2005). In this r
egard, the emergence of 
social media platforms such as wikis, blogs, and microblogs si
gnificantly increase a firm™s risk for 
being negatively associated with a specific issue (Jones 
et al., 2009). Users of these new technologies 
can now spread their opinion freely, unfiltered and at the speed of 
thought to many other people 
(Dellarocas, 2003). Since a firm™s stakeholders such as, e.g., 
customers, investors or potential 
employees increasingly rely on information from these sources, c
ontent on social media platforms can 
significantly impact a firm™s business performance and compet
itiveness (Rindova et al., 2005). Hence, 
for being able to respond quickly to reputational threats, firms shou
ld carefully sense communication 
on social media sites to achieve business agility in turbulent business env
ironments. 
Accordingly, this article aims at enhancing our understanding of how
 social media can be used to 
improve an organization™s business agility based on the use o
f IT. Therefore, we conduct an empirical 
study based on microblogging data to analyze how firms might benefit
 from sensing social media for 
CR management. Furthermore, we investigate the role of IT in 
this context, hypothesizing that 
achieving business agility through social media sensing essential
ly relies on the availability of 
analytical information systems. Hence, we contribute to the l
iterature on business agility, CR and 
social media in several directions. First, we bring togethe
r these distinct streams of research and 
discuss how IT adds value to business by improving an organization™s 
sensing capabilities. Moreover, 
to the best of our knowledge, we are the first to conduct a de
tailed analysis on the value of social 
media for CR management. In doing so, we contribute to the few exi
sting studies on how 
organizations might benefit from social media (Richter et al., 2011). 

The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: in secti
on two we provide the theoretical 
background for our research. Thus, we provide a definition and give
 a broad overview of the literature 
on business agility as well as CR management. Then we bring both 
streams together and discuss 
theoretically how IT might enable business agility based on soc
ial media sensing for CR management. 
In chapter three we exemplarily discover to what extent socia
l media content is relevant for managing 
a firm™s reputation. Based on our empirical results, we then e
laborate on how business agility might be 
affected and to what extent IT would have been needed in practice. 
We conclude with a summary of 
our findings and present limitations of our work as well as implications 
for further research. 
  
 2 Theoretical Background 
This research combines two distinct streams of literature:
 the strategic- and IT-management literature 
focusing on business agility and literature on CR. Therefore, relev
ant concepts from these domains are 
briefly highlighted in the following. In the last part of this 
section we bring both streams together and 
discuss how firms might utilize social media for managing CR and for
 achieving business agility. 
2.1 Business Agility 

In literature, many definitions of business agility can be foun
d, mostly originating from the 
manufacturing domain. In this regard, Goldman et al., (1995) and Yusuf
 et al., (1999) elaborate on the 
term of agility as an organizations ability to perform business 
within rapidly changing and 
continuously fragmenting markets. In order to achieve this, fir
ms should focus on producing high-
quality, high-performance, customer-configured goods and services (Sha
rifi and Zhang, 1999). 
Beyond the manufacturing domain, business agility has been described
 as a firm™s ability to remain 
competitive in turbulent business environments (Overby et al., 2006).
 Therefore, organizations need to 
detect changes and threats in their business environment for being
 able to respond to them through 
reconfiguring resources, processes, and strategies rapidly (Dov
e, 2001). Accordingly, the concept is 
typically broken down into sensing and responding as the two main capa
bilities of business agility 
(Overby et al., 2006). For the purpose of this study, we specifica
lly focus on firms™ sensing 
capabilities which we define as the intellectual ability t
o sense, detect, and anticipate environmental 
changes as the basis for responding in an efficient and effective manner
 (Overby et al., 2006). 
Most often, a firm™s business environment is changing due to new
 regulatory or legal requirements, 
competitors™ actions, shifting consumer preferences or technologic
al progress (Sharifi and Zhang, 
1999). For being able to handle such changes, Sambamurthy et al. (2003)
 suggest enterprises develop 
sensing capabilities to achieve agility on three different di
mensions: customer agility, partnering 
agility, and operational agility. Customer agility reflects 
the competence of a firm to gain market 
intelligence by leveraging the voice of the customer. Moreover, pa
rtnering agility refers to a firm™s 
competence to build effective networks with business partne
rs and to exploit opportunities coming 
along with them (Sambamurthy et al., 2003). Finally, operational agili
ty is defined as a firm™s ability 
to identify operational deficiencies or opportunities and to rede
sign and build new processes 
accordingly (Overby et al., 2006). 

Furthermore, the importance of IT for enabling business agility
 has gained attention from scientific 
research as well (Sambamurthy et al., 2003). Although IT may affec
t agility directly through 
‚managing by wire™, an enterprise™s sensing capabilities mi
ght be supported in an indirect way through 
digital options (Overby et al., 2006). In this regard, digital opti
ons have been defined as digitized work 
processes and IT-systems that enhance a firm™s knowledge reach 
and richness. For example, business 
intelligence systems can provide managers with high-quality i
nformation about the state of the 
business which help them to detect emerging opportunities and thre
ats. Sensing their environment on 
demand business units might thus obtain rich knowledge related to c
ompetitors™ actions or customer 
opinions (Overby et al., 2006). Hence, IT provides digital options, which 
complement a firm™s sensing 
capabilities thereby enhancing agility and performance (Sambamurthy et a
l., 2003). 
2.2 Corporate Reputation 

Within scientific literature CR has been addressed in many
 different disciplines, such as psychology, 
sociology, economics, management, and marketing (Fombrun and Van Riel, 199
7; Walsh and Beatty, 
2007). While many competing definitions of CR are offered within the
se streams of research, we refer 
to the most frequently cited definition given by Fombrun (1996, p. 72)
 who views CR as ﬁa perceptual 
representation of a company™s past actions and future prospects that des
cribes the rm™s overall appeal 
to all of its key constituents when compared with other leading ri
valsﬂ. Accordingly, CR can be 
viewed as a multidimensional construct consisting of the followi
ng attributes (Walker, 2010): CR is 
  
 based on perceptions, represents the summarized perception of all
 stakeholders, is issue specific and 
comparable. The first attribute points to the fact that CR i
s based on perceptions of people and thus 
can not be controlled directly (Fombrun, 1996; Rindova et al., 2005). T
he second attribute highlights 
the social and collective nature of CR as representing the 
aggregated perceptions of all stakeholders of 
a firm (Fombrun et al., 2000; Walker, 2010). In this regard, stake
holders might be external to the 
company such as customers, suppliers and shareholders or internal a
s, e.g., employees or a firm™s 
management. Defining CR as issue specific, the third attribute
 states that an organization may have a 
separate reputation for different relevant aspects (Walker, 
2010). In line with this idea, Fombrun et 
al.™s (2000) reputational quotient (RQ) defines the following six CR issue
s: emotional appeal, products 
and services, financial performance, vision and leadership, wor
kplace environment and social 
responsibility. Finally, the last attribute states that a fi
rm™s CR can be compared with the reputation of 
its main competitors (Fombrun, 1996). In this regard and in line with t
he comparative nature of CR, a 
firm™s overall and issue specific CR is typically positive or n
egative (Walker, 2010). 
Consistent with the resource-based view of the firm (Barney
, 1991), CR is considered an intangible 
asset that can contribute to a competitive advantage. In thi
s regard, a positive CR may lead to, e.g., 
higher customer retention, higher sales rates and a better posi
tion in the market (Fombrun and Van 
Riel, 1997). Moreover, CR may help creating market barriers 
(Roberts and Dowling, 2002), reducing 
employee turnover or being successful in the war for new tal
ents (Nakra, 2000). On the other hand, a 
negative CR may have an opposite effect on all the aforementi
oned examples and thus bears an 
existential risk for enterprises (Fombrun and Shanley, 1990; Scott
 and Walsham, 2005). Therefore, 
firms need to carefully manage this valuable but very sensi
tive asset (Walsh and Beatty, 2007). 
However, the basis for managing CR properly essentially relie
s on an organization™s ability to assess 
its CR as well as those of its competitors in a timely manner (Jone
s et al., 2009).  
2.3 Sensing Social Media for Corporate Reputation M
anagement 
As is typical for IT-based innovations, social media technologies
 such as blogs, microblogs or social 
network platforms have dramatically changed the way business i
s conducted (Kohli and Grover, 
2008). Switching from physical to online communication within large vi
rtual networks, organizations 
are now able to reach audiences of unprecedented scale at a low
 cost (Dellarocas, 2003). On the other 
hand, individuals can now make their personal thoughts and opinions on a
lmost anything easily 
accessible to the global community of Internet and social media users 
(Jones et al., 2009).  
However, the power and the effects of social media platforms ha
ve created opportunities as well as 
threats for organizations with respect to CR (Jones et al., 2009). 
Specifically, it has been shown that 
the emergence of technologies such as, e.g., microblogs can acce
lerate the process for a company to 
become tarnished or negatively associated with some issue. On 
the one hand, this can be attributed to 
the fact that social media platforms allow individuals to spr
ead negative information freely, unfiltered 
and at the speed of thought to many people (Dellarocas, 2003). On the ot
her hand, the impact of 
negative content is further intensified by the so-called ﬁnega
tivity effectﬂ, which states that negative 
information is generally greater weighted in the formati
on of evaluations in individuals™ minds than 
positive information (Baumeister et al., 2001). Since an organizatio
n™s stakeholders such as customers, 
investors or potential employees increasingly rely on others™ opi
nions prior to making decisions, firms 
need to sense their social media environment for being able to av
ert a reputational damage which 
might have negative consequences for their business (Rindova et al., 2005)
.  
Fortunately and based on the remarkable ability of the web to not
 only disseminate, but also collect 
and aggregate information from large communities at low cos
t, there is the opportunity Œ but also the 
need Œ for analyzing the digitized and aggregated stakeholder pe
rceptions about a firm on the web 
(Dellarocas, 2003). In short, the same mechanisms that might threat
en an organization can be used for 
sensing a company™s business environment regarding CR. Thus, anal
yzing social media, firms can 
enhance their sensing capabilities regarding CR issues and thus
 improve their business agility which 
enables them to better respond to reputational threats. Although i
t may be difficult to obtain relevant 
  
 content from all social media platforms available, there are 
providers such as Twitter for which user 
data is offered for free. However, for sensing the masses of da
ta available from these sources, 
intelligent information systems such as decision support system
s, data warehouses, and online 
analytical processing are needed (Kohli & Grover 2008; Overby et al. 2006).  

From a business agility point of view, information about stake
holders™ perceptions about an 
organization based on the analysis of social media data can be 
provided by IT as a digital option. In 
this regard, knowledge reach is enhanced through integration of th
is new source of data in a firm™s 
information system. Moreover, the knowledge base for decision 
making is enriched by using data 
mining technologies for pattern detection and by timely provision of hi
gh-quality information 
regarding stakeholders™ perceptions. This leads to an increased
 sensing capability which may enhance 
a firm™s business agility by option. Depending on whether business u
nits utilize this digital option, 
competitive actions may follow, potentially resulting in superio
r firm performance. Thus, consistent 
with findings from the IT management literature, the value of 
social media sensing for firms evolves 
from the complementarity of IT and business (Kohli and Grover, 2008; Sambamurthy
 et al., 2003) 
3 Sensing Social Media for Corporate Reputation Manag
ement:  
An Empirical Example from the Banking Industry 
In this section we provide an empirical example to illustrate 
how organizations might utilize social 
media data for sensing their environment with respect to CR and t
hus to achieve business agility. For 
this purpose, we focus on the American banking sector which is sti
ll struggling as a result of the 
financial crisis in 2008 as well as recent developments in Eur
ope. In other words, like most banks in 
the world, American banks have been subject to massive environmenta
l changes in the last couple of 
years. From a business agility perspective, such turbulent envir
onments require firms to effectively 
sense their business environment for being able to react swiftly
 to occurring changes (Overby et al., 
2006). One of the most important capabilities of a firm which is
 based on sensing capabilities is the 
ability to quickly and efficiently manage CR (Fombrun, 1996; Jones et al., 2009)
.  
In the following, we thus elaborate on the question how social medi
a might be sensed for improving 
CR management in the banking sector. Particularly, we analyz
e to what extent users communicate 
positive and negative perceptions about firms on social media p
latforms. Applying an issue-specific 
lens based on Fombrun et al.™s (2000) RQ we further explore how people s
pread their opinion with 
respect to six different CR issues. While our approach shou
ld be relevant for other sectors, countries 
and social media technologies as well, for our exemplary illu
stration we focus on a large American 
Bank utilizing microblogging data from the public platform Twitt
er. Our analysis is guided by a three 
step approach as illustrated in figure 1. The remainder of this se
ction is structured accordingly. 
 3.1 Data Collection 

For the purpose of our study we collected microblogging data fr
om the public platform Twitter. Since 
Twitter does not provide functionality to access historical d
ata itself, we used the tool TwapperKeeper 
(2011) which allows defining archives for collecting messages Œ 
also referred to as ﬁTweetsﬂ Œ that 
contain specific keywords. As depicted in Figure 1, we thus had 
to define keywords for the data 
collection in a first step. In particular we selected the ba
nk™s name as well as its commonly used 
Data Collection
ŁKeyword Definition

ŁTwitter Data Collection

ŁTwitter Data Extraction
Sentiment Analysis
ŁSubjectivity Classification

ŁSentence Sentiment 
Classification 
Content Analysis
ŁCoding Schema Creation

ŁCoder Training

ŁSample Coding

ŁFinal Coding
Results
Data Collection
ŁKeyword Definition

ŁTwitter Data Collection

ŁTwitter Data Extraction
Sentiment Analysis
ŁSubjectivity Classification

ŁSentence Sentiment 
Classification 
Content Analysis
ŁCoding Schema Creation

ŁCoder Training

ŁSample Coding

ŁFinal Coding
Results
 Figure 1
: Empirical analysis approach 
  
 abbreviations. Then, we created a TwapperKeeper archive for eac
h keyword and started collecting all 
Tweets from the beginning of June 2010 until January 2011. By adopting 
a longitudinal approach we 
made sure to include a diversity of social, economic, and politi
cal events. Finally, we extracted a 
dataset consisting of 271,207 Tweets including metadata such as creation dat
e, user ID, language code, 
as well as the technical device used for sending the message.
 3.2 Sentiment Analysis Procedure 

According to its definition, CR is based on stakeholders™ percep
tions about an organization which are 
typically either positive or negative (Walker, 2010). Thus for 
measuring CR, we focused on Tweets 
containing indicators of positive and negative emotions and 
perceptions. For that reason we conducted 
an automated sentiment analysis, as this is an appropriate m
ethodology for ﬁ... identifying positive and 
negative opinions, emotions, and evaluations...ﬂ (Wilson et al. 2005, p. 347)
 from text-based datasets. 
In general, sentiment analysis is often conducted in two subsequent
 steps: subjectivity and sentence 
level classification (Liu, 2010). While subjectivity cla
ssification aims at extracting all non-objective 
messages from a dataset, the goal of sentence level class
ification is to classify sentences as having 
either positive or negative polarity. Moreover the strength of polarit
y is determined as well. 
For the subjectivity classification step, we applied a dic
tionary approach which is typically based on 
tracking messages for predefined words that signal subjec
tivity (Wilson et al., 2005; Liu, 2010). Thus, 
we utilized an existing keyword list ﬁAFINNﬂ (Nielsen, 2011) consi
sting of 2,477 words which has 
been explicitly created for sentiment analysis of microbloggi
ng messages. Since the list contains 
English words and phrases only, we first removed all Tweets wh
ich were labelled any other language 
than English. For tracking the presence of all words from the 
AFINN list in each message of the 
resulting dataset of 269,826 Tweets, it was necessary to program
 a script in STATA 12. The rationale 
for this is that we did not find any open-source software being
 capable of processing such an amount 
of data. As a result we identified 123,721 Tweets that contained subject
ive information about the bank. 
Since Tweets are restricted to 140 characters and rarely c
onsist of more than one sentence, the second 
step Œ sentence sentiment classification Œ was conducted on 
Tweet level. Thus we determined the 
strength of polarity for each of the remaining 123,721 Tweets. 
Fortunately, the AFINN list already 
contains a polarity value for each word on a scale from ﬁ-5ﬂ (ver
y negative) to ﬁ+5ﬂ (very positive). 
However, many Tweets contained more than one word from the list a
nd in some cases these were both 
positive and negative. Thus, for measuring a Tweet™s overall po
larity strength, we summed up polarity 
values of all relevant words in a message (Liu, 2010). As a 
result, 72,481 Tweets (59%) were 
classified as negative, while 47,627 (38%) had positive polarity. I
n 3% of the cases (3,613 Tweets) 
positive and negative words neutralized each other. Nonetheless, t
hese posts were not excluded for 
further analysis, since they contain opinion-based information 
which might be relevant for the bank™s 
CR. Next we computed the average daily polarity of all Tweets
 sent via the platform on a specific day 
for exploring how users™ perceptions about the bank evolved during our pe
riod of analysis. As figure 2 
depicts, sentiment is subject to significant fluctuations, w
hile the overall trend indicates a more 
-4
-3
-2
-1
01234July-10August-10September-10October-10November-10De
cember-10January-11
Average Sentiment-Value per Day
02000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
No. of Mesaages per Day
No. of Messages per Day
Average Sentiment-Value per Day
Jul 10
Aug 10
Sep 10
Okt 10
Nov 10
Dez 10
Jan 11
+4
+3
+2
+1
0-1
-2
-3
Average Tweet Polarity per Day
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
Number of Tweets per Day
0Number Tweets
Tweet Polarity
Trend Tweet Polarity
Trend Tweet Number
-4
-3
-2
-1
01234July-10August-10September-10October-10November-10De
cember-10January-11
Average Sentiment-Value per Day
02000
4000
6000
8000
10000
12000
No. of Mesaages per Day
No. of Messages per Day
Average Sentiment-Value per Day
Jul 10
Aug 10
Sep 10
Okt 10
Nov 10
Dez 10
Jan 11
+4
+3
+2
+1
0-1
-2
-3
Average Tweet Polarity per Day
10,000
8,000
6,000
4,000
2,000
Number of Tweets per Day
0Number Tweets
Tweet Polarity
Trend Tweet Polarity
Trend Tweet Number
  Figure 
2: Sentiment and amount of Tweets over time on a daily basis 
  
 negative polarity over time. It is interesting to n
ote that polarity seems to be negatively correlated
 with 
the number of Tweets. As figure 2 illustrates, the 
number of Tweets peaks around extremely negative 
polarized days such as, e.g., in October and Decemb
er. Accordingly, the trend lines in figure 2 show 
that the number of Tweets increase while sentiment 
gets worse. Both observations can be attributed to 
the ﬁnegativity effectﬂ leading users to perceive n
egative content as more important than positive 
content thereby increasing the number of Tweets (Ba
umeister et al., 2001). 
3.3 Content Analysis Procedure 

For analyzing which specific CR issues a firm™s sta
keholder share via social media we conducted a 
manual content analysis on all polarized Tweets. As
 a method to make systematic and valid inferences 
from data to the context, content analysis is typic
ally used to classify text into specific categories
 
based on an explicit coding scheme (Krippendorff, 20
04). In this regard, we applied a directed content 
analysis which allowed us to utilize predefined cat
egories from existing theory (Hsieh and Shannon, 
2005). During our analysis all actions were guided 
by an established process (Morris, 1994) for 
making our analytical approach transparent and to a
ssure reliability and validity of our results and 
measures. As unit of analysis for the coding proces
s we focused on single Tweets since these are 
objectively identifiable by independent coders (Rou
rke et al., 2001).  
In a first step, we developed an explicit coding sc
heme (Krippendorff, 2004), based on the six CR 
issues as defined in Fombrun et al.™s (2000) RQ. Th
us, categories from previous research were adapted 
to our specific context. For ensuring validity, we 
conducted intense discussions and asked a panel of 
1 
practitioner and 2 academics to review our operatio
nalizations. Within this process the coding scheme 
was revised several times until the final version w
as created. Operationalizations of all CR issues an
d 
examples from our data sample are described in the 
resulting coding scheme in Table 1. 
Second, we trained two researchers in coding the da
ta. This included an overall introduction to the 
categories of the scheme, instructions for document
ing the coding, and a joint coding session for 
getting familiar with the data. Therefore, we appli
ed systematic random sampling (Cochran, 1977) for 
generating a representative data sample of 1,000 Tw
eets. Then, two researchers were provided the 
sample for jointly coding the data (Krippendorff, 20
04). Since training improves a coder™s familiarity 
with the coding scheme this is an important step to
 assure objectivity of the judges. Afterwards the 
results were discussed and the coding scheme was re
vised accordingly.  
Subsequently, we started an iterative process of in
dependent sample coding and joint revisions until a
n 
acceptable level for all reliability measures was r
eached (Morris, 1994). Consistent with findings fro
m 
prior research the size of each reliability sample 
was set to 1,000 Tweets which were not part of our 
final research sample (Krippendorff, 2004). Then, t
he coders independently assigned all posts in the 
sample to the categories of our coding scheme. Krip
pendorff's alpha and Cohen™s kappa were 
computed to assess the reliability of the coding sc
heme and to ensure validity of our results. For bot
h 
measures we considered a value of more than .70 as 
evidence for the reliability of our measures (Box 
et al., 2005). Discrepancies between coders were th
en discussed and the coding scheme was revised. 
The process was repeated twice until an acceptable 
level of intercoder agreement was reached. 
After reliability of our scheme was approved, we ap
plied systematic random sampling (Cochran, 
1977) for obtaining a representative dataset for th
e final coding. The rationale for this is that manu
al 
content analysis is always subject to the ﬁcost-ben
efitﬂ question, with a huge amount of data availabl
e 
on the one hand, but limited coder resources on the
 other hand
 (Riffe et al., 1998). Thus, we followed 
Lombard et al.™s (2002) approach and selected 10% o
f the data for our analysis (12,300 Tweets). Then 
one researcher started coding based on our coding s
cheme. After every 500 Tweets we analyzed 
whether the distribution of the results had changed
 significantly as compared to the 500 Tweets before
. 
The goal was to determine the point when increasing
 the sample would not significantly improve the 
representativeness of our results. Hence, we stoppe
d coding after 2,500 Tweets since distributional 
differences for each CR issue had reached a value o
f below .01 (Johnson and Bhattacharyya, 1996). 
  
 CR Issues 
Operationalization 
Examples 
Product 

Consistency 

and Quality 
Brand consistency and ability to stand behind 

its products (Fombrun et al., 2000)  
ﬁWe went through a loan mod four times with 

Bank X and they lost our paperwork each time and 

we had to start overﬂ  
Innovation 
Ability to transform ideas into 

New or improved products (Baregheh et al., 

2009) 
ﬁOh look! Bank X is on Twitter I had no idea!ﬂ 

ﬁJust added text banking and mobile app to my 

phone for my new Bank X account. Awesome!ﬂ 
Utility 
Positive perception of having made the right 

choice (Wang et al., 2009) 
ﬁBank X charges non-customers $6 to cash checks. 

I shouldn™t have opened account thereﬂ 
Products & Services 
Customer 

Support 
Responsiveness, friendliness, reliability, and 

promptness regarding customer requests 

(Blodgett et al., 1987) 
ﬁNote: avoid Bank X = bad customer service!ﬂ 

ﬁOn an average it takes 2 minutes to get Bank X 

customer service agent on the phone.ﬂ 
Trust, Mistrust, 

Respect, 

Disrespect 
Expectation of ethically justifiable behavior 

(Hosmer, 1995) and adoration of corporate 

success 
ﬁYou cannot trust Bank X. What's the point of 

calling a customer service when they do nothingﬂ 

ﬁThank you Bank X for doing what I need ﬁ 
Emotional 
App
eal
 Like, Dislike,  

Adore, Hate 
State of pleasure, fondness, enjoyment, 

sympathy (Fombrun et al., 2000) 
ﬁI would like to send hate Tweets to Bank  Xﬂ 

ﬁX Bank I hate youﬂ 
Social 

Responsibility 
Ethical behavior and attitude toward people, 

helping and developing the society (Fulmer 

and Barry, 2009) 
 ﬁGreat news! We have been awarded a $20k grant 

from the Bank X! It will provide 100 chronically 

hungry kids w/food next yr!ﬂ 
Social 
Responsibility
 Environmental 

Engagement 
Engagement in environmental 

activities (Fombrun et al., 2000) 
 ﬁHelp animals a little with your next latte! get t
he 
credit card from Bank X ﬁ 
Future Vision 
Clear vision, ambitions, challenging long term 

plan  
ﬁBank X hires two from fidelity to expand 

retirement business –ﬂ 
Management 
Past and present quality management team, 

qualification, experience, leadership style 

(Fombrun et al., 2000) 
ﬁBanks accused of misleading owners: 1 and oct. 

15 Bank X and its mortgage-servicing home loansﬂ
 Market Position
 Effective use of the market opportunities, 

reliable strategy, comparison with competitors 

(Ries and Trout, 2005) 
ﬁWell I am officially done with Bank Z next stop 

either Bank X or Bank Y...ﬂ 

ﬁBank X saw opportunity but bought a load of 

trouble home loans for people with bad creditﬂ
 Vision & Leadership 
Corporate 

Governance 
Statements about Governmental actions ﬁBank X chief
 tries to inspire improve work forceﬂ 
Good Company 

to work for 
Opinions about employee treatment within the 

corporation (Walker, 2010) 
ﬁLovely day at work :) (@ Bank X)ﬂ 

ﬁJust started my new position as a corporate 

instructor for Bank X and loving it!ﬂ 
Workplace 
Environment
 Corporate 

Infrastructure 
Quality of infrastructure (Oldham and Brass, 

1979) 
ﬁYou think Denver airport is creepy take a look at 

the creepy walls at the Bank Xﬂ 

ﬁThis bank looks like a hotel lobby! Awesome!ﬂ 
Indicators of 

Profitability 
Financial measures reflecting profitability, 

liquidity, assets and liabilities of the company 
ﬁAccounting tool boosts financial firms' profit: 

Bank X  notched perfect ...ﬂ 

ﬁBank X reports  billion lossﬂ 
Risk 
Information or measures of 

different risk types 
ﬁIf proven countrywide mortgage fraud could 

threaten Bank Xﬂ 
Financial 
Performance
 Growth 

Prospects 
Quantitative measures or financial indicators of 

future growth 
ﬁBank X tops forecast as credit losses decline: 

Bank X became the second major bank to– ﬂ 
Table 1:  Coding scheme and operationalization based on Fombrun et al. (2000) 

3.4 Data Analysis & Results 

As the results of our analysis show, the messages e
xchanged via the social media platform are a rich 
source of information regarding a companies CR. In 
this regard, 55.37% of all Tweets in our data 
sample contained CR relevant information at least w
ith respect to one CR issue. The remaining 
44.62% were irrelevant with respect to our analysis
 on CR, since these either did not contain any clea
r 
information regarding our CR issues or were difficu
lt to understand due to the style of language used.
 Overall, with 57.55% the majority of Tweets had neg
ative polarity, while every third message had 
positive content. Moreover, 65% of all relevant Twe
ets were further forwarded to a greater number of 
users - so called ﬁRetweetsﬂ. Figure 3 depicts deta
iled results of our analysis on CR issue level. 
  
   
Figure 3: Distribution of CR issues, polarity and retweets in datase
t 
 
As illustrated in figure 3, with 20.67% 
ﬁFinancial Performanceﬂ
 occurs with highest frequency 
among all 6 CR issues. On a more detailed level ove
r 70% of Tweets within this category reflect the 
subcategory ﬁRiskﬂ (54.35%). The importance of stak
eholder concerns about ﬁFinancial Performanceﬂ 
was confirmed by the tendency to retweet relevant t
opics more often. More specifically, 93.63% of all 
Tweets were retweeted to other users. Considering t
he fact that almost 80% of these Tweets had 
negative polarity this might be attributed to the n
egativity effect which leads to retweeting behavior
 
thereby multiplying the impact of negative Tweets o
n a firm™s reputation. With a frequency of 18.48% 
users discuss CR relevant topics regarding a firm™s
 ﬁProducts and Servicesﬂ
. According to our results, 
stakeholders were almost equally concerned about th
e subcategories ﬁInnovationﬂ, ﬁUtilityﬂ and 
ﬁProduct consistency and Qualityﬂ (all between 15-2
0%). However, the majority of users express their 
opinions on ﬁCustomer Supportﬂ (around 50% of Tweet
s). In contrast to the ﬁFinancial Performanceﬂ 
category, only 27.05% of all messages are being ret
weeted through the users. Moreover 13.35% of all 
Tweets are relevant with respect to the CR category
 ﬁEmotional Appealﬂ
 and thus contain expressions 
of stakeholders™ emotional perceptions of the compa
ny. Reconsidering the negativity effect it is 
interesting to note that the majority of tweets con
tains negative content but the number of retweets i
s 
rather low as compared to the ﬁfinancial performanc
eﬂ category. Among the remaining three issues, 
ﬁVision and Leadershipﬂ
 is mostly discussed on Twitter (6.52%). On a more 
detailed level 
stakeholders are most interested in the subcategori
es ﬁMarket positionﬂ (43.56%) and ﬁManagementﬂ 
(48.47%). In this regard, it is worth mentioning th
at users retweet almost every second message out of
 
three. Thus, while there are only few Tweets releva
nt for this CR issue, their impact might be 
amplified through retweeting. Moreover, 
ﬁWorkplace Environmentﬂ and ﬁSocial Responsibilityﬂ
 are 
not of major interest among Twitter users. The majo
rity of these Tweets represent short statements 
about the bank™s activities for society or about em
ployee treatment. Akin to ﬁEmotional Appealﬂ it 
should be mentioned that a great share of ﬁSocial R
esponsibilityﬂ Tweets (65.26%) are being 
redistributed through Twitters retweet feature alth
ough the majority of tweets is positive. This gives
 
rise to the notion, that the negativity effect migh
t be relevant to specific CR issues only. 
3.5 Discussion  

In the previous sections we have shown how organiza
tions might utilize publicly available social 
media data for CR management. The results of our em
pirical investigation clearly show that platforms 
such as Twitter are a rich source of information th
at might impact stakeholders™ perceptions about a 
firm. Content communicated via social media reaches
 many people and thus might significantly 
impact stakeholders™ perceptions about an organizat
ion. In order to prevent reputational damage, 
organizations should therefore sense social media c
ontent for being able to respond to such threats 
quickly. In this regard, measuring CR on different 
dimensions enables faster reactions, since 
assessment of the reasons for reputational loss can
 be conducted in a more focused way. In our 
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
35%
40%
45%
50%
Emotional AppealProducts and
Services
Vision and
Leadership
Workplace
Environment
Corporate
Responsibility
Financial
Performance
Not relevant
Non-Relevant
Financial 
Performance
Social 
Responsibility
Workplace 
Environment
Vision & 
Leadership
Products & 
Services
Emotional 
Appeal
CR Issue
-93.62 %
65.26 %
25.00 %
65.64 %
27.05 %
13.77 %
Retweets
-4.06 %
4.21 %
5.36 %
3.07 %
11.09 %
9.58 %
Neutral
-16.05 %
92.63 %
69.44 %
46.63 %
43.24 %
26.59 %
Positive
-79.88 %
3.16 %
25.00 %
50.31 %
45.68 %
63.47 %
Negative
40%
30%

20%

10%
Share of 
Tweets
13.35 %
18.03 %
6.52 %
2.24 %
3.79 %
20.67 %
44.62 %
0%
   
 empirical example we have shown how Fombrun et al.™
s (2000) CR issues might be utilized for this 
purpose. On the other hand organizations might bene
fit from sensing social media not only with 
respect to negative developments of CR. Rather, pos
itive shifts of CR may help firms to better learn 
about their stakeholders™ requirements and needs (D
ay, 1994). This, in turn, might enable better 
alignment of corporate strategy with an organizatio
n™s business environment. Finally, it might be 
worth sensing social media regarding competitors™ C
R. Identifying reputational weaknesses of 
competitors should help an organization to achieve 
advantages in the market through responding to 
these shortcomings in a targeted and timely manner.
 In this regard, firms may gain market share 
through enticing customers (Dellarocas, 2003) or th
rough headhunting their competitors™ best human 
resources (Nakra, 2000). As a result, we suggest or
ganizations enhance their sensing abilities through
 analyzing social media as this should enable faster
 responses to environmental changes. Hence, our 
example shows how organizations could exploit socia
l media data for improving their business agility. 
However, while our empirical analysis shows how fir
ms can improve CR management through social 
media sensing, our example is rather simple, since 
our goal was to provide a first example for our 
theoretical and practical statements. Firms have ac
cess to additional sources of internal and external
 
data and probably have implemented other processes 
for CR management (Walker, 2010; Walsh and 
Beatty, 2007). Moreover, due to the massive amount 
of social media data available, measuring CR 
manually is not feasible in a reasonable amount of 
time and effort. According to the business agility 
concept, firms in turbulent environments need real-
time data on demand to be able to react on changes 
rapidly (Overby et al., 2006). Therefore, social me
dia data should be integrated into existing CR 
processes to complement and extend them. Moreover, 
since content from social media sites is 
digitized already it can probably be integrated int
o existing IT-systems in an automated fashion. 
Applying data mining methods, the data can be analy
zed and combined with other information to 
produce high quality information in a timely manner
. Users from business units might then be able to 
assess CR on demand broken down by specific dimensi
ons. In other words, leveraging their IT to 
automate the manual process in our example, organiz
ations might be able to enhance their knowledge 
reach and richness. Business units can then utilize
 this digital information by option which might lea
d 
to a better sensing ability and enhanced business a
gility (Overby et al., 2006). 
4 Conclusion 
Contributing to the business agility literature (Sa
mbamurthy et al., 2003; Overby et al., 2006), this 
research theoretically and practically analyzed how
 firms might use social media data for enhancing 
their ability to sense their environment in turbule
nt times. In particular, we analyzed to what extent
 
stakeholders communicate their positive and negativ
e perceptions about an organization on social 
media platforms. Moreover we analyzed how these sta
keholders provide this information with respect 
to the different CR specific issues as defined in F
ombrun et al.™s (2000) RQ. Overall, we found strong
 
support for our assumption that social media is a c
ritical source of CR relevant information which 
should be utilized to improve an organization™s CR 
management and more generally a firm™s sensing 
capabilities. Further, we argue that using IT is es
sential for sensing social media, since the data ha
s to 
be analyzed and provided on demand, preferably in r
eal-time to meet the requirements of the business 
agility concept. Thus, intelligent information syst
ems are needed which integrate and analyze these 
data automatically, offering the results as a digit
al option to decision makers (Overby et al., 2006).
 As 
a result, business agility is enhanced and business
 units may initiate competitive actions in a better
 
way to achieve superior performance and business va
lue, respectively (Sambamurthy et al., 2003). 
Thus, we additionally contribute to the discussion 
of how IT creates business value and provide 
evidence for the view that IT adds value indirectly
 through its complementarity with business. 
Our argumentation essentially relies on the assumpt
ion that firms have access to data about 
stakeholders™ perceptions from social media platfor
ms. We are aware of the fact that such data may 
not be obtainable for all commercial areas or indus
tries. Moreover, individuals might use platforms 
and technologies for sharing their opinions that do
 not offer data for analytical purposes. Thus, the 
  
 data available for analysis might not be a represen
tation of all stakeholders™ perceptions about the f
irm 
under consideration. In this regard it should be me
ntioned that it has not been analyzed yet whether a
ll 
stakeholders of a firm utilize social media for com
municating their perceptions. However, firms can 
collect and sense data from Twitter which is one of
 the most frequently used social media platforms. 
This data may be enriched by CR relevant data from 
other sources such as surveys or publicly 
available CR rankings as well as any other relevant
 data available in a firm™s IT-system as, e.g., 
statistics about customer complaints or opinions co
llected via an organization™s website.  
Combining two distinct streams of literature this w
ork provides a foundation for several new research 
directions. From a management and IT management per
spective it should be analyzed what other 
sensing activities might be improved through analys
ing social media. Moreover, the value of other 
social media platforms should be discovered with re
spect to business agility and CR in particular. 
Regarding CR, future research should explore whethe
r sensing social media captures the perceptions 
of all stakeholders orŠif notŠof which specific sta
keholder instead. Moreover, our results indicate 
that the ﬁnegativity effectﬂ might amplify the diff
usion of negative information on social media 
platforms and thus might be relevant for managing C
R. In this regard, more focused research is needed 
to understand the phenomenon in more detail. From a
 technical perspective, integration of the data in 
existing information systems to achieve highly-avai
lable and on demand accessibility might be of 
interest just as the inclusion in existing procedur
es for knowledge generation. Beyond our research, 
specific data mining algorithms should be developed
 and applied for being able to conduct the manual 
part of our analysis automatically. Such methods wo
uld be highly relevant for practice as firms would 
be able to sense and measure their CR on issue leve
l and hence could respond to turbulences in a more 
targeted way.  

References 

Baregheh, A., Rowley, J. and Sambrook, S., 2009. To
wards a Multidisciplinary Definition of 
Innovation. Management Decision, 47(8), 1323-1339. 
Barney, J.B., 1991. Firm Resources and Sustained Co
mpetitive Advantage. Journal of Management, 
17(1), 99-120. 
Baumeister, R. et al., 2001. Bad is Stronger than G
ood. Review of General Psychology, 5(4), 323-370. 
Blodgett, J.G., Wakefield, K.L. and Barnes, J.H., 19
87. The Effects of Customer Service on Consumer 
Complaining Behavior. Journal of Services Marketing
, 9(4), 31-42 
Box, G.E.P., Hunter, J.S. and Hunter, W.G., 2005. S
tatistics for Experimenters: Design, Innovation, 
and Discovery. 2nd edition. Wiley-Interscience, New
 York. 
Cochran, W.G., 1977. Sampling Techniques. 3rd editi
on. Wiley & Sons, New York. 
Day, G.S., 1994. The Capabilities of Market-Driven 
Organizations. Journal of Marketing, 58(4),37-52. 
Dellarocas, C., 2003. The digitization of Word of M
outh: Promise and Challenges of Online Feedback 
Mechanisms. Management science, 49(10), 1407-1424. 
Dove, R., 2001. Response Ability: the Language, Str
ucture, and Culture of the Agile Enterprise. Wiley 
& Sons, New York 
Fombrun, C.J., Gardberg, N.A. and Sever, J., 2000. 
The Reputation Quotient: A Multi-Stakeholder 
Measure of Corporate Reputation. Journal of Brand M
anagement, 7(4), 241-255. 
Fombrun, C. and Shanley, M., 1990. What™s in a Name
? Reputation Building and Corporate Strategy. 
Academy of Management Journal, 33(2), 233-258. 
Fombrun, C. and Van Riel, C., 1997. The Reputational
 Landscape. Corporate Reputation Review, 
1(1), 5-13. 
Fombrun, C.J., 1996. Reputation: Realizing Value fro
m the Corporate Image. Harvard Business Press, 
Boston. 
Fulmer, I.S. and Barry, B., 2009. Managed Hearts an
d Wallets: Ethical Issues in Emotional Influence 
by and within Organizations. Business Ethics Quarte
rly, 19(2), 155-191. 
Goldman, S.L., Nagel, R.N. and Preiss, K., 1995. Agi
le Competitors and Virtual Organizations: 
Strategies for Enriching the Customer. Van Nostrand 
Reinhold, New York. 
  
 Hosmer, L.T., 1995. Trust: the Connecting Link betw
een Organizational Theory and Philosophical 
Ethics. Academy of Management Review, 379-403. 
Hsieh, H.-F. and Shannon, S.E., 2005. Three Approac
hes to Qualitative Content Analysis. Qualitative 
Health Research, 15(9), 1277-1288. 
Johnson, R.A. and Bhattacharyya, G.K., 1996. Statist
ics: Principles and Methods. 3rd edition. Wiley 
& Sons, New York. 
Jones, B., Temperley, J. and Lima, A., 2009. Corpor
ate Reputation in the Era of Web 2.0: the Case of 
Primark. Journal of Marketing Management, 25(9), 92
7-939. 
Kohli, R. and Grover, V., 2008. Business Value of IT: 
an Essay on Expanding Research Directions to 
Keep Up with the Times. Journal of the Association f
or Information Systems, 9(1), 23-39. 
Krippendorff, K., 2004. Content analysis: An Introduc
tion to its Methodology, Sage Publications, 
Thousand Oaks. 
Liu, B., 2010. Sentiment Analysis and Subjectivity.
 In Indurkhya, N. and Damerau, F. J.  (Eds.),  
Handbook of Natural Language Processing. 2nd Editio
n. Chapman & Hall, Boca Raton. 
Lombard, M., Snyder-Duch, J. and Bracken, C.C., 200
2. Content Analysis in Mass Communication. 
Human Communication Research, 28(4), 587-604 
Morris, R., 1994. Computerized Content Analysis in 
Management Research: A Demonstration of 
Advantages & Limitations. Journal of Management, 20
(4), 903-931. 
Nakra, P., 2000. Corporate Reputation Management. P
ublic Relations Quarterly, 45(2), 35-42. 
Nielsen, F.A., 2011. AFINN, Available at: 
www2.imm.dtu.dk/pubdb/views/publication_details.php
?id=5981 [Accessed 2011-11-21]. 
Oldham, G.R. and Brass, D.J., 1979. Employee Reacti
ons to an Open-Plan Office: A Naturally 
Occurring Quasi-Experiment. Administrative Science 
Quarterly, 267-284. 
Overby, E., Bharadwaj, A. and Sambamurthy, V., 2006.
 Enterprise Agility and the Enabling Role of 
Information Technology. European Journal of Informa
tion Systems, 15(2), 120-131. 
Richter, D., Riemer, K. and vom Brocke, J., 2011. In
ternet Social Networking. Business & 
Information Systems Engineering, 3(2), 89-101. 
Ries, A. and Trout, J., 2005. Marketing Warfare. Mc
Graw-Hill, New York. 
Riffe, D., Lacy, S. and Fico, F., 1998. Analyzing M
edia Messages: Using Quantitative Content 
Analysis in Research. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, 
New Jersey. 
Rindova, V.P. et al., 2005. Being Good or Being Known
. The Academy of Management Journal, 
1033-1049. 
Roberts, P.W. and Dowling, G.R., 2002. Corporate Re
putation and Sustained Superior Financial 
Performance. Strategic Management Journal, 23(12), 
1077-1093. 
Rourke, L. et al., 2001. Methodological Issues in t
he Content Analysis of Computer Conference 
Transcripts. International Journal of Artificial In
telligence in Education, 12, 8-22. 
Sambamurthy, V., Bharadwaj, A. and Grover, V., 2003. 
Shaping Agility through Digital Options. MIS 
Quarterly, 27(2), 237-263. 
Scott, S.V. and Walsham, G., 2005. Reconceptualizing
 and Managing Reputation Risk in the 
Knowledge Economy: Toward Reputable Action. Organiza
tion Science, 308-322. 
Sharifi, H. and Zhang, Z., 1999. A Methodology for 
Achieving Agility in Manufacturing 
Organisations: An Introduction. International Journ
al of Production Economics, 62(1-2), 7-22. 
TwapperKeeper, 2011. Available at: www.Twapperkeeper
.com [Accessed 2011-11-21]. 
Walker, K., 2010. A Systematic Review of the Corpora
te Reputation Literature: Definition, 
Measurement, and Theory. Corporate Reputation Revie
w, 12(4), 357-387. 
Walsh, G. and Beatty, S.E., 2007. Customer-Based Co
rporate Reputation of a Service Firm: Scale 
Development and Validation. Journal of the Academy o
f Marketing Science, 35(1), 127-143. 
Wang, J., Novemsky, N. and Dhar, R., 2009. Anticipa
ting Adaptation to Products. Journal of 
Consumer Research, 36(2), 149-159. 
Wilson, T., Wiebe, J. and Hoffmann, P., 2005. Recog
nizing Contextual Polarity in Phrase-Level 
Sentiment Analysis. In Proceedings HLT 2005. Vancouv
er. 
Yusuf, Y.Y., Sarhadi, M. and Gunasekaran, A., 1999.
 Agile Manufacturing: The Drivers, Concepts 
and Attributes. International Journal of Production
 Economics, 62(1-2), 33-43. 
