 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)SOFTWARE-MEDIATED PROCESSASSESSMENT FOR IT SERVICE CAPABILITYMANAGEMENTAnup ShresthaUniversity of Southern Qensland, Toowoomba, Queensland, AustraliaAileen Cater-SteelUniversity of Southern Qensland, Toowoomba, Queensland, AustraliaWui-Gee TanUniversity of Southern Qensland, Toowoomba, Queensland, AustraliaMark TolemanUniversity of Southern Queensland, Toowoomba, Queensland, Australia   

 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Sy
stems, Tel Aviv 2014
                                        
1  
 SOFTWARE-MEDIATED PROCESS ASSESSMENT FOR IT 
SERVICE CAPABILITY MANAGEMENT 
 Research in Progress 
 
Shrestha, Anup, University of Southern Queensland, 
Toowoomba, Australia, 
anup.shrestha@usq.edu.au 
Cater-Steel, Aileen, University of Southern Queensl
and, Toowoomba, Australia, aileen.cater-
steel@usq.edu.au 
Tan, Wui-Gee, University of Southern Queensland, To
owoomba, Australia, wui-
gee.tan@usq.edu.au 
Toleman, Mark, University of Southern Queensland, T
oowoomba, Australia, 
mark.toleman@usq.edu.au 
 
Abstract 
Process improvements provide a structured approach 
for an organisation to improve the way they 
operate. A number of process improvement methodolog
ies such as ISO9000, TQM, Six Sigma, Lean, 
and Agile have been proposed over the last few deca
des and subsequently software tools have been 
developed to apply these methodologies. However, th
e determination of process capabilities to 
measure improvements is predominantly conducted by 
expert process assessors and consultants with 
their proprietary frameworks. We propose the use of
 the international standard of process assessment 
ISO/IEC 15504 for a consistent measurement of proce
ss capability. We also demonstrate development 
of a software tool based on the standard. This tool
 enables organisations to self-assess their process
es 
efficiently. In this paper, we explain the developm
ent and implementation of a software-mediated 
process assessment approach in the area of IT Servi
ce Management at two large public-sector IT 
organisations in Queensland, Australia. This paper™
s unique contribution is the integration of the 
design science research methodology with the task-t
echnology fit theory for the development of the 
software tool as a research artefact. For practitio
ners the project demonstrates transparent and 
efficient self assessment of IT service processes t
hat facilitates continual service improvement. 
Keywords: Process Assessment, IT Service Management
, Task-Technology Fit, Design Science 
Research, ISO/IEC 15504. 

  Shrestha et al. / SMPA for IT Service Management 
 
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Sy
stems, Tel Aviv 2014
                                         
2  
 1 Introduction 
Organisations have adopted methodologies such as IS
O9000, TQM and Six Sigma for better business 
performance in terms of process effectiveness and e
fficiency (Harrington, 1991). Software developed 
to apply these methodologies such as Business Proce
ss Modelling tools have expedited process 
adoption and improvement (Aguilar-Saven, 2004). How
ever, process assessments lack uniformity and 
transparency in the way they are conducted (Lloyd, 
2011). Moreover it is reported that process 
assessments are costly and time-consuming (Fayad an
d Laitinen, 1997; Lloyd, 2011).  
ISO/IEC 15504, the international standard for proce
ss assessment has emerged as a general process 
assessment standard. In response to the paradigm sh
ift of IT™s focus from technology to service 
provision, the standard has published a process ass
essment model for IT services (ISO/IEC, 2012). We 
intend to evaluate the standard assessment model by
 developing a software tool based on the model to 
enable organisations to self-assess service process
es. Investment in IT services exceeded that in IT 
devices, IT systems and enterprise software in 2012
 and is forecast to continue (Lovelock, 2013). It i
s 
obvious that businesses will increasingly evaluate 
IT in terms of what value is offered by IT services
 
rather than how the technologies are managed. The I
T Service Management (ITSM) discipline has 
embraced a process approach to manage IT. The popul
ar ITSM framework, Information Technology 
Infrastructure Library (ITIL®) and the internationa
l standard for ITSM (ISO/IEC 20000) stress the 
importance of process improvement for better IT ser
vice quality to support business activities. In 
practice, ITSM is endorsed by an internationally ac
tive practitioners™ forum but there is limited 
scholarly work in this discipline (Winniford et al.
, 2009). 
The research problem that motivates this research i
s the lack of transparency for effective process 
assessments and the need for efficiency for organis
ations to repeatedly conduct process assessments. 
We propose an approach called 
Software-mediated Process Assessment (SMPA)
: a standard-based 
approach by which organisations can self-assess the
ir processes using a software tool to determine 
process capabilities. A research project in collabo
ration with academics, practitioners and standards 
committee members with combined expertise in ITSM a
nd process assessment was initiated in 2011 to 
develop and evaluate performance of the SMPA approa
ch. The research team includes an industry 
partner, Assessment Portal, which provided its soft
ware platform to develop our tool, and the IT 
service departments of two large public-sector orga
nisations in Queensland, Australia to evaluate the 
tool. The overall research question of our project 
is: 
How well can an organisation manage its service 
capability using the software-mediated process asse
ssment approach?
 The objective of this paper is 
to report the development of the software tool deve
loped for the SMPA approach. Since the evaluation 
part of the research is in progress, the sub-questi
on that this paper focuses to answer is: 
How can a 
software tool based on a standard assessment model 
be developed for a transparent and efficient 
process assessment?
 We approach this research as a Design Science Rese
arch (DSR) project (Hevner 
et al., 2004) with the focus on building the softwa
re tool as an IT artefact. 
This paper is structured based on the DSR publicati
on schema suggested by Gregor and Hevner 
(2013). The introduction section discussed the rese
arch problem and research question. The next 
section provides an overview of existing ITSM proce
ss assessment frameworks, followed by the 
research methodology. The artefact development and 
demonstration are then explained. A note about 
evaluation is provided before a conclusion includin
g limitations, contributions and future work. 
2 Literature Review 
In DSR projects, it is advised to use established k
ernel theories to inform and justify the research 
(Venable, 2006). We present the task-technology fit
 (TTF) theory (Zigurs and Buckland, 1998) as the 
kernel theory to advise how the task challenges in 
process assessment and technology requirements for 
 Shrestha et al. / SMPA for IT Service Management 
 
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Sy
stems, Tel Aviv 2014
                                         
3  
 a new software tool fit together to articulate the 
artefact design and development. The choice of TTF 
theory is justified by the core focus of the resear
ch question to build a technology solution in respo
nse 
to task challenges. An ideal fit profile is generat
ed to match the task challenges in process assessme
nts 
and technology requirements for the software tool. 

TTF theory proposes that IT is more likely to have 
a positive impact on individual performance if the 
capabilities of the IT match the tasks that the use
r must perform (Goodhue and Thompson, 1995).  
TTF deviates from self-reported user evaluations an
d looks at the ﬁfitﬂ between the technology 
features and the task requirements to be supported 
by the technology. Zigurs and Buckland (1998) 
applied TTF theory for evaluation of group performa
nce by verifying the fit with group support 
systems technology. Since then the theory has been 
applied to a diverse range of information systems 
and is considered one of the prominent theories to 
explain the impact of IT on performance. We adopt 
Zigurs and Buckland's TTF theory for two reasons: t
he SMPA tool is a decision support tool that 
shares similar technology dimensions as proposed in
 the theory, viz. communication support, process 
structuring and information processing; and our app
roach of designing an ideal fit profile to match 
task and technology is supported by this theory. 
2.1 Existing Frameworks of ITSM Process Assessment 
There are several commercial ITSM process assessmen
t tools (e.g. PinkElephant, 2013). These 
services can be considered as a black box since the
 rationale behind the assessment activities is not 
disclosed. We found three frameworks from the liter
ature review: (a) Tudor™s ITSM Process 
Assessment provides an overall approach to conducti
ng process assessments based on ITIL and 
ISO/IEC 15504 (Barafort et al., 2009); (b) Standard
 CMMI Appraisal Method for Process 
Improvement (SCAMPI) uses CMMI for Services (CMMI-S
VC) as the measurement model (CMMI, 
2010); and (c) ITIL Process Maturity Framework asse
sses ITIL processes (MacDonald, 2010). The 
role of ISO/IEC 15504 as a consistent measurement f
ramework for ITSM process assessment was 
confirmed by Mesquida et al. (2012). We did not fin
d published research or industry initiatives on 
transparent approaches to conduct self-assessments.
 We base our research on this identified gap.  
3 Research Methodology 
We use DSR (Peffers et al., 2008) as our methodolog
y because this research is motivated to develop a 
novel artefact in order to solve an organisational 
problem (Hevner et al., 2004). Figure 1 shows the 
integration of the TTF theory process model with th
e DSR methodology. 
We deal with a decision task of determining process
 capability and improvement recommendations in 
process assessments. Addressing transparency and ef
ficiency are two major challenges of process 
assessments. The 
task challenges
 represent the first DSR phase of 
problem identification and 
motivation
. The second DSR phase, 
objectives of a solution
 can be defined from the three technology 
dimensions derived from the TTF theory (Zigurs and 
Buckland, 1998): communication support, 
process structuring and information processing. We 
use the technology dimensions as 
technology 
requirements
 for the development of the tool. Ultimately alignm
ent between task challenges and 
technology requirements is represented with an idea
l fit profile that proposes design principles for t
he 
tool development. The 
fit profile 
and the tool are developed during the 
design and development
 phase.  
As illustrated in Figure 1, the concept of fit arti
culated by the TTF theory in terms of matching task
 
challenges and technology dimensions aligns with th
e primary objective of DSR to develop a research 
artefact as a solution to identified problems. Ther
efore, the research artefact can be described using
 a 
fit profile (instantiated as the SMPA tool) where c
hallenges of process assessment (task) are addresse
d 
using the technology dimensions from the TTF theory
. 
 Shrestha et al. / SMPA for IT Service Management 
 
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Sy
stems, Tel Aviv 2014
                                         
4  
  Figure 1. Research Methodology based on Zigur & Buc
kland (1998) and Peffers et al. (2008) 
Two case study organisations are selected to execut
e the 
demonstration
 and 
evaluation
 phases of 
DSR. Evaluation is planned during three stages of t
he research: development method evaluation, tool 
experience evaluation and SMPA approach evaluation.
 Evaluation is conducted using semi-structured 
interviews with IT service managers and process per
formers. This paper is a research publication of 
the 
communication
 phase of DSR to obtain feedback regarding the deve
lopment of the artefact. 
4 Artefact Design and Development 
TTF theory has been associated with evaluative rese
arch where a fit of task requirements is sought 
from existing technologies (Fuller and Dennis, 2009
). We extend the application of TTF theory to 
design a fit profile to understand the development 
of a new technology for particular task challenges.
 
This approach is particularly suitable for DSR to e
xert rigour in explaining development of novel 
artefacts. It also makes sense in the practical wor
ld: requirements must be carefully considered befor
e 
designing and developing a technology solution. The
refore, integration of TTF theory in the DSR 
process is an original research approach illustrate
d in Figure 1 and we propose this integration as a 
unique contribution of this paper.  

We now discuss four stages of tool design and devel
opment: (1) the challenges for a transparent and 
efficient process assessment (
task challenges
); (2) requirements for assessment workflow and 
automation to be supported by the tool (
technology requirements
); (3) design of a fit profile based on 
for developing the tool; (4) application of design 
considerations from the fit profile to develop the 
tool. 
4.1 Defining Task Challenges 
We define two task challenges in process assessment
s: transparency and efficiency.
 a) Transparency:
 For our task of process assessment, transparency i
s the concept of facilitating 
assessment activities with accessible information. 
Existing ITSM process assessment frameworks use 
proprietary assessment models and follow indistinct
 assessment activities. The issue of transparency i
s 
therefore a significant hurdle in conducting an obj
ective process assessment. The standard mandates 
the requirement of a documented assessment process 
to determine assessment workflow. We therefore 
consider transparency as a task challenge that need
s to be addressed by the technology solution.
 b) Efficiency:
 Efficiency determines the degree of economy with w
hich any assessment consumes 
resources, especially time and money (Roberts, 1994
). We believe efficiency can be achieved in 
process assessments since a number of process asses
sment activities can be automated with the use of 
the tool. This translates to significant cost savin
gs from not using expensive assessors and consultan
ts 
while enabling repeated self-assessments for organi
sations. We consider efficiency as our second task 
challenge. 
 Shrestha et al. / SMPA for IT Service Management 
 
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Sy
stems, Tel Aviv 2014
                                         
5  
 4.2 Defining Technology Requirements 
According to the TTF theory, technology requirement
s for the challenges of a decision task must focus 
on ﬁinformation processingﬂ and ﬁprocess structurin
gﬂ dimensions of technology for enhanced 
performance (Zigurs & Buckland, 1998). We use the t
erm "technology requirements" rather than 
"technology dimensions" as used originally in the t
heory. This is because we are not evaluating 
existing technology dimensions for a fit but develo
ping a technology solution that fits task challenge
s 
to technology requirements. 

a) Process Structuring:
 The tool must define the assessment workflow steps
 to conduct the phases of 
the assessment: Definition, Preparation, Assessment
, Analysis, Results Presentation and Closure 
phases (Barafort et al., 2009). The technology requ
irements of process structuring should lead to the 
development of the tool that can facilitate the ent
ire assessment approach in a transparent manner. 
b) Information Processing:
 The ability to automate some activities of process
 assessment is 
considered as the information processing requiremen
t: assessment data collection and validation, 
process capability ratings and reporting of the ass
essment results requires gathering, aggregating, 
evaluating and finally presenting information. Ther
efore, having an efficient information processing 
capability is an important requirement for the tool
. 
4.3 Designing the fit profile 
Venkatraman (1989) discussed the perspective of fit
 as ﬁprofile deviationﬂ to observe the degree of 
association between a fit profile and its effect on
 performance. Since we approach the TTF theory to 
develop a new technology for task challenges, our p
roposed fit profile is not designed to evaluate 
performance. Instead, the fit profile provides cons
iderations for the tool development based on the ta
sk 
challenges and technology requirements. We group ou
r task challenges as a typical ﬁdecision taskﬂ 
since process assessments are conducted to make inf
ormed decisions on improving processes 
continually. 

The fit profile as shown in Table 1 answers the res
earch question:
 how can a software tool based on a 
standard assessment model be developed for a transp
arent and efficient process assessment?
 It 
provided design principles to guide the design proc
ess for the development of the SMPA tool.  
 Task Challenges in 

Process Assessments 
Technology Requirements 

for SMPA tool 
Artefact Development 

Considerations 
Resources 
Transparency Process Structuring Facilitate Assessm
ent 
Workflow 
International Standard of Process 

Assessment (ISO/IEC 15504) 
Efficiency Information Processing Automate Assessme
nt 
Activities 
Software tool 
Table 1. Fit profile for tool design and developmen
t 
4.4 Development of the SMPA tool 
We used the fit profile to arrive at the two develo
pment considerations and the two key resources we 
needed before commencing the actual tool developmen
t. Based on the development considerations and 
using the resources from the fit profile (see Table
 1), our research artefact was developed to address
 
the task challenges using technology requirements. 

While most of the existing process assessments rely
 on process-specific indicators that demonstrate 
objective evidence of process capabilities, the sof
tware tool facilitates a top-down approach where 
assessment at each level is defined with a goal and
 then assessment is guided by explicit questions an
d 
 Shrestha et al. / SMPA for IT Service Management 
 
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Sy
stems, Tel Aviv 2014
                                         
6  
 metrics that are set to goal attainment. A top-down
 approach in process assessment ensures that the 
measurement follows a transparent workflow of asses
sment activities. This approach is guided by the 
Goal-Question-Metric (GQM) approach. The GQM approa
ch defines a measurement model for 
software metrics on three levels: goal (conceptual 
level), question (operational level) and metric 
(quantitative level) (Van Solingen et al., 2002).  

While the GQM approach has been previously applied 
in the software industry, use of this approach to 
develop a process assessment tool in ITSM is novel.
 The international standard defines a reference 
model where each process is defined in terms of pur
pose and outcomes (ISO/IEC, 2010). Attainment 
of the process purpose by meeting the outcomes defi
nes the ﬁgoalﬂ component of the software tool. 
Likewise, the standard provides a set of base pract
ices to fulfil the process outcomes and a set of 
generic practices for Level 2 (process management),
 Level 3 (standardisation), Level 4 (quantitative 
measurement) and Level 5 (innovation) of process ca
pability. In a formal process assessment, these 
would be used as indicators to enable evaluation of
 the process capabilities. In our context, the 
emphasis is on less formal assessment to provide in
formation that can drive improvement of IT service 
processes. These indicators have been translated in
to a set of assessment questions. The tool allocate
s 
these questions to the respondents based on three p
rocess roles: process performers, process managers 
and other process stakeholders. This defines the ﬁq
uestionﬂ component of the tool. 
Finally every question is rated using the scale: ﬁN
otﬂ, ﬁPartiallyﬂ, ﬁLargelyﬂ, ﬁFullyﬂ and ﬁNot 
Applicableﬂ as defined in the standard. This rating
 is a knowledge metric of the process stakeholders.
 
Rather than the assessment team making a subjective
 choice of the indicator rating, the software tool 
has a ﬁmetricﬂ component that collects and objectiv
ely measures feedback from the process 
stakeholders directly from the responses to the que
stions.  
The application of an objective GQM approach for as
sessment workflow is the key facilitator for a 
transparent process assessment. The features of the
 SMPA tool that facilitate assessment workflow and 
automate many of the assessment activities are illu
strated in Figure 2. A screenshot of the survey 
interface of the tool is available on the project w
ebsite (INVEST, 2014). 
Figure 2. Structure of the Software-mediated Proces
s Assessment tool 
a) Assessment Data Collection & Validation: 
The tool collects responses from all the concerned 
process stakeholders. The approach of asking questi
ons directly in a web-based survey environment 
represents a faster and more efficient data collect
ion method compared to assessment interviews 
(Deutskens et al., 2006). 

b) Process Capability Determination & Rating
: We use the standard guidelines for each process t
o 
calibrate the process capability ratings. The softw
are tool determines the final score for each capabi
lity 
level by calculating the mean value of all the resp
onses for that level by all the respondents. The 
coefficient of variation (
CoV
) score is computed and can be used to determine re
liability of the process 
score based on dispersion of the responses. The mea
n value and the 
CoV
 are simple yet effective 
statistical measures to understand what the critica
l mass of assessment respondents believe about the 
processes being assessed.  
 Shrestha et al. / SMPA for IT Service Management 
 
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Sy
stems, Tel Aviv 2014
                                         
7  
 With the software tool facilitating online surveys,
 process assessments can reach all process 
stakeholders regardless of proximity. This approach
 may not fully correspond to a formal process 
assessment which is generally conducted by taking m
ultiple factors into consideration: manifold 
objective evidence, observations, document reviews 
and expert judgment. However automating parts 
of the assessment activity can drive self-assessmen
ts by providing a Do-It-Yourself option to IT 
organisations. Automation of these assessment activ
ities enabled by information processing is a major 
driver in support of efficiency. 

 c) Assessment Reporting with Process Improvement R
ecommendations: 
The SMPA tool is not only 
a stand-alone survey engine; it has embedded a know
ledge base that stores recommendations for 
process improvements. Using the knowledge base deve
loped from best practice guidelines for process 
improvements, the tool performs gap analysis based 
on the collected response metrics and produces a 
report with improvement recommendations. We develop
ed the knowledge base with recommendation 
items at the question level for four IT service pro
cesses. For every question when the mean rating is 
either "partially" or "not", i.e. there is an eleme
nt of risk in the process activity, a recommendatio
n 
item is extracted from the knowledge base and the i
tems are compiled into an assessment report.  
5 Artefact Demonstration 
We implemented the tool in two case study organisat
ions. At each organisation, three ITSM processes 
were selected for assessment using a process select
ion method (Shrestha et al., 2013), and one 
assessment facilitator trained to use the tool cons
ole. Likewise, 10-12 process stakeholders at each 
organisation participated in the assessment survey.
 For each organisation, the SMPA tool collected 
survey responses and generated a report with proces
s capability score ratings, process improvement 
recommendations, and comments from the respondents.
 There were a total of 93 and 319 process 
improvement recommendations presented in the assess
ment reports at the two organisations. In order 
to compare the process and outcome of the SMPA appr
oach with a conventional process assessment, 
we also conducted a manual process assessment (Cate
r-Steel et al., 2006) at each organisation. 
6 Artefact Evaluation 
This paper reports primarily on the design and deve
lopment of the artefact. However, DSR projects 
require an equally important evaluation segment in 
order to determine effectiveness of the artefact 
(Hevner et al., 2004). From the TTF theoretical per
spective as well, the current work is focused on th
e 
generation of the fit profile and the software tool
. However evaluation of the fit needs to be reviewe
d 
by examining the utility of the tool and we plan to
 evaluate the perceived decision quality and 
perceived decision efficiency (Jarupathirun and Zah
edi, 2007) experienced from the SMPA approach 
at the two case organisations selected for this pro
ject. This part of the research project is in progr
ess.  
Our evaluation is based on the framework of Pries-H
eje et al. (2008). The 
ex-ante
 evaluation took 
place in several iterations during the design and d
evelopment of the artefact by the research team 
which included ITSM practitioners and researchers. 
As part of an iterative build-evaluate cycle 
(Hevner, 2007), several evaluation checkpoints were
 implemented during artefact design and 
development. For instance, the use of the TTF theor
y for a fit profile to obtain development 
considerations for the tool, adherence to the inter
national standard of process assessment, use of the
 GQM approach in facilitating assessment workflow, a
nd software automation in several assessment 
activities. Moreover, assessment questions were pil
ot tested and feedback incorporated to further 
improve the clarity of the questions during artefac
t development. 
In the 
ex-post
 evaluation stage we interviewed survey participant
s regarding their use of the tool in 
focus group discussions at the two case study organ
isations based on the usability concept from the 
 Shrestha et al. / SMPA for IT Service Management 
 
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Sy
stems, Tel Aviv 2014
                                         
8  
 international standard for software quality in use 
model ISO/IEC 25010 (ISO/IEC, 2011). Six quality 
attributes are used for the evaluation: effectivene
ss, efficiency, usefulness, trust, pleasure and com
fort.  
Preliminary findings reveal that participants found
 the tool easy to use and largely agreed that a sel
f-
assessment experience made the exercise more useful
 and less costly: ﬁ
I can be honest as I am not 
being watched [during assessment survey]
ﬂ and ﬁ
...the survey can be very accurate, and is probably
 a 
better return on investment because you are not tak
ing up everyone™s time all at once...
ﬂ. There was 
feedback to improve the wording of assessment quest
ions: ﬁ
I think the questions were relevant but the 
interpretation was the big barrier ... once you und
erstand what was being asked and how it was 
presented, it became a lot easier to answer the que
stions
ﬂ. This feedback is incorporated to further 
improve the assessment questions. The next round of
 interviews will evaluate how well an 
organisation can manage their service capability. T
he summative evaluations on tool usability and 
outcomes will enable further enhancements to the as
sessment questions, score determination and 
reports generated from the tool. In future, followi
ng repeated use of the tool, it will also be possib
le to 
conduct a long-term outcome evaluation by observing
 the impact of the SMPA approach on service 
capability management. 
7 Conclusion 
The SMPA approach is expected to address transparen
cy issues in process assessment by following a 
goal-oriented measurement of IT service processes u
sing a standard process assessment model. 
Besides the use of the international standard for p
rocess assessment, the contributions of the SMPA 
approach on its own are twofold: (a) transparency a
nd efficiency by using online surveys to allow 
faster and consistent assessment data collection an
d analysis; and (b) use of a knowledge base of best
 
practice guidelines for improvement recommendations
.  
The iterative design process can be reused for the 
development and evaluation of similar assessment 
approaches beyond the discipline of ITSM, such as I
T governance (COBIT). The SMPA approach can 
be applied to other domains of IT services such as 
customer satisfaction, service value and service 
behaviour (Lepmets et al., 2012) by selecting appro
priate frameworks for the survey engine and 
knowledge base of the SMPA tool. 

Our unique contribution to knowledge is the applica
tion of the fit profile from task and technology 
requirements to develop an artefact as a technology
 solution for task challenges. More specifically, t
he 
integration of TTF theory with the DSR methodology 
is a novel approach. Our research framework 
demonstrates to future researchers the value and ap
plicability of a kernel theory (TTF theory in this 
research) to justify their design process (DSR meth
odology). Our research framework is also expected 
to be beneficial when an explicit specification of 
task problems and technology solution options has 
guided the design process in DSR projects, such as 
the case in this research. Moreover the implication
 
of this research in practice is the goal-oriented m
easurement based on the GQM approach for process 
assessments in IT service management.  

We recognise limitations of this research: only thr
ee IT service management processes were assessed 
at two sites. Consequently, we do not claim general
isation and call for future research to investigate
 
and evaluate the SMPA approach in more organisation
s and in broader disciplines beyond ITSM. 
Moreover, in practical terms, we do not claim that 
the SMPA approach can replace a formal and 
rigorous process assessment. The tool is developed 
with an intention to automate several activities of
 a 
standard process assessment and therefore enable or
ganisations to repeatedly self-assess their 
processes for improvements.  
 Shrestha et al. / SMPA for IT Service Management 
 
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Sy
stems, Tel Aviv 2014
                                         
9  
 References 
 Aguilar-Saven, R.S. (2004). Business Process Modell
ing: Review and Framework, International 
Journal of Production Economics, 90(2), 129-149. 
Barafort, B., Betry, V., Cortina, S., Picard, M., S
t-Jean, M., Renault, A. and Valdès, O. (2009). ITSM
 
Process Assessment Supporting ITIL. Van Haren Publi
shing, Zaltbommel. 
Cater-Steel, A., Toleman, M. and Rout, T. (2006). P
rocess Improvement for Small Firms: An 
Evaluation of the RAPID Assessment-based Method, In
formation and Software Technology, 48(5), 
323-334. 
CMMI (2010). CMMI® for Services, Version 1.3, Softw
are Engineering Institute, Carnegie Mellon 
University, MA. 
Deutskens, E., de Ruyter, K., and Wetzels, M. (2006
). An Assessment of Equivalence Between Online 
and Mail Surveys in Service Research, Journal of Se
rvice Research, 8(4), 346-355. 
Fayad, M.E. and Laitinen, M. (1997). Process Assess
ment Considered Wasteful, Communications of 
the ACM, 40(11), 125-128. 
Fuller, R.M. and Dennis, A.R. (2009). Does Fit Matt
er? The Impact of Task-Technology Fit and 
Appropriation on Team Performance in Repeated Tasks
, Information Systems Research, 20(1), 2-
17. 
Goodhue, D.L. and Thompson, R.L. (1995). Task-Techn
ology Fit and Individual Performance, MIS 
Quarterly, 19(2), 213-236. 
Gregor, S. and Hevner, A.R. (2013). Positioning and
 Presenting Design Science Research for 
Maximum Impact, MIS Quarterly, 37(2), 337-355. 
Harrington, H.J. (1991). Business Process Improveme
nt: The Breakthrough Strategy for Total Quality, 
Productivity, and Competitiveness, McGraw-Hill, New
 York. 
Hevner, A.R. (2007). A Three Cycle View of Design S
cience Research, Scandinavian Journal of 
Information Systems, 19(2), 87-92. 
Hevner, A.R., March, S.T., Park, J. and Ram, S. (20
04). Design Science in Information Systems 
Research, MIS Quarterly, 28(1), 75-105. 
INVEST (2014). Improving Net Value of Enterprise Sy
stems and Technologies, Retrieved 18 March, 
2014, from http://www.usq.edu.au/acsbd/projects/tea
ms-leadership-organisational-change/invest 
ISO/IEC (2010). ISO/IEC TR 20000-4:2010 Œ Informati
on Technology Œ Service Management Œ Part 
4: Process Reference Model, International Organizat
ion for Standardization, Geneva. 
ISO/IEC (2011). ISO/IEC 25010:2011 Œ Systems and So
ftware Engineering Œ Systems and Software 
Quality Requirements and Evaluation (SQuaRE) - Syst
em and Software Quality Models, 
International Organization for Standardization, Gen
eva. 
ISO/IEC (2012). ISO/IEC TS 15504-8 Information Tech
nology - Process Assessment - Part 8: An 
Exemplar Process Assessment Model for IT Service Ma
nagement, International Organization for 
Standardization, Geneva. 
Jarupathirun, S. and Zahedi, F. (2007). Exploring t
he Influence of Perceptual Factors in the Success o
f 
Web-Based Spatial DSS, Decision Support Systems, 43
(3), 933-951. 
Lepmets, M., Cater-Steel, A., Gacenga, F. and Ras, 
E. (2012). Extending the IT Service Quality 
Measurement Framework through a Systematic Literatu
re Review, Journal of Service Science 
Research, 4(1), 7-47. 
Lloyd, V. (2011). ITIL Continual Service Improvemen
t, The Stationery Office, London. 
Lovelock, J.D. (2013). Forecast Alert: IT Spending,
 Worldwide, 4Q12 Update, Gartner, Inc., 
Connecticut. 
MacDonald, I. (2010). ITIL Process Assessment Frame
work, The Co-operative Financial Services, 
Manchester. 
Mesquida, A.L., Mas, A., Amengual, E. and Calvo-Man
zano, J.A. (2012). IT Service Management 
Process Improvement based on ISO/IEC 15504: A Syste
matic Review, Information and Software 
Technology, 54(3), 239-247. 
 Shrestha et al. / SMPA for IT Service Management 
 
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Sy
stems, Tel Aviv 2014
                                         
10
  
 Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., Rothenberger, M.A. and C
hatterjee, S. (2008). A Design Science Research 
Methodology for Information Systems Research, Journ
al of Management Information Systems, 
24(3), 45-77. 
PinkElephant. (2013). PinkSCANŽ - Online Process Ma
turity Assessment, Retrieved 12 June, 2013, 
from http://www.pinkelephant.com/Products/PinkONLIN
E/PinkScan/ 
Pries-Heje, J., Baskerville, R. and Venable, J.R. (
2008). Strategies for Design Science Research 
Evaluation. In Proceedings of the 16th European Con
ference on Information Systems, Galway, 
Ireland. 
Roberts, L. (1994). Process Reengineering: The Key 
to Achieving Breakthrough Success. American 
Society for Quality Press, WI. 
Shrestha, A., Cater-Steel, A., Tan, W-G. and Tolema
n, M. (2013). A Decision Support Tool to Define 
Scope in IT Service Management Process Assessment a
nd Improvement. In Design Science at the 
Intersection of Physical and Virtual Design, Spring
er-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg, 7939, 308-23. 
van Solingen, R., Basili, V., Caldiera, G. and Romb
ach, D.H. (2002). Goal Question Metric (GQM) 
Approach, Encyclopedia of Software Engineering, Joh
n Wiley & Sons. 
Venable, J.R. (2006). The Role of Theory and Theori
sing in Design Science Research. In Proceedings 
of the 1st International Conference on Design Scien
ce Research in Information Systems and 
Technology, CA. 
Venkatraman, N. (1989). The Concept of Fit in Strat
egy Research: Toward Verbal and Statistical 
Correspondence, Academy of Management Review, 14(3)
, 423-444. 
Winniford, M., Conger, S. and Erickson-Harris, L. (
2009). Confusion in the Ranks: IT Service 
Management Practice and Terminology, Information Sy
stems Management, 26(2), 153-163. 
Zigurs, I. and Buckland, B.K. (1998). A Theory of T
ask/Technology Fit and Group Support Systems 
Effectiveness, MIS Quarterly, 22(3), 313-334. 
