 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)WE«VE GOT 99 PROBLEMS, BUT A PHONEAIN'T ONE: MOBILE ICT AND ACADEMICAGILITY IN INFORMATION SYSTEMSRESEARCHCarsten S¿rensenLSE, London, London, United KingdomJonathan Landaucreate, Zrich, Switzerland S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 
99 ProblemsÉ
  Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
                     1   WEÕVE GOT 99 PROBLEM
S, BUT A PHONE AIN'T
 ONE MOBILE ICT AND ACADEMIC AGILITY IN INFORMATION SYSTEMS RESEARCH
 Complete Research
  Carsten S¿rensen, 
London School of Economics and Political Science
, London, UK
, c.sorensen@lse.ac.uk
 Jonathan Landau, 
Schibsted
 Classified Media
, Zch, Switzerland
, jslandau@gmail.com
 Abstract
 The year 2013 celebrated the 40th anniversary since Martin Cooper made the WorldÕs first mobile 
phone call setting off a slow start to a mobile revolution diffusing a range of mobile infor
mation and 
communication technologies (mobile ICT) within reach of just about anyone. This paper explores how 
the Information Systems (IS) field has reacted to this significant phenomenon as an example of a 
measure of our fieldÕs agility in 
quickly address
ing environmental changes to the 
sociotechnical 
phenomena 
constituting our field 
and incorporating the
se changes
 into the mainstream academic 
discussions. The main assumption is that irrespective of what possible impact and influence the IS 
field may have 
on such emerging phenomena, it is an essential part of the fieldÕs justification for 
existence to provide academically grounded treatments of the most significant sociotechnical 
phenomena. Given the force, pace and generativity of contemporary ICT developm
ent, we assume an 
increasing need for the IS field to display agility in the way it considers emerging phenomena and 
either rejects or adopts them as significant for the field. This paper explores the IS field response to 
mobile ICT as an example of such n
eed for academic agility. A bibliometric study of the basked of 
eight journals from 2000 to 2010 reveals that the IS field still needs to find ways of responding to 
developments in a more agile manner.
 Keywords: Mobile ICT Research, IS Research, Academic A
gility, Bibliometric Study.
 1 Introduction
 ÒIn theory, there is no difference between theory and practice. In practice, there is.Ó
 - Yogi Berra
 The Information Systems
 (IS)
 field 
may have
 many problems, but in the words of New York rap artist 
Jay
-Z, the phone ainÕt one! There are currently around 7 billion GSM connections and over 3 billion 
customers globally as opposed to only a couple of billion internet connections, and the latter are 
increasing faster through mobile phone access than by any other means. Smartphones and tables 
invade private
- and working lives whilst resulting in
 industrial reconfiguration as old industrial giants 
are facing new ones. In 2008 Nokia became the World's lar
gest camera manufacturer leaving 
traditional camera brands struggling with Kodak filing for bankruptcy protection in 2012. Microsoft 
has now bought the handset manufacturing part of the Finnish company and both are united in their 
struggling against Apple,
 Samsung, and Google on the global mobile phone market.
 These are just a 
small selection of dramatic changes directly related to Mobile information and communication 
technology.
 One of the important challenges for the IS field is to scan the emerging devel
opments where 
technologies and human practices are innovated and through the academic process of open debate 
decide upon the relative significance of these phenomena. Within the IS field, the main part of this 
debate is conducted through journal publicatio
ns, although books and conference papers also play an 
important role
. Based on the notion of business agility as the ability to quickly and resourcefully adapt 
 S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
     2   to environmental changes (Mathiassen
 and 
Pries
-Heje, 2006), we define academic agility as the ab
ility 
of an academic field to quickly and resourcefully being able to explore environmental changes within 
its mainstream academic debate. 
This paper 
therefore 
considers the academic agility of the IS field in 
terms of how the field through journal papers 
engage in a debate of the relative importance of 
emer
ging sociotechnical phenomena. Past research has studied the IS field lack of treatment of a 
number of issues, for example, health information systems mobile ICT (Lyytinen
 and 
Yoo, 2002b), 
(Chiasson
 and 
Davidson, 2004), digital convergence (Herzhoff, 2009), and digital infrastructures 
(Tilson et al, 2010). 
The mobile revolution is one of the best examples of digital innovation the past 20 
years 
and
 is therefore a very good example of a challenge to the ac
ademic agility of the IS field. 
This 
paper has, therefore, chosen to explicitly follow up on Lyytinen
 and 
YooÕs (2002b) call to action, 
identifying a lack of IS research within mobile ICT. 
We wanted to explore how the field has 
responded to this call and t
he general technological phenomenon of mobile 
information and 
communication technology (mobile 
ICT
). We wanted to understand the agility of the Information 
Systems field 
- the speed and strength of the feedback loop from the rapidly evolving global scene o
f digital innovation to the main outlets of Information Systems research results, and thereby the 
dominant forum for academic discussions within the field. 
 There are good examples of research relating significantly to the global diffusion of mobile 
commun
ications
, such as the extensive 
body of work within the social 
stud
y of mobile communication
 (See for example,
 Katz and Aakhus, 2002;
 Licoppe, 2004
; Ling, 2008)
. However, whilst these 
theoretical explorations will be relevant for the study of 
mobile ICT
 within the Information Systems 
field, they will be based on slightly different premises, historical context, theoretical aims, and 
therefore offer other types of outcome. As examples, these studies largely are not concerned with the 
materiality of mobile com
munications and tent to take this aspect for granted while emphasizing the 
social aspects (S¿rensen, 2011).
 A bibliometric study retrieved 
76 journal articles relating to 
mobile ICT
 from the 2001 papers 
published in the basket of eight IS journals between 
2000 and 2010
, representing a proportion of 3.8% 
of the articles. The study also suggests an inverse correlation between the journal impact factor and the 
propensity of that journal to publish articles on 
mobile ICT
. The study found that the mobile ICT 
app
roaches and perspectives largely mirrored those within the existing IS mainstream.
 Comparing the 
social and organisational role of mobile ICT, our findings do
 not seem to 
point towards the IS field 
having established
 an agile and measured response
, despite
 the slight increase in 
mobile ICT
 publications over the ten
-year period studied.
 This paper contributes to a lengthy, on
-going, debate 
within the Information Systems field of its status, role and possible contributions to research at large
 (For example, King
 and 
Lyytinen, 
2006). Here, a significant body of work has for more than a quarter 
of a century sought to understand the possible relationships between the field and its practice context 
and to other academic fields. 
This paper contribut
es to the discussion of the academic agility within IS 
to rapidly engage in a research
-based debate of emerging phenomena. 
 The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 outlines IS research in the IS field and positions this 
paper within this discussion. 
Section 3 outlines some of the academic responses so far to the challenge 
of mobile ICT. Section 4 presents the research approach. Section 5 presents the findings from our 
bibliometric study. Section 6 both discusses these findings and concludes the paper.
 2 IS Studying IS
 The Information Systems field has been declared in various crises for a number of years 
(Benbasat and 
Zmud, 2003;
 King and Lyytinen, 2004;
 Lyytinen and King, 2004;
 Agarwal and Lucas Jr, 2005)
. The 
role of the field has been discussed widely
 in a number of articles and books 
(Benbasat and Zmud, 
1999; Baskerville and Myers, 2002;
 Benbasat and Zmud, 2003;
 King and Lyytinen, 2006;
 Baskerville 
and Myers, 2009;
 Gill, 2009)
.  Various solutions have been suggested, for example: innovativeness rated 
higher in academic 
 S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
     3   Information Systems journals 
(Lyytinen et al., 2007)
; academic caring less about the recognition of 
colleagues 
(King and Lyytinen, 2004;
 Lyytinen and King, 2004)
; turn Information Systems into a 
proper discipline 
(Benbasat and Zmud, 2003
); and reducing importance of peer
-reviewed A
-journal 
papers 
(Dahlbom, 1996)
. It as equally been argued that the current state of affairs with digital 
innovation represents an unique opportunity for our field to contribute 
(Yoo, 2013
).  It could be argued 
that as a field we are too concerned about academic rigor and less about relevance, 
as argued within management studies 
(Mintzberg, 2005;
 Hambrick, 2007)
, and indeed Information 
Systems itself 
(King and Lyytinen, 2004;
 Lyytinen and King, 2004)
. It has with
in several fields been 
argued that a close connection between the dynamic phenomena and research is critical 
(Gibbons, 
1994; Tushman and O'Reilly III, 2007;
 Van De Ven, 2007)
.  Information Systems is a field characterised both by the need for theoretical i
nsights in constantly 
shifting phenomena. The HCI field is perhaps even more subjected to such requirements and
 conference papers have overtaken in importance over journal publications as the primary means of 
engaging in academic discourse, something Dahlb
om 
(1996)
 argued a necessity for Information 
Systems a while ago. With increased digitalisation of a broader set of human activities, and the various 
forms of convergence across and within digital infrastructures, the speed of digital innovation is not 
set
 to slow down
 as our ability to engage in more effective recombinant innovation will increase 
(Brynjolfsson and McAfee, 201
4, Chapter 5
). While most of this research has focused on the impact from Information Systems research to 
practitioners engaging in d
igital innovation and to academics in related fields, this paper focus solely 
on the feedback loop from the practice of digital innovation and into the Information Systems 
theoretical debate. This paper is not arguing for full
-cycle micro
-organisational be
haviour research 
(Chatman and Flynn, 2005)
, or action research 
(Mathiassen et al., 201
2; Sein et al., 2011)
, per se
, but 
merely for the need for Information Systems to closely 
follow
 if not 
shape, 
both the information 
technology artifact
 and the associated emerging practices.
 The paper draws on the 
concept of business agility denoting the ability to quickly and resourcefully 
adapt to environmental changes (Mathiassen
 and 
Pries
-Heje, 2006). C
ontemporary organisations 
subjected to changing environmental conditions 
must display some form of agility 
in order to thrive 
(Tallon and Pinsonneault, 2011)
. Similarly, we define academic agility as the ability of an academic 
field to quickly and resource
fully being able to explore environmental changes within its mainstream 
academic debate. Whilst realising that agility both has been used within software engineering as a 
specific concept characterising specific techniques, while at the same time being a b
road concept 
inviting a multitude of different interpretations, we believe that simply focusing on an academic fieldÕs 
ability to draw emerging changes in the environment into the mainstream discussion offers us a 
sufficiently fixed meaning of agility for 
the purpose of this paper. T
he paper 
assumes
 that part of our 
research fields' strength increasingly will emerge from its agility in absorbing, relating to, and 
critiquing, rapidly emerging digital innovations and associated practices. It is not an argumen
t in itself 
that any new digital innovation immediately ought to result in new categories, conferences, journals, 
or indeed research fields. At times the newness does not represent a difference that theoretical
ly 
makes 
a difference 
(Bateson, 2000)
. However
, the Information Systems field critically hinges upon 
technological development 
within our empirical environment 
(Lyytinen, 1999)
. The strength of the 
field is partly residing in the capacity to rapidly engage in the debate of emerging technological 
devel
opment with theoretical grounding. In order for the Information Systems field to develop it 
constantly need to move with the technical and technological development of information technology, 
yet at the same time it needs to accumulate theoretical insights
.    S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
     4   3 Mobility Research
 This section situates the phenomenon of mobile ICT in neighbouring academic contexts as a way of 
understanding the diversity of responses to the socio
-technical developments
. Mobile ICT has been 
chosen as it constitutes a prototypical
 case of an emerging socio
-technical assemblage with 
considerable effect on the field of empirical study within IS. T
his paper is in particular considering a 
specific class of information technology, broadly categorised by supporting combinations of mobile
-, port
able
-, and pervasive computing 
(Lyytinen and Yoo, 2002b;
 Lyytinen and Yoo, 2002a)
, in short 
mobile ICT
. This technology evokes theoretical notions of movement and interaction across time, 
space and context (Kakihara
 and 
S¿rensen, 2001; Arnold, 2003)
. A broad range of academic fields and disciplines research issues related to variations in and 
combinations of space, time, movement and technology. Within the interdisciplinary field of human 
geography these aspects have for decades formed significant th
emes of research, see for example 
(Carlstein, 1983;
 Gregory and Urry, 1985)
. More recently the increased interest in issues broadly 
related to movement and temporality has been labelled Òthe mobility turnÓ 
(Urry, 2007, p.6)
. The 
broad social science discus
sion on mobilities assembles an interesting and rich discourse by growing 
tentacles that reach deep into a variety of social science issues as illustrated in 
(Urry, 2007)
. However, 
the discussion
 here tends to avoid any explicit consideration for the mater
ial aspects of 
how social 
affairs and contemporary information technology are constitutively entangled 
(Orlikowski, 2007)
 in 
everyday life.
 Within the social sciences, an emerging and growing community of researchers are engaged in a social 
study of mobile
 communications, largely fuelled by the advent of mobile voice calls and 
SMS
 connectivity, for example; 
(Katz and Aakhus, 2002;
 Ling, 2008)
. This research field is related to, yet 
distinct from, the general mobilities research, and has explicitly chosen mo
bile communications as a 
focal point of interest. However, characteristic for this highly interesting research is the almost entirely 
black
-boxing of the technology itself. The emphasis is largely on social behaviour under a regime of 
mobile phone use and 
not on a broader understanding of the inner socio
-technical workings. LingÕs 
(2008)
 exposition of rituals in the age of the mobile phone is an interesting sociological analysis that 
largely takes for granted the technological properties afforded by the mob
ile phone. Arnold 
(2003)
 investigates the phenomenology of technology, using the mobile phone as an example. Arnold refutes 
the notion of a simple relationship or performance between affordance and purpose, but rather a multi
-faceted complex arrangement of
 contrary performances. Even still, the notion of affordance is not 
unfolded and merely represented as a black box. 
 The social science studies of 
mobile ICT
 are largely concerned with a single technology, the mobile 
phone, applied with a general social co
ntext 
(S¿rensen, 2011)
. There is little research on the co
-construction of mobile
- and ubiquitous information technology and working practices within 
organisations, as is there only sparse research moving beyond the mobile phone to explore complex 
assemblages of mobile
- and ubi
quitous technology. The work by Wajcman and colleagues is a notable 
exception studying the mobile phone at work 
(Wajcman et al., 2008;
 Bittman et al., 2009)
, and 
ManningÕs 
(2003;
 2008) extensive research into the use of complex technological assemblages wi
thin 
the police force provides another elegant exception that proves the rule. 
 Considering social science research of flexible working practices facilitated by the use of 
mobile ICT
, then there is here a significant body of research discussing organisatio
nal practices without 
significantly linking it into a deeper understanding of the co
-construction of these practices and 
specific technological choices. Felstead and colleagueÕs 
(1998;
 2000; 2005) work on shared offices, 
home working, and mobile working is
 an excellent example of a highly interesting organisational 
discourse. Similarly, Sturdy and colleagues 
(2009)
 take a close look at management consultancy 
practices, characterised in terms of boundary spanning and knowledge flows between organisations. 
Dale and 
Burrell 
(2008)
 study the mutual construction of organisational spaces and practices by 
relating both to literature from organisational theory, philosophy, social geography and architecture 
Ð  S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
     5   yet, information technology is absent. 
 At the opposite en
d of an imaginary 
Ð and in many ways problematic 
Ð socio
-technical continuum, we 
find a broad range of research within the technical sciences engages in the construction of socio
-technical visions directly relating to mobilities, for example; wearable comp
uting 
(Barfield and 
Caudell, 2001; Mann and Niedzviecki, 2002)
, ubiquitous computing 
(Weiser, 1991)
, novel forms of 
mobile device interaction 
(Kjeldskov and Graham, 2003)
, and pervasive computing 
(Hansmann et al., 
2003; Kourouthanassis and Giaglis, 2008)
. Characteristic for most of the technical research is an 
intense interest in creating technological affordances, and only to limited extent exploring these in any 
social contexts beyond laboratory experiments or other forms of controlled environments 
(S¿ren
sen, 
2011).  The existing research related to mobile ICT, as listed above, simultaneously represent an opportunity 
for the 
Information Systems
 field to both connect and contribute. This does, however, require an initial 
agile step of relating to the primar
y phenomenon, exploring it, and discussing it.
 4 Approach
  4.1 Research framework The aim of the approach is to examine 
Information Systems
 research on mobile ICT applying a 
number of conceptual frameworks. They are adopted from existing, introspective studi
es of academic 
IS from within the field, ensuring that the relevant concepts are used in a critical and well
-informed 
way (Avison
 and 
Elliot, 2006). In order to draw on a representative sample of IS knowledge, these 
indicators are applied to recent papers 
on mobile ICT from top IS journals. This approach has a rich 
tradition in IS. Empirical analyses of articles published in one or more IS journals have become an 
established method of studying IS research in general (Orlikowski
 and 
Baroudi, 1991; Farhoomand
 and 
Drury, 1999; Orlikowski
 and 
Iacono, 2001; Chen
 and 
Hirschheim, 2004; Sidorova et al., 2008) as 
well as specific topics, such as knowledge management (Raub
 and 
ling, 2001; Schultze
 and 
Leidner, 2002), hospital information systems (Chiasson
 and 
Davidson, 2004), digital convergence 
(Herzhoff, 2009), and digital infrastructures (Tilson et al., 2010).
 For this paper we have selected three indicators of academic agility within IS in relation to mobile 
ICT: 1) 
The 
first indicator essentially counts th
e number of published
 articles discussing mobile ICT 
across the basked of eight journals; 2) the second indicator is directly based on Lyytinen
 and 
YooÕs 
(2002b) categorisation and therefore classifies IS papers on mobile ICT based on their eight categorie
s of possible IS research into mobile ICT; and 3) the third indicator is based on the main five 
perspectives on the ICT artefact identified by Orlikowski
 and 
Yates (2001). The following table 
outlines the three indicators.
 !Indicator
 Dimensions
 1 Number 
 The number of published articles discussing mobile ICT
 2 Aspect
 A) Individual
-level services; B) Individual
-level infrastructure; C) Team
-level services; D) 
Team
-level infrastructure; E) Organizational
-level services F) Organizational
-level 
infrastructure
; G) Interorganizational
-level services; H) Interorganizational
-level 
infrastructure
 3 Artefact
 A) Tool view; B) Proxy view; C) Computational view; D) Ensemble view; E) Nominal view
 Table
 1: The sub
-dimensions coded for each of the 
three
 indicators
. As 
the first chosen i
ndicator
, the number of articles
 published 
on mobile ICT
 is tallied as a measure of 
the representation of the extent of research on the phenomenon within the mainstream 
Information 
Systems
 discussion. The second indicator classifies the t
hematic focus of mobile ICT research in IS. 
The interest here is to analyse the extent to which the literature takes into account the novel nature of 
mobile ICT. Lyytinen
 and 
Yoo (2002b) argue that IS is uniquely positioned to explore the emerging 
 S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
     6   socio
-technical characteristics of mobile ICT. They distinguish between: a lower 
infrastructure
 layer 
that is heterogeneous and decentralized yet based on common interoperability protocols and standards; 
and, supported by that infrastructure, a higher
 service
 laye
r accessible through dynamic mobile 
devices and mechanisms. They also define four levels, namely individual, team, organizational and 
interorganizational. This leads to the eight research themes listed in Table 1. This framework 
specifically relates to the
 phenomenon and provides a suitable indicator of the IS fieldÕs academic 
agility with respect to mobile ICT. 
 The third indicator relates to the presentation and representation of the mobile ICT artefact in IS 
research classified according to Orlikowski
 and IaconoÕs (2001) categories of the: A) Tool view 
perceiving ICT as a stable Òblack boxÓ that behaves in unproblematic and pre
-defined ways; B) proxy 
view understanding ICT through representative, surrogate indicators; C) computational view 
representing IC
T in terms of its computational capabilities; D) ensemble view where ICT is perceived 
as a complex socio
-technical package that includes, shapes and is shaped by social, economic and 
political elements; and E) nominal view where ICT is evoked in name but n
ot in any distinctive 
understanding or description. The original study included further two indicators, namely the 
methodologies applied across the papers on mobile ICT, and the types of knowledge claims made. 
However, these two indicators were excluded fo
r this paper to comply with the space constraints. 
 4.2 Bibliometric
 study
 In order to investigate the IS response to mobile ICT, the paper conducts a bibliometric
- and content 
analysis of Information Systems represented by 10 years of publications from th
e Òbasket of eightÓ IS 
journals based on the three indicators discussed above. Although such journal listings have been 
criticized (see Willcocks et al., 2008) and by necessity exclude parts of the IS research body, these 
eight journals fulfil a number of 
criteria. They enjoy high acceptance among scholars and represent a 
geographical and topical diversity that has been widely called for (see Gallivan
 and 
Benbunan
-Finch, 
2007). Furthermore, the Òbasket of eightÓ includes only journals that are specific to I
S, an important 
requirement for any empirical study focusing on the IS field (Chen
 and 
Hirschheim, 2004).
 The Òbasket of eightÓ consists of four journals mainly based in Europe: 1) European Journal of 
Information Systems (EJIS); 2) Information Systems Jour
nal (ISJ); 3) Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems (JSIS); and 4) Journal of Information Technology (JIT). And four journals mainly based in 
USA: 1) Journal of Management Information Systems (JMIS); 2) Information Systems Research 
(ISR); 3) Journal of 
the Association for Information Systems (JAIS); and 4) Management Information 
Systems Quarterly (MISQ). The corpus consisted of the publications within these eight journals within 
the period of January 2000 to August 2010 
Ð a timeframe that takes into acco
unt the novelty of mobile 
ICT while allowing for sufficient temporal breadth. The analysis excluded: editorials, book reviews, 
opinion articles and responses, teaching cases and obituaries. However, research notes were included. 
 An initial screening of ti
tle and abstract, and (where available) keywords of all articles resulted in a 
first pool of papers. If the paper was deemed to be relevant, i.e, in some capacity exploring the issue of 
mobile ICT, the full paper was downloaded for further analysis. The th
ematic criteria for inclusion in 
the mobile article pool were relatively narrow, given the limited scope of this paper. Articles that 
specifically mention mobile ICT or related concepts such as ubiquitous computing were included. 
However, the process exclu
ded papers that discuss wider concepts of relevance to the broader mobility 
discourse without explicitly referencing mobile ICT. Thus, excluded from the mobile ICT article pool 
were some (but not all) articles on distributed work (see Sarker
 and 
Sahay
, 2004; Kotlarsky
 and 
Oshri, 
2005), virtual teams (see Griffith et al., 2003; Schweitzer
 and 
Duxbury, 2010), telecommuting (see 
Belanger et al., 2001; Iscan
 and 
Naktiyok, 2005) and telehealth (see Klecun
-Dabrowska
 and 
Cornford, 
2000). The analysis also exc
lude meta
-research papers discussing or calling for, rather than actually 
conducting, research on mobile technology (see March et al., 2000; Lyytinen
 and 
Yoo, 2002b; Sawyer 
et al., 2003; Mbarika et al., 2005; Wareham et al., 2009; Yoo, 2010). 
  S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
     7   5 Results
 The 
results section first presents the results from the bibliometric study counting IS articles on mobile 
ICT, then discusses the findings with respect to the other two indicators based on Lyytinen
 and 
Yoo 
(2002b) and Orlikowski
 and 
Yates (2001) respectively.
 5.1 How many mobile ICT 
articles
 and where published? Examining the titles, abstracts and keywords of all 2,001 articles published in the Òbasket of eightÓ 
journals between January 2000 and August 2010, revealed that 76 articles specifically discuss mobile 
ICT
, representing a proportion of 3.8% of the initial article pool and with 92.1% of the papers 
published in the second half of the sampling period, 2005
-2010. Table 2 provides an annual 
breakdown. 
 ICTs is very small in some journals, 2% or less in 
MISQ
, JMI
S, ISR
 and 
JAIS
. The others 
- ISJ, JIT
, JSIS
 and 
EJIS
 - display substantially higher figures, from 5.7% (
ISJ
) to 7.5% (
EJIS
). The 25 articles 
on mobile ICT published in 
EJIS
 alone represent almost a third of the mobile article pool. Table 3 
highlights the 
distribution of mobile ICT research in the eight journals. 
 Being the focus of 3.8% of the IS literature is not much for a technological phenomenon as global as 
mobile ICT, especially in a field that is said to be susceptible to contemporary fashions (Bask
erville
 and 
Myers, 2009). Perhaps journal editors, perceiving a Òcausal distanceÓ between mobility and core 
IS themes (Benbasat
 and 
Zmud, 2003), consider it best to leave the exploration of the concept to other 
disciplines. At the same time, the increased 
interest in mobile ICT since 2005 compared to earlier 
years may signify a growing recognition of mobile technology; such expansions of scholarly attention 
usually lead to more mature discussions (Sidorova et al., 2008). This does indicate that the 
phenomen
on is indeed considered relevant for IS but also that the field here is not exercising academic 
agility in terms of quick and resourceful response to environmental changes. 
 The difference between two groups of journals can be directly correlated to the jo
urnal impact 
rankings. Many scholars assert that ÒeliteÓ IS journals with low acceptance rates, who play an 
important role in setting the IS research agenda, often display thematic and methodological 
conservatism (see Hirschheim
 and 
Klein, 2003; Willcocks 
et al., 2008; Gill
 and 
Bhattacherjee, 2009). 
Indeed, the four journals with low counts of mobile ICT research enjoy the highest impact levels. 
Table 
3 also provides an overview of the two journal groups and their respective data.
1  High
-ranking academic in
stitutions are inherently conservative, and for good reasons: the replacement 
of dominant discourses should not be achieved too easily (Lyytinen
 and 
King, 2004). But the fact that 
MISQ
 and 
ISR
, the IS fieldÕs most highly ranked journals (as measured in 200
9), jointly published 
only 6 articles on mobile technology in over a decade demonstrates a certain disconnection between 
these IS outlets and Òreal worldÓ of IS practice.
 At the same time, any journal ranking must be taken with a pinch of salt. While the i
mportance of 
MISQ 
is uncontested, many European IS journals are regularly misrepresented in rankings that fail to 
take into account, for instance, the distinctiveness of citation patterns among European researchers 
(Willcocks et al., 2008). Yet there are c
ommonly accepted differences between American and 
European IS: the latter is more thematically and methodologically diverse (Avgerou, 2000) and more 
strongly encourages practitioner involvement in research efforts (Gill
 and 
Bhattacherjee, 2009). 
                                                          1 The 5
-Year Impact Factor data is taken from the Thomson Reuters Journal 
Citation Report 2009, available at 
http://admin
-apps.isiknowledge.com/JCR/JCR (accessed 26 August, 2010). 
  S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
 Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
     8     Table 2
: Articles on mobile ICT by year p
ublished (*=January
-August 
only
 !!!!!!!!  Table 3
:  Journals grouped by geographical origin and impact 
factor. *5
-year impact factor from Thomson Reuters Journal 
Citation Report 2009.
 ! Table 4: 
Distribution of 
research 
themes 
according to 
classification 
from Lyytinen
 and Yoo 
(2002b)
     Table 5: 
Distribution of IT 
conceptualisation 
in research on 
mobile ICT 
applying 
Orlikowski
 and IaconoÕs (2001) 
framework.
 Year
 Mobile
 Total
 % 2000 1 165 0.6
 2001 2 147 1.4
 2002 1 151 0.7
 2003 1 151 0.7
 2004 1 163 0.6
 2005 11 185 5.9
 2006 18 210 8.6
 2007 9 239 3.8
 2008 12 226 5.3
 2009 18 229 7.9
 2010* 2 135 1.5
 Total
 76 2001 3.8
 Journal
 Impact*
 Mobile
 Total
 % Tot.
 % Mob.
 MISQ 
(USA)
 9.2
 2 247 0.8
 2.6
 ISR (USA)
 4.9
 4 249 1.6
 5.3
 JMIS (USA)
 3.2
 6 393 1.5
 7.9
 JAIS (USA)
 3.1
 4 201 2 5.3
 Total USA
 5.1
 16 1090 1.5
 21.1
 JIT (EU)
 2.7
 13 223 5.8
 17.1
 JSIS (EU)
 2.5
 11 161 6.8
 14.5
 ISJ (EU)
 2.5
 11 194 5.7
 14.5
 EJIS (EU)
 1.5
 25 333 7.5
 32.9
 Total EU
 2.3
 60 911 6.6
 78.9
 Total
  76 2001 3.8
 100 Theme
 Articles
 % Individual 
Ð Service
 33 43.4
 Interorganisational 
ÐInfrastructure
 12 15.8
 Organisational 
ÐService
 12 15.8
 Organisational 
ÐInfrastructure
 9 11.8
 Team 
- Service
 4 5.3
 Individual 
- Infrastructure
 3 3.9
 Interorganisational 
Ð Service
 2 2.6
 Team 
- Infrastructure
 1 1.3
 Total
 76 100 Total Service
 51 67.1
 Total Infrastructure
 25 32.9
 ICT Concept
 Articles
 % Proxy View
 32 42.1
 Perception
 31 40.8
 Diffusion
 1 1.4
 Capital
 0 0 Ensemble View
 29 38.2
 Embedded System
 13 17.1
 Production Network
 12 15.8
 Development Project
 3 3.9
 Structure
 1 1.3
 Tool View
 8 10.5
 Information Processing
 5 6.6
 Productivity
 2 2.6
 Social Relations
 1 1.3
 Labour Substitution
 0 0 Nominal View
 5 6.6
 Computational View
 2 2.6
 Model
 2 2.6
 Algorithm
 0 0 Total
 76 100  S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 
99 ProblemsÉ
     Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
                    9   Aga
inst this backdrop, it is not surprising that the four journals with low impact levels (as of Reuters 
2009) and high counts of mobile ICT research are the four European journals, namely 
EJIS
, ISJ
, JIT 
and 
JSIS
.2 Taken together, they provide 60 of the 76 ar
ticles on mobile ICT (78.9%) and account for 
each of the 7 articles co
-authored with one or more IS practitioners. 
Special issues form a major source 
of papers on mobile ICT in European journals (e.g., 
JIT
, vol. 24 (2), 2009). These embody specific 
calls f
rom editorial decision
-makers for mobile ICT research, implying a political will to expand the 
boundaries of IS research
.  Political and institutional factors partially explain why mobile ICT research is underrepresented and 
unevenly distributed in IS 
research, especially given the perceived state of crisis in the field. King
 and 
Lyytinen (2004) describe the phenomenon of Òhorizontal violenceÓ, in which academics deliberately 
promote disciplinary narrowness in order to protect their position vis
-‹-vis n
ewcomers. But as 
mentioned above, explaining the scarcity of mobile technology research in IS is only one piece in a 
wider puzzle. The next step consists of examining in detail the subset of 76 articles on mobile ICT. 
 5.2 Does mobile ICT 
research within IS d
eviate from the 
rest of IS?
 The analysis revealed that all 
eight aspects (indicator 
2) based on Lyytinen
 and 
YooÕs (2002b) 
categorisation are represented in the pool of 76 papers, but in uneven measures (See 4). The study of 
individual
-level services is the
 focus of 43.4% of the articles. Interorganizational
-level infrastructure, 
organizational
-level services and organizational
-level infrastructure each account for over 10% of 
articles. The other
 four research themes are poorly examined in the mobile ICT lit
erature, with team
-level infrastructure the lowest at 1.3%. The substantial majority of 43.4% studying individual
-level 
services corroborates S¿rensenÕs (2010b) claim that mobility research tends to concentrate on the 
individual use of mobile ICT, particul
arly mobile phones, in a general social context. Many papers in 
this category of the pool engage in conventional survey research examining individual mobile 
technology adoption (see Venkatesh
 and 
Ramesh, 2006; Kim
 and 
Han, 2009), though some, for 
instance 
Meso et al. (2005), do so in unconventional settings such as developing countries. Research 
on interorganizational
-level mobile infrastructure is relatively well represented, making up 15.8% of 
the mobile ICT article pool. These studies examine the Òhighes
tÓ level in Lyytinen
 and 
YooÕs (2002b) 
framework, exploring societal and national ICT policy issues. This is an area that, while not 
traditionally strong, is gaining attention in the IS field (Sidorova el al., 2008; Tilson et al, 2010), for 
example; Studie
s of interfirm relations in converging mobile ecosystems (Basole, 2009), and the 
development of South KoreaÕs mobile broadband infrastructures (Yoo et al., 2005).
 At a 
combined 27.6%, the mobile ICT article count for organizational
-level services and infra
structure 
shows that enterprise mobility is
 receiving attention in the subset of IS mobile technology research. 
Topics covered in the pool range from corporate wireless security policies (Katos
 and 
Adams, 2005) to 
RFID use in hospitals (Lee
 and 
Shim, 2007)
. Still, the numbers only amount to a quarter of a very 
limited branch of IS research. More striking are the themes that appear infrequently in the mobile ICT 
article pool, especially team
-level examinations on both the service (5.3%) and the infrastructur
e layer 
(1.3%). IS has long been interested in virtual teams and distributed work, but most of this research 
either predates mobile technology and/or focuses on stationary collaboration tools. This likely explains 
why 
Ð with notable exceptions (see Chudoba
 et al., 2005) 
Ð this theme is largely missing from the 
mobile ICT article pool. Equally rare in the literature are studies of interorganizational
-level services 
(2.6%) and individual
-level infrastructure (3.9%). Overall, analysing the chosen research them
es 
                                                        2 ÒEuropean journalsÓ refers here to journals published in Europe and ÒUS journalsÓ to those published in the 
US. This is a key distinction, because 
US journals overwhelmingly publish research from US
-based researchers, 
while the majority of articles in European journals are written by scholars based in European institutions 
(Galliers
 and 
Meadows, 2003).
  S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
    Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
                     10   reveals that while the essence of mobile ICT practice is reflected in the literature on mobile 
technology, several gaps exist. In addition to the ones identified in the previous paragraphs, the overall 
infrastructure layer is also under
-researched compa
red to the services layer. This supports the verdict, 
advanced by Tilson et al. (2010), that mobile information infrastructures are becoming increasingly 
complex and difficult to study and that the IS field in general lacks infrastructure research.
 Regarding
 indicator 3
, the conceptualization of the mobile ICT artefact
, the article pool features 
two predominant views, namely the proxy view (42.1%) and the ensemble view (38.2%) 
Ð see 
Table 
5. Tool views, nominal views, and computational views are sign
ificantly less frequent with a 
combined 19.2%. The articles were also examined one level below the five top
-level groupings and 
classified accordingly. This distribution of ICT conceptualizations in the mobile article pool varies 
greatly from Orlikowski
 and IaconoÕs (2001) findings within IS in general. In fact, the proportions 
here are almost reversed. While the nominal view makes up almost a quarter of all articles examined 
in the original paper, only 6.6% of the mobile ICT articles display this understan
ding. This is 
unsurprising, given that the author selected articles precisely for their focus on a specific technology, 
namely mobile ICT and more importantly that several articles only nominally discussing mobile ICT 
were thus excluded from the pool to be
gin with. Furthermore, one could argue that research on mobile 
ICT 
- an emerging, non
-mainstream IS issue 
- must constantly justify itself as worthy of attention. 
Accordingly, authors can hardly avoid specifying the artifact to a certain extent. The comput
ational 
view of ICT, common in standard computer science literature, is nearly as widespread in Orlikowski
 and 
IaconoÕs (2001) ranking as the nominal view. However, only 2.6% of the articles in the mobile 
ICT pool display this view. This corresponds to a w
ider decline of the IS development stream in 
academic IS (Sidorova et al., 2008). Indeed, one of the papers in the pool laments the shortage of 
design
-oriented IS research on heterogeneous mobile environments (Krebs et al., 2004). The tool view 
represents 
the typical social scientific conceptualization of ICT as a black
-boxed instrument that 
enhances or transforms social practices (Orlikowski
 and 
Iacono, 2001). Again, its high proportion in 
overall IS research (just over 20%) is not matched in the present a
rticle pool: only 10.5% are classified 
as tool views. Of these, most describe mobile ICT as an information
-processing tool, for instance 
linking the adoption of mobile ticketing in public transport to enhanced revenue management (Li et 
al., 2009). Converse
ly, no papers view mobile technology as a labour substitution tool 
Ð undoubtedly 
because humans use mobile ICT rather than being replaced by it. What explains this scarcity of tool 
views? Conceptualizing technology as a tool usually involves quantifying it
s impact. While such an 
approach supports measuring the aggregate effect of ICTs and processes, researching the impact of 
specific technologies 
- such as mobile ICT 
- is more meaningfully explored by asking 
how this impact 
occurs (Sheng et al., 2005). Only
 one article views mobile ICT as a tool that determines social 
relations, thus showing that many mobile ICT researchers engage closely with the artifact to avoid 
oversimplification (Brigham
 and 
Introna, 2006). 
 Slightly less than half of the articles in th
e mobile ICT pool display the proxy view: an understanding 
of mobile ICT through surrogate measures, most prominently the technologyÕs perception. This view, 
present in merely 18.1% of the original study, is most commonly found in the aforementioned 
multit
ude of articles on individual
-level adoption of mobile services. Given that mobile technology is 
redefining established notions of ICT use (Ferneley
 and 
Light, 2008; Yoo, 2010), these articles do 
little to promote a ÒreturnÓ to the technology artifact. Fur
thermore, they potentially confuse mobile 
ICT with the measure representing it (Orlikowski
 and 
Iacono, 2001). Nevertheless, differentiated 
accounts of technology perception beyond conventional technology acceptance models do appear in 
the mobile ICT articl
e pool (see Jarvenpaa
 and 
Loebbecke, 2009). Similarly widespread is the 
ensemble view, underlying 38.2% of the mobile research pool 
- a threefold increase since Orlikowski
 and 
Iacono (2001) explicitly called for it. This represents the clearest divergence 
between mobile ICT 
research and the dominant IS paradigm. Most ensemble views found in the mobile ICT article pool 
conceptualize the artifact as either an embedded system or a production network. An illustrative 
example of the former is provided in Lucas
 and GohÕs (2009) description of how digitalization 
 S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
    Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
                     11   transformed not only digital camera technology, but the entire sociotechnical process of photography. 
KietzmannÕs (2008) study of the complex networks involved in RFID innovation processes 
exemplifies the l
atter subset of ensemble views. Both constitute good indications of how the 
sociotechnical complexities of Òreal worldÓ mobile technology are being appreciated in mobile ICT 
research. 
 6 Discussion
 The aim of this paper has been to understand the extent and 
nature of the 
Information Systems
 fieldÕs 
agility in absorbing emerging socio
-technical phenomena and through research collectively engage in 
a process of deciding how to comprehensively deal with these phenomena. The paper argue that 
mobile ICT forms an important example of an environmen
tal change, which the mainstream IS field 
must be able to respond to through dealing with the phenomenon in journal articles. Lyytinen
 and 
Yoo 
(2002b) argued exactly this in their call to arms over a decade ago. The findings from the study of 
2001 journal 
articles published within the Òbasked of eightÓ 
Information Systems
 journals between 
2000 and 2010 show a diversified representation of practice in the small 
Information Systems
 subset 
of mobile ICT research. In some respects, the picture is in line with o
verall IS research, most visibly in 
the focus on a proxy view of individual
-level services. Beyond that, the IS literature on mobile 
technology displays several approaches that account more explicitly for mobile technology and 
practice. These include a str
ong interest in interorganizational mobile infrastructures and a surprisingly 
frequent conceptualization of mobile ICT as a sociotechnical ensemble 
- approaches that are located 
beyond the dominant IS paradigm (Orlikowski
 and 
Iacono, 2001; Lyytinen
 and 
Yoo
, 2002b). Since the 
data was collected and analysed in 2010 the IS field may have changed slightly, with a couple more 
European based journal special issues. However, the IS field still has not established a significant 
response to the challenge of mobile 
ICT, and this is only one of the challenges to our fieldÕs academic 
agility. Perhaps we c
an tentatively hypothesise that research into mobile ICT has not managed to 
establish a Òmobilities turnÓ within Information Systems, as research into mobilities has w
ithin social 
geography and sociology (Urry
, 2007
). 
This turn has gathered researchers around a research agenda 
and even resulted in a new journal. Within IS, i
t has been a challenge to identify a theoretical 
discourse linked to the emerging phenomena, whic
h could be strong enough to break through the 
rigorous inspections of knowledge claims in the mainstream journals. The level of research into 
mobile ICT has therefore mainly been one where socio
-technical practices are studied empirically but 
where the the
oretically constructs are not directly related to the category of technology.
 The choice of mobile ICT offered a phenomenon with global impact and one that is continuing to 
undergo rapid 
changes. It is, however, merely
 one indicator of the lack of academic
 agility within IS to 
rapidly and resourcefully consider emerging socio
-technical phenomena within a mainstream context. 
A quick scan of possible external phenomena the IS field will need to incorporate at least as empirical 
objects, but also possibly as m
ore substantial areas providing sources of theoretical insights reveal, for 
example; 3D printing, 3D scanning, machine learning, mobile robots, machine
-to-machine 
communication, augmented reality, in
-memory databases, smart cities, sustainable IT, near
-fie
ld 
communications (NFC), contactless payment, wearable computing,
 gamification, crowd sourcing, big 
data, consumer telematics, quantified self services, consumer
-managed automation, and the internet of 
things. 
There is not end in sight with the granularity
 of technological materiality diminishing, 
converging and reconfiguring at a staggering pace (Brynjolfsson
 and 
McAfee, 2014).
 With increasing complexity of technological arrangements come an increasing need for critical 
insights into design choices and the
ir consequences based on current knowledge of state
-of-the
-art. If 
the Information Systems field cannot establish an arrangement with a sufficiently rapid feedback
-loop 
between digital innovation processes and the academic process offering essential reflec
tion, then the 
field will not be able to offer relevant insights.
 As has been argued within management studies 
(Tushman and O'Reilly III, 2007)
, the 
Information Systems
 field need to locate its own way of rapidly 
 S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
    Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
                     12   reconfiguring its PasteurÕs Quadrant 
(Stoke
s, 1997)
. This paper is not about impact and considerations 
for use, but merely the first all
-important phase of discovering new sociotechnical configurations and 
assessing, within an academic context, to what extent these configurations can offer new insi
ghts, need 
to be understood as new categories of phenomena. In this sense, this paper is a call for action to the IS 
field of developing more agile boundary spanning practices and to more comprehensively support 
those engaged in boundary spanning (Williams
, 2002; Levina
 and 
Vaast, 2005). The inclusion of a 
diversity of journal editors representing interest in emerging phenomena, establishing different types 
of opinions and discussion papers, and establishing special issues on emerging subjects can clearly b
e one way of dealing with the issue of academic agility. However, considering academic agility as a case 
of organisational ambidexterity (
Birkinshaw
 and 
Gibson, 2004; O'Reilly
 and 
Tushman, 2004) 
then the 
academic incentive structure of increasingly importa
nt classification of acceptable journal outlets and 
rankings can easily counter this and further result in emphasis placed on exploitation over exploration. 
It could also be argued that in the context of a field seeking to respond in an agile manner to eme
rging 
socio
-technical phenomena, the most productive first response should be seeking to apply a 
qualitative, explorative approach, rather than draw on a positivist paradigm requiring a range of strict 
assumptions up front. 
The problem and opportunity is p
aradoxically in the inherent contextual 
ambidexterity of our academic field. The balancing of exploitation and exploration is to a large extent 
left to individual
s. 
This can, for example, lead to mobile ICT being extensively studied in Scandinavia, 
yet wit
h little theoretical impact on the mainstream Cross
-Atlantic IS field, while the Anglo
-Saxon IS 
research community for decades did not study 
the phenomena at all
 (S¿rensen, 2003).
  We will leave the discussion of viable strategies for addressing the issue 
to another paper, but a range 
of efforts could support increased academic agility, such as: Increased individual professionalization 
in balancing exploitation and exploration; more diverse editorships of journals; increased stratification 
of categories of 
papers within journals; and increased importance of citations leading to conference 
papers increasing in importance. It is, however, obvious to us that the battle for increased IS agility is 
not over yet.
 References
 Agarwal, R.
 and 
H.C. Lucas, Jr. (2005), 
The Information Systems Identity Crisis: Focusing on High
-Visibility and High
-Impact Research, MIS Quarterly, 29 (3), pp. 381
-398 Arnold, M. (2003), On the Phenomenology of Technology: The Janus
-Faces of Mobile Phones, 
Information and Organization, 13 (4),
 pp. 231
-256. Avison, D.
 and 
S. Elliot (2006), Scoping the Discipline of Information Systems, in J.L. King
 and 
K. 
Lyytinen (eds.), Information Systems: The State of the Field, John Wiley
 and 
Sons Ltd, Chichester, 
UK, pp. 3
-18 Barfield, W.
 and 
T. Caudell, e
d. (2001): Fundamentals of Wearable Computers and Augmented 
Reality. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
 Baskerville, R.
 and 
M.D. Myers (2002), Information Systems as a Reference Discipline, MIS 
Quarterly, 26 (1), pp. 1
-14 Baskerville, R.
 and 
M.D. Myers (2004), 
Special Issue on Action Research in Information Systems: 
Making IS Research Relevant to Practice 
- Foreword, MIS Quarterly, 28 (3), pp. 329
-335 Baskerville, R.
 and 
M.D. Myers (2009), Fashion Waves in Information Systems Research and 
Practice, MIS Quarterly
, 33 (4), pp. 647
-662 Basole, R.C. (2009), Visualization of Interfirm Relations in a Converging Mobile Ecosystem, Journal 
of Information Technology, 24 (2), pp. 144
-159 Bateson, G. (2000): Steps to an Ecology of Mind. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 Belanger, F., R.W. Collins
 and 
P.H. Cheney (2001), Technology Requirements and Work Group 
Communication for Telecommuters, Information Systems Research, 12 (2), pp. 155
-176  S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
    Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
                     13   Benbasat, I.
 and 
R. Zmud (2003): The Identity Crisis within the IS Discipline: Def
ining and 
Communicating the Discipline's Core Properties. MIS Quarterly, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 183
-194. 
 Benbasat, I.
 and 
R.W. Zmud (1999), Empirical Research in Information Systems: The Practice of 
Relevance, MIS Quarterly, 23 (1), pp. 3
-16 Birkinshaw, J.
 and C. Gibson (2004): Building Ambidexterity Into an Organization. Sloan 
Management Review, vol. 45, no. 4, pp. 47
-55. 
 Bittman, M., J. E. Brown,
 and 
J. Wajcman (2009): The Mobile Phone, Perpetual Contact and Time 
Pressure. Work, Employment
 and 
Society, vol
. 23, no. 4, pp. 673
-691. 
 Brigham, M.
 and 
L.D. Introna (2006), Hospitality, Improvisation and Gestell: A Phenomenology of 
Mobile Information, Journal of Information Technology, 21 (3), pp. 140
-153 Brynjolfsson and McAfee (2014): The Second Machine Age: Wo
rk, Progress, and Prosperity in a 
Time of Brilliant Technologies. WW Norton
 and 
Company. 
 Carlstein, T. (1983): Time Resources, Society and Ecology. London: George Allen
 and 
Unwin. 
 Chatman, J. A.
 and 
F. J. Flynn (2005): Full
-Cycle Micro
-Organizational Beh
avior Research. 
Organization Science, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 434
-447. 
 Chen, W.
 and 
R. Hirschheim (2004), A Paradigmatic and Methodological Examination of Information 
Systems Research from 1991 to 2001, Information Systems Journal, 14 (3), pp. 197
-235 Chiasson, M. W.
 and 
Davidson, E. (2004) Pushing the Contextual Envelope: Developing and 
Diffusing IS Theory for Health Information systems Research. Information and Organization, 
14(3): 155
-188. Chudoba, K.M., E. Wynn, M. Lu
 and 
M.B. Watson
-Manheim (2005),
 How Virtual are we? Measuring 
Virtuality and Understanding its Impact in a Global Organization, Information Systems Journal, 15 
(3), pp. 279
-306 Dahlbom, B. (1996): The New Informatics. Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, vol. Vol. 8, 
no. 2, pp. 
29-47. 
 Dale, K.
 and 
G. Burrell (2008): The Spaces of Organisation
 and 
the Organisation of Space: Power, 
Identity
 and 
Materiality at Work. Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Farhoomand, A.
 and 
D.H. Drury (1999), A Historiographical Examination of Inform
ation Systems, 
Communications of the AIS, 1 (1), pp. 1
-27 Felstead, A.
 and 
N. Jewson (1999): Global Trends in Flexible Labour. Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Felstead, A.
 and 
N. Jewson (2000): In Work, At Home: Towards an Understanding of Homeworking. 
London: Routle
dge. 
 Felstead, A., N. Jewson,
 and 
S. Walters (2005): Changing Places of Work. London: Palgrave 
Macmillan. 
 Ferneley, E.
 and 
B. Light (2008), Unpacking User Relations in an Emerging Ubiquitous Computing 
Environment: Introducing the Bystander, Journal of In
formation Technology, 23 (3), pp. 163
-175 Galliers, R.D. (2003), Change as Crisis or Growth? Toward a Trans
-Disciplinary View of Information 
Systems as a Field of Study: A Response to Benbasat and ZmudÕs Call for Returning to the IT 
Artifact, Journal of th
e AIS, 4 (6), pp. 337
-351 Galliers, R.D.
 and 
M. Meadows (2003), A Discipline Divided: Globalization and Parochialism in 
Information Systems Research, Communications of the AIS, 11 (1), pp. 108
-117 Gallivan, M.J.
 and 
R. Benbunan
-Finch (2007), Analyzing IS R
esearch Productivity: An Inclusive 
Approach to Global IS Scholarship, 
European Journal of Information Systems, 16 (1), pp. 36
-53 Gibbons, M. (1994): The New Production of Knowledge: The Dynamics of Science and Research in 
Contemporary Societies. London; Th
ousand Oaks, Calif.: SAGE Publications. 
 Gill, G. (2009): Fashion Waves Versus Informing: Response to Baskerville and Myers. MIS 
Quarterly, vol. 33, no. 4, pp. 667
-671. 
 Gill, G.
 and 
A. Bhattacherjee (2009), Whom Are We Informing? Issues and Recommendation
s for 
MIS Research from an Informing Sciences Perspective, MIS Quarterly, 33 (2), pp. 217
-235 Gregory, D.
 and 
J. Urry, ed. (1985): Social Relations and Spatial Structures. Palgrave Macmillan. 
  S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
    Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
                     14   Griffith, T.L., J.E. Sawyer
 and 
M.A. Neale (2003), 
Virtualness 
and Knowledge in Teams: Managing 
the Love Triangle of Organizations, Individuals, and Information Technology, 
MIS Quarterly, 27 
(2), pp. 265
-287 Hambrick, D. C. (2007): The Field of ManagementÕs Devotion to Theory: Too Much of a Good 
Thing? Academy of Mana
gement Journal, vol. 50, no. 6, pp. 1346
-1352. 
 Hansmann, U., L. Merk, M. S. Nicklous,
 and 
T. Stober (2003): Pervasive Computing. Berlin: 
Springer. 
 Herzhoff, J. (2009), The ICT Convergence Discourse in the Information Systems Literature 
- A Second
-Order O
bservation, in S. Newell, E.A. Whitley, N. Pouloudi, J. Wareham
 and 
L. 
Mathiassen (eds.), 17th European Conference on Information Systems (Verona, Italy), pp. 2639
-2650 Hirschheim, R.
 and 
H.K. Klein (2003), Crisis in the IS Field? A Critical Reflection on 
the State of the 
Discipline, Journal of the AIS, 4 (5), pp. 237
-293 Iscan , O.F.
 and 
A. Naktiyok (2005), Attitudes Towards Telecommuting: The Turkish Case, Journal of 
Information Technology, 20 (1), pp. 52
-63 Jarvenpaa, S.L.
 and 
C. Loebbecke
 (2009), Strategic Management Implications of a Consumer Value 
Perspective on Mobile TV, Journal of Information Technology, 24 (2), pp. 202
-212 Jarvenpaa, S.L.
 and 
K.R. Lang (2005), Managing the Paradoxes of Mobile Technology, Information 
Systems Managemen
t, 22 (4), pp. 7
Ð23 Kakihara, M.
 and 
S¿rensen, C. (2002) Mobility: An extended perspective. In 35th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, ed. Sprague, H. R. J. IEEE.
 Katos, V.
 and 
C. Adams (2005), Modelling Corporate Wireless Security and Pri
vacy, Journal of 
Strategic Information Systems, 14 (3), pp. 307
-321  Katz, J. E.
 and 
M. Aakhus, ed. (2002): Perpetual Contact. Cambridge University Press.. 
 Keen, P.G.W. (1980), MIS Research: Reference Disciplines and a Cumulative Tradition, in E. 
McLean (
ed.), Proceedings of the First International Conference on Information Systems 
(Philadelphia, US), pp. 9
-18 Kietzmann, J. (2008), Interactive Innovation of Technology for Mobile Work, European Journal of 
Information Systems, 17 (3), pp. 305
-320 Kim, B.
 and 
I. Han (2009), What Drives the Adoption of Mobile Data Services? An Approach from a 
Value Perspective, Journal of Information Technology, 24 (1), pp. 35
-45 King, J. L.
 and 
K. Lyytinen (2004): Reach and Grasp. MIS Quarterly, vol. 28, no. 4, pp. 539
-551.  King, J. L.
 and 
K. Lyytinen, ed. (2006): Information Systems: The State of the Field. Chichester: John 
Wiley
 and 
Sons. 
 Kjeldskov, J.
 and 
C. Graham (2003): A Review of Mobile HCI Research Methods. In Proceedings of 
Mobile HCI 2003, Udine, Italy. ACM. 
 Klecun
-Dabrowska, E.
 and 
T. Cornford (2001), Telehealth Acquires Meanings: Information and 
Communication Technologies within Health Policy, Information Systems Journal, 10 (1), pp. 41
-63 Klein, H.K.
 and 
F. Rowe (2008), Marshaling the Professional Experience
 of Doctoral Students: A 
Contribution to the Practical Relevance Debate, MIS Quarterly, 32 (4), pp. 675
-686 Klein, H.K.
 and 
R. Hirschheim (2008), The Structure of the IS Discipline Reconsidered: Implications 
and Reflections from a Community of Practice Per
spective, Information and Organization, 18 (4), 
pp. 280
-302 Kotlarsky, J.
 and 
I. Oshri (2005), Social Ties, Knowledge Sharing and Successful Collaboration in 
Globally Distributed System Development Projects, European Journal of Information Systems, 14 
(1),
 pp. 37
-48 Kourouthanassis, P. E.
 and 
G. M. Giaglis, ed. (2008): Pervasive Information Systems. Armonk, New 
York: M.E.Sharpe. 
 Krebs, A.M., B. Dorohonceanu
 and 
I. Marsic (2004), Supporting Collaboration in Heterogeneous 
Environments, Journal of Management 
Information Systems, 20 (4), pp. 199
-227  S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
    Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
                     15   Lee, A. S. (2010): Retrospect and Prospect: Information Systems Research in the Last and Next 25 
Years. Journal of Information technology, vol. 25. 
 Lee, A.S. (2004), Thinking about Social Theory and Philosophy for 
Information Systems, in J. 
Mingers
 and 
L. Willcocks (eds.), Social Theory and Philosophy for Information Systems, John 
Wiley
 and 
Sons Ltd, Chichester, UK, pp. 1
-26 Lee, A.S.
 and 
G.S. Hubona (2009), A Scientific Basis for Rigor in Information Systems Resear
ch, 
MIS Quarterly, 33 (2), pp. 237
-262  Lee, C.
-P. and 
J.P. Shim (2007), An Exploratory Study of Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) 
Adoption in the Healthcare Industry, European Journal of Information Systems, 16 (6), pp. 712
-724 Levina, N.
 and 
Vaast, E
. (2005) The emergence of boundary spanning competence in practice: 
Implications for implementation and use of information systems. MIS Quarterly, 29(2): 335
-363. Licoppe, C. (2004): Connected Presence: The Emergence of a New Repertoire for Managing Social
 Relationships in a Changing Communication Technoscape. Environment and Planning D: Society 
and Space, vol. 22, pp. 135
-156. 
 Ling, R. (2008), New Tech, New Ties: How Mobile Communication is Reshaping Social Cohesion, 
MIT Press, Cambridge, US
 Lucas Jr., H.
C. and 
J.M. Goh (2009), Disruptive Technology: How Kodak Missed the Digital 
Photography Revolution, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 18 (1), pp. 46
-55 Lyytinen, K. (1999): Empirical research in information systems: On the relevance of practice in 
thinking of IS research. MIS Quarterly, vol. 23, no. 1, pp. 25
-28. 
 Lyytinen, K.
 and 
J.L. King (2004), Nothing At The Center? Academic Legitimacy in the Information 
Systems Field, Journal of the AIS, 5 (6), pp. 220
-246 Lyytinen, K.
 and 
Y. Yoo (2002a), Issu
es and Challenges in Ubiquitous Computing, Communications 
of the ACM, 45 (12), pp. 63
-65 Lyytinen, K.
 and 
Y. Yoo (2002b): The Next Wave of Nomadic Computing: A Research Agenda for 
Information Systems Research. Information Systems Research, vol. 13, no. 4, 
pp. 377
-388. 
 Lyytinen, K., R. Baskerville, J. Iivari,
 and 
D. Te'eni (2007): Why the Old World Cannot Publish? 
Overcoming Challenges in Publishing High
-Impact IS Research. European Journal of Information 
Systems, vol. 16, no. 4, pp. 317
-326. 
 Mann, S.
 and 
H. Niedzviecki (2002): Cyborg: Digital Destiny and Human Possibility in the Age of the 
Wearable Computer. Doubleday Canada. 
 Manning, P. K. (2003): Policing Contingencies. Chicago: University of Chicago.
 Manning, P. K. (2008): The Technology of Policing: C
rime Mapping, Information Technology, and 
the Rationality of Crime Control New York: New York University Press. 
 March, S., A. Hevner
 and 
S. Ram (2000), Research Commentary: An Agenda for Information 
Technology Research in Heterogeneous and Distributed Env
ironments, Information Systems 
Research, 11 (4), pp. 327
-341 Mathiassen, L., Chiasson, M.,
 and 
Germonprez, M. (2012) Style Composition in Action Research 
Publication. MIS Quarterly, 36(2): 347
-363.  Mbarika, V.W.A., P. Datta, T.A. Byrd
 and 
C. Okoli (2005),
 The Neglected Continent of IS Research: 
A Research Agenda for Sub
-Saharan Africa, Journal of the AIS, 6 (5), pp. 130
-170 Meso, P., P. Musa
 and 
V. Mbarika
 (2005), Towards a Model of Consumer Use of Mobile Information 
and Communication Technology in LDCs: The Case of Sub
-Saharan Africa, Information Systems 
Journal, 15 (2), pp. 119
-146  Mingers, J. (2001), Combining IS Research Methods: Towards a Pluralist Me
thodology, Information 
Systems Research, 12 (3), pp. 240
-259 Mingers, J. (2004), Real
-izing Information Systems: Critical Realism as an Underpinning Philosophy 
for Information Systems, Information and Organization, 14 (2), pp. 87
-103 Mintzberg, H. (2005): 
Managers Not MBAs: A Hard Look at the Soft Practice of Managing and 
Management Development. Berrett
-Koehler Publishers. 
  S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
    Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
                     16   Newell, S., J. Swan,
 and 
M. Robertson (1998): A cross
-national comparison of the adoption of 
business process reengineering: fashion
-setting networks? Journal of Strategic Information 
Systems, vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 299
-317. 
 O'Reilly, C. A.
 and 
M. L. Tushman (2004): The Ambidextrous Organization. Harvard Business 
Review, pp. 74
-81. 
 Orlikowski, W. (2007): Sociomaterial Practices: Exploring T
echnology at Work. Organization 
Studies, vol. 28, no. 09, pp. 1435
-1448. 
 Orlikowski, W.J.
 and 
C.S. Iacono (2001), Research Commentary: Desperately Seeking the IT in IT 
Research 
- A Call to Theorizing the IT Artifact, Information Systems Research, 12 (2), 
pp. 121
-134 Orlikowski, W.J.
 and 
J.J. Baroudi (1991), Studying Information Technology in Organizations: 
Research Approaches and Assumptions, Information Systems Research, 2 (1), pp. 1
-28 Orlikowski, W.J.
 and 
S.R. Barley (2001), Technology and Institutions:
 What Can Research on 
Information Technology and Research on Organizations Learn from Each Other?, MIS Quarterly, 
25 (2), pp. 145
-165 Mathiassen, L.
 and 
Pries
-Heje, J. (2006) Business agility and diffusion of information technology. 
European Journal of Inf
ormation Systems, 15(2): 116
-119. Raub, S.
 and 
C.-C. ling (2001), The Knowledge Management Tussle 
- Speech Communities and 
Rhetorical Strategies in the Development of Knowledge Management, Journal of Information 
Technology, 16 (2), pp. 113
-130  Sarker, S
. and 
S. Sahay (2004), Implications of Space and Time for Distributed Work: An Interpretive 
Study of US
-Norwegian Systems Development Teams, European Journal of Information Systems, 
13 (1), pp. 3
-20 Sawyer, S., J.P. Allen
 and 
H. Lee (2003), Broadband and 
Mobile Opportunities: A Socio
-Technical 
Perspective, Journal of Information Technology, 18 (2), pp. 121
-136 Schultze, U.
 and 
D.E. Leidner (2002), Studying Knowledge Management in Information Systems 
Research: Discourses and Theoretical Assumptions, MIS Qua
rterly, 26 (3), pp. 213
-242 Schweitzer, L.
 and 
L. Duxbury (2010), Conceptualizing and Measuring the Virtuality of Teams, 
Information Systems Journal, 20 (3), pp. 267
-295 Sein, M. K., O. Henfridsson, S. Purao, M. Rossi,
 and 
R. Lindgren (2011): Action Design
 Research. 
MIS Quarterly, vol. 35, no. 1, pp. 37
-56. 
 Sheng, H., F.F.
-H. Nah
 and 
K. Siau (2005), Strategic Implications of Mobile Technology: A Case 
Study Using Value
-Focused Thinking, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 14 (3), pp. 269
-290 Sidorova,
 A., N. Evangelopoulos, J.S. Valacich
 and 
T. Ramakrishnan (2008), Uncovering The 
Intellectual Core of the Information Systems Discipline, MIS Quarterly, 32 (3), pp. 467
-482 S¿rensen, C. (2003), Scandinavian Versus UK Research: The Importance of Institution
al Context, 
Scandinavian Journal of Information Systems, 15 (1), pp. 95
-99 S¿rensen, C. (2010a), Cultivating Interaction Ubiquity at Work, The Information Society, 26 (4), pp. 
276-287 S¿rensen, C. (2010b), Mobilities
 and 
Mobile Technologies: Conceptual Cle
arings in Search of 
Clarity?, in A. D'Andrea (ed.), 2nd International Seminar on Methodologies for Mobilities 
Research: Challenges and Innovations (Limerick, Ireland)
 S¿rensen, C. (2011): Enterprise Mobility: Tiny Technology with Global Impact on Work. Pal
grave. 
http://enterprisemobilitybook.com
 S¿rensen, C. (2012), Mobile IT, in R.D. Galliers
 and 
W. Currie (eds.), The Oxford Handbook of 
Management Information Systems: Critical Perspectives and New Directions, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, UK
 S¿rensen, C
. and 
D. Gibson (2008), The Professional's Everyday Struggle to Ubiquitize Computers, in 
K.L. Kraemer
 and 
M.S. Elliott (eds.), Computerization Movements and Technology Diffusion: 
From Mainframes to Ubiquitous Computing, Information Today, Medford, US, pp. 
455-479  S¿rensen
 and Landau / WeÕve Got 99 ProblemsÉ
    Twenty Second European Conference on Information Systems, Tel Aviv 2014
                     17   S¿rensen, C.
 and 
D. Pica (2005), Tales from the Police: Mobile Technologies and Contexts of Work, 
Information and Organization, 15 (3), pp. 125
-149 Stokes, D. E. (1997): Pasteur's quadrant: Basic science and technological innovation. Brookings 
Inst
itution Press.. 
 Sturdy, A., Handley, K., Clark, T.,
 and 
Fincham, R. (2009) Management Consultancy: Boundaries and 
Knowledge in Action. Oxford University Press. 
  Tallon, P. P.
 and 
A. Pinsonneault (2011): Competing perspectives on the link between strategi
c information technology alignment and organizational agility: Insights from a mediation model. 
MIS Quarterly, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 463
-484. 
 Tilson, D., Lyytinen, K.,
 and 
S¿rensen, C. (2010) Digital Infrastructures: The Missing IS Research 
Agenda. 
Information Systems Research, 21(5): 748
Ð759.  Tushman, M. L.
 and 
C. A. O'Reilly III (2007): Research and Relevance: Implications of Pasteur's 
Quadrant for Doctoral Programs and Faculty Development. Academy of Management Journal, vol. 
50, no. 4, pp. 769
-774. 
 Urry, J. (2000): Mobile Sociology. British Journal of Sociology, vol. 51, no. 1, pp. 185
-203. 
 Urry, J. (2007), Mobilities, Polity, Cambridge, UK
 Van De Ven, A. H. (2007): Engaged Scholarship: A Guide for Organizational and Social Research. 
New York: O
xford University Press. 
 Venkatesh, V.
 and 
V. Ramesh, Web and Wireless Site Usability: Understanding Differences and 
Modeling Use, MIS Quarterly, 30 (1), pp. 181
-206 Wajcman, J., M. Bittman,
 and 
J. E. Brown (2008): Families without Borders: Mobile Phones, 
Connectedness and Work
-Home Divisions. Sociology, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 635
Ð652. 
 Wales, R.C., V.L. Shalin
 and 
D.S. Bass (2007), Requesting Distant Robotic Action: An Ontology for 
Naming and Action Identification for Planning on the Mars Exploration Rover Mi
ssion, Journal of 
the AIS, 8 (2), pp. 75
-104 Wareham, J.D., X. Busquets
 and 
D. Austin (2009), Creative, Convergent, and Social: Prospects for 
Mobile Computing, Journal of Information Technology, 24 (2), pp. 139
-143 Weiser, M. (1991), The Computer for the T
wenty
-First Century, Scientific American, 265 (3), pp. 94
-104 Willcocks, L.
 and 
A.S. Lee (2008), Series Introduction: Major Currents in the Information Systems 
Field, in L. Willcocks,
 and 
A.S. Lee (eds.), Major Currents in the Information Systems Field, Sa
ge 
Publications, London, UK, pp. xxix
-xxxv Willcocks, L.
 and 
E.A. Whitley (2009), Developing the Information and Knowledge Agenda in 
Information Systems: Insights From Philosophy, The Information Society, 25 (3), pp. 190
-197  Willcocks, L., E.A. Whitley
 and C. Avgerou (2008), The Ranking of Top IS Journals: A Perspective 
from the London School of Economics, European Journal of Information Systems, 17 (2), pp. 163
Ð168 Williams, P. 
(2002) The Competent Boundary Spanner. Public Administration, 80(1): 103.
 Yoo,
 Y. (2010), Computing in Everyday Life: A Call for Research on Experiential Computing, MIS 
Quarterly, 34 (2), pp. 213
-231 Yoo, Y. (2013
) The Table Has Turned: How can IS field contribute to the technology and innovation 
management? Journal of the AIS,
 14, pp. 227
-236. http://www.youngjinyoo.com/the
-table
-has
-turned.pdf
 Yoo, Y., K. Lyytinen
 and 
H. Yang (2005), The Role of Standards in Innovation and Diffusion of 
Broadband Mobile Services: The Case of South Korea, Journal of Strategic Information Systems, 
14 (3), pp. 323
-353 