 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)University of Mnster - ERCIS, Mnster, NRW, GermanyECIS 2013 Research inProgress. IARIS 
 SUPPORTING ENTERPRISE TRANSFORMATION 
USING AN ITERATIVE ISD METHOD 
Steinhorst, Matthias, University of Münster - ERCIS, Leonardo Campus 3, 48149 Münster, 
Germany, matthias.steinhorst@ercis.uni-muenster.de  
Abstract  
Enterprise architecture framewor
ks can be used to guide the development process of an information 
system (IS). While these frameworks cover a comprehensive approach to IS development, most of them 
essentially proclaim a linear, stepwise development process. In the field of computer science, such 
linear, waterfall-based approaches have been replaced by so-called agile methods proclaiming an 
iterative development process. As these approaches are naturally only concerned with software 
engineering, they do not consider the business processes the software is supposed to support or the 
organizational structures the software is supposed to be employed in. The purpose of this paper is to 



 in joining the comprehensive approach to IS development of common EA frameworks 
with the iterative software engineering paradigm. The paper contributes to the research on enterprise 

transformation in proposing a method tailored to support IS development in a rapidly changing 
environment. The paper furthermore reports on an on-going IS development project providing insights 

into how iARIS can be applied. The paper thus contributes to the research on enterprise 
transformation in suggesting how an IS development method can be used in practice. 
Keywords: Agile Information Systems Development, iARIS, compliance management, pattern 
matching. 
  1 The need for iterative IS development methods
 Today, modern enterprises are subject to continuous transformations. New technologies, new markets, 
new customer requirements, and new regulations require enterprises to constantly change to meet the 
challenges of a rapidly fluctuating environment. These dynamics require the information systems 
supporting the business functions of an enterprise to change accordingly. Developing an information 
system is a time-consuming, error-prone, and high-risk activity (Lyytinen and Robey, 1999). The need 
to constantly adapt to changing environments additionally impedes the development process of an IS. 

Supplementary requirements need to be considered at any stage in the development process and errors 

 Recently, enterprise architecture (EA) managemen

development of the enterprise as a whole and the development of (
) 


means to better align business and its supporting IT systems (Aier, Riege, and Winter, 2008, p. 299 or 
Saat et al., 2011). To do so, enterprise architecture frameworks provide a model based description of 

al structure, etc. Popular frameworks 
include ARIS (Scheer, 2002), Zachman (Zachman, 1987), and many others. Other than for enterprise 

modelling, some 
EA frameworks can also be used to structure and guide the development process of 
an information system (Scheer, 2002, p. 5). Such frameworks typically propose a set of views and 
layers to structure the development process of an 
IS. Each view describes a particular aspect of the 
IS like the business processes it is supposed to support or the data it needs to manage. Each layer contains 

conceptual models designed to incrementally translate the corporate reality the 
IS is supposed to 
capture into a working implementation. The idea of many of these frameworks is that each layer of 
each view is run through sequentially to develop a comprehensive model of the 
IS that is then 
implemented. The underlying definition of an information system is that of a socio-technical system 

 communications technology (i.e., technical task bearers), and organizational concepts (i.e., functions, 


, 2011, p. 8).  
While the frameworks that are based on this definition cover a comprehensive approach to 
IS development, most of them essentially proclaim a linear, stepwise development process. Consider the 

example of ARIS that divides the development process into three phases (or layers). Each phase is 
executed once and provides an output that is further worked on in the following phase. In doing so, 
business requirements are incrementally transformed into a working implementation. ARIS and 
similar frameworks can thus be considered the IS equivalent to the waterfall approach of software 
engineering (Plümicke, 2004).  
The waterfall approach, however, suffers from significant drawbacks. It assumes that all software 
requirements are a priori known and can thus be included in the conceptual specification. This, 
however, is seldom the case, as customer requirements constantly change (Abrahamsson et al., 2002
, p. 71). To consider these requirements, an existing prototype has to be modified or altogether 
developed anew. This causes significant extra work and the application of additional resources. 

Furthermore, developers might only realize during implementation that particular aspects of the 
conceptual specification cannot be realized as envisioned. If noticed too late, this again causes 
significant rework. Against the backdrop of enterprise transformation, waterfall-based approaches are 
consequently not suitable to handle the complexity of an IS development project. 
In the domain of computer science, waterfall-based software development methods have since been 
replaced by so-called agile methods proclaiming an iterative development process that starts with a 
small subset of requirements that are implemented first (e.g. DSDM or ASD (Abrahamsson et al., 
2002)). The resulting prototype is then iteratively augmented to include the remaining requirements. In 
doing so, additional customer requirements can flexibly be included at any stage and errors in the 
 
the domain of computer science, these methods are naturally only concerned with software 
engineering. Consequently, they do not consider the business processes the software is supposed to 
support or the organizational structures the software is supposed to be employed in. Hence, these 

methods are only concerned with software development, not 
information systems 
development.  
This paper introduces an iterative 
IS development method called iARIS. It is based on ARIS and 

est of 


with the iterative software engineering paradigm. The paper contributes to the research on enterprise 

transformation in proposing a method tailored to support IS development in a rapidly changing 
environment. The paper furthermore reports on an on-going IS development project providing insights 
into how iARIS can be applied. The paper contributes to the research on enterprise transformation in 
suggesting how an IS development method can be used in practice (Nafiz et al., 2004).  
Following a design science research process (Peffers et al., 2004) the remainder of this paper is 
structured as follows. In Section 2, related work is presented to frame the objectives of our solution. 
To design and develop the solution, the iARIS method is introduced in Section 3 by explaining its 
underlying framework, its principles, and its basic modelling techniques. To demonstrate and 
preliminarily evaluate the solution, Section 4 provides insights into an on-going iARIS-based IS 
development project that is concerned with the design and construction of a process compliance 

management system. The paper closes with a summary and an outlook to future research. 
2 Related w
ork In the domain of information systems, Plömicke (2004) proposes the ARIS Unified Process, a 
combination of the original ARIS framework and the Rational Unified Process (Abrahamsson et al., 
2002). Plömicke adopts the three layers of the ARIS framework and combines them with the five 
development phases known from RUP. In each phase all layers are run through with varying intensity. 
In the construction phase for instance the focus is on implementing the solution, whereas in the early 
inception phase the focus is on defining requirements. In doing so, the strictly linear development 
method of ARIS is mitigated towards a more iterative approach. As opposed to that, in iARIS all 
layers are of equal importance in all views and must be run through in one development iteration. 

Keller and Teufel (1998) propose an iterative approach to customizing and deploying standard ERP 
software. The approach is also based on ARIS. Its focus is not on developing an information system, 
but configuring an existing (commercial) solution. 
As opposed to linear frameworks like ARIS or Zachman, TOGAF (Open Group, 2013) proclaims an 
iterative development process for enterprise architectures. This process contains a set of eight phases 
during which four architectures are iteratively developed. Conceptually, TOGAF is similar to ARIS in 
the sense that what TOGAF refers to as a phase is called a layer in ARIS. What TOGAF refers to as an 
architecture is called a view in ARIS. However, we chose to base our method on ARIS, because ARIS 
was explicitly designed to be applicable for IS development (Scheer, 2002, p. 5), whereas TOGAF is 
designed to primarily be an EA framework. Although TOGAF could probably be augmented 

accordingly as well, we chose ARIS as the basis of our work because of its explicit purpose of being 
both an EA framework and an IS development method. In addition, we intend iARIS to be applicable 
in the context of 
enterprise transformation
, in which quick development iterations are necessary to 
respond to rapidly changing environments. TOGAF has been criticized for being overly complex 

(Keller, 2012), which might impede its applicability in the context of enterprise transformation. 
In the domain of computer science, many software development methods have been proposed 
proclaiming an iterative approach to software engineering. Among the most prominent are the 
Dynamic Systems Development Method (DSDM) and Adaptive Software Development (ASD) 
(Abrahamsson et al., 2002) to name only a few. As mentioned above, these methods focus on 
 developing software. The focus of developing an information system is wider than that encompassing 
the definition of organizational structures and business processes the software is supposed to support. 
The purpose of the paper at hand is thus to propose and apply an iterative IS development method. 
3 iARIS
 3.1 Framework 
As specified in the original ARIS method, the iARIS framework disaggregates the development 
process into views and thereto orthogonal layers. It contains the four views 


and 
as well as the three layers 


of the original ARIS framework (cf. 
Figure 1
). Each view 
captures a subsystem of the entire information system. In each view, a particular solution is developed 
(cf. the icons within the view circles in Figure 1; the icons in the overall circle represent the entire 
information system). The data view produces a database capturing all required data. The organization 
view produces organizational structures required for running the IS. The function view produces the 
application software capturing the functional requirements of the IS. The process view integrates all 
other views by defining processes that describe the sequence, in which organizational units execute 
functions that produce data (Scheer, 2002, p. 36)
. The process view thus defines dependencies 
between all other model views. Particular dependencies have to be defined for each individual 
information system development project.  
 Figure 1: The iARIS framework 
Each layer describes the respective view on a particular level of abstraction starting from a purely 
conceptual requirements definition that is incrementally translated to a working implementation. The 
implementation layer of a given view also includes testing the developed prototype which triggers an 
additional development iteration for that view. This is necessary, as during implementation and testing 
additional requirements and errors in the design specification might turn up that were not conceived of 

before. As specified below, changes to a particular view need to be reflected with respect to their 
impact on other views. Each inner-view iteration therefore triggers additional iterations in all other 
views represented by the circular arrows in the framework.  
 3.2 Principles 
The basic principles of iARIS guide the design and development process of an 
IS. Many of the iARIS 
principles are similar to those of other agile software development methods (Abrahamsson et al., 
2002). The iARIS principles furthermore cover all views and layers of the original ARIS framework 
thus proclaiming a more comprehensive view on IS development than agile software engineering 
methods. The principles contain a set of roles that need to be represented in an IS development team. 

These roles are the software developer, the business process analyst, the organizational designer, and 
the data analyst. The iARIS principles are as follows. Note that the order of the principles is not 
intended to be an assessment of their relative importance. All principles are equally important.  
Collaborate (P1)
: Software developers need to work together with business process analysts as well as 
organizational designers and data analysts. The team structure needs to reflect all views of the ARIS 
architecture, i.e. all roles defined by iARIS need to be represented in the development team to 
comprehensively cover all aspects of developing an information system.  
Develop iteratively (P2)
: An information system is developed iteratively. All layers of a given view 
are run through iteratively. In each iteration, the focus is on developing a working prototype that can 
be tested and improved upon early. Feedback is required from all team members to consider all 
aspects of the development process.  
Think small, then get bigger (P3)
: A set of core features has to be defined that constitute the main 
functionality of the IS. This set of core features is implemented and tested early. It is then 
incrementally augmented to include additional features that should, respectively could be included in 
the information system.  
Think holistically (P4)
: In one development iteration all views of the framework need to be 
considered. Changes to one view need to be reflected in terms of the resulting changes to all other 
views, i.e. changes to one view trigger a development iteration in all other views.  
Communicate (P5)
: Design decisions need to be communicated early and clearly. Communication 
techniques have to be employed that are understood by all team members. Workshop sessions need to 
be conducted to communicate progress on the development project.  
Plan ahead (P6)
: To deliver results on time, a development iteration must have a clearly defined 
timeframe. Project plans must be communicated early to raise awareness of the next milestones. 
 3.3 Techniques 
In many EA frameworks, specific modelling techniques are prescribed in each layer of each view. 
iARIS on the other hand does not prescribe particular techniques. Rather, the use of existing (well 
established) modelling and implementation techniques is recommended. The development team is 
required to define the set of modelling and implementation languages that best fit the intended purpose 
of the particular IS development project. We follow the argument of Scheer (2002, p. 4) in proposing a 
language independent IS development method. Scheer argues that language independence guaranties 
the method to be applicable for any development purpose (2002, p. 4.). Particularly in the context of 
enterprise transformation, the IS development method has to assure a high level of flexibility in order 

to allow the development team to adapt to changing requirements. In our opinion, this cannot be 
achieved by prescribing a fixed set of modelling and implementation languages. Instead, the 
development team has to choose respective techniques given the particular development purpose. In 
terms of conceptual modelling languages (e.g., ER models for the data view or BPMN for the process 
view), it is furthermore advisable to configure existing languages to meet the intended purpose. This 

can achieved by adding new or deleting obsolete language constructs. To do so, meta-modelling tools 
having been numerously proposed in the literature need to be used. 
 4 Application of iARIS
 In cooperation with a German IT service provider we are currently developing a design-time 
compliance management system (CMS) concerned with detecting compliance violations in process 
models. Such violations translate to particular patterns that need to be found in the overall model 
graph (Bräuer et al., 2013)
. We are implementing a pattern matching approach as a plugin for a meta-
modelling tool that was available from a previous research project. This tool in combination with the 

pattern matching approach comprises the CMS. Compliance management requires an enterprise to 

constantly transform its business processes to comply with changing laws and regulations. Business 
processes that are not compliant can potentially be very costly for the enterprise. To develop a CMS, it 
is therefore necessary to apply a development method 
like iARIS that is designed to be applicable in 
this context of enterprise transformation and allows for quickly implementing a working prototype that 
is then iteratively augmented as new requirements arise. The core development team consisted of four 
people each holding all four iARIS roles (P1). Daily scrum meetings were hold to inform all team 
members of current developments and plan the next milestones (P5 and P6). The pattern matching 
approach and its application in the domain of compliance checking are published elsewhere (Bräuer et 
al., 2013
). The purpose of this section is to reflect on its development process against the backdrop of 
iARIS. We distinguish two development iterations and define prototypical solutions surrounding the 
introduction of such a CMS at the IT service provider (P2 and P3). We will elaborate on the effect of 
particular design decisions in one view on the design in all other views (P4). We will elaborate on the 
modelling and implementation techniques we used.  
4.1 First iteration 
In terms of 
functional
 requirements for the pattern  matching approach, it recognizes any conceptual 
model as a graph consisting of the set O of its objects (i.e. graph nodes) and the set R of its 
relationships (i.e. graph edges). The approach offers set-altering functions that take these two basic 
sets as input and perform particular operations on them. The approach allows for nesting these 
functions. The result of one function serves as input for the next, resulting in a tree-like pattern query, 
which can be run on a process model returning all model subgraphs that comply with it. To 

conceptually model these requirements we formally specified all functions using set theoretical 
formulas. The application logic was implemented using C# as a programming language, because the 
underlying meta-modelling tool is also implemented in this language. In terms of 
data
 requirements 
the query is parsed to a single string value that can be efficiently stored and accessed in a relational 

database. Hence, we avoid storing and accessing complex tree structures. An ER model captures these 

data requirements. The pattern query is transformed into a string using an open source parser 
generator. NHibernate is used to map pattern objects to a relational database. In terms of 
organizational
 requirements, an enterprise-wide role that we call a compliance manager needs to be 
created that consistently defines pattern queries for all compliance rules relevant to the organization. 
The compliance manager is responsible for unambiguously defining pattern queries. The compliance 

manager also needs to manually check all models containing pattern occurrences in order to determine 
if they indeed represent compliance violations. This role requires in-depth knowledge of the approach 
as well as of legal and process modelling issues. In terms of 
processes
, the use of the CMS induces a 
model analysis process that consists of the following iterative sequence of activities: model processes, 
identify relevant regulations for processes, represent regulations as pattern queries, run pattern queries 
on model base, analyse returned compliance violations, redesign processes and corresponding models. 
4.2 Second iteration 
A prototypical implementation of the pattern matching approach served to carve out additional 
functional
 requirements. In particular, some compliance rules require additional information (e.g. 
 comparison of labels in the 4-eye-principle (Bräuer et al., 2013)) to be included in the matching 
process. The approach was thus augmented such that some functions also take variables as input, 
which can be compared to one another. Such a comparison can be expressed in the form of variable 
equations. During a search run on a particular model all possible variable assignments and all pattern 

occurrences for which the equations hold are determined. A caching mechanism was included to speed 
up matching performance. In terms of 
data
 requirements, these additional features required changing 
the query parser to also include variables and variable equations. No changes need to be made to the 

CMS in terms of 
organizational
 requirements or supported business 
processes
. 
5 Summary and o
utlook
 This paper introduces an iterative information system development method taking into account not 
only software engineering related aspects but also organizational and process related issues. The IS 
development method is prototypically applied in the context of a compliance management system to 

demonstrate its applicability. Future research will focus on actually introducing this compliance 
management system to an IT service provider for the financial industry. 
References
 Abrahamsson, P., Salo, O., Ronkainen, J. (2002). Agile software development methods. Review and 
analysis. VTT Electronics. 
Aier, S.; Riege, C. and Winter, R. (2008). Enterprise Architecture 
 Literature Overview and Current 
Practices. In: Business & Information Systems Engineering 50(4), p. 292-304. 
Bräuer, S., Delfmann, P., Dietrich, H., Steinhorst, M. (2013). Using a Generic Model Query Approach 
to Allow for Process Model Compliance Checking 
 An Algorithmic Perspective. In: Proceedings 
of the 11th International Conference on Wirtschaftsinformatik. Leipzig, 2013. 
Keller, W. (2012). TOGAF 9.1 Quick Start Guide for IT Enterprise Architects. 
http://www.objectarchitects.biz/TOGAF9/TOGAF_9_1_Quickstart_%28V0_9%29.pdf. [Accessed: 
2013-03-14]. 
Keller, G.; Teufel, T. (1998): R/3 Process Oriented Implementation: Iterative Process Prototyping, 
Addison-Wesely. 
Lyytinen, K and Robey, D (1999). Learning failure in information systems development. Information 
Systems Journal 9(2), 85-101. 
Nafiz, M., Harmsen, F., van Slooten, K., Stegwee, R. (2004). An Agile Information Systems 
Development Method in Use. Turkish Journal of Electrical Engineering, 12(2), 127-138. 
Open Group (2013). TOGAF 9.1 http://pubs.opengroup.org/architecture/togaf9-doc/arch/index.html. 
[Accessed: 2013-03-14]. 
Österle, H., Becker, J., Frank, U., Hess, T., Karagiannis, D., Krcmar, H., Loss, P., Mertens, P., 
Oberweis, A., Sinz, E. (2010). Memorandum on design-oriented information systems research. 
European Journal of Information Systems, 20 (1), 7-10. 

s on Enterprise Engineering. In Proceedings 
of the 15th European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS 2007), p. 1965, St. Gallen. 
Peffers, K., Tuunanen, T., Rothenberger, M., Chatterjee, S. (2008). A design science research 
methodology for information systems research. Journal of MIS, 24(3), 45
77. 
Plümicke, M (2004). ARIS meets RUP. The ARIS Unified Information System Development Process. 
In: Proceedings of the 2004 Workshop on Business Process Management with EPC
s. Saat, J., Winter, R., Franke, U., Lagertröm, R., Ekstedt, M. (2011). Analysis of IT/Business Alignment 
Situations as a Precondition for the Design and Engineering of Situated IT/Business Alignment 
Solutions. In Proceedings of the 44th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, USA. 
Scheer, A.-W. (2002): ARIS 
 Vom Geschäftsprozess zum Anwendungssystem. Springer, Berlin. 
Zachman, J.A. (1987): A Framework for Information Systems Architecture. In: IBM Systems Journal, 
6 (3), 277-321. 
