 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)University of Cape TownUniversity of Cape TownECIS 2012Proceedings. TOWARDS AN UNDERSTANDING OF THE CONTEXTUAL 
INFLUENCES ON DISTRIBUTED AGILE SOFTWARE 
DEVELOPMENT: A THEORY OF PRACTICE PERSPECTIVE 
Tanner, Maureen, University of Cape Town, South Africa, mc.tanner@uct.ac.za
 Chigona, Wallace, University of Cape Town, South Africa, Wallace.Chigona@uc
t.ac.za
 Abstract 

As the number of organisations involved in agile software development 
in the Global Software 
Development context is rising, there is a need for comprehensive 
research on distributed agile practices. 
Numerous papers have been published prescribing how distributed agile should 
be employed but do not 
provide enough information on the context of use. However, the successf
ul use of a methodology depends 
on a broader and more tacit understanding of the usage context and it is inapp
ropriate to assume that 
practitioners can merely apply prescribed sets of agile best p
ractices and expect them to succeed. As 
such, this study proposes another perspective on agile software developm
ent by exploring the underlying 
forces shaping agile practices. Instead of merely prescribing se
ts of best practices, the reasons why 
distributed agile practices (as embodied by the Scrum methodology) are 
adapted and followed were 
investigated. By appreciating the various contextual factors shaping most of
 their decisions pertaining to 
how agile practices are adapted and followed, it is hoped that practition
ers would make more informed 
decisions which would meet the needs of most stakeholders. 

1. Introduction 

Software development practices are constantly evolving and Globa
l Software Development (GSD) is one 
of the growing trends. Another trend in the software industry is t
he adoption of agile software paradigms 
(Agile Alliance, 2001). As the number of organisations employing a
gile software development in GSD is 
rising (VersionOne, 2008), so is the need for comprehensive research on 
globally distributed agile 
practices. However, the body of knowledge on distributed agile s
oftware development appears to be 
mostly maintained by agile practitioners, who regularly produce whi
te papers and experience reports on 
how to optimise the distributed agile process (e.g. Cannizzo, Marci
onetti, & Moser, 2008). Studies have 
also been prescriptive, lacked rigour and failed to take the cont
ext of use into consideration. This study 
adopts a different perspective. In line with Introna and Whitle
y (1997), the study is founded on the basis 
that the successful use of a methodology as well as the use of 
sets of best practices depends on a broader 
and more tacit understanding of the usage context. Hence, the study a
ddresses this research question: 
Why are particular distributed agile practices (as embodied 
by the Scrum methodology) adapted and 
followed? This will be realised by investigating the context of
 use. Through the lens of Theory of Practice 
(Bourdieu, 1990), two projects, executed between South Africa a
nd Brazil and South Africa and India, 
were investigated. A framework of concepts from the Theory of P
ractice (Bourdieu, 1990) has been 
proposed to guide the data analysis process. 

The study proposes another perspective on agile software devel
opment to practitioners by exploring the 
underlying forces shaping agile practices. By appreciating the v
arious contextual factors shaping most of 
their decisions pertaining to how agile practices are adapted a
nd followed, it is hoped that practitioners 
would make more informed decisions which would meet the needs of mos
t stakeholders. Practitioners 
would also be able to evaluate the applicability of agile practices
 they currently employ, given the context 
they engage in. This might improve the chances of project success. 
 2. Distributed Agile Software Development from the 
literature™s 
perspective 
As a means to understand the current state of literature on di
stributed agile software development, a total 
of 27 papers published between 1999 and 2010 were reviewed of which 12 we
re journal papers and 15 
were conference proceedings. The study seeks to investigate s
oftware development as a social 
phenomenon with some technical implications and to emphasise the proje
ct phenomena. Hence, literature 
adopting a more technical perspective on project management has not been c
onsidered. 
The publication list selected for review is not exhaustive. Howev
er, the list does cover a wide enough 
timeframe and range of sources, in order to provide a broad coverag
e of the various perspectives on 
distributed agile software development best practice.  Papers 
from these specific journals and conferences 
were chosen because they appeared to have a continuous debate on the topi
c of distributed agile. A 
general inductive approach (Thomas, 2003) was employed to facilita
te the analysis process. The themes 
identified specifically corresponded to studies where an understa
nding of the context was important but 
was ignored or not probed enough. The results of the analysis can be 
summarized into five themes; the 
use of technology, team management, managing the requirements, meeti
ngs, and applicability of various 
parts of agile methods. Each of the themes is described and problematized be
low.  
Based on the literature, it appears that numerous studies and experience reports
 have focused on 
the use of 
technology
 during distributed agile software development. It was suggest
ed that technologies should be 
used to mimic the face-to-face component of agile software
 development (e.g. Phalnikar, Deshpande & 
Joshi, 2008) and for automation purposes (e.g. Ramesh, Cao, & Baskervil
le, 2010). Even though the use 
of technology is clearly important in the context of distribut
ed agile software development, these studies 
do not shed light on the intricate ways in which these tools 
are adapted by the participants based on their 
personal goals and agendas or contextual requirements.  

Focus has also been placed on the need for effective 
team management.
 Researchers and practitioners 
have proposed numerous ways of tackling this issue. For instance, 
ways of enhancing collaboration 
between dispersed team members and clients have been proposed (e.g
. Moore & Barnett, 2004). Various 
possible team configuration strategies were investigated and pu
t forward as best practices (Sureshchandra 
& Shrinivasavadhani, 2008), and solutions were proposed on how to manag
e collaboration (e.g. Layman 
et al., 2006). The need of creating cultural awareness within the di
stributed team has also been 
highlighted (e.g. Fowler, 2003). However, team management is a so
cial endeavour, and calls for a careful 
understanding of the complex human interactions within a team while 
they engage in agile software 
development. Each team member might have different past experience
s, goals, interests and power level, 
which would impact on the manner in which the agile team collaborates
. So far, past studies have rarely 
taken these aspects into consideration while prescribing distributed ag
ile team management practices. 
Requirements management
 is an important aspect of agile software development and soft
ware 
development at large. Past studies and experience reports have
 thus extensively focused on this topic. 
Various techniques for the prioritisation of functionalities ha
ve been investigated and proposed (e.g. 
Paasivara et al., 2008) and the use of testing and test-scripts t
o better understand requirements have been 
prescribed (e.g. Fowler, 2003). However, as will be discussed later, 
software projects are complex in 
nature and are composed of social constructions which render the r
equirement elicitation issue quite 
complex. It is thus important to understand what the social forces dr
iving the requirements process are, 
and studies so far have not focused enough on this aspect. 

The need for 
meetings
 is a core feature of agile and Scrum in particular (e.g
. Beck, 1999). Studies 
proposed regular short status meetings to introduce transparency in
 the teams (e.g. Paasivaara & 
Lassenius, 2004). Various mechanisms to undertake iteration planning 
meetings tailored for remote sites 
have also been prescribed (e.g.  Paasivaara et al., 2008). Howeve
r, little is known about the strategies 
employed by the various stakeholders attending these meetings to a
chieve their goals and interests within 
 the agile project. These strategies might be key drivers 
to agile processes and should be further 
understood. 

Numerous studies and experience reports have attempted to determ
ine which aspects of various agile 
methods are 
applicable to the distributed setting
 (e.g. Holmstrom, et al., 2006). However, there are 
discrepancies among these studies on which agile practices f
ail and succeed in GSD. Hence, it is 
important to understand the underlying factors leading to the succ
essful implementation of practices in 
some circumstances, and why these practices might fail in others. 

3. The Nature of Software Projects 

A software project is usually initiated by a project manage
r and project workers on behalf of an owner, to 
deliver unique and valued outcomes within a certain period of time, a
s well as within scope, quality and 
cost (Sewchurran & Scott, 2009). Up until the 21st century, researc
hers have been considering project 
management as a technical and best practice discipline (Se
wchurran & Scott, 2009). However, in line 
with the Information Systems™ discipline perspective, software
 development is a social phenomenon with 
some technical implications. Thus, there is a need for a s
hift in emphasis from project management 
practices to the project phenomena. This paper argues that the sa
me paradigm shift is necessary for the 
study of agile software development; agile software development
 should be understood as a phenomenon 
firstly and secondly as methods and tools. 

Söderholm (2008) defines projects as being contextually dependent and c
ontinuously reliant on 
environmental relations.  In practice, people have to cope with var
ious sets of influences (Sewchurran, 
2009) which give rise to ad-hoc practices which are circumspect
ively enacted. Often these ad-hoc 
practices are later reported as best-practices in numerous i
ndustry reports and even in empirical studies. 
Work practices which emerged as informal end up being prescriptive
 (Thomas, 2006, p.92). Project work 
is, however, innovative by nature (Sewchurran, 2009) and often requir
es improvisation and intuition to 
cope with unexpected circumstances (Söderholm, 2008). The use of bes
t practices do not allow for the 
management of these unexpected circumstances and do not allow for inn
ovative actions, applying 
detachment strategies, setting up intensive meeting schedul
es, and negotiating project conditions 
(Söderholm, 2008). Whilst making these prescriptions, projects are 
perceived as goal-oriented systems of 
activities which are completed through rigid following of project 
life cycle steps in order to achieve 
progress. Since projects are social constructions (Linehan &
 Kavanagh, 2004), it is important to focus 
research efforts on understanding the as-lived experiences of pro
jects, based on the assumption that 
project processes are complex social processes (Cicmil et
 al., 2006). This study investigates software 
projects in line with what was mentioned by Cicmil et al. (2006)
. The focus is on gathering knowledge 
about the project, people, technologies and the means through which rel
ations between these actors are 
coordinated and controlled, as well as to what end. 

4. Theory of Practice 

This study employed the Theory of Practice (Bourdieu, 1990) as a t
heoretical framework to provide an 
explanation for why particular agile practices are adapted and fol
lowed in the GSD context. This 
framework was deemed appropriate for this study as it focuses
 on the relationships between people, social 
structures and the influences present in individual interact
ions, through empirically-informed sociological 
perspective (Rhynas, 2004). To answer the aforementioned research 
question, the following concepts 
from the Theory of Practice were deemed relevant: Field, whi
ch in turn can have Constraints and 
Demands; Habitus; Practice, which can pertain to Decision Making
 and Improvisation; Agents, who have 
Goals and Interests and Past Experiences, and Strategies. Bourdie
u™s Theory of Practice is complex and is 
composed of several more concepts.  
 Bourdieu defines a field as a social formation or arena in which 
agents (i.e. individuals who undertake 
certain practices) manoeuvre and struggle in pursuit of desirab
le resources (e.g. cultural goods, housing, 
intellectual distinction, social class prestige) (Bourdieu, 1992)
. These social formations can be 
institutions, rules, rituals, or conventions which allow for certai
n activities or discourse to occur within 
the field (Webb, Schirato, & Danaher, 2005).  

Habitus relates to the tendencies and pre-dispositions that shape 
people™s conduct, thoughts, feelings and 
judgments (Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992). Habitus is internalized in t
he minds and bodies of agents and 
further imposes socially accepted behavior (Hanks, 2005) by functioni
ng as ﬁthe generative basis of 
structured, objectively unified practicesﬂ (Bourdieu, 1990, Vii). I
n doing so, culture is established and 
common communication practices are shaped, which might include g
estures, manner of speech, and other 
verbal and non-verbal embodied actions (Hanks, 2005).   

Field and habitus are reciprocally constructive and interact under
 given concrete situations, thus resulting 
in the emergence of practices (Bourdieu & Wacquant, 1992). Howev
er, habitus orchestrates practice by 
both harmonising interests and by ensuring that all agents share and adhere to a co
mmon consensus on the 
meaning of the practices (Acciaioli, 1981). A field provides t
he frame of analysis for the study of any 
aspect of social life. Practice is produced because of the encoun
ter between habitus and its disposition, as 
well as the constraints and demands of the social field in whi
ch the actor is moving. Practices can be 
explained as recognizable patterned actions, in which both individuals
 and groups engage. Bourdieu 
(1973) describes this theory as having a dominant circular path. I
n this causal loop of generation and 
reproduction, actors internalise the structure of a field as habitus. Habit
us, in turn, generates practices, and 
practices serve to reproduce and reinforce the structure of the 
field. Practice has a purpose even though it 
is accomplished without conscious deliberation. Practices are gene
rated by dynamically combining past 
experience, present situation, and the anticipation of the futu
re consequences of these actions. Practices 
are not recognised by agents as explicit principles. Instead, t
hey are ﬁembodied corporeally in postures 
and attitudes and interactionally in the style of strategies 
whose implementation constitutes practiceﬂ 
(Acciaioli, 1981, pp31).  

Actors have goals and interests, and the identification of the
se goals and interests might help in 
identifying the source of their practice in their own reality
. This is known as strategizing (Jenkins, 2002). 
The manifestations of these strategies are termed as posit
ion taking. Bourdieu (1992) states that ﬁthese 
position-takings are inseparable from the objective positions 
occupied by the agent as a result of their 
possession of a determined quantity of specific capitalﬂ. Theref
ore, strategies are employed by agents and 
institutions to improve or defend their positions in relation to other
 ﬁoccupantsﬂ of the fields (Naidoo, 
2004). These concepts are represented in Figure 1. 

 Figure 1   Proposed Research Framework 
 5. Methodology 

The study was critical in nature. A multiple case study appr
oach was employed to investigate the 
distributed agile phenomenon within a real-life context (Yin, 1994). The
 case selection was purposive and 
site selection was based on geographic coverage and the use of 
an agile methodology. In addition, a 
similar agile methodology (i.e. Scrum) was chosen for both site
s in order to allow the results from the 
first case to inform the second, and to seek more richness 
in the data being gathered. Care was also taken 
to select organisations having mature agile setups, (i.e. the
 teams having used Scrum for more than 1 
year). However, a heterogeneous GSD setup was sought in order to a
cquire a wide understanding of the 
various possible social influences inherent to the various setups.  

In the first case, all team members belonged to one organisation but were
 distributed across two countries, 
namely South Africa (Cape Town) and Brazil (Sao Paulo). The fir
st case study was conducted in 
Company 1 (C1) which was part of a group of media companies dispersed a
ll over the world. Three 
members were located in Brazil and five members in South Afric
a, under the leadership of the Chief 
Executive Officer (CEO) and the Chief Operations Officer (CO
O). The team was involved in the 
development of a knowledge management tool (MKX). The applicati
on was initially developed using a 
plan-based approach, which eventually proved inadequate for the projec
t nature and setting. 
Consequently, the Scrum methodology was adopted. 

In the second case, a service provider / customer relationship 
existed between the team members who 
belonged to different organisations distributed across two countries, 
namely India (Pune) and South 
Africa (Durban). The second case study was conducted in C2, a globa
l software and services company 
spread across 18 countries around the world including India, US, UK, Germ
any, Sweden, South Africa, 
and Singapore among others. With a CMMI Level 5 certification, C2 p
rovides expertise that spans Retail 
and Distribution; Banking; Financial Services and Insurance; He
althcare and Life Sciences; 
Manufacturing; Energy; Utilities. The team was involved in
 the development of an online gambling 
application. 

Data was collected through semi-structured interviews, dir
ect observation, documentation, and field 
notes. Furthermore, triangulation across various techniques of da
ta collection was particularly beneficial 
as it provided multiple perspectives on an issue, supplied m
ore information on emerging concepts, and 
allowed for cross-checking (Eisenhardt, 1989). Table 1 details the
 interviews conducted during the case 
studies. A total of 16 interviews and one focus group were co
nducted. The case number, site, job title, 
duration and mode of interview have been provided. As can be seen in Tabl
e 1, the respondents belonged 
to a wide variety of job titles with different levels of 
experience within the teams. These respondents were 
thus selected because they provided different perspectives on the practice and be
nefits of distributed agile. 
In particular, the key informants were selected according to
 the key roles in a Scrum team as it was 
anticipated that they would have different goals and interests wi
thin the Scrum process. In addition, 
snowballing was employed, whereby whenever one respondent mentioned that
 one particular team 
member or stakeholder had key knowledge on a specific topic, that person was al
so interviewed. 
 Case No
 Job Title Experience in team Mode of Interview 
1 COO 2 years Face-to-Face 
1 Product Owner 1 year 3 months Face-to-Face 
1 Scrum Master 1 year 6 months Face-to-Face 
1 Technical Architect 3 months Face-to-Face 
1 CEO 3 years Face-to-Face 
1 Lead Technical Architect 2 years Conference call 
1 Front End Developer  1 year 8 months Video Conference 
2 Project Manager + Delivery N/A Focus group 
 Unit Head + CEO 
2 Project Manager 5 years Face-to-face 
2 Delivery Unit Head 5 years Face-to-face 
2 Technical Specialist 9 months Face-to-Face 
2 Developer 2 years  Face-to-Face 
2 Team Leader (Development) 2 years 6 months Face-to-Face 
2 Tester 2 years 6 months Face-to-Face 
2 Tester <6 months Face-to-Face 
2 Junior Developer 1 year Face-to-Face 
2 Developer 2 weeks Face-to-Face 
Table 1. Case Interview Description 

Observations of several meetings were undertaken including Scrum
 Meetings (18), Sprint Planning 1 and 
2 (4), Sprint Reviews (1), Pre-Scrum meetings (4), and Meetings to discuss wa
y forward (1). A total of 28 
meetings were observed during the case studies. Examples of docum
ents investigated include user stories, 
task boards, bug reports, specifications, burn-down charts and emails. The document
s were primarily used 
to augment evidence from other sources. Field notes were record
ed into a notebook computer on a daily 
basis including contextual data, personal comments and immediate in
terpretation of events (Kirk & 
Miller, 1986).  

 
As recommended by Patton (1988) and Fereday and Muir-Cochrane (2006), a mi
xture of inductive and 
deductive analysis was employed to make sense of the data. Dat
a was analysed in four stages with the 
theoretical framework to assist in the analysis of the data.
 In the first stage, a code book was developed 
based on the concepts from the theoretical framework to assis
t in the analysis of the data.
In the second 
stage, an inductive approach was followed to summarise and identif
y themes in the data. The third stage 
of data analysis was deductive in nature and the code book was use
d to perform additional coding. Stage 
four was concerned with connecting the codes and identifying relation
ships in the data to prove or negate 
the propositions. Data analysis was also facilitated by the N
Vivo 8 qualitative analysis tool. In particular, 
stage four was undertaken in conjunction and iteratively to Stage 3. 

6. Findings & Discussion 

6.1 Past Experiences of the project team members 

In both cases, the findings show that some agents internalised the 
values of other software development 
approaches they were previously employing (e.g. Waterfall). Thei
r habitus was thus shaped by the values 
and beliefs inherent in these methodologies. However, past experienc
es of distributed agile participants 
had both a positive and a negative impact on the manner in which t
hey engaged in agile practices. 
Distributed agile participants were either restrained in 
applying the prescribed agile practices or were 
inclined to adopt them when they perceived agile to be superior
 to other approaches: 
ﬁhaving been in 
other methods like the Waterfall is good because you generally know
 the downfalls of them [–]. I didn™t 
find it that difficult to switch to Scrumﬂ.
 Past experiences of the participants impacted on the manner in
 which they improvised while using the 
agile practices. For instance, Scrum does not recommend the use 
of any particular form of software 
engineering standards (Schuh, 2005). It is a project management me
thodology. When Scrum was used as 
a standalone methodology (i.e. without XP), participants drew upon expe
riences from other 
methodologies and past projects to engage in the software devel
opment process and decide on task 
estimation, analysis, design, development and testing. As mentioned by 
one interviewee, 
ﬁwe know what 
works and what doesn™t based on our past projects and we try not to make 
the same mistakes. We then 
 have to adapt our practices accordinglyﬂ.
 Smyth and Morris (2007) also put forward the notion of 
software projects being linked to history and context, and the pa
st experience of agile participants is a 
particular instance of the historical elements of agile projects
. 
It was also noted that when agile teams had no prior agile e
xperiences and were required to participate in 
an agile team / project for the first time, their understanding 
of agility was based on their past experiences 
with other projects and other methodologies. As mentioned by Söderholm
 (2008), the practice of agile in 
this case was thus based on intuition. They consequently improvise
d and drew on knowledge of past 
projects to devise practices which they labelled as agi
le practices. Often, after undertaking training, they 
realised that these practices were not in line with what agi
le prescribed and thus adapted them in further 
sprints. Past studies also highlighted the need for meetings t
o improve common project definition, 
planning, status updates, clearly delineated documentation format, ag
reement seeking mechanisms and 
uncertainty minimization (Tanner, 2009). The project teams investi
gated acknowledged the benefits of 
such mechanisms mostly from past mistakes. Consequently, they 
established a common goal of not 
repeating these errors, and embraced these practices. 

6.2 Standards in place within the organisation 

In line with Söderholm (2008) and Winter et al. (2006), who claimed t
hat projects are contextually 
dependent, the study confirmed that agile projects are influenced by contextual f
actors. For instance in the 
study, particular agile practices were adapted and followed bec
ause the companies had to abide by 
standards. One interviewee mentioned that he had to 
ﬁdocument as much as possible whatever because of 
the rules within the team about documentingﬂ.
 Participants were keen to abide by agile best practices se
t forward by key players in the field, but also had 
to abide by other demands in the field pertaining to corporate st
andards or customer contracts. The need 
to abide by standards could either create more commitment on the par
t of the agile participants, especially 
if the standards are in line with the agile values, or decr
ease the level of commitment if the agile values 
and the standards contradicted each other. In either case, the di
stributed agile practice was adapted 
accordingly. In situations where agile standards and other corporat
e standards were in contradiction, agile 
standards did not take priority. This might be due to the polit
ical aspirations, agendas and objectives of 
the stakeholders (Williams & Samset, 2010) involved in the agile project
. 
6.3 Improvisation mechanisms followed by project te
am members 
The findings show that distributed agile projects require int
uition and some degree of improvisation on 
the part of the participants to cope with unexpected circumstances 
as well as the demands and constraints 
within the development environment. The forms of improvisation eme
rge from the habitus of the 
participants. This is supported by Sewchurran (2009) and Söderholm (2008)
 who also recognized 
improvisation in software projects in general. Participants i
mprovised while learning about agile, during 
sprint planning meetings where the planning poker game was avoided f
or simple tasks, while using the 
communication technologies, and improvised to mitigate for the daily
 challenges they faced in the 
distributed context. For instance, the Scrum tool which was used 
by C1 was described as not ideal by the 
team members since it did not provide all the functionalities 
which should have been available for the 
practice of distributed agile. However, because of the learning 
and innovation habitus inherent in the C1 
distributed agile team, they ﬁ
adapted it. [They] were using some columns in ways that [they] wer
e not 
supposed to but [they] knew what the column was for.  So [they] over
came most of the shortcomingsﬂ
. 
Also, because of their past experiences with other software deve
lopment methodologies, some Indian 
team members in C2 improvised and adapted their practices to 
match what they thought was the best way 
to be agile. Improvisation relates to the innovative (Sewchurr
an, 2009) and emergent (Sabherwal & 
Grover, 2009) nature of software projects. According to the def
inition of agility, distributed agile 
participants were agile in their degree of improvisation. A
gility is defined as the ﬁthe readiness of an IS 
 development method to rapidly or inherently create change, proactivel
y or reactively embrace change, 
and learn from change while contributing to perceived customer value (e
conomy, quality, and simplicity), 
through its collective components and relationships with its environmentﬂ (
Conboy, 2009),.  
The work processes which emerged from the sets of improvisat
ion might not perfectly match official 
agile norms, but have emerged in response to the work environment
 and were adapted to meet 
environmental demands and leverage project success. Livari and Li
vari (2011) posit that a method can be 
qualified as agile if it exhibits emergent agility suffici
ently regularly, and if the method is reasonably 
faithfully followed by the software developers. Livari and Livari
 (2011) also rightfully raise the question 
of how we evaluate whether a method is followed sufficiently fai
thfully. If the criteria employed for such 
an evaluation is based on the method™s principles and techniques, t
his might lead to a ﬁdogmaticﬂ 
interpretation of ﬁagileﬂ methods. This study deviates from such a form of a
gile evaluation. 
6.4 Goals and Interests of project team members 

The behaviour of stakeholders of distributed agile software d
evelopment was influenced by the goals and 
interests of these stakeholders, hence revealing complex social construc
tions in place within these projects 
(Linehan & Kavanagh, 2004). The goals and interests of the development 
team members were related to 
the need to reduce risks of software failure and errors, s
peed up delivery of completed stories, make 
accurate estimations pertaining to task completion, provide vi
sibility to customers, ease coordination, 
meet the customers™ requirements and have a versatile team. 
The customers™ goals and interests related to 
the need to retain control over the software development proces
s and to obtain a software product which 
exactly met their business requirements. Similarly to the s
oftware development team, management also 
wanted to promote versatility in the team and to provide high vis
ibility to the customers. For instance, 
stories were never allocated randomly to team members. Alloc
ation was instead based on careful 
strategies employed by key players in the team.  One intervie
wee mentioned that 
ﬁsomeone will be 
involved in a particular area of the system in which they™ve got 
experienceﬂ
. Such was the case because 
the participants did not want to waste time and risk having er
rors in the code. The goal was thus to have 
stories completed fast and efficiently. The goals and interes
ts varied at different stages in the project and 
the resulting strategies also varied. Consequently, the practi
ce of defining sets of best practices for agile 
software development is questionable since these practices emana
te from specific goals and interests 
which emerge at specific points in the project lifecycle. It
 is thus inappropriate to posit that these derived 
practices would be applicable to all situations.  

As confirmed by Williams and Samset (2010), the differences in a
gendas, objectives, perceptions and 
political aspirations of the stakeholders compromised the attempt
s to align the IT projects and corporate 
strategies. Cicmil et al. (2006) also mentioned the political a
gendas of actors during software projects. 
This study unpacked instances of these political agendas. For instanc
e, findings show that customers or 
fund providers were inclined to retain control over the softwar
e development process. Because of their 
vested interest in the project and their financial investment
, it was hard for them to delegate power to the 
development team. The development team did not 
ﬁhave control over the development environment. At 
times the ability to manipulate the web application development 
and web servers is limitedﬂ
. In C2, the 
servers and data resided in South Africa and this caused nume
rous challenges for the Indian developers 
because when the server was down, they were unable to complete t
heir work. Consequently, the 
developers faced environmental constraints (Söderholm, 2008) because o
f limited access to resources 
within the development context.  

Another goal and interest of the customer in C2 was to have a c
lear idea of what the developers in India 
were doing on a daily basis. Visibility was important to them, irrespecti
ve of whether the tasks were being 
completed on time and of quality. Thus, the practice at C2 was ada
pted according to the customers' goals 
and interests. An onsite coordinator was introduced to enhance t
he communication process and visibility 
within the dispersed team. As mentioned by one interviewee: 
ﬁwe were discussing how to send the status 
 and in which format to send the status to the customer so that
 there was no misunderstanding. And we 
found that just the daily scrum was not enough for that. So we introduced a coordinator ther
eﬂ
. 
The customer also retained control by establishing that matt
ers pertaining to lack of performance should 
not be discussed openly with the team members in retrospective
 meetings: 
ﬁLet™s say productivity of this 
person is not good. [The customers] think that if they discuss dire
ctly with that person, he will feel badﬂ
. 
However, this could also be perceived as a form of double meaning s
trategies (Bourdieu, 1990) on the 
part of the customer to maintain confidentiality on some informat
ion and to retain the control over the 
agile software development process. In doing so, the customers retai
ned control over the software 
development process by withholding information from the development t
eam. Because of these complex 
social constructions (Sewchurran, 2009), the practices in place cont
radict the spirit of scrum pertaining to 
retrospective meetings (Schuh, 2005) and indicate that in reality
, the team has to face numerous 
constraints which are not fully taken into consideration by the methodology.  

6.5 The need to retain competitiveness in the marke
t 
It was also uncovered that software providers need to remain compe
titive in the market. Consequently, 
they strategized and adapted their agile practices so that 
they always met their customers™ demands. In 
C2, the 
developers ﬁdidn™t wait for the scrum meeting to inform the customer of a
ny problems that we are 
facing while we are working on their tasksﬂ
. This was a strategy employed by the developers™ to ensure 
that they were not blamed for hiding things from the customer, who required visibi
lity at all times.  
Because of their need to fulfil the customers™ needs, the develop
ers™ goals and interests lay in the 
completion of the project within budget and on time. In turn, the custom
ers™ also has vested interests in 
other projects and were at times not fully committed to the pro
ject under investigation. They thus did not 
provide answers to queries fast enough. In these situations, the proj
ect teams applied strategies to obtain 
answers from the customer. For instance, they contacted team mem
bers with more symbolic capital to 
ensure that their queries were answered: 
ﬁWe communicate with the project manager who can in turn 
push the product manager to give more timely answersﬂ
. Otherwise, they sent emails to all stakeholders 
informing them that their work was on hold until the query was ans
wered. The latter was used to ensure 
that the developers were not held responsible in case of delaye
d delivery. Consequently, they did not lose 
their position in the field. This implies that various forces 
are at play during agile projects and all parties 
have to apply various strategies to meet their ends.  

6.6 Decision Making 

Based on the habitus shared by the agents in the field, it was 
commonly accepted that final decisions 
should be taken by top level management (for C1) and the customers (
for C2). As mentioned by one 
interviewee, 
ﬁthe decision is theirs and if they say do it, we do itﬂ
. This did not imply that participants did 
not voice out their opinion when needed: 
ﬁbut we have space to argue about it and expose our opinionsﬂ
. 
In C2, decisions on the manner in which agile practices would be ada
pted and followed appeared to be 
driven by the need to meet any standards set forth within the 
team, the organization and industry. For 
instance, when the need arose to adopt agile methodologies within t
he organization, management based 
their decisions on 
ﬁindustry standards and on what agile recommends. They looked at Scrum and X
P, 
interacted with other companies who were pioneers in agileﬂ
. This was not the case in C1 where 
decisions were mostly taken by the COO and the CEO. 

6.7 Demands in the field 

In both cases, demands in the fields were mostly customer-relat
ed. In both cases, one of the demands 
related to the need to complete as many stories as possible during one s
print. This demand was exerted by 
the customer who had enough symbolic capital to do so. Consequently, the pra
ctice was adapted such that 
 stories 
ﬁwere completed in parallel. One feature was given to a maximum of 
two people. If there was 
dependency between two features then [they] did it sequentially
. Otherwise things would not be 
completed in four weeksﬂ.
 According to Scrum, the Scrum Master should be dedicated to the Sc
rum Master role and should not be 
involved in coding. However, in C1 the Scrum master was involved in 
coding. This is because of the 
workload which had to be completed: 
ﬁIt is hard. It™s quite a bit of work just being Scrum Master. Even
 
in a small team like this, lots of things come up and need to be dealt with. When I was the Scrum
 Master, I 
only gave 50% of my time to coding. And I found it to be too much time to 
give to coding in any case. So, 
I dropped it down to 30%ﬂ
. The workload relates to the demands of the field which influenced pract
ice.  
In C2, the impact of workload demands could be perceived in the fr
equency with which review meeting 
were held. Review meetings were held more frequently in times
 of urgency, indicating that the 
participants adjusted their practice based on the demands in th
e fields. In C2, demands sometimes related 
to the upcoming of a sprint filled with complex requirements. In t
hat case, the distributed agile teams 
adapted their practice and had a shorter sprint of two weeks pr
ior to the long one, including all the simple 
tasks that they could finish quickly in that sprint. 

6.8 Constraints in the field 

The study showed that distributed agile software development is under
taken in an environment restrained 
by various constraints which further influence practice. For instance, infr
astructure constraints, limitations 
of communication tools, GSD issues, lack of resources, external environmental 
constraints and constraints 
pertaining to the nature of software projects all impact on agile p
ractice.  
 
In both cases, there were insufficient resources in comparison t
o the amount of work to be completed. 
Consequently, some team members 
ﬁwere involved in several projects simultaneouslyﬂ
. In C1, 
participants formed structures with other team members 
which, in spite of being external to the MKX 
project, still influenced the distributed agile practice. Duri
ng task allocation, the fact that team members 
had to balance their time between MKX and other projects had
 to be taken into consideration. Also, by 
being involved with other teams, participants were often unable t
o fully involve themselves in the project 
and planning errors were only discovered too late. One participant 
explained that they are 
ﬁsometimes 
flown to Johannesburg for other projects. These are things that [they] 
only find out about a day or two 
before. So it™s not something that [they] could plan properly in the sprintﬂ
.  
In C1, the lack of resources also resulted in the frequent chang
es in Scrum Master: 
ﬁall the changes in 
Scrum Master were linked to who is available and who is notﬂ
. By being in other teams, distributed agile 
team members™ habitus shifted from being fully committed to the 
MKX project, to being committed to 
other projects. Hence, it became common practice (or even norma
l) for the Scrum Master role to be 
embraced by different team members at different points in ti
me. The frequent changes in Scrum Master 
were not perceived as counter-productive. Scrum warns that wheneve
r a change or disturbance occurs 
within the team, it might take about three weeks for things t
o stabilise. This warning was not considered 
as a serious threat for the distributed agile team in C1. Inst
ead, they were adapting Scrum as much as 
possible to fit their contextual requirements. 

7. Conclusion 

This study embraced a different perspective on distributed agi
le software development and projects. It 
was demonstrated that agile software development is innovative
 in nature and require a high degree of 
improvisation on a daily basis to achieve project success. It w
as suggested that software projects are 
contextually dependent, whereby demands and constraints emerge from
 the influencing context and 
further drive agile practices. Such a finding implies that bes
t-practices should be applied carefully and 
 should not be considered as silver bullets which can solve any problem. 
The study also contributed to 
theory by revealing how agendas, objectives and political aspir
ations of stakeholders within distributed 
agile software development impact on practice. No studies on distri
buted agile software development 
uncovered such a correlation and the study thus contributes to a better un
derstanding of how people chose 
to adopt or adapt certain practices. The findings are also par
ticularly important to agile project teams 
seeking to engage in GSD. The study has revealed that, to some e
xtent, collocated and distributed teams 
face similar challenges. Some practices will nevertheless have 
to be adapted to the GSD setting. However, 
the social and contextual elements highlighted in the study could be u
sed as a basis and a lens by such 
practitioners who will have to adapt their agile practices to a
 new context. These practitioners will also be 
aware of the various possible fields of influence in a GSD c
ontext, thus allowing them to take preventive 
actions to meet the respective demands and constraints. The res
ulting distributed agile practices could, to 
some extent, be carefully thought through, instead of being a reaction to mi
stakes being made.  
8. References 

Acciaioli, G. L. (1981). Knowing what you™re doing: A review of Pierre Bourdieu™
s Outline of a Theory 
of Practice. Canberra Anthropology, 4(1), 23-51 
Agile alliance 2001, Retrieved September 2006, from http://www.agilealli
ance.com/intro.
 Beck, K. (1999). 
Extreme Programming Explained: Embrace Change
. Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley 
Professional 
Bourdieu P. (1992). The Logic of Practice. Polity Press, Cambridge. 

Bourdieu, P. (1973). Three forms of theoretical knowledge. Social Science Inf
ormation, 12, 53Œ80. 
Bourdieu, P. (1990). Structures, habits, practices. In P. Bourdieu, The l
ogic of practice. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press 
Bourdieu, P. and Wacquant, L. J. D. (1992) An Invitation to Reflexive Soci
ology. Cambridge, Polity 
Press. 
Cannizzo, F., Marcionetti, G., & Moser, P. (2008). Evolution of the Too
ls and Practices of a Large 
Distributed Agile Team, 
Agile
, 513-518 
Cicmil, S., Williams, T, Thomas, J., & Hodgson, D. (2006). Rethinking 
Project Management: 
Researching the actuality of projects. 
International Journal of Project Management
, 
24
(8), 675-686. 
Conboy, K. (2009). Agility from first principles: Reconstructing the concept 
of agility in information 
systems development, 
Information Systems Researh, 20(3), 329-354 
Eisenhardt, K.M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Acade
my of Management Review, 
4(4), 532 Œ 550. 
Fowler, M. (2003). Using an Agile Software Process with Offshore Developme
nt, available at 
http://www.it.uu.se/edu/course/homepage/acsd/ht03/Fowler.pdf 
Hanks, W. (2005).  Pierre Bourdieu and the practices of language, Available at 
http://www.scribd.com/doc/219357/Hanks-Pierre-Bourdieu-and-the-Practi
ces-of-Language 
Highsmith, J.A., & Cockburn, A. (2001). Agile software development: The business of 
innovation. 
Computer
, 34(9), 120-122. 
Holmström, H., Fitzgerald, B., Ågerfalk, P.J., & Ó. Conchúir, E. (2006). Agile pra
ctices reduce distance 
in global software development. Information Systems Management, 23(3), 7 Œ 18.
 Introna, L. D., & Whitley, E. A. (1997). Against Method-
ism: 
Exploring the Limits of Method, 
Information, Technology and People, 
10(1), 31-45. 
Jenkins, R. (2002). Pierre Bourdieu. Routhledge Eds, ISBN: 0415285275 

Layman, L., Cornwell, T., & Williams, L. (2006). Personality types, learning sty
les and an agile approach 
to software engineering education. In SIGCSE 2006, 1-5 March, Hourston, Texas 
Lindstrom, L. & Jeffries, R. (2004). Extreme Programming and Agile Software D
evelopment 
Methodologies
. Information Systems Management Journal
, 21(3), 41-52 
 Linehan, C. & Kavanagh, D. (2004). From project ontologies to communities of virtue. Pa
per presented at 
the 2
nd
 International Workshop, Making Projects critical, University of West
ern England, 13-14
th
 December 2004 
Livari. J. & Livari, N. (2011). The relationship between organizational cul
ture and the deployment of 
agile methods, 
Information and Software Technology, 53, 509-520 
Moore S., & Barnett, L. (2004). Offshore outsourcing and agile development, Retrie
ved July 2008, from 
http://www.attitudeweb.be/doc/resources/studies/offshore_outsourcing
_and_agile_development_en.p
df 
Naidoo, R. (2004). Fields and institutional strategy: Bourdieu on the relations
hip between Higher 
Education, Inequality and Society, British Journal of Sociology of Education, 25(4), 457 Œ 
471 
Paasivaara, M. & Lassenius, C. (2004). Using iterative and incremental p
rocess in global software 
development. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on Global Software De
velopment, 
International Conference on Software Engineering (ICSE 2004), Edinburgh, Scotland
 Paasivaara, M., Durasiewicz, S. and Lassenius, C. (2008), Using scrum in a globall
y distributed project: a 
case study. Software Process: Improvement and Practice, 13: 527Œ544. doi: 10.1002/
spip.402 
Phalnikar, R., Deshpande, V.S., & Joshi,S.D. (2009). Applying Agile Principles
 for Distributed Software 
Development, International Conference on Advanced Computer Control 2009, p.535-539 ,IEEE 
Ramesh, B., Cao, L., & Baskerville, R. (2010). Agile Requirements Engineering Pra
ctices and 
Challenges: An Empirical Study. Information Systems Journal 20 (5) pp. 449-480 
Rhynas, S. (2004). Bourdieu™s theory of practice and its potential in nursing resea
rch, 
Journal of 
Advances Nursing, 50(2), 
179-186 
Sabherwal, R., & Grover, V. (2009). A taxonomy of political processes in systems de
velopment. 
Information Systems Journal
, 
20
(5), 419-447. 
Schuh, Peter (2005) 
Integrating Agile Development in the Real World. 
Hingham, MA:Charles River 
Media Inc. 
Sewchurran, K. (2009). Towards a regional ontology of Information Systems Pr
oject Management, 
Unpublished PHD dissertation 
Sewchurran, K., & Scott, E. (2009). Learning and making sense of project phenomena in Inf
ormation 
Systems Education, 
Proceedings of the 2
nd
 International Conference on Interaction Sciences: 
Information Technology, Culture and Human, Korea, Seoul, 1-8 
Smyth, H., & Morris, P. (2007). An epistemological evaluation of research into pr
ojects and their 
management: Methodological issues. 
International Journal of Project Management
, 
25
(4), 423-436. 
Söderholm, A. (2008). Project management of unexpected events.
International Journal of Project 
Management, 2008
(28), 80-86. 
Sureshchandra, K. &Shrinivasavadhani, J. (2008).Adopting agile in distribut
ed development, IEEE 
International Conference on Global Software Engineering. 
Tanner, M. (2009). Communication and Culture in Global Software Development: The
 case of Mauritius 
and South Africa, Journal of Information, Information Technology and Organisati
on, 4, 57-85 
Thomas, D. R. (2003). A general inductive approach for qualitative data analys
is. Retrieved on November 
4, 2007, from http://wwwhealthaucklandacnz/hrmas/resources/Inductive2003pdf 
VersionOne. (2008). 3rd Annual Survey: 2008 ﬁThe State of Agile Developmentﬂ. Retri
eved 09.05.2009, 
from http://www.versionone.com/pdf/3rdAnnualStateOfAgile_FullDataR
eport.pdf
 Webb, J., Schirato, T., Danaher, G. (2002). Understanding Bourdieu, SAGE, ISBN: 076197
4636 
Williams, T., & Samset, K. (2010). Issues in front-end decision-making on projec
ts I. 
Project 
Management Journal
, 
41
(2), 38-49. 
Winter, M, Andersen, E., Elvin, R., & Levene, R. (2006). Focusing on business projects 
as an area for 
future research: An exploratory discussion of four different perspective
s. 
International Journal of 
Project Management
, 
24
(8), 699-709 
Yin, R.K. (1994). Case Study Research, Design and Methods (2nd ed.). New
bury Park: Sage 
Publications.
