 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)FROM AGILE TO LEAN: THEPERSPECTIVES OF THE TWO AGILEONLINE COMMUNITIES OF INTERESTLero Xiaofeng WangMichael LaneKieran ConboyECIS 2011 Proceedings. FROM AGILE TO LEAN: THE PERSPECTIVES OF THE 
TWO AGILE ONLINE COMMUNITIES OF INTEREST 
Xiaofeng Wang, Lero - The Irish Software Engineering Research
 Centre, Limerick, Ireland, 
xiaofeng.wang@lero.ie 
Michael Lane, University of Limerick, Limerick, Ireland
, michael.lane@ul.ie  
Kieran Conboy, NUI Galway, Galway, Ireland, kieran.conboy@nuigal
way.ie 
Abstract 

In the last several years there has been a noticeab
le focus shift of agile methods from eXtreme 
Programming (XP) and Scrum to Lean approaches, whic
h is indicated as ﬁfrom agile to leanﬂ. 
However our understanding of the driving factors be
hind this focus shift is very limited. The study 
proposed in this paper attempts to investigate the 
shift through a content analysis of two major agile
 
mailing lists. The expected result is a set of driv
ing factors behind the shift from agile to lean, wh
ich 
can contribute to a better understanding of if and 
why Lean software development is ﬁthe next wave of 
software processﬂ. 

Keywords: Agile Methods, Lean Thinking, Lean Softwa
re Development, Community of Interest, 
Content Analysis. 

 
 
  1 Introduction 

2011 will mark the ten year anniversary of the Agil
e Manifesto
1. During these ten years the practice 
and research of agile methods has become highly pre
valent. In recent years some have started to 
reflect on the agile movement. The term Agile 2.0 w
as coined to denote some of the evaluations of 
agile methods (e.g., Miller 2006). A shift of focus
 of agile methods from eXtreme Programming (XP) 
and Scrum more recently to Lean software developmen
t has been noticed and advocated. Lean 
software development is claimed to be ﬁthe next wav
e of software processﬂ
2. Its adoption is believed 
to be a necessary progression for organisations pla
nning to scale up agile (Anderson 2010). Others 
claim that Lean software development can resolve is
sues agile methods failed to address (Birkeland 
2010). But our understanding of this focus shift, w
hich is generally termed from agile to lean (Hibbs 
et 
al. 2009), if it really exists, is very limited.  

The purpose of the proposed study is to uncover the
 reasons why there is a shift of focus from agile t
o 
lean. The study will focus on the views of the agil
e community in relation to this subject. The resear
ch 
question we ask is: 
What are the driving factors behind the shift from 
agile to lean?
 Since the 
research on the broad topic of Lean software develo
pment is considered a nascent area (Dingsøyr et al.
 
2008), we believe our study is an important additio
n to this branch of research in general, and on the
 
topic of the shift from agile to lean in specific. 
 To answer the research question, we will conduct a 
review of agile and lean software engineering 
literature, followed by an analysis of the mailing 
lists of two online agile communities of interest, 
namely XP and Scrum, as these are two of the most p
opular agile methods used in the past decade 
(Dingsøyr et al. 2008). We plan to analyse each mai
ling list in turn then compare and contrast the 
findings from the two mailing lists. A common set o
f themes will be identified which illustrate the 
driving factors behind the shift from agile to lean
. 
This research-in-progress paper presents the early 
stage of our study. Section 2 reviews the 
background literature and related work. This is fol
lowed by a description of the conceptual framework 
used to frame the subsequent data analysis. The res
earch approach section explains the rationale of 
analysing the two mailing lists and describes the a
nalysis procedures. The paper ends with expected 
results and concluding remarks.  

2 Agile Methods vs. Lean Software Development 

The Agile Alliance and the publication of the Agile
 Manifesto formally introduced agile methods to 
the software engineering community in 2001, yet the
re is no precise, concise and universally accepted 
definition of
 agile method
 (Conboy 2006). The literal meaning of 
agile method
 can be a method that 
brings agility to software development, or a method
 that has agility as a quality. In agile literature
, 
however, 
agile methods
 generally means a family of methods under the umbr
ella of the Agile 
Alliance, including: XP (Beck 1999), Scrum (Schwabe
r and Beedle 2002), Dynamic Systems 
Development Method (DSDM, http://www.dsdm.org), Cry
stal Methods (Cockburn 2001), Feature-
Driven Development (FDD, Coad and Palmer 2002), Lea
n Development (Charette 2002) and 
Adaptive Software Development (ASD, Highsmith 2002)
. Among these agile methods, XP and Scrum 
are the two most popular and widely adopted methods
 (Dingsøyr et al. 2008). XP is originally 
described by the authors as a lightweight method fo
r small to medium-sized teams developing 
software in the face of vague or rapidly-changing r
equirements (Beck 1999). Scrum has been built on 
the metaphor of a rugby scrum. It sees a software d
evelopment process as a ﬁchaordicﬂ process similar 
to the scrum stage, and attempts to control it usin
g a simple project management framework which 
                                           
 1 http://www.agilealliance.org 
2 http://atlanta2010.leanssc.org/ 
 represents an adaptive, quick, self-organising prod
uct development process (Schwaber and Beedle 
2002, Abrahamsson et al. 2002). 

In the last several years, however, lean software d
evelopment has picked up momentum and become 
increasingly eminent and popular among agile practi
tioners and researchers. Lean thinking has its 
origin in manufacturing and especially the Toyota P
roduction System. There are five main lean 
concepts: value, value stream, flow, pull, and perf
ection (Womack et al. 2007). The primary focus is 
on the identification and elimination of waste from
 the process. Key lean practices include value 
stream mapping, kanban, limited WIP (Work-in-Progre
ss), Kaizen (continuous improvement), etc..
Lean software development applies the concepts, pri
nciples and practices of lean thinking in software 
development activities (Poppendieck and Poppendieck
 2003, Hibbs et al. 2009). For example, 
Poppendieck and Poppendieck (2003) specify seven pr
inciples of lean software development: 
eliminate waste, build quality in, create knowledge
, defer commitment, deliver fast, respect people, 
and optimize the whole. An increasing number of sof
tware organisations or IT departments have been 
adopting or are planning to adopt lean thinking and
 techniques. Many of these groups have already 
adopted other agile methods, such as XP and Scrum (
such as the cases reported in Parnell-Klabo 2006, 
Smits 2007, Long and Starr 2008, Willeke 2009 and S
hinkle 2009). New hybrid practices have 
emerged, such as Scrumban (Ladas 2009) and the Limi
ted Red Society (Kerievsky 2010). 
Viewed originally as just another agile method (Hig
hsmith 2002, Dybå and Dingsøyr 2009), there is 
an increasing focus on Lean software development an
d it is viewed as being a method category in 
itself rather than an instance of agile methods (Hi
bbs et al. 2009). Poppendieck (2007) claims that 
Lean provides the theory behind agile practices whi
ch is much needed given the fact that the 
theoretical foundation of agile software developmen
t is weak (Abrahamsson et al. 2009). Lean 
software development is conjectured as the means th
rough which knowledge-based, knowledge-
creating companies and organizations can effectivel
y implement agile software development 
principles and practices (Sutherland and Tabaka 200
7). Several studies claim that lean software 
development has the potential to resolve issues tha
t agile methods have failed to address. Ambler 
(2009) argues that agile processes based on XP or S
crum can break down when one or more scaling 
factors are present (such as organizational wide ag
ile adoption and transition or distributed agile 
development). Instead, a lean governance model base
d on enablement, collaboration, and motivation 
can enable agility at scale. Birkeland (2010) prese
nts the experience of a software team shifting from
 a 
timebox-based development process (Scrum) to a flow
-based process (pull-based, kanban), to show 
that flow-based process can better manage certain t
ypes of software development projects and 
activities, e.g. maintenance. 

Therefore, the focus shift from agile to lean, as d
emonstrated by these studies, is not simply a shift
 of 
methods, but a shift pertaining to organizational c
oncerns in software development. In other words, 
agile and lean are not different approaches that ad
dress the same kinds of issues encountered by 
software development practitioners. They address di
fferent organizational issues at different levels 
(strategic, tactical, and operational). However, as
 far as we are aware, there is no rigorous research
 that  
examines the driving factors behind this shift. Tha
t is, what are these organizational issues 
encountered by software companies that agile fails 
to answer but lean succeeds. This is the knowledge 
gap we intend to fill by our study. 

3 Conceptual Framework 

One promising avenue to explore the shift from agil
e to lean, we believe, is to understand the key 
differences between agile methods and lean approach
. It serves as a conceptual framework to analyse 
the empirical data. The key differences will be dra
wn through a more comprehensive review of agile 
and lean literature. As a starting point, we will u
se the following list of key differences identified
 in 
the agile and lean literature (Highsmith 2002, Hibb
s et al. 2009): 
· The difference in the scope: Agile methods mostly c
oncern themselves with the specific practice 
of developing software and the project management t
hat surrounds software development. They 
 do not generally concern themselves with the surrou
nding business context in which the software 
development is taking place. Lean principles can be
 applied to any scope, from the specific 
practice of developing software to the entire enter
prise where software development is just one 
small part. The larger the scope, the larger the po
tential benefits. 
· The difference in the primary focus: The primary fo
cus of agile methods is on close customer 
collaboration and the rapid delivery of working sof
tware as early as possible. The primary focus of 
lean software development is on the elimination of 
waste in the context of what the customer 
values. 
· The difference in the formality of practice: Agile 
methods have a fair number of prescribed 
practices, such as pair programming, standup meetin
gs, whereas lean software development has no 
formal practices. It has a toolkit of recommended p
ractices from which to choose. It is quite 
common to pick agile practices as a starting point 
and begin applying other lean tools (such as 
value stream mapping) from there. 
· The difference in the adoption style: Agile adoptio
n generally takes a bottom-up approach whereas 
lean adoption is typically top-down. 
We do not claim that this is a definitive and exclu
sive list. Actually it will be modified, refined an
d 
extended as we carry out more comprehensive literat
ure review. 
4 The Research Approach 

The proposed study is exploratory in nature due to 
the fact that the topic we investigate is nascent. 
Our 
intention is to understand the perspectives of the 
agile community on the driving factors behind the 
focus shift from agile to lean. For this purpose we
 conduct a content analysis of two mailing lists of
 
agile methods, which represent the online communiti
es of interest of the two most popular agile 
methods: XP and Scrum. One assumption behind the ch
oice of these two mailing lists is that people 
interested in lean related topics discuss them in t
hese two agile specific mailing lists, rather than 
switching to lean specific mailing lists for these 
issues. 
Content analysis of mailing lists is a commonly use
d research method (e.g., Lasker et al. 2005, 
Esquivel et al. 2006, Rdgby and Hassan 2007). Conte
nt analysis has been defined in many different 
ways, but one of the most commonly cited is ﬁa rese
arch technique for the objective, systematic, and 
quantitative description of the manifest content of
 communicationﬂ (Berelson 1952). There are four 
main types of content analysis ranging from simple 
to complex, namely syntactical, referential, 
propositional, and thematic (see Cooper and Schindl
er 2003 for a detailed description of these). This 
study will adopt different types at the different s
tages of data analysis. The description information
 of 
the two mailing lists are summarised in Table 1: 

 
Name of the mailing list  XP Scrumdevelopment 
Agile method representing XP Scrum 
Number of members 9, 520 6, 766 
Starting time 31/12/1999 01/02/2000 
Messages posted within the 

period of analysis (Starting time 

Œ 30/11/2010) 
156, 197 49, 463 
Messages containing the 

keyword ﬁleanﬂ 
2, 674 2, 811 
Table 1. The two agile mailing lists. 

It can be seen from Table 1 that, in comparison, th
e XP mailing list is more active than its Scrum 
counterpart, both in terms of the number of subscri
bed members and the amount of posts. It is worth 
noting that the two online communities overlap to a
 certain extent, which can be identified by a 
 comparison of the member IDs. Due to the fact that 
the same person can have different identities in 
different forums, there is also a hidden overlap th
at is difficult to identify. 
The data collection phase involves getting a local 
copy of all the messages posted to the two mailing 
lists within the period of analysis, including the 
meta information of the post, such as the sender, d
ate 
sent, etc. The period of analysis is from the start
ing time of the mailing list to the 30th November 2
010 
(the latest possible date that is allowed by our st
udy). We will also obtain a local copy of the membe
r 
list of the two online communities, to understand t
o which extent the two online communities overlap. 
The data collection phase also involves eliminating
 the redundant data. It is typical that when a 
message is responded, the text or part of it from t
he original message is included. If the thread has 
many responses the same text would be repeated many
 times. If left un-dealt with, they would greatly 
affect the results of the data analysis. Therefore 
the data need to be cleansed to eliminate the 
redundancy.  

The data analysis phase is composed of two steps: t
he analysis of each mailing list individually, and 
the comparison of the two mailing lists. For each m
ailing list, a simple type of content analysis of t
he 
messages posted within the specified period will be
 conducted, focusing on the frequency of the 
keywords related to LSD, to explore the existence o
f the shift from agile to lean. Then the more 
complex types of content analysis will be applied t
o conduct a more focused analysis of the discussion
 
threads that contain posts with LSD related keyword
s. The purpose is to identify the perceived driving
 
factors behind the shift from agile to lean. There 
is possibility that a post is LSD related but does 
not 
contain any LSD related keywords, such as a respons
e to a post that contains these keywords. To take 
into account this factor, we will use a discussion 
thread as a unit of analysis rather than a single p
ost 
and consider all the posts in the thread relevant d
ata. To support the data analysis process, the soft
ware 
tools WordStat and QDA Miner from Provalis Research
3 will be used. 
The comparison of the two mailing lists intends to 
search for common patterns that emerge from the 
first step of analysis, in order to deepen the unde
rstanding and enhance the generalisability of the 
findings. It should be noted that although the auth
ors propose that this approach is a useful mechanis
m 
to explore the research question at a high-level, t
hey also acknowledge that a number of issues existi
ng 
in relation to content analysis techniques.  A numb
er of researchers have assessed the validity of 
content research, and have documented the various l
imitations and potential pitfalls of using the 
approach. The first possible pitfall occurs if the 
researcher is guilty of faulty definition and struc
ture of 
content categories (Weber 1990). This, however, is 
not very relevant in this study as content analysis
 
is used in a very simple manner. For example, one u
se is to assess the frequency with which lean 
related keywords were referred to. This does not in
volve the development of categories, but just 
requires the development of a list of lean related 
keywords. The second pitfall is analysing content 
under categories that are not mutually exclusive (W
eber 1990; Roberts 1997). To resolve this, overlaps
 
are identified. For example, in searching for the n
umber of references to lean software development, a
 
search is done for the terms lean, lean development
, as well as all references to the lean principles.
 The 
final limitation of content analysis and especially
 simple word frequency counts is the failure to 
account for the context in which the words are used
. Researchers such as Roberts (1997) and Carley 
(1990) suggest that once the researcher has identif
ied the number of citations of a keyword, they 
should then double check each citation to ensure th
e word is being used in the right context, thus 
strengthening the validity of any inferences drawn 
from the analysis. Reliability of the data is a 
concern given that keywords found in different post
ings may not have been intended to convey the 
same meaning. This is particularly true given that 
both ‚agile™ and ‚lean™ are concepts shown to be 
highly polymorphous, multi-dimensional, vague and a
mbiguous (Conboy, 2009). To achieve this, 
NVivo software is used which allows the researchers
 to extract not just the number of times each 
keyword was cited, but also the sentence surroundin
g each citation, thus making this task relatively 
straight-forward.   

                                           
 3 http://www.provalisresearch.com/ 
 5 Summary 

The focus shift of agile methods from XP and Scrum 
to lean software development has been 
noticeable in the last several years. However our u
nderstanding of the driving factors behind this shi
ft 
is very limited. The proposed study attempts to inv
estigate this phenomenon through a content 
analysis of two major agile mailing lists. We inten
d to identify a set of driving factors behind the s
hift 
from agile to lean, which can help both agile pract
itioners and researchers better understand this 
relatively new evolution of agile movement. 

A quite interesting observation at this early stage
 is that it seems that the Scrum online community i
s 
displaying a higher interest in lean than the XP on
e. Although we may not be able to explain this 
different level of interest, it presents an intrigu
ing direction for future study. It also has implica
tions 
that, there might be a different set of driving fac
tors behind a shift from a specific agile method to
 
LSD.  We may need to conduct separate investigation
s on the shift to lean software development 
depending upon the method in use, i.e. XP to Lean o
r Scrum to lean. 
Acknowledgement 

This work is supported, in part, by Science Foundat
ion Ireland grant 03/CE2/I303_1. 
References 

Abrahamsson, P., O. Salo, J. Ronkainen and J. Warst
a (2002). Agile Software Development Methods: 
Review and Analysis. VTT Electronics, Espoo VTT Pub
lications 478. 
Abrahamsson, P., Conboy, K. and Wang, X.: 'Lots Don
e, More To Do': the Current State of Agile 
Systems Development Research, European Journal of I
nformation Systems, (2009), 18(4): 281-
284.  
Ambler, S. W. (2009). Scaling agile software develo
pment through lean governance. SDG™09, 
Vancouver, Canada, May 17, 2009. 
Anderson, David J. (2010). Business Drivers for Kan
ban Adoption. In Proceedings of Lean Software 
& Systems Conference, 7-14. 
Beck, K. (1999). Extreme Programming Explained. Add
ison Wesley, Reading, MA. 
Berelson, B. (1952). Content Analysis in Communicat
ion Research. Glencoe, Ill: Free Press 1971 
(first edition from 1952). 
Birkeland, O. (2010). From a Timebox Tangle to a Mo
re Flexible Flow. In Proceedings of the 11th 
International Conference on Agile Processes in Soft
ware Engineering and Extreme Programming, 
325-334. Trondheim. 
Carley, K. (1990). Content Analysis. The Encycloped
ia of Language and Linguistics. R. Asher. 
Elmsford, NY, Pergamon: 725-730. 
Charette, R. N. (2002). Foundations of Lean Develop
ment: The Lean Development Manager's Guide. 
Vol. 2, The Foundations Series on Risk Management (
CD). Spotsylvania, Va.: ITABHI 
Corporation, 2002. 
Coad, P. and S. Palmer (2002). Feature-Driven Devel
opment. Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, NJ. 
Cockburn, A. (2001). Crystal Clear: A Human-Powered
 Software Development Methodology for 
Small Teams. Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.  
Conboy, K. (2006). A Framework of Method Agility in
 Information Systems Development, PhD 
thesis, University of Limerick. 
Conboy, K. (2009) Agility from first principles: Re
constructing the concept of agility in information 
systems development, Information Systems Research, 
20, 3, 329-354. 
Cooper, D. R. and Schindler P. (2003). Business Res
earch Methods, McGraw Hill. 
Dingsøyr, T., T. Dybå and P. Abrahamsson. (2008). A
 Preliminary Roadmap for Empirical Research 
on Agile Software Development. Agile 2008 Conferenc
e, Toronto, 4-8 August. 
 Dyba, T. and T. Dingsoyr (2009). What Do We Know ab
out Agile Software Development? IEEE 
Software, Sept./Oct. 2009: 6-9. 
Erlandson, D., E. Harris, et al. (1993). Doing Natu
ralistic Inquiry: A Guide to Methods. Newbury 
Park, CA, Sage. 
Esquivel, A., F. Meric-Bernstam and E. V. Bernstam 
(2006). Accuracy and self correction of 
information received from an internet breast cancer
 list: content analysis. BMJ (Clinical research 
ed.) 332, no. 7547 (April): 939-42.  
Hibbs, C., S. Jewett and M. Sullivan (2009). The Ar
t of Lean Software Development: A Practical and 
Incremental Approach, 1st edition, O™Reilly Media, 
Inc., CA. 
Highsmith, J. (2002). Agile software development ec
osystems. Addison-Wesley, Boston. 
Kerievsky, J. (2010). The Limited Red Society. http
://xp2010.org/content.ap?thisId=84, last accessed 
on 07/12/2010. 
Ladas, C. (2009). Scrumban - Essays on Kanban Syste
ms for Lean Software Development. Modus 
Cooperandi Press , USA 
Lasker, J., E. Sogolow and R. Sharim (2005). The ro
le of an online community for people with a rare 
disease: content analysis of messages posted on a p
rimary biliary cirrhosis mailinglist. Journal of 
medical Internet research 7, no. 1 (January): e10. 
Long, K. and D. Starr (2008). Agile Supports Improv
ed Culture and Quality for Healthwise. Agile 
2008 Conference, Toronto, 4-8 August. 
Miller, R. (2006). Second Generation Agile Software
 Development, 
http://blogs.msdn.com/b/randymiller/archive/2006/03
/23/559229.aspx, last accessed on 
07/12/2010. 
Parnell-Klabo, E. (2006). Introducing Lean Principl
es with Agile Practices at a Fortune 500 Company. 
Agile 2006 Conference. Minneapolis, Minnesota, USA,
 23-28 July 2006. 
Poppendieck, M. (2001). Lean Programming. Software 
Development Magazine, 9(5): 71-75. 
Poppendieck, M. (2007). Lean Software Development. 
In the Proceedings of the 29th International 
Conference on Software Engineering. Minneapolis, Mi
nnesota, USA. 20 - 26 May 2007. 
Poppendieck, M. and T. Poppendieck (2003). Lean Sof
tware Development: An Agile Toolkit 
Addison-Wesley Professional. 
Rigby, P. and A. Hassan (2007). What Can OSS Mailin
g Lists Tell Us? A Preliminary Psychometric 
Text Analysis of the Apache Developer Mailing List 
(May): 23. 
Roberts, C. E. (1997). Text Analysis for the Social
 Sciences: Methods for Drawing Statistical 
Inferences from Texts and Transcripts. Mahwah, NJ, 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 
Schwaber, K and A. Beedle (2002). Agile Software De
velopment with SCRUM. Prentice-Hall, Upper 
Saddle River, NJ. 
Shapiro, G. and J. Markoff (1997). A Matter of Defi
nition. Text Analysis for the Social Sciences: 
Methods for Drawing Statistical Inferences from Tex
ts and Transcripts. C. Roberts. Mahwah, NJ, 
Lawrence Erlbaum: 35-54. 
Shinkle, C. M. (2009). Applying the Dreyfus Model o
f Skill Acquisition to the Adoption of Kanban 
Systems at Software Engineering Professionals (SEP)
. Agile 2009 Conference, Chicago, USA. 24-
28 August 2009. 
Smits, H. (2007). The Impact of Scaling on Planning
 Activities in an Agile Software Development 
Center. In the Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii Inter
national Conference on System Sciences, 
Waikoloa, Big Island, Hawaii, 3-6 January 2007. 
Sutherland, J. and J. Tabaka (2007). Incorporating 
Lean Development Practices into Agile Software 
Development. In the Proceedings of the 40th Hawaii 
International Conference on System Sciences, 
Waikoloa, Big Island, Hawaii, 3-6 January 2007. 
Weber, R. (1990). Basic Content Analysis. Newbury P
ark, CA. , Sage. 
Willeke, E. R. (2009). The Inkubook Experience: A T
ale of Five Processes. Agile 2009 Conference, 
Chicago, USA. 24-28 August 2009. 
Womack, J. P., D. T. Jones and D. Roos (2007). The 
Machine that Changed the World: How lean 
production revolutionized the global car wars, Simo
n & Schuster Ltd. 
