 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)University of LimerickUniversity of BathECIS 2007 Proceedings. ORDER AND CHAOS IN SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT: A 
COMPARISON OF TWO SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT TEAMS 
IN A MAJOR IT COMPANY 
Xiaofeng Wang, Lero, University of Limerick, Limerick, Irel
and, xiaofeng.wang@ul.ie 
Richard Vidgen, University of Bath, Bath, BA2 7AY, UK, mnsrtv@
management.bath.ac.uk 
Abstract 

Agile methods have emerged and become popular over 
last few years as a response to shortcomings of 
the waterfall process model. However, agile process
es are stamped by some as chaotic processes and 
are placed in opposition to waterfall approaches. T
his paper uses the edge of chaos concept from 
complex adaptive systems theory as a theoretical le
ns to analyse the roles of structure and planning i
n 
the software development process. The software deve
lopment processes of two teams in a major IT 
company, on of whom uses agile methods and the othe
r a waterfall approach, are presented and the 
project structure and planning process of each is h
ighlighted then compared. Our research finds that 
structure and planning are essential to agile proce
sses and take different forms from the waterfall 
model. Contrary to the belief that agile software d
evelopment may be chaotic we conclude that it is 
possible that the waterfall method may be chaotic d
ue to prescribed rather than effective structures. 
Keywords: Agile Processes, Agile Methods, Complex A
daptive Systems, the Edge of Chaos, Structure, 
Planning 
807 1 INTRODUCTION 

Software development has long been considered deman
ding due to the inherent complexity of 
software products and the consequent problematics o
f the development process (Brooks 1987). It 
becomes even more challenging in an unpredictable a
nd constantly changing business environment. 
Traditional software development approaches, charac
terized by a linear waterfall lifecycle, are 
considered incapable of handling this complexity (H
ighsmith 2002) and in the past few years, agile 
software development has emerged as a promising sol
ution to the problem of software development 
complexity. Various agile methods have been propose
d and some have gained great attention in the 
software engineering community, especially eXtreme 
Programming (XP) (Beck & Andreas 2004) and 
Scrum (Schwaber & Beedle 2002). However, since they
 came into being as a response to the failure of 
waterfall approaches and downplay the importance of
 a formal process and planning, agile methods 
have been pushed to the opposite of waterfall appro
aches (Boehm 2002) and considered generators of 
chaos (Rakitin 2001). But is chaos really a proper 
metaphor for agile processes, that is, software 
development processes applying agile methods? 

This paper sets out to shed some lights on this que
stion. Our objective is to provide a better 
understanding of the nature of agile processes, whi
ch can in turn benefit the effective application of
 
agile methods in software development. To this end,
 our study draws on complex adaptive systems 
(CAS) theory, which can provides valuable insights 
to understand complex systems, adaptation and 
related issues (Anderson 1999). CAS theory has been
 applied in management and the study of 
organizations (Brown & Eisenhardt 1998, Haeckel 199
9, Mitleton-kelly 1997, Stacey 2003). It has 
also been used to study agile software development 
(Augustine et al. 2005, Meso & Jain 2006, Vidgen 
& Wang 2006). In particular, this paper uses the id
ea of the ﬁedge of chaosﬂ from CAS theory to study 
the software development process. This paper is bas
ed on our empirical study of two software 
development teams in the same division of a major I
T company, one of them applying an agile 
methodology, XP, the other using the waterfall appr
oach. Both software development processes are 
analysed using the lens of the ﬁedge of chaosﬂ, whi
ch is part of a broader CAS-based conceptual 
framework (Vidgen & Wang 2006). The paper is organi
zed as follow. Section 2 introduces an ongoing 
debate about agile methods and waterfall approaches
. The edge of chaos concept is elaborated in 
Section 3. In Section 4 the two cases are presented
 and compared, and the findings are summarized. 
Then Section 5 discusses the findings and their imp
lications for software development using the notion
 
of the edge of chaos. The last section concludes th
e paper and indicates future research. 
2 WATERFALL VS. AGILE: AN ONGOING DEBATE 

Early software development often took place in a ra
ther chaotic and haphazard manner, relying 
entirely on the skills and experience of the indivi
dual staff members performing the work. The 
waterfall model is the earliest method of structure
d system development and is widely used to 
counteract the ad-hoc development of software (Avis
on & Fitzgerald 2003a). The waterfall model is a 
linear process model that advocates using extensive
 planning, upfront and in detail, to make 
development a predictable activity (Boehm 2002). Al
though it is widely used and considered a 
dominant approach, it has been criticized in recent
 years. Avison and Fitzgerald (2003b, p.34) give a 
list of criticisms of the waterfall model, among wh
ich are instability and lack of control, perhaps to
 the 
surprise of those who believe that the waterfall mo
del provides a basis for a predictable and 
controllable process. 

An alternative model of software development proces
s to the waterfall is the iterative model. The basi
c 
idea of the iterative model is to develop a softwar
e system incrementally, so allowing the developer t
o 
take advantage of what was being learned during the
 development of earlier, incremental, deliverable 
versions of the system (Basili & Turner 1975). Havi
ng a history arguably as long as the waterfall 
808 approach (Larman & Basili 2003), the iterative mode
l has gone through several cylces of popularity 
and has recently gained new momentum in the agile s
oftware development movement. A set of ﬁlight-
weightﬂ software development methods have emerged i
n the past several years as a response to the 
rapidly changing world and the inefficiency of conv
entional ﬁrigorousﬂ software development 
methodologies (Highsmith 2002). XP and Scrum are th
e most popular ones. The proponents of agile 
methods argue that software development is not a me
chanistic defined process, but an organic 
empirical one (Schwaber 1996), as a consequence, th
e belief of complete pre-knowledge and control 
of the process embedded in the traditional methodol
ogies is unrealistic. ﬁIn chaotic environments, 
success is accidentalﬂ (Highsmith 2000, p. 29). The
y question the values of detailed planning over the
 
entire lifespan of a project, precise prediction an
d rigid control strategies characterized in the wat
erfall 
model, and advocate more subtle ways, ﬁto bound, di
rect, nudge, or confine, but not to controlﬂ 
(Highsmith 2000, p. 40). The values and principles 
behind various agile methods have been 
summarized and explicated in the agile manifesto (h
ttp://www.agilemanifesto.org): individuals and 
interactions over processes and tools; working soft
ware over comprehensive documentation; customer 
collaboration over contract negotiation; responding
 to change over following a plan. The agile 
manifesto acknowledges that there is value in the t
erms on the right (e.g., processes and tools) but 
places greater value and emphasis on the terms on t
he left (e.g., working software). 
Although the proponents of agile methods have demon
strated the successful application of their 
respective methods (Beck & Andres 2004, Highsmith 2
000, 2002, Schwaber & Beedle 2002), 
scepticism and criticism have been raised around ag
ile values and practices. Rakitin (2001) argues tha
t 
process, documentation, user contract and planning 
are essential in software development, whereas 
agile values, such as people interaction and respon
ding to change, reflect a hacker culture which 
allows people to irresponsibly write code and have 
no respect for engineering discipline. His ﬁhacker 
interpretationsﬂ of the Agile Manifesto puts agile 
methods at the opposite polar of process and 
discipline, and regards agile values as chaos gener
ators. In the same vein, in their book titled ﬁExtr
eme 
Programming Refactored: The Case Against XPﬂ, Steph
ens and Rosenberg (2003) doubt both XP 
practices and the philosophy behind XP and try to r
estore the values of documentation, upfront 
planning and design in software development. Boehm 
(2002) notices that many agile advocates also 
consider the agile and plan-driven software develop
ment methods to be polar opposites. Baskerville 
(2006, p. 113) suggests that this polar view is due
 to the fact that, in the attempt to clarify what a
gile 
really means, ﬁauthorities seeking to describe agil
e software development methods often cast about for
 
its opposite. These opposites are sometimes called 
‚disciplined™ approaches or ‚plan-driven™ 
approachesﬂ. While Boehm (2002) attempts to synthes
ize the two opposites thus implicitly taking an 
either/or approach and admitting that planning is n
ot an inherent part of agile processes, Baskerville
 
(2006, p. 113) doubts this dichotomy and puts forwa
rd the question ﬁBut is agility really the opposite
 
of discipline and planningﬂ? Following Pettigrew et
 al. (2003) we will recast the either/or as a 
both/and. In the following section we draw on the e
dge of chaos concept in CAS theory to provide a 
new angle to understand agile processes. 

3 SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT AS STRUCTURED CHAOS 

According to Gell-Mann (1995), when something is in
 complete order or complete disorder, the 
effective complexity is zero. Effective complexity 
can be high only in a region intermediate between 
total order and complete disorder. This critical zo
ne is called ﬁthe edge of chaosﬂ, where ﬁthe 
components of a system never quite lock into place,
 and yet never quite dissolve into turbulence, 
eitherﬂ (Waldrop 1994, p. 12). Stacey (2003) terms 
it bounded instability, that is, stable and unstabl
e at 
the same time. It is stable in the sense that the s
ystem shows patterns of behavior and the possibilit
y 
space of the system™s states can be depicted using 
fine detail in the short term, but unstable in the 
sense that the path which the system will follow is
 uncertain and unpredictable in the long term. 
McKelvey (forthcoming) suggests that, in the contex
t of organizations, it is better to think of a ﬁreg
ion 
of emergent complexityﬂ rather than an ﬁedge of cha
osﬂ. This region lies between stasis and chaos and 
809 is defined by two critical values. If an organizati
on falls below the first critical value because it 
exhibits minimal response to addressing the adaptiv
e tensions it faces then order will prevail. If the
 
organization over-responds to its adaptive tensions
, for example, by initiating too many change 
programmes too quickly, then it may exceed the seco
nd critical value and chaos will ensue. 
Why would organizations poise at the edge of chaos 
(or the region of emergent complexity)? Because 
it is where all the really interesting behaviour oc
curs in a system, ﬁwhere life has enough stability 
to 
sustain itself and enough creativity to deserve the
 name of lifeﬂ(Waldrop 1994, p. 12). The edge of 
chaos provides organizations ﬁwith sufficient stimu
lation and freedom to experiment and adapt but 
also with sufficient frameworks and structure to en
sure they avoid complete disorderly disintegrationﬂ
 
(McMillan 2004, p. 22), and ﬁgives them a selective
 advantage: systems that are driven to (but not 
past) the edge of chaos out-compete systems that do
 notﬂ (Anderson 1999 citing Kauffman 1995). 
According to Stacey (2003, p. 262), the dynamic in 
this region should be understood as a ﬁdynamic of 
paradox, that is, simultaneous stability and instab
ility, which is a requirement for the emergence of 
noveltyﬂ. 
Processes and tools
Comprehensive 
documentation
Contract negotiation
Following a plan
Too much structure:
BUREAUCRACY
Just enough structure:
EDGE OF CHAOS
Individuals and 
interactions
Too little structure:
CHAOS
Working software
Customer collaboration
Responding to change
First critical 
value
Second critical 
value
Agility
 Figure 1. The agile/edge of chaos conceptual framew
ork 
Agile processes have been viewed as chaotic process
es by some, as reviewed in Section 2, which put 
agile methods and the waterfall model on the opposi
tes of a spectrum of increasing emphasis on 
structure and planning. However, according to the s
pectrum from order to chaos with the transit zone -
 the edge of chaos - somewhere in the middle (Figure
 1), it can be argued that, to be responsive to 
change, to be adaptive and innovative, agile proces
ses should not be chaotic, rather, they should pois
e 
at the edge of chaos. Too little structure and the 
software development project will exceed the second
 
critical value and fall into chaos - Brown and Eise
nhardt (1998) identify the warning signs as a rule-
breaking culture, loose structure and chaotic commu
nication. Too much structure and the project will 
fall below the first critical value and into bureau
cracy (the warning signs being a rule-following 
culture, rigid processes and structures, and channe
lled communication). In the next section, the 
software development processes of two teams from th
e same division of a major IT company are 
presented and compared to illustrate our understand
ing of agile processes.  
4 A COMPARISON OF TWO TEAMS 

The case studies reported here follow an interpreti
ve research approach which is considered 
appropriate and beneficial for our study. Semi-stru
ctured interviews using open-ended questions have 
810 been conducted to collect data on the organization 
of software development process. Documentation 
review and non-participative observation have been 
used as complementary data collection methods. 
A theoretical framework based on CAS theory (Vidgen
 and Wang 2006) has acted as a sensitising 
device in the process of data collection and later 
analysis. 
4.1 Organizational context 

The two cases are two software development teams (T
eams A and B for the purposes of anonymity) in 
the same division of a major IT company. The compan
y is considered to be a hierarchical and 
bureaucratic organization by the interviewees. Agil
e methods have not been formally introduced to all 
development teams, but some teams have been using X
P for several years. Team A is one of them and 
the earliest to adopt XP. In contrast, Team B apply
 the waterfall model which has been used in the 
company for a long time and which the senior manage
ment of the company has pushed down a 
directive to use. This directive has been shielded 
by the management of the division, especially the 
people manager who is directly in charge of Team A 
and B, so that Team A can continue to use XP. 
The head of the division is keen to try agile metho
ds and has been supportive to the teams using agile
 
methods, but expressed the feeling of being afraid 
of losing control over these teams, whereas the 
people manager who has direct knowledge of the deve
lopment processes of the teams believes that 
teams using agile methods are actually more predict
able. 
The profiles of the two teams are as shown in Table
 1. 
 
 Team A Team B 
Development 

methodology 
XP (eXtreme Programming) The waterfall approach man
dated by 
the company 
Development tools Java and VB based tools C++ based 
tools 
Team composition 
· 
7 developers (among whom 1 

project manager, 1 team lead and 

1 technical lead) 
· 
1 test manager 
· 
1 onsite customer 
5 developers (among whom 1 project 

manager) 
Project 
· 
Redeveloping a legacy system  
· 
Web application hosted on the 

servers of the company 
· 
The nature of the system is very 

much GUI-driven (Graphic User 

Interface) 
· 
A rolling project 
· 
Backend service residing on and 

assessing customer computing 

environment 
· 
The nature of the system is a 

command-line package )therefore 

limited interface with users) 
Customer Customer service organizations of the 
company who then deal with external 

customers 
Field service engineers of the 

company who in turn deal with 

external customers 
Table 1.  The profiles of the two software developm
ent teams 
4.2 The software development processes of the two t
eams 
In our study we adopt a broad definition of the sof
tware development process. It is not only a 
framework for the tasks and series of steps that ar
e required to build the software (Pressman 1997), b
ut 
also incorporating people that build the software a
nd tools that support development work and the 
interactions among people (Schach 1998). But for th
e purpose of the paper we concentrate on the 
structure of and planning in the processes. 

4.2.1 The software development process of Team A 
811 The software development process of Team A is illus
trated in Figure 2. 
(1) The project cycle 

At the beginning of the project, the onsite custome
r collects initial user requirements by workshoppin
g 
for a piece of functionality and elaborates them wi
th the team. When the team start to develop that 
piece, the customer goes on to define other require
ments. So the requirement gathering starts at the 
beginning of the project but goes along in parallel
 with the development throughout the whole project.
 
After the initial scoping phase, the project manage
r, team leads, onsite customer and business sponsor
s 
have a release planning meeting in which the areas 
that need to work on are decided and the 
requirements are broken down into user stories. A u
ser story should have four attributes: it has 
business value, it can be estimated, it can be test
ed, and it acts as a token for a conversation. It i
s not 
intended to be a definitive definition of a require
ment. Although there are no intermediate releases 
during the project as mandated by the business, sev
eral release planning meetings have been held to 
review the initial plan and the focuses of the next
 iterations. After a release planning meeting, the 
team 
begin the iterations. All code is developed in iter
ations (see ﬁThe iteration cycleﬂ). When developmen
t 
work is completed, the system goes into testing. Si
nce the team do not deliver to a live environment a
t 
the end of each iteration, an overall test called r
egression test is run on the complete system. Then 
the 
build is deployed in the live environment for custo
mers to do field testing and eventually use the 
system. At the end of the project a postpartum meet
ing is held to address wider issues including the 
connection of the development team with support and
 how the team interface with other groups. 
Iterate per each user story
(1) The project cycle
(2) The iteration cycle (bi-weekly)
Write
unit test
Iteration 
planning 
meeting
Write
function code
Acceptance
test
Refactoring
Release
planning
meeting
Iterations
Retrospective
(3) The daily routines
Standupmeeting
Daily system build
Write 
acceptance 
test
Regression
test
Production
every 4 -6 iterations
Project
Initiation phase
(workshop)
Deliver to 
onsite 
customer
Postpartum
Tracking
 Figure 2. The software development process of Team 
A 
(2) The iteration cycle 

The team uses two-week iterations, as suggested by 
XP, and generally do not change the length of the 
iterations. An iteration begins with an iteration p
lanning meeting in which all the team participate, 
including the onsite customer and the test manager,
 to determine what the team do in the next two 
week period. The onsite customer introduces each us
er story and the team discuss them in enough 
detail to provide an estimate of effort required. T
he estimates are expressed in ﬁperfect engineering 
daysﬂ, i.e. 8 hours devoted to the problem at hand 
with no interruptions. A user story can be as small
 
as 0.25 perfect engineering day, but no bigger than
 4. Any user story with an estimate bigger than 4 i
s 
considered a sign of it not being at the right leve
l of granularity. The development team inform the 
812 customer of the velocity, i.e. the number of perfec
t engineering days of work that the team can 
complete for the current iteration. The customer th
en prioritises the user stories to be completed in 
that 
iteration, and ensures that the total estimates for
 all stories in the iteration are less than or equa
l to the 
team™s velocity. The user stories that need to be i
mplemented in the iteration are written on quarter 
A4-sized paper cards and stuck on the cubicle walls
, which serve as story boards. In principle the use
r 
stories are not allowed to change during an iterati
on, but the team do adjust the user stories accordi
ng 
to suggestions from the customer. After the plannin
g meeting, the team generally run a retrospective t
o 
review the process used during the previous two wee
ks. The team provide feedback on the process 
under three categories: (a) keep these - things tha
t worked well throughout the iteration; (b) problem
s - 
issues with the process identified during the itera
tion; and (c) try these - suggestions to alleviate 
the 
issues identified in (b) or things that would impro
ve the process. The onsite customer participates in
 
the retrospective of the team as well. She is invol
ved in every step of the development process and 
gets the opportunity and flexibility to steer the s
oftware. 
The team lead tracks the progress on the stories tw
ice per iteration. The tracking involves asking eac
h 
story owner to estimate the amount of time spent on
 a story to date and the amount of time remaining. 
The information is then fed back to the next iterat
ion planning meeting to determine the actual veloci
ty 
of the team in that iteration. 

The team adopt a test first development pattern. De
velopers write a test for a piece of function befor
e 
writing the code to implement that function. Each u
ser story has a set of acceptance tests associated 
with it. While the developers implement user storie
s, the test manager and the customer are writing th
e 
acceptance test scripts. When a user story is imple
mented, it can be tested without delay and most 
bugs caught by testing can be fixed within the iter
ation. 
(3) The daily routines 

The team have a stand-up meeting everyday at 10 o™c
lock. All participate in the meeting, including the
 
onsite customer. The team members report the progre
ss and issues of the work from the previous day 
and quickly go through the work of the day. Another
 routine is daily system build. It is required that
 
all code will be checked in to the code base at lea
st daily. Before checking code in, all unit tests f
or 
that code must pass. The system is built automatica
lly on build machines and deployed to the test 
server at least once a day. The deployment is avail
able for the onsite customer to review the ongoing 
functionality and to assess it. 

4.2.2 The software development process of Team B 

The software development process of Team B is illus
trated in Figure 3. Generally the team deliver a 
new major version of the product within 12 months. 
At the beginning of the project, in the conception 
and scoping stages, the project manager does a high
 level brainstorming with clients over what needs 
to be done for the next 12 months, and get a high l
evel view of what are the major deliverables. These
 
are the overall business requirements which do not 
involve input from the developers. The business 
requirements are broken down into product requireme
nts with more technical details in the analysis 
stage. The project manager then consults the team m
embers for assigning development tasks and 
works out a work schedule for the whole project. A 
task generally takes no less than 1 day but no more
 
than 5 days, except for a very predictable piece of
 work which may have an estimate of up to 3 weeks. 
The work schedule has been reviewed and updated by 
the project manager a couple of times during 
the project. 

Since changes happening to the project come frequen
tly from management level, such as 
organizational changes and project cut or scope cha
nges, which demand the team to terminate the 
project and quickly deliver something, the team hav
e twisted the waterfall process and evolved a 
phased approach. Instead of having one big construc
tion (coding) phase, they break it up into several 
4 
to 6-week phases. Each phase is composed of a set o
f mini-waterfall steps, including analysis, design,
 
coding and testing. The most crucial blocks of work
 are put in early phases and packaged in a self-
813 contained way that, though the team do not actually
 deliver anything to the customer at the end of a 
phase, if something happens and the team have to ma
ke release, they would be able to do so. 
After development phases are completed, a long test
 stage will follow Œ up to 10 weeks with 
accordingly high costs. After the system is deploye
d, a postpartum is held at the end of the project t
o 
review all the issues in the project. Everyone on t
he project and any other key parties participate in
 the 
meeting, including the people manager. 
The project cycle
Conception
Scoping 
(Requirement
gathering)
Analysis
of the
whole project
Deployment
(rollout)
System
testing
Postpartum
Phase
analysis
Phase
analysis
Phases (every 4 to 6 weeks)
Design
Design
Construction
(coding)
Construction
(coding)
Unit
testing
Unit
testing
 Figure 3. The software development process of Team 
B 
Certain types and amount of documents are produced 
at the end of each stage and need to be signed 
off by the senior architects and the people manager
. These documents are tokens that are used to get 
through the gateways from one stage to the next. A 
change control mechanism is used for significant 
changes either to the scope or to the schedule of t
he project. The project manager needs to fill out a
 
change request and get it signed out by the people 
manager and the senior architects before the team 
can implement the change. Depending on where the pr
oject is, the team have meetings at different 
frequency. They formally meet once every 2 or 3 wee
ks in the middle of a design phase. During the 
intensive test phase, they meet formally every few 
days. There are no daily routines in the team™s 
development work. 

4.3 A comparison of the two processes  

4.3.1 Structure  

In the case of Team A, the team members believe the
y have a formal process and there is a structure in
 
the process, which brings a sense of certainty to t
he team. The formality and structure come from the 
routines in the process, such as 2-week iterations,
 iteration planning meetings, retrospectives and 
stand-up meetings. The test first coding pattern is
 also a routine that the team members stick to: 
ﬁThere's a structure there and I like it, and kind 
of you know what's ahead of you.ﬂ (Team A) 
ﬁI suppose it™s kind of formal process, you know, t
hat™s the difference, you have a form. 
[but 
waterfall is not formal?]
 it™s not, I mean, it™s do the work, test it, and l
eave it, really it isn™t.ﬂ 
(Team A) 
814 ﬁYou can not be so flexible that things are choppin
g and changing every single day– We have to 
be rigid in order to be agile.ﬂ (Team A) 
Meanwhile, Team A periodically review their process
 to avoid process rigidity or deterioration. It is 
considered essential for agile processes by the tea
m: 
ﬁYou don't have an agile process unless you have it
 (the retrospective) – that constant review 
process, you know, from planning point of view help
s us to maintain the sustainable pace.ﬂ 
(Team A) 
The routines and the frequent retrospectives make t
he process internalised in the minds of the team 
members: 
ﬁI suppose people know the process, in this case so
, you know, keep stand-up meetings or keep 
onsite customers,  which were sort of things inside
 on your own –ﬂ (Team A) 
In the case of Team B, in contrast, the team member
s have no clear awareness of the process they are 
using, neither do they care about it. It is seen as
 imposed by the management. No retrospective 
regarding process has ever been conducted. 
 ﬁI mean we don™t concern as much the process – may
be the project manager, I should say he 
knows more about the approach, me personally I just
 yeah I have a task, I implement it, that™s 
it.ﬂ (Team B) 
The officially signed-off documentation plays the r
ole of gateways in the process of Team B, and is 
the main source of formality of the process. There 
are no built-in routines in the process, rather, th
e 
team members have a negative opinion on routines. 
 ﬁ[Do you have daily meetings?]
 No. I wouldn't like them anyway, daily
. [You know the other 
team they have daily meeting?]
 They're losing precious time. When they could be c
oding they 
are having meetings.ﬂ (Team B) 
4.3.2  Planning 

In the case of Team A, they have several release pl
anning meetings in the course of the project where 
they make a sketchy plan for a period of 4 to 6 ite
rations. Then they have a detailed plan for each 2-
week iteration at the iteration planning meeting. T
he daily stand-up meeting functions as a quick 
steering of their daily work: 
ﬁWe did have a lot of focus on planning, but we had
 a very fluid plan, fluid in the sense in that the 
plan changed from iteration to iteration.ﬂ (Team A)
  
The team do not follow plans rigidly. The release p
lans are reviewed regularly and the execution of 
iteration plans are tracked for the purpose of impr
oving the team™s ability of planning: 
ﬁWhat you find in your initial plan is that, as you
 work on stories, other stories come out that 
things keep added, particularly, this is actually a
 quite complex project –ﬂ (Team A) 
Since Team A work on short iterations and break dow
n the user requirements to a fine level of 
granularity (no bigger than 4 perfect engineering d
ays), they can plan their work for each iteration 
accurately and in detail. 
ﬁI find the XP estimation would be better. It™s dow
n to more detail, it™s down to the actual day – 
is actually taking them to a level that™s typically
 not going to in the waterfall approach.ﬂ (The 
people manager) 
In the case of Team B, planning is an important act
ivity at the beginning of the project and is time 
consuming. The plan covers the whole lifespan of th
e project. The work schedule as a result is 
considered the most important document by the proje
ct manager and meant to be followed. It has been 
only reviewed twice during the 12-month project. 
815 ﬁThe schedule is kind of like, if we were driving, 
for me to be the map, and if we start to go out of 
the map, we have to figure out how to get back on t
o the map – the schedule would be what I 
view as a kind of directive, so where we are going.
ﬂ (Team B) 
Table 2 summarizes the key characteristics of the d
evelopment processes of the two teams according 
to the dimensions of Figure 1. 

 
Agile manifesto Team A Team B 
Team members consider they have a formal 

process.  
Team members are not clearly aware of the 

process they are using.  
The formality comes from the routines both 

in the iteration cycle (2-week iteration, 

iteration planning meeting, retrospective, test 

first coding pattern) and at daily level (stand-

up meeting and daily build). 
The formality mainly comes from the 

documentation sign-off, no built-in routines. 

Team members have negative opinion on 

routines. 
Team members periodically review the 

process. 
No retrospective regarding the process. 
Development 

process 
The process becomes internalised in the 

minds of the team members.  
The process is imposed by the management 

and remains external to the team members. 
Documentation No heavy documentation Œ the user sto
ry and 
associated acceptance tests are in the place of 

requirement documents, unit tests in the place 

of system analysis and design documents. 
Documentation is mandated and prescribed Œ 

it plays the role of a token for negotiation of 

process gateways. 
Customer 

relationships 
User story is business driven and considered 

as a token of conversation between the 

customer and the developers rather than a 

binding contract. 
Signed-off user requirements are the contract 

between developers and user. 
Planning is frequent and fluid: 

· 
Release planning 
· 
Iteration planning 
· 
Daily planning at stand-up meeting 
Planning is upfront and covers a long period, 

up to 12 months. Updates to the plan are rare 

and infrequent. 
Planning at a fine level of granularity (user 

stories fit to a 2-week iteration, no story 

bigger than 4 perfect engineering days), 

therefore better at estimation. 
Planning at a coarse level of granularity (no 

fixed unit of timeframe is used for estimating 

tasks) . 
Planning 
Plans are reviewed regularly and their 

execution is tracked for the purpose of 

improving planning in the next round. 
The plan is directive. No regular review is 

made of the plan. 
Table 2. The comparison of the two software develop
ment processes  
5 DISCUSSION 

The edge of chaos concept (Figure 1) implies that a
 truly agile process is neither chaotic nor static.
 It 
needs to be structured but not so much that order p
revails and innovation is stifled. A well-structure
d 
process can provide stability to a software develop
ment team. Agile practices such as time-boxed 
iterations and daily stand-up meetings provide a te
am with regular heartbeats. Meanwhile a process 
needs continuous adjustment and adaptation to the s
pecific situations a team is embedded in to avoid 
process rigidity and deterioration. The regular ret
rospectives by Team A on their process allow them 
to take gradual steps to change and improve it, rat
her than leaving it to a stage where no effective 
action can be taken. An agile process is a delicate
 balance of structuring and restructuring which 
enables a software development team to work at a fa
st yet sustainable pace. 
In terms of Figure 1, Team A seems to be following 
an agile methodology and achieving a balance 
between chaos and order, thus providing the enablin
g conditions for poising at the edge of chaos. By 
816 contrast, Team B is at one level over-structured an
d might be expected to fall into the 
order/bureaucratic region. But, at another level th
ere is a disconnect between what Team B say they do
 
and what they actually do. This gap may lead to the
m tipping into the chaotic region, i.e., the espous
ed 
structures adopted by Team B may become ineffectual
 with the result that the project has insufficient 
structure. Our conceptual model suggests that it is
 not just agile methods that are at risk of tipping
 into 
chaos - it is also possible that the waterfall appr
oach to software development may well turn out, in 
practice, to be chaotic. 

The edge of chaos metaphor also implies that, while
 it is possible to work on the fine details of the 
short-term patterns of a system, its long-term beha
viours are unpredictable. In agile processes, short
 
iterations provide a timeframe in which a team can 
work with certainty. This certainty makes short-
term planning possible and meaningful. Since user r
equirements are typically broken down to a fine 
level of granularity in agile processes, it provide
s a good basis for accurate and detailed planning. 
However, there is a danger of becoming short-sighte
d while working on short-term iterations, that is, 
to ignore the potential problems posed by long-term
 uncertainty. Frequent planning and plan 
reviewing enable a team to embrace long-term uncert
ainty by constantly steering and adjusting the 
direction they head for. Frequent planning is also 
a natural consequence of frequent feedback loops in
 
agile processes due to the intensive interactions b
etween customers and development teams as well as 
among team members. The value of feedback would be 
lost if no appropriate planning action 
followed. Meanwhile, plan reviewing is a learning o
pportunity for a team to improve their ability to 
plan. Planning in agile processes is a ﬁparadox of 
planning and not planning that unfolds as a practic
e 
required by settings in which large degrees of unce
rtainty and ambiguity are inevitableﬂ (Baskerville 
2006, p.115). Rather than upfront long-term plannin
g, agile processes incorporate frequent and fluid 
planning which enables a team to work with short-te
rm certainty while embracing long-term 
uncertainty. 

In summary, agile processes are not at the opposite
 of structure and planning, rather, structure and 
planning are integral elements of agile processes. 
A truly agile process is able to balance order and 
chaos and to poise at the edge of chaos, in the reg
ion of emergent complexity. Therefore, a ﬁchaordicﬂ
 
(Highsmith 2002, p. xxiii) - both order and chaos- 
perspective is needed for managing agile processes.
 6 SUMMARY 

The contribution of this paper has been to use the 
edge of chaos concept from Complex Adaptive 
Systems theory to investigate software development 
processes and provide a better understanding of 
the role played by structure and planning. To illus
trate our points, the software development processe
s 
of two teams in a major IT company, one using XP, t
he other the waterfall process, have been 
presented and compared, and the issues regarding st
ructure and planning in agile processes have been 
discussed using the edge of chaos and the agile man
ifesto as the theoretical lens. We have suggested 
that the waterfall method, although potentially ove
r-structured and bureaucratic in the abstract, may,
 in 
practice, turn out to be chaotic. Conversely, it se
ems reasonable to assume that agile methods, when 
followed rigidly without reflection, could also bec
ome bureaucratic and over-ordered. Further work is 
needed to explore the patterns of organization and 
behaviour that contribute to agility, irrespective 
of 
the espoused methodology. 

References 

Anderson, P. (1999). Complexity theory and Organiza
tion Science. Organization Science: A Journal 
of the Institute of Management Sciences, 10(3), 216
-232. 
Augustine, S., Payne, B., Sencindiver, F. and S. Wo
odcock (2005). Agile Project Management: 
Steering from the Edges. Communication of ACM, 48(1
2), 85-89. 
Avison, D. E. and G. Fitzgerald (2003a). Where now 
for development methodologies? 
Communications of the ACM, 46(1), 78-82. 
817 Avison, D. and G. Fitzgerald (2003b). Information S
ystems Development: Methodologies, Techniques 
and Tools. 3rd Edition. McGraw-Hill, London. 
Basili, V.  and J. Turner (1975). Iterative Enhance
ment: A Practical Technique for Software 
Development. IEEE Trans. Software Eng., Dec. 1975, 
390-396. 
Beck, K. and C. Andreas (2004). Extreme Programming
 Explained: Embrace Change. 2nd Edition. 
Addison Wesley Professional, Mass. 
Baskerville, R. L. (2006). Artful Planning. Europea
n Journal of Information Systems, 15(2), 113-115. 
Boehm, B. (2002). Get Ready For Agile Methods, With
 Care. Computer, 35(1), 64-69.
 Brooks, F. (1987). No Silver Bullet: Essence and Ac
cidents of Software Engineering. Proc. IFIP, IEEE 
CS Press, 1987, 1069-1076; reprinted in Computer, A
pr. 1987, 10-19. 
Brown, S. L. and K. M. Eisenhardt (1998). Competing
 on the edge: strategy as structured chaos. 
Harvard Business School Press, Boston. 
Gell-Mann, M. (1995). What Is Complexity? Complexit
y, 1(1), 16-19. 
Haeckel, S. (1999). Adaptive Enterprise: Creating a
nd Leading Sense-and-respond Organizations. 
Harvard Business School Press, Boston. 
Highsmith, J. (2002). Agile Software Development Ec
osystems. Addison-Wesley, Boston. 
Highsmith, J. A. (2000). Adaptive Software Developm
ent: A Collaborative Approach to Managing 
Complex Systems. Dorset House Publishing, New York.
 Kauffman, S. (1995). At Home in the Universe: The S
earch for Laws of Self-Organization and 
Complexity. Oxford University Press, New York. 
Larman, C. and V. R. Basili (2003). "Iterative and 
Incremental Development: A Brief History." IEEE 
Computer, 36(6), 47-56. 
McKelvey, B. (forthcoming). MicroStrategy from Micr
oLeadership: Improving distributed  
intelligence via complexity science, in A. Lewin an
d H. Volberda (eds.) Mobilizing the Self-
renewing Organization. Palgrave Macmillan, New York
. 
McMillan, E. (2004). Complexity, Organizations and 
Change. London, Routledge, Taylor & Francis 
Group. 
Meso, P. and R. Jain (2006). Agile Software Develop
ment: Adaptive Systems Principles And Best 
Practices. Information Systems Management, 23(3), 1
9-30. 
Mitleton-kelly, E. (1997). Organisations as Co-evol
ving Complex Adaptive Systems. British Academy 
of Management Conference, BPRC (Business Processes 
Resource Center) Paper Series, No 5. 
Pettigrew, A., Whittington, R., Melin, L., Sanchez-
Runde, C., van den Bosch, F., Ruigrok, W. and 
Numagami, T. (2003). Innovative Forms of Organizing
. Sage Publications
, London.
 Pressman, R. S. (1997). Software Engineering: A Pra
ctitioner's Approach, McGraw-Hill, Beijing. 
Rakitin, S. (2001). Manifesto Elicits Cynicism. IEE
E Computer, 34(12), 4. 
Schach, S. R. (1998). Software Engineering with JAV
A, McGraw-Hill, Beijing. 
Schwaber, K. (1996). Controlled Chaos: Living on th
e Edge. American Programmer, April 1996. 
Schwaber, K and A. Beedle (2002). Agile Software De
velopment with SCRUM. Prentice-Hall, Upper 
Saddle River, NJ. 
Stacey, R. D. (2003). Strategic Management and Orga
nisational Dynamics: The Challenge of 
Complexity. 4th Edition. Prentice-Hall, London. 
Stephens, M. and D. Rosenberg (2003). Extreme Progr
amming Refactored: The Case Against XP. 
Apress, New York. 
Vidgen, R., and Wang, X., (2006). Organizing for Ag
ility: a Complex Adaptive Systems Perspective 
on Agile Software Development Process In: Proceedin
gs of the 14th European Conference on 
Information Systems, Göteborg, Sweden, June 12-14. 
Waldrop, M. M. (1994). Complexity: The Emerging Sci
ence at the Edge of Chaos. Penguin books, 
London. 
818