 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)IT-enabled change into the structures of healthinformation systems in Africa: A case study inKenyaXiaofeng WangKieran Conboy UNDERSTANDING AGILITY IN SOFTWARE DEVELOPMENT 
FROM A COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS PERSPECTIVE 
Xiaofeng Wang, Lero, the Irish Software Engineering Research
 Centre, Limerick, Ireland, 
xiaofeng.wang@ul.ie 
Kieran Conboy, National University of Ireland, Galway, Irela
nd, 
kieran.conboy@nuigalway.ie 
Abstract 

Agile software development methods have emerged in 
recent years and have become increasingly 
popular since the start of the century. While much 
research claims to study agile methods, the 
meaning of agility itself in software development i
s yet to be fully understood. Agility is viewed by 
some as the antithesis of plan, structure disciplin
e and bureaucracy. This study aims to develop a 
better understanding of agility, using the key conc
epts of Complex Adaptive Systems as a theoretical 
lens. The study explores agility from several diffe
rent angles, including autonomous team, stability 
and uncertainty, and team learning. A multiple case
 study research method was employed. The 
findings of the study emphasize that agility is man
ifested as stability and discipline, which are just
 as 
desirable as flexibility, and context sharing is of
 the same value and importance as knowledge 
sharing. In addition, the collective nature of lear
ning is underlined. 
Keywords: agility, complex adaptive systems, autono
my, stability, team learning 
 1 INTRODUCTION 
The last ten years or so has seen the emergence of 
agile software development methods as a response 
to the inefficiency of existing software developmen
t methods in rapidly changing environments 
(Highsmith 2002), e.g. eXtreme Programming (XP) (Be
ck 1999) and Scrum (Schwaber & Beedle 
2002). A brief reflection on the history of the agi
le software development movement, however, reveals 
that agile methods originated as a set of technique
s and practices, and the term agile is more a post-
rationalization to justify a set of existing ﬁlight
-weightﬂ methods. Agility in software development h
as 
been interpreted in many different ways in practice
. Skepticism and criticism of agile methods place 
agility to the opposite of plan, structure and disc
ipline which are generally considered the core 
components of more traditional waterfall methods (R
akitin 2001, Stephens & Rosenberg 2003).  
To clarify the meaning of agility, Conboy and Fitzg
erald (2004) conduct a review of the literature on 
agility across several disciplines including manufa
cturing, business and management, and carefully 
distinguish several intertwined concepts, including
 flexibility and leanness. Based on the comparison 
and contrast of these concepts, they provide a broa
d definition of agility as ﬁthe continual readiness
 of 
an entity to rapidly or inherently, proactively or 
reactively, embrace change, through high quality, 
simplistic, economical components and relationships
 with its environmentﬂ (Conboy & Fitzgerald 
2004, p.40). Lyytinen and Rose (2006) explore agili
ty in an information systems development (ISD) 
context. They claim that ISD agility is concerned w
ith why and how ISD organizations sense and 
respond swiftly as they develop and maintain inform
ation system applications. They outline a theory 
of ISD agility drawing upon a model of Information 
Technology (IT) innovation and organizational 
learning which adopts March™s (1991) concepts of ex
ploration and exploitation. Their empirical study 
shows that the concept of ISD agility is more multi
faceted and contextual than conceived so far in the
 
literature. It relates to being nimble in terms of 
the velocity to absorb base innovations and innovat
e 
with IS products; the velocity to shift from one in
novation regime to another (organizational 
flexibility); the velocity to learn from experience
s (trial and error learning); and the velocity to d
eliver 
IS solutions. Each one of these demands different c
ompetencies and expects managerial shaping of 
alternative organizational goals and incentives. Th
eir findings suggest that the dynamics and 
interactions between these four types of agility fo
rm different ecological niches. Each one follows a 
different organizing logic. Managers must view the 
meaning of agility differently in each niche. 
While these studies help to understand agility, and
 do highlight the lack of theoretical foundation 
regarding agility in an ISD context, they do not ad
dress specifically how agility is manifested in 
software development environments. Based on this ob
servation, this study investigates the meaning of 
agility in software development using the lenses of
 Complex Adaptive Systems (CAS), an important 
branch of the complexity study which provides insig
hts of how a system can be adaptive to its 
environment. (Note that in the following sections t
he full phrase complex adaptive system is used to 
refer to an instance of a complex system that demon
strates an adaptive nature, while CAS is used to 
refer to the study and theory of such systems.) The
 empirical part of the study employs a multiple-cas
e 
study approach. The remaining part of the paper is 
organized as follows. Section 2 introduces the key 
concepts of CAS and builds a conceptual framework b
ased on CAS which guides the empirical 
investigation; Section 3 describes the research met
hod and the context of the empirical study; then th
e 
findings are presented in Section 4 and discussed i
n Section 5. The paper ends up with a conclusion 
section where the implications and limitations of t
he study are reviewed and the future work 
summarized. 

2 A COMPLEX ADAPTIVE SYSTEMS PERSPECTIVE ON AGILITY 
A complex adaptive system, roughly defined, consist
s of a large number of agents, each of which 
behaves according to some set of rules. These rules
 require agents to adjust their behaviour to that o
f 
other agents. They interact with, and adapt to, eac
h other. CAS seeks to identify common features of 
 the dynamics of such systems or networks in general
 (Stacey 2003). There is no single and definitive 
account of CAS. Anderson (1999), Mitleton-Kelly (20
03) and Stacey (2003) provide valuable 
introductions to CAS in the context of organization
 and management. Four key concepts of CAS in the 
centre of these accounts are of particular relevanc
e to this study: inter-connected autonomous agents,
 
self-organization, the edge of chaos and emergence.
 These key concepts provide a new perspective to 
investigate different facets of agility as a desira
ble property for software development teams in 
constantly changing environments. 

The concepts of inter-connected autonomous agents a
nd self-organization suggest that, to be agile, a 
software development team should be composed of aut
onomous members who have their own 
schemata, which generally refer to norms, values, b
eliefs, and assumptions that are held by individual
s 
(Senge 1990, Schein 1997). Team members are interco
nnected in such a way that a decision or action 
by any individual may affect related individuals an
d the team. A team composed of autonomous but 
inter-connected members can spontaneously come toge
ther to perform a task (or for some other 
purpose); the team decides what to do, how and when
 to do it; and no one outside the group directs 
those activities (Mitleton-Kelly 2003). To do so, a
 team needs energy imported into and constantly 
flowing within it, which can be interpreted, partly
, as the sharing of information, knowledge or other
 
resources needed to sustain self-organized activiti
es. 
The edge of chaos provides organizations ﬁwith suff
icient stimulation and freedom to experiment and 
adapt but also with sufficient frameworks and struc
ture to ensure they avoid complete disorderly 
disintegrationﬂ (McMillan 2004, p. 22). Brown and E
isenhardt (1998) contend that, to compete at the 
edge, organizations must understand what to structu
re and what not to structure, to foster 
communication and to capture cross-business synergi
es. The edge of chaos concept suggests that being 
agile is neither chaotic nor static. It needs stabi
lity but not so much that order prevails and innova
tion 
is stifled. It is a delicate balance of both. 

The concept of emergence sheds new light on learnin
g, which can be seen as a collective behavior of 
creating new patterns of thought at the team level 
based on the interaction of individuals, instead of
 
often seen exclusively as the provision of individu
al training. Learning means not only training or th
e 
acquisition of new skills, but also the gaining of 
insight and understanding which leads to new 
knowledge and behavior. When learning leads to new 
behavior, the team can be said to have adapted 
and evolved (Mitleton-Kelly 2003). An agile team fa
cilitates team learning and generation of new 
knowledge. In addition, new knowledge needs to be s
hared to generate further new learning, 
knowledge and behavior.  

In summary, this study investigates the meaning of 
agility from three facets: autonomous but sharing 
team, stability with embraced uncertainty and team 
learning, as shown in Table 1. 
 
Facets of Agility Underlying CAS Concepts Relevant 
Studies 
Autonomous but sharing team Inter-connected autonom
ous agents 
Self-organization 
Anderson 1999; Choi et al. 2001 ; 

Mitleton-Kelly 2003 
Stability with embraced 

uncertainty 
The edge of chaos Brown and Eisenhardt 1998; 
Stacey 2003 
Team learning Emergence Mitleton-Kelly 2003; Stacey
 2003 
Table 1. Agility through the CAS perspective 

 
3 RESEARCH APPROACH 
This study adopts an interpretivist stance, emphasi
zing that agility are situational and can be better
 
understood through the understanding and sense maki
ng of people who are involved in software 
development. In particular, this study employs a qu
alitative approach, treating agility as a qualitati
ve 
 property of a software development team that can be
 better studied through words and the meanings 
people ascribe to them rather than numbers or frequ
encies. The specific research method used in this 
study is case study, which is an appropriate approa
ch when a research phenomenon is investigated in 
its real-live context (Yin 2003). A multiple-case d
esign is employed. Given the research focus of the 
study, the level of inquiry is at the team level, s
o it seems appropriate to take a software developme
nt 
team as a case. The unit of analysis is the softwar
e development team. Three software development 
teams - XPTeam A, XPTeam B and WaterfallTeam - from
 two different companies were chosen as the 
cases. XPTeam A is a representative case; XPTeam B 
is a confirming case of the first one; and 
WaterfallTeam is a contrasting case, following the 
strategy suggested by Yin (2003). The profiles of 
the three cases are shown in Table 2. XPTeam A is a
 software development team in SecureSoft, a 
small software house specialized in network securit
y and management systems development. XPTeam 
B and WaterfallTeam are software development teams 
in WorldTech, a major IT company providing 
both IT projects and services.  

 
 XPTeam A XPTeam B WaterfallTeam 
Team size 4 8 5 
Team composition 3 developers, 1 project 
manager 
6 developers, 1 test manager, 

1 project manager 
4 developers, 1 project 

manager 
Development method XP XP Waterfall style mixed with
 
some agile elements 
Years of method use 4.5 - 5 years 11 months to 1.5 
years More than 5 years 
Location Co-located in an open 
office space 
Co-located in an semi-open 

office space 
Collocated in an semi-

open office space 
Software developed Application for external 
customer 
Web application for internal 

use 
Backend application for 

internal use 
Table 2. The profiles of the three cases 

Two rounds of data collection are conducted. The in
terval between the two rounds is six months. The 
main data collection method used is semi-structured
 face-to-face interviews. The questions are all 
open-ended. The members of each team are interviewe
d. Each interview lasts between 30 minutes to 
two hours. In all the cases, most interviewees are 
interviewed twice. Table 3 lists the people 
interviewed in each team. Documents regarding the d
evelopment processes of the case teams are 
collected when available. Some non-participative ob
servations are conducted as the opportunities 
occur. Field notes are taken during both rounds of 
data collection. 
 
 XPTeam A XPTeam B WaterfallTeam 
First round 

interviews 
1 group interview (with the 4 team 

members below), 4 individual interviews 
- Project manager 
- Coach 
- Developer A 
- Developer B 
5 individual interviews 
- Project manager 
- Team lead 
- Tech lead 
- Developer A 
- Test manager
 1 individual interview 
- Project 

manager 
Second 

round 

interviews 
2 group interviews (with the team 

members below), 3 individual interviews
 - Coach 
- Developer A 
- Developer B 
6 individual interviews 
- Project manager 
- Team lead 
- Tech lead 
- Developer B 
- Developer C 
- Test manager 
3 individual interviews 
- Project 

manager 
- Developer A 
- Developer B 
Table 3. Two rounds of interviews  

The data analysis includes two steps: within-case a
nalysis and cross-case comparison (Eisenhardt 
1989). The emphasis is on the cross-case comparison
, in which an analysis tactic suggested by 
 Eisenhardt (1989) is used: the three cases were div
ided into two groups, XPTeam A and XPTeam B in 
one group as the cases using agile approach, while 
WaterfallTeam in the other group as the case that 
uses waterfall approach. XPTeam A and B are compare
d firstly for similarities and differences, and 
then they as a group are contrasted with WaterfallT
eam for similarities and differences. 
4 MANIFESTATION OF AGILITY IN THE THREE TEAMS 
This section presents how agility has been manifest
ed (or shown to be absent) in the three cases. 
4.1
 Autonomous but sharing team 
Team autonomy in XPTeam A and B firstly is shown as
 competences relevant to software 
development being distributed among team members. T
he members of the two teams are involved in 
all development activities of their projects, and a
ll have to deal with the customers, analyse user 
requirements and write code together. There are no 
traditional roles such as system analyst, designer 
or programmer. Each team member is able to assume a
ll the roles, since comprehensive competences 
are required to work with user stories, the impleme
ntation of which is self-contained and encapsulates
 
different development activities: 
ﬁThe problem is not to have three persons for analy
sis, or two persons for design, but a user 
story inside has to resolve analysis, developing, a
nd, etc., everything.ﬂ (Project 
manager/XPTeam A) 
For example, when XPTeam B started the project, the
re were big gaps among team members in terms 
of Java related knowledge and skills. With the proj
ect going on, the developers with less Java 
experience learnt quickly from those more experienc
ed, and the team members reached fairly the same 
level of competence. As a result, there is no depen
dency on a particular individual, since each team 
member gets exposure to different areas of a projec
t. Distributed competence is shown in the case of 
WaterfallTeam too, although the team uses waterfall
 approach. Like the other two teams, there are no 
specific roles like analyst, designer or coder in t
he team. The developers are not specialized on spec
ific 
tasks. Everybody has chances to do different things
. 
Team autonomy is also manifested as a disciplined t
eam in XPTeam A and B, which is seemingly 
contradictory to the idea of autonomy. However, bot
h teams reckon the importance of disciplines. As a 
member of XPTeam B describes, disciplines are neces
sary components of an agile process, and they 
come from the process the team uses: 
ﬁThere is a set of rules really, and you may not ad
opt them, you probably adopt most of them, 
and those rules kind of direct you really, it™s lik
e you need to formalize it so you can be more 
flexible.ﬂ (Test manager/XPTeam B) 
Team autonomy does not mean the team members are wo
rking on their own; instead, there is constant 
sharing among them. XPTeam A considers sharing an i
mportant aspect of team working. They believe 
that, as a team, they have to face every moment in 
any case without barriers. Sharing is also seen as 
a 
contributor to a team™s agility by WaterfallTeam wh
o works with the waterfall approach. The 
difference is that sharing in the two teams using a
gile processes goes beyond simply knowledge 
sharing. It extends to context sharing and the shar
ing of achieved results. What is shared among the 
team members is not only the technical knowledge re
lated to different areas of a project, which helps 
to distribute competences among them. It is also th
e knowledge about who knows what, which is 
particularly important for a bigger team like XPTea
m B, and helps the team members self-organize to 
implement tasks: 
ﬁI think the ten o'clock stand-up meeting is defini
tely good, because you know what everybody 
else on the project is working on, and you might sa
y ‚I'm working on this and I'm not sure how 
to™– and someone says ‚oh yeah actually I did it ye
sterday™.ﬂ (Developer B/XPTeam B) 
 In XPTeam A and B, the developers are attentive to 
what happens around them, with the help of the 
open space the teams are working in: 
ﬁWhen you are doing something, you have to listen w
hat the pair, or the single one if you are in 
pair, what he's doing, what they are saying, you ha
ve one ear in this way and the other (in the 
other way).ﬂ (Developer A/XPTeam A) 
Collective ownership of results is another kind of 
sharing. The two teams using the agile processes 
both endorse the collective ownership of code, as s
uggested by XP. A developer of XPTeam B, 
however, warns that collective ownership can become
 collective irresponsibility sometimes, which 
means no one claims to be responsible if there is s
ome problem with a piece of code. In the case of 
XPTeam A, in addition to collective ownership of co
de, the team also owns collectively other forms of 
working results, such as designs, solutions, etc., 
which helps the team to have a sense of common 
achievement. 

4.2
 Stability with embraced uncertainty 
Stability for software development is a desired pro
perty by all three teams, which is seen as an 
indispensable component in responding to change: 
ﬁThere has to be some limitation of what you are do
ing, you cannot be so flexible that things 
are chopping and changing every single day.ﬂ (Test 
manager/XPTeam B) 
Stability first of all is demonstrated as a short-t
erm certainty in all the three teams. The short-ter
m 
certainty means a team has a very clear idea of wha
t they have to do in a short time frame, such as 
one-week or two-week iterations in the cases of XPT
eam A and B. WaterfallTeam also realizes the 
importance of the short-term certainty to deal with
 constant changes from the management:  
ﬁWell I guess in terms of uncertainty, you don't kn
ow really tomorrow you are going to work on 
the same project, so on a phased approach you can c
omplete one phase and then this is done. 
And say after tomorrow, let's say the next phase is
 cancelled because of the management 
decision, then you still have a product that works.
ﬂ (Developer A/WaterfallTeam) 
In the cases of XPTeam A and B, stability is also s
hown as a sense of frequent achievement and 
satisfaction. The two XP teams realize that, with t
heir agile process, the team members can be 
motivated more easily than with the waterfall metho
d, since the developers can see the result of their
 
work at the end of each iteration, rather than work
ing for six months without anyone has ever seen or 
used the code produced as what can happen in tradit
ional processes. There is evidence to suggest that 
the developers of WaterfallTeam also recognize the 
importance of motivating people, and believe that 
a satisfied and motivated team is a source preventi
ng a project from falling apart: 
ﬁIf someone is not happy with what he's doing, he's
 not going to do his job well. If he doesn't 
like it, he doesn't like to co-operate, if he's not
 happy with people, he wasn't going too far– So 
the main thing is with people, keep them happy– bec
ause if people are unhappy, the project 
falls apart.ﬂ (Developer A/WaterfallTeam) 
In addition, a team focused on working is also a si
gn of stability. A focused team has several meaning
s 
in the two XP teams: one meaning is to focus on wor
k in a short but appropriate amount of time. It can
 
be an iteration, as in XPTeam A and B. Another mean
ing of being focused is to focus on current work, 
not wasting time to do future-proof work, which has
 been emphasized particularly in XPTeam B. The 
third meaning is to focus on development activities
 and not to mix them with personal desires of 
learning new things. For example, XPTeam A is very 
attentive of keeping the team focused on 
development activities by reserving daily studying 
time to satisfy the developers™ desires to learn. 
Last but not least, stability shows as team working
 at a sustainable pace, with ease and without 
anxiety, is another aspect of the stability for dev
elopment. A developer of XPTeam A associates this 
working state with agility directly: 
 ﬁI think agility is a state of mind– you don't have
 to feel anxiety, you have to be relaxed when 
you approach a problem, and XP or Scrum is just a m
ethod to obtain this kind of relaxity– If 
you are happy on what you are doing, if you are not
 stressed, I think you can say you are 
agile.ﬂ (Developer B/XPTeam A) 
Stability co-exists with uncertainty which is unavo
idable in the teams using agile methods. 
Uncertainty needs to be embraced. Embraced uncertai
nty is manifested firstly as the probability to 
change directions in the cases. All the teams belie
ve that the iterative nature of their processes giv
es 
them more possibility to change directions when nee
ded, including WaterfallTeam, since they use 
iterative phases within the waterfall process. But 
the probability to change should be complemented by
 
having a whole picture of the project, which has be
en emphasized in the two XP teams. XPTeam B 
observes that having a whole picture of the project
 occurs not only to the developers, but also to the
ir 
onsite customer. 

4.3
 Team learning 
XPTeam A understands that learning means doing thin
gs differently. If a team wants to be adaptive 
and evolve, they have to learn. In the two XP teams
, learning happens as team learning rather than 
individual learning, which means a team as a whole 
acquires new knowledge and competences, and 
the results of learning are shared among team membe
rs. Compared with WaterfallTeam, team learning 
happens continuously and mutually, through using ag
ile practices in the two XP teams. It happens in 
daily development activities. It is a continuous ex
perience for the team members. Meantime, since 
learning happens through interactions among the dev
elopers, it is generally bi-directional. A develope
r 
of XPTeam B comments: 
ﬁI think it (XP) is a very good way of learning as 
well, because with pair programming which is 
part of it, you are learning from somebody differen
t every day, and likewise you're able to teach 
somebody else for you™ve been doing the day before 
– it gives a sense of shared, the project is 
shared– There's more, definitely more knowledge bee
n shared.ﬂ (Developer C/XPTeam B) 
Besides, learning is not a daunting experience due 
to the fact that the teams using the agile processe
s 
generally work on small pieces of tasks. The develo
pers learn gradually through implementing them, 
sometimes with the help of others. The team lead of
 XPTeam B observes that: 
ﬁBecause it is down to granular level, it's easier 
to put better workload over people and also 
easier for people to get involved, it™s also easier
 for people who don't have skill learn gradually 
on the smaller story rather than having to develop 
something big on their own, so I think it's 
easier to get a higher level skill without being ov
erly complicated– They are not huge chunk of 
piece to take on.ﬂ (Team lead/XPTeam B) 
 Due to these attributes, team learning is seen mor
e efficient than individual learning: 
ﬁThe learning, when we do pair programming it's mor
e efficient. In one year I learn a lot of 
things that I didn't think (I could do) when I was 
in the university.ﬂ (Developer B/XPTeam A) 
Table 4 summaries the findings. 

5 DISCUSSION 
As shown in this study, agility in the context of s
oftware development is highly multifaceted and 
ambiguous. In this section the different facets of 
agility demonstrated in the cases are discussed by 
drawing on relevant agile literature.  

5.1
 An autonomous but sharing team 
Despite the suggestion by advocates of agile that s
oftware development processes should be organized 
to improve and distribute both technical and social
 competences continuously (Cockburn & Highsmith 
 2001), few empirical studies in agile research have
 supported this stance. Only Auvinen et al. (2006) 
highlight an increased competency in a team where s
everal agile practices are piloted. Similarly, no 
empirical research in the reviewed literature focus
ed on discipline in agile processes despite the 
emphasis many agilists place on its importance (e.g
. Beck & Boehm 2003).  
 
Agility through CAS 
Manifested in software development
 Distributed competences 
Disciplined team 
Knowledge sharing 
Context sharing 
Autonomous but sharing 

team 
Collective ownership of results 
Short-term certainty 
Team being satisfied, motivated and focused 
Working at a sustainable pace 
Probability to change directions 
Stability with embraced 

uncertainty 
Having a whole picture of the project 
Learning continuously  
Mutual learning  
Team learning 
Learning gradually 
Table 4. Manifestation of agility in software devel
opment 
This study suggests that a team composed of autonom
ous but interacting developers has a tendency to 
be agile. Each of them is able to solve various dev
elopment issues and to interact with customers. 
Competences are not concentrated on few people so t
hat there is no bottleneck in the development 
process. Team members are confident and courageous 
in the interactions with customers and with 
each other. They are also mature and willing to try
 new things. An autonomous team, however, does 
not mean team members can be completely amethodical
 and ill-disciplined. On the opposite, it is 
composed of disciplined, self-responsible and commi
tted individuals. Discipline is an essential 
component of an autonomous team, and is drawn from 
the interactions among peer team members. 
Sharing is a common theme investigated in several a
gile studies, though most are focused on 
knowledge sharing (Fredrick 2003, Melnik & Maurer 2
004, Poole & Huisman 2001, Schatz & 
Abdelshafi 2005). Context sharing has also been obs
erved, but is somewhat understated in agile 
literature. Melnik and Maurer (2004) believe that t
he so-called ﬁbackground knowledgeﬂ about a 
project is important to achieve effective communica
tion. It is important for all team members to have 
a 
common frame of reference - a common basis of under
standing. Poole and Huisman (2001) observe 
that, in the organisation they studied, there was a
 measurable increase in the visibility of what 
everyone was doing on the team subsequent to the ad
option of the agile practices. In fact, this 
improvement in visibility is considered one of the 
greatest successes the company has achieved. In 
terms of results sharing, Fredrick (2003) reports t
he experience of collective ownership of codes. 
When it is realized, even the most complex business
 problems can be easily figured out. In contrast, i
t 
was found that individual ownership of code made pe
ople defensive - people took it personally when 
someone suggested their code did not work. Schatz a
nd Abdelshafi (2005) also document the 
collective ownership in their experience report whe
re developers took ownership of the features they 
created and took pride in showing their work to the
 stakeholders during sprint reviews. Rising and 
Janoff (2000) notice that in a team they have studi
ed, at every meeting, as small tasks were completed
 
and the team could see progress toward the goal, ev
eryone was more satisfied with their work and 
project progress.  

The findings of this study confirm that sharing in 
an agile team not only means knowledge sharing. 
Context sharing is equally important. To effectivel
y self-manage, a team needs to share the 
understanding of their working context. Context sha
ring is a precondition to provide effective 
feedback, interpret them in a sensible way, and tak
e appropriate actions. Sharing also means results 
 sharing, such as collective ownership of code and s
olutions, which reduces the risk of knowledge loss 
and increases the sense of being a true team. 

Another type of sharing, namely problems sharing, i
s reported by Rising and Janoff (2000) but does 
not emerge in this study. In the team they have stu
died, when one team member raises an obstacle in 
the Scrum meeting, the entire team™s resources come
 together to bear on that problem, and the entire 
team immediately owns any one individual™s problems
. 
5.2
 Stability with embraced uncertainty 
Several agile studies have noticed team satisfactio
n and motivation in agile processes (e.g. Rising & 
Janoff 2000, Poole & Huisman 2001, Drobka et al. 20
04). For example, Drobka et al. (2004) conduct a 
survey of a team using XP and find that it creates 
a surge in morale since XP provides constant 
feedback to the developers and at the end of each d
ay the team has a working product. Team members 
gain a sense of accomplishment from their daily wor
k, because they immediately see the positive 
impact their efforts have on the project. When mora
le is high, people are excited about their work, 
leading to a more effective, efficient development 
team. Short-term certainty has also been noticed in
 
agile studies, though not so extensively. Murru et 
al. (2003) claim that XP enhances programmers™ 
sense of project control. They find that programmer
s with the experience of Rational Unified Process 
(RUP) felt that XP™s planning game gave them a stro
nger feeling of control than traditional planning 
did. They knew where their project was going and wh
ether it was delayed. Furthermore, programmers 
were more aware of keeping the project™s strategic 
goals in focus. This knowledge improved the 
programmers™ motivation.  

The role played by uncertainty is acknowledged by a
gile advocates (Highsmith & Cockburn 2001, 
Williams and Cockburn 2003). Williams and Cockburn 
(2003) believe that uncertainty is inevitable in 
all software development. Many changes occur during
 the time that the team is developing the 
product. It is highly unlikely that any set of pred
efined steps will lead to a desirable, predictable 
outcome. It is necessitated short ﬁinspect-and-adap
tﬂ cycles and frequent, short feedback loops. Agile
 
software development is about change and feedback. 
Highsmith and Cockburn (2001) claim that agile 
organizations and managers understand that to deman
d certainty in the face of uncertainty is 
dysfunctional, and agile practices encourage change
 rather than discourage it. In turbulent business 
situations, the change tolerance of a development p
rocess must be geared to the change rate of a 
specific environment, not some internal view of how
 much change is acceptable. Despite these claims 
of agile proponents, however, few empirical studies
 of agile processes have focused on uncertainty 
and how it is embraced, with the exception of Elssa
madisy and Schalliol (2002) who suggest that, 
when using the XP practices, especially the simple 
design, one should look ahead and do things 
incrementally, in order to have a big picture. 

This study emphasizes stability as a desired proper
ty of development teams that have to deal with 
continuous changes due to close relationships with 
customers and evolving requirements. A team 
needs stability, needs to find a proper heartbeat f
or their development process so that it would not b
e 
dissolved into turbulence. Stability gives develope
rs a sense of security and control over what they a
re 
working on. It can be drawn from a short-term certa
inty provided by a time-boxed development 
process. Stability for development also means a tea
m is working at a sustainable pace, focused and 
motivated, working with ease and satisfaction. Cert
ainty and security is only for a short term, 
however. Uncertainty is inevitable in software deve
lopment. It comes from both the environment a 
team is embedded in and the development process its
elf. Managing uncertainty does not mean to 
predict what is going to happen and do future proof
 work today. It is to ensure the probability to 
change the direction a team goes towards but meanti
me not to get short-sighted. Team members need 
to have a whole picture of the project in mind.  
 5.3
 Team learning 
Learning is a common theme explored in much agile r
esearch (e.g. Dingsoyr & Hanssen 2002, Drobka 
et al. 2004, Hunt & Thomas 2003, Meso & Jain 2006),
 but the focus is mainly on individual rather 
than team learning. In a survey conducted by Drobka
 et al. (2004), it was found that XP can reduce the
 
learning curve for new team members. Fifty-five per
cent of the developers believed that using XP 
shortened their initial project-learning curve. Hun
t and Thomas (2003) emphasize that learning in an 
agile process is a continuous process, and it means
 learning about more than just the technology 
involved. It covers how the team works together (or
 how it doesn™t) and team members themselves, 
which leads to behavior and mental model change. 

Learning means doing things differently. One import
ant consequence of learning for an individual and 
a team is to change either their behavior or mental
 model. It is a prerequisite for organizational 
evolution and co-evolution (Mitleton-Kelly 2003). T
his study suggests that team learning is different 
than individual learning, though closely related an
d dependent on it. From the CAS perspective, team 
learning is emergent from the interactions of team 
members. Team learning is a collective result, 
which means a team as a whole acquires new knowledg
e and competences, and results of individual 
learning are shared among team members. In an agile
 team, team learning happens constantly, 
mutually and gradually.  

6 CONCLUSION 
This study investigates how agility is manifested i
n agile software development through studying the 
software development processes of three teams, two 
using XP, one using waterfall approach. Taking 
the key concepts of CAS as theoretical lenses, the 
study explores the true meaning of being agile from
 
several different angles, including autonomous team
, stability and uncertainty, and team learning. 
Compared with the existing agile literature, the fi
ndings emphasize that stability and discipline are 
as 
desirable as flexibility, and context sharing is of
 the same value and importance as knowledge sharing
 
in agile processes. In addition, the collective nat
ure of learning is underlined. The main theoretical
 
contribution of the study is the understanding of a
gility in software development which is both theory
-informed and empirically grounded. Drawn on CAS, th
e study lifts the understanding beyond the 
advocational literature found in agile field (Baske
rville & Pries-Heje 2004). The discovered agile 
properties enrich the understanding of agility in s
oftware development. The practical implication of 
the study is that the findings indicate the desired
 effects of using agile methods. The agile properti
es 
provide a software development team with observable
 agile indicators from different facets of 
software development. 

One limitation of the study comes from using CAS as
 the theoretical basis of the study. CAS has 
originated in natural sciences. There is a deeper c
oncern whether CAS is appropriate to the study of 
human organizations. A combination of CAS theory wi
th appropriate social theories might be a 
promising avenue for future research. Some limitati
ons are associated with the case study research 
approach. One concern is the uniqueness of corporat
e, team and project characteristics of each case 
which makes valid comparison and theoretical genera
lization of the case study results difficult 
(Kitchenham et al. 2002). Specific to this study, a
n affecting factor is the diversity of the team pro
files 
(as shown in Table 2). To increase the validity of 
the study, the contextual information of the cases 
has 
been taken into account in the data analysis. Anoth
er limitation is that only one agile method, XP, ha
s 
been involved in our case studies. Future work woul
d be to verify if the findings apply to teams using
 
other agile methods, such as Scrum, Lean system dev
elopment, etc. 
References 

Anderson, P. (1999). Complexity Theory and Organiza
tion Science. Organization Science, 10(3), 216-
232.  
 Auvinen, J., R. Back, J. Heidenberg, P. Hirkman and
 L. Milovanov (2006). Software process 
improvement with agile practices in a large telecom
 company. In Proceedings of Product-Focused 
Software Process Improvement, Springer-Verlag, Berl
in, LNCS 4034, 79-93. 
Baskerville, R. and J. Pries-Heje (2004). Short cyc
le time systems development. Information Systems 
Journal, 14(3), 237-264. 
Beck, K. and B. Boehm (2003). Agility through disci
pline: a debate. Computer, 36(6), 44-46. 
Beck, K. (1999). Extreme Programming Explained. Add
ison Wesley, Reading, MA. 
Brown, S. and K. Eisenhardt (1998). Competing on th
e Edge: Strategy as Structured Chaos. Harvard 
Business School Press, Boston. 
Choi, T. Y., K. J. Dooley and M. Rungtusanatham (20
01). Supply Networks and Complex Adaptive 
Systems: Control versus Emergence. Journal of Opera
tions Management, 19(3), 351-366. 
Cockburn, A. and J. Highsmith (2001). Agile Softwar
e Development: The People Factor. Computer, 
34(11), 131-133. 
Conboy, K. and B. Fitzgerald (2004). Toward a Conce
ptual Framework of Agile Methods. In 
Proceedings of Extreme Programming and Agile Method
s - XP/ Agile Universe 2004, Springer-
Verlag, Berlin. 
Dingsoyr, T. and G. K. Hanssen (2002). Extending ag
ile methods: Postmortem reviews as extended 
feedback. Advances in Learning Software Organizatio
ns, Springer-Verlag, Berlin. LNCS 2640, 4-
12. 
Drobka, J., D. Noftz and R. Raghu (2004). Piloting 
XP on Four Mission-Critical Projects. IEEE 
Software, 21(6), 70-75. 
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building Theories from Ca
se Study Research. Academy of Management 
Review, 14(4), 532-550. 
Elssamadisy, A. and G. Schalliol (2002). Recognizin
g and Responding to ﬁBad Smellsﬂ in Extreme 
Programming. In Proceedings of the 24th Internation
al Conference On Software Engineering. 
Association Computing Machinery, New York, 617-622.
 Fredrick, C. (2003). Extreme Programming: Growing a
 Team Horizontally, Extreme Programming 
and Agile Methods - XP/Agile Universe 2003. Springe
r-Verlag, Berlin. LNCS 2753, 9-17. 
Highsmith, J. and A. Cockburn (2001). Agile Softwar
e Development: the Business of Innovation. 
IEEE Computer, 34(9), 120-122. 
Highsmith, J. (2002). Agile Software Development Ec
osystems. Addison-Wesley, Boston. 
Hunt, A. and D. Thomas (2003). Preparing the Raw Ma
terial. IEEE Software, 20(5), 97-98. 
Kitchenham, B., S. L. Pfleeger, L. Pickard, P. Jone
s, D. C. Hoaglin, K. E. Emam and J. Rosenberg 
(2002). Preliminary Guidelines for Empirical Resear
ch in Software Engineering. IEEE Transaction 
on Software Engineering, 28(8), 721-734. 
Lyytinen, K. and G. M. Rose (2006). Information Sys
tem Development Agility as Organizational 
Learning. European Journal of Information Systems, 
15(2), 183-199. 
March, J. G. (1991). Exploration and Exploitation i
n Organizational Learning. Organization Science, 
2(1), 71-87. 
McMillan, E. (2004). Complexity, Organizations and 
Change. Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, 
London. 
Melnik, G. and F. Maurer (2004). Direct Verbal Comm
unication as a Catalyst of Agile Knowledge 
Sharing. In Proceedings of the Agile Development Co
nference. IEEE Computer Soc, Los Alamitos, 
21-31. 
Meso, P. and R. Jain (2006). Agile Software Develop
ment: Adaptive Systems Principles and Best 
Practices. Information Systems Management, 23(3), 1
9-30. 
Miles, M. B. and A. M. Huberman (1994). Qualitative
 Data Analysis: an Expanded Sourcebook. Sage, 
Thousand Oaks, California. 
Mitleton-Kelly, E. (2003). Ten Principles of Comple
xity & Enabling Infrastructures. In E. Mitleton-
Kelly (Ed.) Complex Systems & Evolutionary Perspect
ives of Organisations: The Application of 
Complexity Theory to Organisations. Elsevier, Perga
mon. 
Murru, O., R. Deias and G. Mugheddu (2003). Assessi
ng XP at a European Internet Company. IEEE 
Software, 20(3), 37-43. 
 Poole, C. and J. Huisman (2001). Using Extreme Prog
ramming in a Maintenance Environment. IEEE 
Software, 18(6), 42-50. 
Rakitin, S. (2001). Manifesto Elicits Cynicism. IEE
E Computer, 34(12), p. 4. 
Rising, L. and N. S. Janoff (2000). The Scrum Softw
are Development Process for Small Teams. IEEE 
Software, 17(4), 26-32. 
Schatz, B. and I. Abdelshafi (2005). Primavera Gets
 Agile: a Successful Transition to Agile 
Development. IEEE Software, 22(3), 36-41. 
Schein, E. (1997). Organizational Culture and Leade
rship. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco. 
Schwaber, K and A. Beedle (2002). Agile Software De
velopment with SCRUM. Prentice-Hall, Upper 
Saddle River, NJ. 
Senge, P. M. (1990). The Leader™s New Work: Buildin
g Learning Organizations. Sloan Management 
Review, 32(1), 7-23. 
Stacey, R. D. (2003). Strategic Management and Orga
nisational Dynamics: The Challenge of 
Complexity. Fourth Edition. Financial Times, Prenti
ce Hall. 
Stephens, M. and D. Rosenberg (2003). Extreme Progr
amming Refactored: The Case Against XP. 
Apress, New York. 
Walsham, G. (1995). Interpretive Case Studies in IS
 Research: Nature and Method. European Journal 
of Information Systems, 4(2), 74-81. 
Williams, L. and A. Cockburn (2003). Agile Software
 Development: it's About Feedback and Change. 
IEEE Computer, 36(6), 83-85. 
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case Study Research: Design and 
Methods. Sage, Thousand Oaks, California. 
