 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)˘4251*8**7*&6&5*67˘64(**).3,7#56.3 ˛˛˙!˛˚˝ ˛˝$!˛˛˜"˘˛University of Bern&.0*.301*.93.'*(-˛˛˝!˙Stevens Institute of Technology641'64;8*:*37*)9#˝ˆ˛University of Bern&79'*.93.'*(-ˇ4114)).8.434608-@7*1&.73*46(.>.&8*6.49,-64(**).3(86.'6&6˙#*˛*((*58*4251*8**7*&6&5*698-46.=*)2.3.786&8(86.'6&6˙#*˛2&81*&7438&(8*1.'6&673*46,"*(422*3)*.8&8.43$.301*6&.0˘64;&6419'*6"*(966*3;1*),&6.*496(*4?;&664/*˛43,.89).389)<ECIS 2015 Completed Research Papers.!&5*˙#-@7*1&.73*46(.   Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015
 1   RECURRENT KNOWLEDGE BOUNDARIES IN  OUTSOURCED SOFTWARE PROJECTS: A LONGITUDINAL STUDY  Complete Research Paper 
 Winkler, Maike, University of Bern, 
Switzerland, maike.winkler@iwi.unibe.ch 
Brown, Carol, Stevens Institute of 
Technology, USA, carol.brown@stevens.edu 
Huber, Thomas, University of Bern, 
Switzerland, thomas.huber@iwi.unibe.ch 
Abstract  Knowledge boundaries can 
constrain cross-border collaboration. 
Based on a qualitative case study of 
a distributed team, we examine which semantic 
knowledge boundaries recur and why they recur over 
the life of an agile, outsourced software project. 
Based on our analysis of observational data, collabo-
ration tool data and interviews, we first identify 
the similar recurrent boundaries and categorize them under three domains for this type of software applic
ation: Assembling, Designing, and Intended user 
interaction. We then examine three practices utilizi
ng software prototypes that team members used to 
bridge them. First, we find that similar semantic 
knowledge boundaries related to all three of the do-
mains recur over the 10-month life of the project. S
econd, we find that team members repeatedly enact 
the same practices to bridge similar knowledge bou
ndaries over the life of the project. Our data also 
suggest that team members in 
outsourced agile software development projects will likely use practices 
to transcend, rather than traverse,
 knowledge boundaries. Based on 
these emergent findings, we develop 
three propositions for future testing. Our study th
erefore contributes to the growing research streams 
on knowledge boundaries in IS outsourcing and the usage
 of prototypes in agile software development. 
Keywords: Knowledge boundaries, 
team collaboration, outsourced workforce and governance, IS out-
sourcing, agile development met
hods, object bridging practice 
1 Introduction 
It is well known that knowledge differences can im
pede cross-border team collaboration by creating 
knowledge boundaries (e.g., Majchrzak
 et al., 2012, Carlile, 2002). He
terogeneous knowledge bases and 
specializations cause different ﬁthought worldsﬂ (D
ougherty, 1992). Consequently, team members de-
fine, and perceive situations from 
various perspectives (Baba et al
., 2004, Boland and Tenkasi, 1995) 
and do not interpret things in the same way (Cramt
on, 2001, Bechky, 2003, Carlile
, 2002) Œ that is, they 
encounter semantic knowledge boundaries (Carlile, 
2002). Acquiring an understanding is crucial for 
team members to effectiv
ely collaborate across organizational 
borders and has been acknowledged as a 
major concern in the dispersed team literature (e.g
., Cramton, 2001, Jarvenpaa 
and Leidner, 1998), par-
ticularly in the offshore information systems devel
opment (ISD) literature (e.g
., Levina and Vaast, 2008, 
Majchrzak et al., 2005, Sarker and 
Sahay, 2004, Carmel and Tjia, 2005). 
In the offshore ISD context, client and vendor ofte
n have extreme knowledge asymmetries (Vlaar et al., 
2008). The client has business knowledge to develo
p the ideas for the software whereas the vendor 
employees have relevant technical knowledge (Tiwan
a, 2004). The resulting different perspectives and 
conceptions make it particularly challenging to 
interpret requirements (e.g., Bergman et al., 2002, 
Gorschek and Wohlin, 2006). For example, vendor em
ployees are likely to ﬁinconsistently ambiguously, 
and inaccurately interpret client needsﬂ (Tiwana, 
2004, p. 6). Hence, issues may endure over a longer 
 Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
2   period of time (Herbsleb and Moitra, 2001). The earlier 
interpretive differences are revealed, the faster 
they can be resolved by team members; otherwise, 
it can be costly and difficult to resolve them (Rowen, 
1990). Since client and vendor employees are geographi
cally distributed (Dibbern et al., 2008), advanc-
ing our understanding of practices to resolve differe
nces in the interpretation of requirements needs 
much closer investigation (Damian and Zowghi, 2003, Hull et al., 2010). 
With the rise of agile software development practi
ces with short iteration cycles and rapid prototyping 
at its core (Schwaber and Beedle, 2002), the softwa
re prototype has become a common object facilitating 
learning between team members (e.g., Highsmith, 
2013, Cao and Ramesh, 2007). Immediate feedback 
based on new revised prototypes may enable software 
developers to resolve differences in interpreta-
tions more quickly. Yet, while it is well acknowle
dged that bridging knowledge boundaries in offshore-
outsourced projects represents a major challenge (e
.g., Dibbern et al., 2008, Levina and Vaast, 2008, 
Kotlarsky et al., 2014), little is known about how prac
tices with software prototypes may help to solve 
interpretive differences within an agile software
 development project over the life of a project. 
Therefore, in this study we seek to a
ddress the following general research questions: 
Which knowledge 
boundaries recur over the life of an outsourced ag
ile software development project when software pro-totypes are used and why do they recur?
 The paper is structured as follows. First, we present 
some relevant literature for our qualitative research 
study, and elaborate on our research design. Then 
we present the findings that emerge from our qualita-
tive analyses, from which we develop propositions for 
future research. Finally, we summarize our con-
tributions and the implications for researchers and 
practitioners related to r
ecurrent interpretive differ-
ences when software prototypes are used in outsourced software projects. 
2 Background 2.1 Knowledge sharing approaches 
Scholars agree that knowledge sharing is important 
to solve interpretive differences. However, there 
are competing perspectives with regards to how
 this knowledge sharing occurs and how much 
knowledge needs be shared. 
On the one hand, scholars suggest that team members 
need to engage in rather effortful and time-con-
suming practices to 
traverse
 knowledge boundaries to converge kn
owledge bases and acquire a common 
understanding across organizational borders (e.g., 
Carlile, 2002, Bechky, 2003). Traversing requires 
team members to ﬁidentify,ﬂ ﬁelaborateﬂ and ﬁthen 
explicitly confront the differences and dependenciesﬂ 
across boundaries through negotiations. This requires d
eep dialogue, time and resources (Majchrzak et 
al., 2012 p. 951). Thus, vendor employees need to 
acquire in-depth business knowledge and the client 
needs to obtain in-depth technical knowledge (Tiwan
a, 2004). In the ISD context, traversing practices 
can be perceived as deeper knowledge sharing practi
ces between client and vendor that help them to 
gain a comprehensive understanding, i.e. an understandi
ng that goes beyond the specific task at hand.  
On the other hand, another stream of literature s
uggests that team members can integrate just enough 
knowledge to 
transcend knowledge boundaries without acquiring 
an in-depth, shared understanding to 
collaborate (e.g., Faraj and Xiao, 2006, Schmickl a
nd Kieser, 2008, Majchrzak et al., 2012, Kellogg et 
al., 2006). That is, team members tend to ﬁexplicitl
y avoid boundary distinctions through minimizing 
differences and distinctions between specialty areasﬂ 
(Majchrzak et al., 2012). This approach prevents 
the risk of ﬁbecoming trapped in recommending practiti
oners to engage in costly and time-consuming 
activities such as education and training to equali
ze their knowledge and experiencesﬂ (Vlaar et al., 
2008, p. 232). In the ISD context, transcending pr
actices can be perceived as sufficient knowledge shar-
ing practices between client and vendor that help 
them to acquire a sufficient understanding. Software 
developers aim to gain just enough knowledge to comp
lete one specific task instead of a comprehensive 
understanding of the overall, ﬁbigger pictureﬂ of the software project. 
 Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
3   Further, scholars across the fields of Sociology, Management and Information Systems have proposed 
the use of boundary objects
 in these knowledge sharing approaches to facilitate cross-border collabora-
tion (e.g., Carlile, 2002, Carlile, 2004, Majchrzak et al
., 2012, Kellogg et al., 2006, Star and Griesemer, 
1989, Levina and Vaast, 2005, Bechky, 2003). Practices 
involving a variety of boundary objects have 
recently received more attention by IS scholars. Different artifacts such as sketches and design drawings 

or prototypes can be used as boundary objects (e.g., Star and Griesemer, 1989, Henderson, 1991, 
Bechky, 2003, Carlile, 2002). These types of objects serve
 as reference points, while also being flexible 
enough to adapt to the needs of each organi
zational site (Star and Griesemer, 1989). 
Next we describe how the usage of prototypes as 
boundary objects in agile software development pro-
jects enables the client and vendor to bridge knowledge boundaries. 
2.2 Using software prototypes for lear
ning in agile software development  
In agile software development contexts, client 
and vendor can use software prototypes to bridge 
knowledge boundaries. During weekly planning and re
view meetings they present the software proto-
type to elicit knowledge about requi
rement and discuss their work, goals and obstacles (Danait, 2005). 
Thus, the prototype has become a common object fac
ilitating interactions between team members even 
in offshored settings. However, the software pr
ototype does not automatically function as boundary 
object (Star, 2010, Levina and Vaast, 2005); the abilit
y to operate as boundary object depends on how 
the prototype is used in practice (Nicolini et al., 2012, Seidel and O'Mahony, 2014, Majchrzak et al., 

2012). Depending on how the software prototype is
 used in software development processes it may 
facilitate cross-border learning. Scholars describe software development as ﬁa mutu
al learning processﬂ between the involved stakehold-
ers (Kautz et al., 1992, p. 51) whereby learning is
 defined as the ﬁgrowth in knowledge.ﬂ (Sørensen, 
2009, p.130) Yet, traditional software development me
thods that have separated the software develop-
ment process into different phases discourage such learni
ng (Kautz et al., 1992), particularly since feed-
back is delayed over longer periods of time (Cao a
nd Ramesh, 2007). In contrast, scholars suggest that 
agile software development facilitates learning 
during the development process (e.g., Dyba and 
Dingsoyr, 2009, Nerur and Balijepa
lly, 2007, Cao and Ramesh, 2007, Hi
ghsmith, 2013, Meso and Jain, 
2006). The short iterative cycles (Awad, 2005) and frequent 
interactions that are part of agile software 
development methods result in immediate feedb
ack, which promotes learning across team members 
(Meso and Jain, 2006, Cao and Ramesh, 2007, Berczuk,
 2007). Frequent revisions of software proto-
types also support iterative learning (Kruchten, 2001): 
As team members are able to reflect on what has 
(not) worked after iterations, they can adjust and 
change the process, practices and artifacts to make 
improvements (Kruchten, 2001, Dingsøyr et al., 201
2p. 1214, Highsmith, 2013). Thus, given that fre-
quent and immediate feedback on prototypes is a co
mmon practice, one would expect the recurrence of 
knowledge boundaries to diminish over the life of
 an agile software development project.  
2.3 Study Background 
This paper is part of a larger study in which we
 investigate how knowledge boundaries can be bridged 
in an outsourced software project when using the so
ftware prototype as boundary object (Winkler et al., 
2014). Our initial focus was on examining how different
 object bridging practices involving a software 
prototype are used to bridge three different ty
pes of knowledge boundaries: syntactic, semantic, and 
pragmatic (Carlile, 2002). We also distinguished betw
een two types of software prototypes that team 
members use in their boundary spanning practices as pa
rt of their agile software development practices: 
1) the 
building prototype (BP)
, the more hypothetical system of the 
prototype that needs to be erected 
to carry out and plan the software development t
ask (e.g., written software requirements, design draw-
ings) and 2) the 
working prototype (WP)
, the system of the prototype that has already been developed 
and is thus represented through fu
nctioning software prototype (ada
pted from Lyytinen and Newman, 
 Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
4   2008). By focusing on the boundary spanning practices for 
what we refer to as an episode Œ i.e., identi-fying the occurrence of a knowledge boundary and pr
actices used by the team members that involved 
one or both types of prototypes to bridge the three different types of knowledge boundaries Œ we iden-

tified five distinct use practices (UP) being utili
zed over the first six months of the project.  
Surprisingly, during our on-going observations of virt
ual meetings between client and vendor for this 
study, we also noted that over time similar seman
tic boundaries recurred, i.e., it seemed as if there were 
instantiations of similar issues that continued to oc
cur. That is, the outsourced software developers 
seemed to continue interpreting similar project require
ments differently than intended by the client over 
the project™s life. Thus, the primary motivation for the 
study reported in this paper is to investigate this 
unanticipated phenomenon Œ i.e., which semantic kno
wledge boundaries recurred despite the usage of 
bridging practices that involved software prototypes to 
resolve them at an earlier point in time, and why.  
The following three practices asso
ciated with semantic knowledge boun
daries that were reported previ-
ously (Winkler et al., 2014) are therefore of primary interest here. 
Contrasting: Visually contrasting the BP with the WP involved activities where the team members con-
trasted the BP with the WP by sw
itching between screen shots, tables,
 and user story descriptions and 
contrasting them with an already implemented functi
onality, feature or visual design. For example, a 
developer opened the current prototype (WP) displaying a design that has already been implemented. In 
addition, he opened a not yet implem
ented screen shot (BP) to contrast it with the already implemented 
design to identify similarities and differences. 
Exemplifying: Visually exemplifying in the BP or WP involved activities such as moving the mouse 
cursor to the relevant part of either the BP or WP to visually highlig
ht the term or click-through scenar-
ios. For example, a developer opened the current 
working prototype. The developer moved the mouse 
cursor to a specific working functionality and clicks through an example.  
Relating: This use practice, which was only applied by th
e client, involved orally relating a concept in 
the WP or BP to a more holistic view in combinat
ion with Contrasting or Exemplifying, such as ex-
plaining the reason and meaning behind functionalitie
s and how they are connected to the overall idea 
for the software application. For example, the client 
used a table (BP) with general descriptions that are 
relevant to different requirements to elaborate on ho
w an idea in one requirement relates to the overall 
software. 
As will be described in more detail in our Methods
 section below, for this 
phenomenon-driven study we 
also expanded our case study scope to in
clude episodes over a 10-month timeline. 
3 Methods 
3.1 Case Selection, Data Coll
ection and Empirical Context  Due to the lack of in-depth field studies on using software prototypes as boundary objects, our research 
approach involves collecting and analyzing data from 
a single case in-depth (Yin, 2009, Sarker et al., 
2012). We observed something unexpected: similar differe
nces in interpretations between the client and 
vendor seemed to re-occur. For this particular st
udy, our research was therefore guided by a phenome-
non-based approach aiming to capture, portray a
nd conceptualize a phenomenon (von Krogh et al., 2012, 
p. 278) that emerged from our initial analysis of the Case study. 
Our in-depth case study data was collected over a 
10-month offshore-outsourced software development 
project that was being conducted using agile softwa
re methods. A client situated in Switzerland who 
had an idea for a new software application decided 
to offshore the software development project to 
Vietnam. A small offshore team located in Vietnam 
(6 team members) was responsible for developing 
a novel software tool using agile development me
thodologies which we refer to as TechProduct. The 
 Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
5   client was responsible for the creati
on of software requirements (i.e., 
user stories) which were then as-
signed to software developers in Vietnam. The so
ftware developers and Sc
rum Masters who facilitated 
communication between them and the client had dail
y internal meetings wher
e they discussed ideas and 
problems with each other. Jointly th
ey collected any open questions as a team to subsequently ask the 
client. When a developer started working on a partic
ular user story, he presented and discussed his work-
in-progress or completed work in virtual meetings
 taking place 2-3 times a week. In those meetings, 
developers and client shared and used the current 
software prototypes (BP and/or WP) via screen shar-
ing.  
The vision for the initial version of TechProduct was to provide users with a single social media tool 
which enables them to manage information in vari
ous ways. Each user can create Tecs which contain 
compressed information and share it with other user
s. This context and setting was appropriate for our 
research purpose since team members engaged in activiti
es with the software prototype in agile software 
development contexts. Prototyping took place in an 
iterative manner throughout the software develop-
ment process. Since the knowledge bases of the client 
and the offshore software developers were very 
different, interpretive differences were likely to remain
 throughout the project. That is, the client devel-
oped the software idea but did not have any experi
ence with software development. Whereas the soft-
ware developers were not involved 
in the development of the software idea, they had the technical 
knowledge to implement the requirement
s. In addition, the level of in
terdependence between the client 
and developers was high: developers 
had to work with the outputs of the client (e.g., design sketches or 
user stories as part of the BP) to understand require
ments, whereas the client relied on the outputs of the 
developers (the WP) who implemented these requireme
nts. Thus, in the weekly meetings, team mem-
bers repeatedly engaged in practices with the soft
ware prototypes to address boundaries that occurred.  
During the first six months of the project, team 
members focused on the implementation of the basic 
TechProduct functionality and the design of the user interface, Tecs and profiles. The WP at the end of 

this time period enabled multiple users to store and 
share information via Tecs with each other. During 
the four subsequent months, the team focused on 
the implementation of further functionalities and fea-
tures, as well as the initial implementations on admi
nistrative support features (frontend and backend); 
for example, the client was able to manage user queri
es. This and other features were also tested in a 
closed beta test during this time period, and this u
ser feedback led to an increased number of require-
ments to make improvements to basic functionaliti
es and design. This 10-month time period therefore 
enabled us to examine what is similar about seman
tic boundaries and in what ways the software proto-
types is used to bridge them over a project™s life. 
To investigate our research questions for this study
, we collected process data
 from the same software 
development project team members. To reconstruct 
events and the time of events, we triangulated pro-
cess data from three different sources. Process data is
 comprised of ﬁstories about what happened and 
who did what when Œ that is, events, activities, a
nd choices ordered over timeﬂ (Langley, 1999 p. 692). 
(1) Recorded observational data: 
We attended and recorded all virtual (video and audio) meetings be-
tween the software developers and the client. Th
ese meetings took place between 2-3 times a week over 
the 10-month period. During these interactions, the deve
lopers in Vietnam shared the latest prototype 
(WP and/or BP) and discussed changes, problems and 
achievements with the client. In total we attended 
91 meetings (average time: 23.5 min) resulting in 35.7 h and 339 pages of notes. The actual recordings 
allowed us to assess when team members faced boun
daries when working on different requirements 
over a software development project as well as the practices with software prototypes the team members 

engaged in.  
(2) Collaboration tool data: 
The team used a collaboration tool ca
lled Assembla to organize and coor-
dinate software development processes. The tool en
compassed all requirements and provided an over-
view to everyone in the team to raise awareness on w
ho is working on what task. All log files and content 
exchanged via Assembla during the 10-month time peri
od were tracked. This allowed us for instance to 
triangulate data of specific observations with additional information. 
 Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
6   (3) In-depth interviews: 
In addition to the above data sources, 
we conducted and transcribed a total of 
12 interviews with individuals in two interview r
ounds via Skype. These interviews were semi-struc-
tured ranging from 30-90 min to allow an appropriate
 degree of flexibility regarding the order of ques-
tions and scope for answers (Opie and Sikes, 2004)
. In the first round of interviews, we conducted 
interviews with all project participants including 
the client (C), three developers (D1-3), two Scrum 
Masters (SM1-2) and the third-party designer (TPD). 
Interviews with two of 
the developers took place 
in form of a written survey due to language barrier
s. We asked about the project in general (e.g., com-
plexity, aims etc.), the collaboration and communi
cation across boundaries and asked them to elaborate 
on interpretive differences that they faced up to this
 point of the project. In the second round of inter-
views, we conducted interviews with five of the 
seven team members (e.g., client, developers, Scrum 
Master) that were still actively involved in the proj
ect and participating in virtual meetings. For these 
interviews we reviewed our notes from the virtual meet
ings as a basis for developing interview questions 
that focused on any changes within 
the project (e.g., tasks, processes)
 and the reasons for why changes 
occurred or did not occur. Then, we focused on how
 team members used the software prototypes to 
address boundaries at different points in time from the 
client™s and the developers™ point of view.  
3.2 Data analysis 
Our analyses for this study began at the episode 
level Œ i.e., identifying when a semantic boundary 
occurred and the specific boundary spanning use practi
ce that was enacted. We then constructed a time-
line so that we could explicitly examine the episodes involving a semantic boundary that occurred over 
the 10-month period. To answer the first part of our research question, 
which semantic knowledge 
boundaries recur, we used an open coding process (Corbin and 
Strauss, 1990) that enabled us to identify 
ﬁsimilarﬂ semantic boundaries and develop a categori
zation scheme. Our initial coding of the episodes 
that involved semantic boundaries resulted in six c
oncepts: Color, Sequence, Form, Count, Display and 
Use (see Table 1). After comparing the episodes for 
each of these concepts we abstracted three higher-
level categories (Corbin and Strauss, 1990) which we
 refer to as domains: Design (Color, Form), As-
sembling (Sequence, Display), and Intended user inte
raction (Use, Count). After coding all of the epi-
sodes by domain, we then determined whether and 
when a similar form of semantic boundary occurred 
over the 10-month project.  
To answer the second part of our research question, 
why semantic knowledge boundaries recur, 
we then 
compared the practices with software prototypes (Con
trasting, Exemplifying, Relating) that the client 
and software developers enacted for the recurring 
knowledge boundaries for each of the three domains. 
We then utilized our interview data to triangulat
e our findings and better u
nderstand the reasons given 
by the team members for why they
 engaged in certain practices. 
In the next section we present our emergent findings
 and develop propositions th
at reflect our interpre-tations. 4 Findings 
4.1 Similar semantic knowledge boundaries that recur 
Our findings reveal that team members faced sim
ilar semantic knowledge boundaries related to three 
different domains over the life of the outsourcing proj
ect as they utilized agile software developments 
to create a new interactive online tool for users. Mo
re specifically, our analyses identified six concepts 
related to the specific TechProject, which we then 
categorized into one of three domains (Table 1). 
Appendix 1 provides examples for similar semantic 
boundaries that recurred first for the two concepts 
of each domain. Appendix 2 provides a detailed exam
ple of recurrent semantic boundaries for one of 
the domains (Design). 
  Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
7   Domains 
Concepts from 
TechProject Example boundary Coding Extract 
Assembling: In-
terpretive differ-

ences on how in-
formation should 
be arranged 
Sequence:
 Infor-
mation should be pre-

sented in a certain or-
der.  
Display:
 Information 
should be seen from 
certain points of view. 
A team member did not un-
derstand in which order se-

lected Tecs should be ar-
ranged  
A team member did not un-
derstand what Tecs and 
WebTecs of profile C can be 
seen when they are linked to 

profile C, but not to profile A 
or B 
"For unselected Tecs the order is 
kept, but what about selected?ﬂ
 (Observation, Month 6) 
ﬁFor Tec and WebTec we should 
see the content of profile C but I 

don't know if the visibility for this 
Tec in private or guide mode, 
i.e.,  what we can seeﬂ 
(Observa-
tion, Month 7)
 Designing:
 Inter-
pretive differ-
ences on how text 

and visual repre-
sentations of in-
formation are de-

signed 
Color:
 Texts or visual 
representations 
should be colored in a 

way that conveys cer-
tain meaning.  
Form:
 Texts or visual 
representations 
should be formed in a 
certain way.  
A team member did not un-
derstand which color Tecs 
should have when they are 

linked to a user™s profile 
 A team member did not un-
derstand whether there 
should be icons to link Tecs 
to a user™s profile 
"Should the color be green?" 
(Observation, Month 3) 
 
 ﬁIs a pin icon needed here?ﬂ
 (Observation, Month 2)
 Indented user in-
teraction:
 Inter-
pretive differ-

ences on how us-ers should interact 
with the product™s 

component 
Use: Functionalities 
and feature should be 
used in a certain way  
Count: Instances of 
information sharing 
should be tracked 
A team member did not un-
derstand what users can do 
with Tec groups 
A  team member did not un-
derstand why the Tec count 
should increase 
ﬁWhat can users do with Tec 
groups?ﬂ
 (Observation, Month 
6) 
ﬁWe understand the use-count 
should go up, yes we do not see 
why?"
 (Observation, Month 2) 
Table 1. Categorization of seman
tic boundaries into three domains 
Table 2 summarizes our findings in terms of the to
tal number of similar semantic boundaries that oc-
curred for each of the three problem domains over th
e life of the project. These counts demonstrate that 
similar semantic boundaries continued to occur at va
rious times of the project for all three of these 
domains.  
  Month 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 Total per 
domain 
Assembling - xxx - xx xxxxxxxxxx xxxxx - - xx 
22 
Designing - xx xxx - x - xxxxxxx- xxxx - 
17 
Intended user 
interaction
 x xxx - xxx x x xx - x x 
13 
Total per month 
1 8 3 5 9 4 14 0 5 3 52 
Table 2. Counts of similar semantic boundaries for three domains over 10-month project;  
(x): occurrence of similar semantic boundary;
 (-): no similar semantic boundary oc-
curred within that month  
   Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
8   In formal terms, our findings therefore suggest the following:  
 Proposition 1: When agile software methods are u
tilized for an offshore-outsourced software project, 
similar semantic knowledge boundaries related
 to multiple domains (assembling, de-signing and intended user interaction) will recur over the life of the project. 
 
Next we look at the specific practices with software prototypes that were utilized when similar seman-
tic boundaries occurred for each these domains. 
4.2 Practices with software prototypes in agile software development 
To address our research question about why boundaries 
recur, we examine what 
practices were utilized 
and why team members engaged in these practices. As 
found in the prior study, three different bridging 
practices were used when they faced semantic boundar
ies: Contrasting (C), Exemplifying (E), and Re-
lating (R). In addition, however, our unexpected fi
nding was that the team members continued to use 
the same use practice when boundaries 
related to a given domain recurred: 
assembling, designing or 
intended user interaction. That is, our overall finding is that sim
ilar practices were utilized when similar 
semantic knowledge boundaries we
re encountered (Table 3).  
 Table 3. Practices for each domain over 10-month 
project, Contrasting (C), Exemplifying (E), 
and Relating (R); Building Prototype (BP); Working Prototype (WP) 
More specifically, when similar se
mantic boundaries related to the 
Assembling domain were encoun-
tered, team members were more lik
ely to engage in Contrasting BP 
& WP and Exemplifying in the BP 
or WP. For example, when a team member did not understand how the order of pages of a Tec should 

be arranged when a page that is linked to a user™s
 profile is deleted. The team member showed the 
current prototype (WP) displaying what was implem
ented so far. The client recommended opening an-
other requirement (BP). They opened the user story 
which described how a page of a Tec is deleted. 
They then contrasted the current prototype (WP) with a requirement (BP) that described how a page of 
a Tec is deleted to compare it to what is displayed 
in the current implementation. Then the client ex-
plained in an example in the WP: when there are 13 
pages of a Tec and 1 page is deleted, other pages 
will move up depending on the tim
e when the page was built.  
Domain
12345678910
Assembling 
-C-BP&WP
E-BP

E-BP
-R-BP
E-WP
C-BP&WP
E-WP

C-BP&WP

C-BP&WP

E-BP
E-BP
C-BP&WP
C-BP&WP
C-BP&WP

C-BP&WP
C-BP&WP
E-WP
C-BP&WP

E-WP

E-BP
--E-WP
C-
BP&WP
Design 
-R-BP &E-BP
E-BP
E-WP
E-BP

E-WP
-E-BP-
C-BP&WP
E-WP

C-BP&WP &R-
BPE-BP&R-BP

C-BP&WP

E-WP

C-BP&WP
-E-BP
E-BP

C-
BP&WP
E-BP
-Intended User 
Interaction
E-WP & R-W
PR-BP
E-WP&R-WP

R-WP
-E-WP
C-BP&WP

R-WP&C-BP&WP
E-WP
C-BP&WP & 
R-WP
E-WP
E-WP & R-WP
-E-BPE-BP
Month
 Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
9   Further, team members were more likely to engage 
primarily in Exemplifying in the BP or WP and 
Contrasting BP & WP which were infrequently combin
ed with Relating in the BP when facing semantic 
boundaries related to the 
Designing domain. For example, a team member did not understand under 
which circumstances connecting lines have different 
colors. The developer opened screen shots attached 
to the user story displaying many colorful connectin
g lines. The client used the visual representation of 
the screen shot to indicate that 
there are three possible colors and discusses examples: blue, red and 
green lines, each indicating the level of ownership of
 Tecs. For instance, Tecs 
connected by a blue line 
belong to a user and the user can control the Tecs. 
He then related the idea to the whole by suggesting 
that the developer should 
"close his eyes and imagine that in the 
future users can activate or deactivate 
a color.ﬂ The user can see immediately if there is 
ﬁa road for other users leading to my Tec here? It 
will improve the feeling about surfing here in Tec.com.ﬂ
 The developer then opened the current WP to 
contrast a similar already implemented functionality 
displaying a single connec
ting line (without color) 
with a screen shot of the not yet implemented colorful connecting lines.  
Finally, when team members face similar semantic boundaries related to the 
Intended user interaction 
domain, they typically engaged in Exemplifying in the WP and Contrasting BP & WP which were often 

combined with Relating in the WP. For example, a 
team member did not understand what users can do 
with a functionality called ﬁTec groups.ﬂ The Scrum 
Master showed and highlighted a written question 
(BP). Then he opened the current prototype (WP) disp
laying a Tec group in the background to contrast 
the question with an already implemented function. 
The user could enter the Tec group name and select 
a language in the current WP. The Scrum Master lo
cated the position in the prototype where users can 
create a Tec group. Then, the client orally related the concept to the whole. Tec groups are very important 

in the system enabling users to meet others who are 
also interested in a particular topic. He stated: 
ﬁAs 
an architect I want to build a house, so I can crea
te a Tec group for that house and invite only the 
workers Œ and share files with them.ﬂ 
Then he also explained that ther
e will be Tec groups where a user 
can decide who can join in a Tec group. A user can
 create a Tec group of FC Basel and invite friends 
that can link to the Tec group. In the curr
ent system everyone can join a Tec group.  
Proposition 2:  When agile software methods are u
tilized for an offshore-outsourced software project, 
team members will likely enact the same 
use practices with software prototypes to 
bridge similar semantic knowledge boundaries over the life of the project. 
In addition, our data reveal that the client and th
e vendor did not invest in deeply sharing knowledge. 
Instead, the team members shared just enough know
ledge to quickly address a semantic boundary at 
hand. Our analyses of the interview data that we co
llected during the project suggest there were three 
primary reasons why. 
First, software developers worked on one requireme
nt at a time. To complete the requirement, they 
learned the information that was necessary to complete
 the single task at hand instead of gaining a more 
comprehensive picture of the whole software product. 
The client selectively elaborated on the overall 
software idea. As a result, it was difficult for vendor employees to understand the whole overall picture 
of Tec.com.  
ﬁThere are misunderstandings that occur... I am awa
re that the programmer now does something some-
where...one can already see it... for some reason some 
Tecs are green in the ri
ght column. If one had 
understood the whole project sincerely, then one shakes the head and says -a moment. And then it be-

comes clear that they have not yet fully understood it. Bu
t this is actually not a big difficulty. [–] I think 
when one sits directly in the same room then one 
would discuss a lot about the big picture. This could 
have the advantage that all participants have a much
 better understanding where this journey is going 
and why something functions the way it does. This 
would of course also require time [–] Would one 
bring all team members to the same level of know
ledge one must somehow take three months to elabo-
rate on it. And that is simply impossible. And that 
is why they simply have to 
trust me, the people there 
that I know what I am doing.ﬂ 
[C] 
 Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
10   Second, although vendor employees had 
daily internal meetings in Vietnam, they did not attempt to 
deeply involve the client in knowledge sharing. During
 the meetings with the client they tried to share 
just sufficient knowledge and focus on delivering results. For instance, they did not share detailed tech-nical information with the client that would take 
a lot of time. Instead, they focused on delivering the 
revised prototype as fast as possible. They also need
ed additional time to learn novel and modern tech-
nologies that were used in the TechProject, but that they were not familiar with.  
ﬁWe don't try to talk much about, too much about detail, 
what we will do, so, to talk about what he need 
and what he expects, and we try to deliver.ﬂ 
[SM1] 
Third, the software prototype helped client and te
am members to convey their ideas and problems during 
cross-border interactions quickly. In particular, the use 
of prototypes helped to visualize ideas, examples 
and scenarios via screen sharing during virtual meetings. 
The client had a strong interest in realizing his 
ideas fast and aimed to accelerate the development pr
ocess. The prototype helped him to transform his 
abstract ideas into something tangible; developing 
a prototype with working core functionality as fast 
as possible was important. The software protot
ype was a vital communication device to convey 
knowledge quickly. 
ﬁ[Screen shots] are simply a visual medium and it is si
mply clear, it is the fastest way. So, when you ask 
why, I could also write an A4 page but then I would 
have to write: Once you click on this bit and at the 
top left etc. So, this in words is –, so I am simp
ly faster, when I rapidly take a picture and then draw 
circles in Photoshop with a pencil and make and arro
w and keyword and then the issue is clear. Mean-
while, there are even tickets where 
there is simply a screenshot and not even some describing text. [C] 
Our findings therefore provide support for the observation previously reported by Majchrzak et al. 
(2012). That is, team members may seek to
 transcend, 
rather than traverse, knowledge boundaries. 
Stated more formally:  
Proposition 3:  When agile software methods are u
tilized for an offshore-outsourced software project, 
team members will likely enact use practi
ces with software prototypes to transcend, 
rather than traverse, semantic knowledge boundaries over the life of the project. 
5 Contribution and Implications 
Our objective for this study was to
 investigate a phenomenon that emerged from our initial observations 
of the virtual team meetings for an outs
ourced software development project: i.e., 
the recurrence of similar semantic knowledge boundaries over the life of
 an outsourced agile software project when soft-
ware prototypes are used. While previous outsourcing scholars have acknowledged the importance of 
bridging knowledge boundaries (Tiwana, 2004, Dibber
n et al., 2008, Levina and Vaast, 2008, Vlaar et 
al., 2008), what has not been addressed in the existi
ng literature was how practices with software proto-
types are used to resolve interpretiv
e differences over time. To the best of our knowledge this study is 
one of the first to explore this ﬁtemporal dimensi
on of IT-mediated team beha
viors (Shen et al., 2014).ﬂ 
Taking a phenomenon-based approach to analyze our ri
ch, in-depth case study data enabled us to take 
into account complex, interrelated occurrences ove
r time (von Krogh et al., 2012) and develop three 
propositions for future research. 
Our first proposition is based on the emergent findi
ng that similar semantic knowledge boundaries re-
lated to multiple domains 
(Assembling, Designing and Intended user interaction)
 will recur over the life 
of the project. This finding enrich
es the semantic boundary concept in
 the agile software development 
context. We provide a more fine-grained and cont
extualized coding example for each of these domains 
specific to the Techproject. However, we believe that
 our categorization approach will be applicable for 
other software projects, and that our first proposition 
can therefore be tested 
in similar and different 
project contexts.  Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
11   Our second proposition is based on our observation that
 team members using agile software methods 
will enact the same practices with one or two softwa
re prototypes types (BP, WP) over the life of a 
project when they encounter similar semantic know
ledge boundaries. This finding is consonant with 
previous findings where use practices were define
d as ﬁrecurrent, materially bounded and situated ac-
tion.ﬂ (Orlikowski, 2002 p. 256) Our results provide 
evidence that team members use the software pro-
totype as a ﬁlearning vehicleﬂ (Floyd, 1984) to visualize thoughts, ideas or difficulties. That is, our 
results also suggest that team members preferred to
 learn by specific examples and comparisons by 
engaging in practices of exemplifying and contrasting.
 Software prototypes helped them to visualize 
specific scenarios and examples for one particular re
quirement. As cautioned by Naur (1984 p. 290), the 
effectiveness of a learn-by-example approach de
pends on ﬁmaking the right generalization from the 
special cases shown in the examples.ﬁ The team members found it challenging to generalize from a 
single requirement to the broader, overall idea of 
the software product. While focusing on specific ex-
amples helped team members to quickly bridge a pa
rticular boundary at hand, they continued to have 
difficulties applying knowledge
 to other requirements in the long ru
n when they faced similar semantic 
boundaries. The practices transformed the software 
prototype as a boundary object into a ﬁpartial and 
temporary bridgeﬂ (Trompette and Vinck, 2009, Ya
kura, 2002) and enabled ﬁspeed and learning in the 
short termﬂ (Kellogg et al., 2006 p.42). The team me
mbers engaged in activities that resulted in ﬁinter-
mediary scaffoldsﬂ to quickly create new versions of the artifact (Majchrzak et al., 2012). Thus, it is 
important to consider how the artifact is used in pr
actice (e.g., Levina and Vaast, 2005, Nicolini et al., 
2012, Seidel and O'Mahony, 2014,
 Barrett and Oborn, 2010). 
 Our findings therefore suggest that the reliance on ag
ile software methods for an offshored custom de-
velopment project will likely 
result in use practices for 
transcending, rather than traversing semantic 
knowledge boundaries. Our third pr
oposition therefore also provides initial support for the assumption 
by Majchrzak et al. (2012) that continuously evolvi
ng, incomplete, fluid objects (such as software pro-
totypes) support transcending practices. Thus, te
am members across boundaries share just sufficient 
knowledge to be able to collaborate without a sync
hronized, common understanding (Majchrzak et al., 
2012, Kellogg et al., 2006, Faraj a
nd Xiao, 2006, Schmickl and Kieser, 2008). In particular, our findings 
provide new insights on the concept of transcending (Majchrzak et al., 2012) in the context of agile 
software development. That is Œ while the engage
ment in transcending practices helped team members 
to quickly develop the software prototype in the s
hort-term, it also allowed similar boundaries to recur 
in the long term. On the other hand, this emergent 
finding contradicts prior researchers that have argued 
that agile software development pr
actices with frequent interactions 
and immediate feedback facilitate 
learning (e.g., Highsmith, 2013, Cao and Ramesh, 
2007). If interpretive differences are identified and 
solved after immediate fe
edback, similar boundaries would not recur over the project™s life. In our study, 
we indicate that similar boundaries can re-occur 
even in agile software development.  
We believe our findings also provide valuable guida
nce for practitioners. First, our study provides strong 
evidence that team members can continually be ch
allenged by interpretive differences over the life of 
an outsourced project using agile software developm
ent methods, and that team members are likely to 
enact similar practices to address them. Our categor
izations of semantic knowledge domains and use 
practices that involve prototypes could be used to 
identify what boundaries are recurring and why. Man-
aging risks in offshore development projects is nece
ssary to achieve the potential gains of outsourcing 
and include risks resulting from different inte
rpretations and perceptions (Kliem, 2004).  
Second, our finding suggest that in order to take 
management actions, it is important to consider the 
trade-offs when using software prototypes in 
practice. When focusing on sharing ﬁjust enoughﬂ 
knowledge, team members may solve a boundary at hand 
quickly; yet, engaging in deeper knowledge 
sharing may help team members to ultimately identif
y underlying causes of such boundaries. Since agile 
work practices require fast responses to meet ti
ght schedules and to frequently present work-in-progress 
to the client (Fowler and Highsmith
, 2001), other management actions ma
y need to be taken if sharing 
ﬁjust enoughﬂ knowledge for each requirement separately 
for a new outsourced IS application is a short-
term approach that will not be valued 
for a long-term client
-vendor arrangement. 
 Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
12   5.1 Limitations and future research 
Our study has several limitations. First, our findings
 are based on a single case study of an outsourced 
software project with a single client that was ge
ographically distributed from 
the developers. Further, the software project involved developing a certain type
 of application:  an online-based, interactive user 
application. While our triangulated, longitudinal data set 
and the internal replication opportunities al-
lowed us to gain valuable insights from a single 
case study (Langley, 1999) and to develop three prop-
ositions, future studies are needed to test our propos
itions with data from other agile development pro-
jects, as well as in non-agile project contexts, as well as
 in other offshore contexts
 and domestic contexts.  
Further, we reveal that similar interpretive diffe
rences continuously challenged the team members. 
While software prototypes helped to address immedi
ate interpretive differences, ﬁsolvingﬂ recurrent 
problems such that similar semantic boundaries do not 
recur may require different practices with soft-
ware prototypes. Thus, future research is needed 
to improve our understanding about how software pro-
totypes need to be used to
 bridge interpretive differen
ces in the short-and long-run. In this study, we found that similar interpretive di
fferences recurred and that 
team members used soft-
ware prototypes to address them. However, future r
esearch is needed to invest
igate whether repeatedly 
bridging semantic boundaries with the same use practi
ces that yield ﬁtemporary bridgesﬂ is more or less 
beneficial than engaging in practices for 
traversing semantic boundaries for a given IS outsourcing pro-
ject. In addition, other contexts need to be inves
tigatedŠincluding those in which team members expect 
to be engaged in a long-term c
lient-vendor relationship and therefore seek to engage in deeper 
knowledge sharing practices.  
Appendix 1: Similar semantic
 boundaries for 3 domains Assembling Designing Intended user interaction 
Sequence Display Color Form Use Count 
A team member did not understand– 
–how the order 
of pages of a 
Tec changes 
when a page that 

is linked to a 
user™s profile is 
deleted (Month 
2) 
–what a user 
can see when 
clicking on  
Tecs and pro-

files in a column 
(Month 2) 
–what the de-
sign looks like 
when a Tec is 
colored as 
ﬁshadowedﬂ and 
if this applies to 
profiles and sub-
ordinate Tecs as 
well (Month 2) 
–whether there 
should be icons 
to link Tecs to a 
user's profile 

(Month 2) 
–under which 
circumstances a 
Tec title is still 
available for a 
user (Month 1) 
–under which 
circumstances 
the use count of 
a Tec increases 

(Month 2) 
–how the Tec 

with the lowest 

page number 
should be or-
dered (Month 2) 
–the rules that 
describe under 

which circum-
stances which 
Tecs or profiles 

should be seen 
(Month 4) 
..which color a 
Tec should have 

when the Tec al-
ready exists in 
the same column 

(Month 3) 
–whether the 
new design will 

have icons for 
users to click on 
(Month 3) 
–how a user 
can select an ex-

isting  weblink 
(Month 4) 
–how to count 
Tecs that are se-

lected by a user 
(Month 2) 
–how switch-
ing between 

pages of unse-
lected Tecs pages affect 

their order in the 
columns (Month 
5) 
–under which 
circumstances 

which back-
ground should 
be shown 

(Month 4) 
–which color 
Tecs  should 

have when they 
are linked to a 
user™s profile 

(Month 3) 
–how the new 
layout for pri-

vate profiles dif-
fers from the old 
one, i.e. what 

changes need to 
be made (Month 
5) 
–why the term 
changed from 

ﬁgroup profileﬂ to ﬁTec groupsﬂ 
(Month 4)  
–the reason for 
why the Tec 

count should in-
crease (Month 2) Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
13   Appendix 2: Detailed Example for Designing Domain (Color) 
A software developer initially faced a boundary related to
 color in the 3rd month of the project when he 
was not clear about which color a Tec should have 
when the Tec already exists in the same column. 
While the developer visually pointed to the example in
 the WP, the client used the WP to explain what 
color the Tec should have in this situation. Anothe
r semantic boundary that was similar to the previous 
one then occurred in the same month when the t
eam member worked on another requirement. For ex-
ample, seven days after the prior episode, a developer was not clear about which color a Tec should 

have when it is linked to a user™s profile. The de
veloper opened the current prototype (WP) to demon-
strate a scenario of a Tec that is linked to a user™s
 profile. The client then explained using the WP that 
Tecs linked to a user profile are green and added a similar comment to the user story. Yet, a similar 
semantic boundaries Œ also related to colors Œ re-occu
rred several months later. For example, a team 
member did not understand under which circumstance
s connecting lines have certain colors. The devel-
oper re-used the screen shots (BP) from an earlier ep
isode to formulate questions about the groups and 
private profiles (e.g., ﬁWhy two lines here?ﬂ)
. The developer pointed to the screen shot to ask about the 
behaviour of connecting lines.Then the developer op
ened the current prototype (WP) displaying what 
he has implemented so far and contrasted it with 
the not yet implemented requirement represented by 
the screen shot (BP). The client explained that the pr
ivate profile is the only element that is shown by 
all three colored lines since ﬁit is always visible to everybody, but at the same time it belongs to the 
user.ﬂ Further similar semantic boundaries (i.e., 
color) re-occurred in the same month. 
   Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
14   References Awad, M. (2005). 
A comparison between agile and trad
itional software development methodologies. School of Computer Science and Software Engineeri
ng. Crawley, Perth, University of Western Aus-
tralia. Baba, M. L., J. Gluesing, H. Ratner, and K. H. 
Wagner (2004). "The contexts of knowing: Natural 
history of a globally distributed team." 
Journal of Organizational Behavior
 25 (5), 547-587. 
Barrett, M. and E. Oborn (2010). "Boundary object u
se in cross-cultural software development teams." 
Human Relations
 63 (8), 1199-1221. 
Bechky, B. A. (2003). "Sharing meaning across occupational communities: The transformation of un-
derstanding on a production floor." 
Organization Science
 14 (3), 312-330. 
Berczuk, S. (2007). "Back to basics: The role of 
agile principles in success with a distributed scrum 
team." In: 
Proceedings of the Agile Conference
. Washington: DC, pp. 382-388. 
Bergman, M., J. L. King and K. Lyytinen (2002). "L
arge-scale requirements analysis revisited: The need 
for understanding the political ecology of requirements engineering." 
Requirements Engineering
 7 
(3), 152-171. 
Boland, R. J., Jr. and R. V. Tenkasi (1995). "P
erspective Making and Perspective Taking in Communi-
ties of Knowing." Organization Science
 6 (4), 350-372. 
Cao, L. and B. Ramesh (2007). "Agile software 
development: Ad hoc practices or sound principles?" 
IT 
Professional 9 (2), 41-47. Carlile, P. R. (2002). "A pragmatic view of know
ledge and boundaries: Boundary objects in new product 
development." 
Organization Science
 13 (4), 442-455. 
Carlile, P. R. (2004). "Transferring, translating, an
d transforming: An integrative framework for man-
aging knowledge across boundaries." 
Organization Science
 15 (5), 555-568. 
Carmel, E. and P. Tjia (2005). 
Offshoring information technology: sourcing and outsourcing to a global 
workforce. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press. 
Corbin, J. and A. Strauss (1990). 
Basics of qualitative research: Gr
ounded theory procedures and tech-
niques. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 
Cramton, C. D. (2001). "The mutual knowledge pr
oblem and its consequences for dispersed collabora-
tion." Organization Science
 12 (3), 346-371. 
Damian, D. E. and D. Zowghi (2003). "RE challe
nges in multi-site software development organisa-
tions." Requirements Engineering
 8 (3), 149-160. 
Danait, A. (2005). "Agile offshore techniques - a case study", In: 
Proceedings of the Proceedings of the 
Agile Development Conference.
 Denver: CO, pp. 214-217. 
Dibbern, J., J. Winkler and A. Heinzl (2008). "Explaini
ng variations in client extra costs between soft-
ware projects offshored to India." 
MIS Quarterly
 32 (2), 333-366. 
Dingsøyr, T., S. Nerur, V. Balijepally and N. B.
 Moe (2012). "A decade of agile methodologies: To-
wards explaining agile software development." 
Journal of Systems and Software
 85 (6), 1213-1221. 
Dougherty, D. (1992). "Interpretive barriers to
 successful product innovation in large firms." 
Organiza-tion Science 3 (2), 179-202. 
Dyba, T. and T. Dingsoyr (2009). "What do we
 know about agile software development?" 
Software, IEEE 26 (5), 6-9. 
Faraj, S. and Y. Xiao (2006). "Coordi
nation in fast-response organizations." 
Management Science
 52 
(8), 1155-1169. 
Floyd, C. (1984). 
A systematic look at prototypi
ng. Approaches to prototyping
. Ed. by R. Budde, K.  
Kuhlenkamp, L. Mathiassen and H. Züll
ighoven. Berlin: Springer, pp. 1-18. 
Fowler, M. and J. Highsmith (2001). "Agile methodologists agree on something." 
Software Develop-
ment 9 (8), 28-32. Gorschek, T. and C. Wohlin (2006). "Requirements abstraction model." 
Requirements Engineering
 11 
(1), 79-101. 
 Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
15   Henderson, K. (1991). "Flexible sketches and inflexible
 data bases: Visual communication, conscription 
devices, and boundary objects in design engineering." 
Science, Technology & Human Values 
16 (4), 448-473. 
Herbsleb, J. D. and D. Moitra (2001). "Global soft
ware development." Software, IEEE 18 (2), 16-20. 
Highsmith, J. (2013). 
Adaptive software development: a collabor
ative approach to managing complex 
systems. 
Boston, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
Hull, E., K. Jackson and J. Dick (2011). 
Requirements Engineering.
 3rd Ed. London: Springer Science 
& Business Media. 
Jarvenpaa, S. L. and D. E. Leidner (1998). "C
ommunication and trust in
 global virtual teams." 
Journal of ComputerMediated Communication
 3 (4), 791-815. 
Kautz, K., K. Kuhlenkamp
, and H. Züllighoven (1992). 
PrototypingŒAn Approach to Evolutionary Sys-
tem Development.
 Berlin: Springer. Kellogg, K. C., W. J. Orlikowski and J. Yates (2006). "Life in the trading zone: Structuring coordination 
across boundaries in postbureaucratic organizations." 
Organization Science
 17 (1), 22-44. 
Kliem, R. (2004). "Managing the risks of offhore IT development projects." 
Information Systems Man-agement 21 (3), 22-27. 
Kotlarsky, J., H. Scarbrough and I. Oshri (2014). 
"Coordinating expertise across knowledge boundaries 
in offshore-outsourcing projects: The role of codification." 
MIS Quarterly
 (forthcoming). 
Kruchten, P. (2001). "Agility with the RUP." 
Cutter IT Journal 14 (12), 27-33. 
Langley, A. (1999). "Strategies for theorizing from process data." 
Academy of Management Review
 24 
(4), 691-710. 
Levina, N. and E. Vaast (2005). "The emergence of
 boundary spanning competence in practice: impli-
cations for implementation and use of information systems." 
MIS Quarterly
 29 (2), 335-363. 
Levina, N. and E. Vaast (2008). "Innovating or doi
ng as told? Status differe
nces and overlapping bound-
aries in offshore collaboration." MIS Quarterly
 32 (2), 307-332. 
Lyytinen, K. and M. Newman (2008). "Explaining information systems change: a punctuated socio-
technical change model." 
European Journal of Information Systems
 17 (6), 589-613. 
Majchrzak, A., A. Malhotra, and R. John (2005). 
"Perceived individual collaboration know-how devel-
opment through information technologyŒenabled c
ontextualization: evidence from distributed 
teams." Information Systems Research
 16 (1), 9-27. 
Majchrzak, A., P. H. More and S. Faraj (2012). 
"Transcending knowledge diffe
rences in cross-func-
tional teams." 
Organization Science
 23 (4), 951-970. 
Meso, P. and R. Jain (2006). "Agile software de
velopment: adaptive systems principles and best prac-
tices." Information Systems Management 
23 (3), 19-30. 
Naur, P. (1984). 
Comments on "On the Psychology of Prototyping" by Anker Helms Jörgensen
. Ap-proaches to Prototyping.
 Ed. by R. Budde, K.  Kuhlenkamp
, L. Mathiassen and H. Züllighoven. 
Springer, pp. 290-291. 
Nerur, S. and V. Balijepally (2007). "Theoretical
 reflections on agile development methodologies." 
Communications of the ACM
 50 (3), 79-83. 
Nicolini, D., J. Mengis and J. Swan (2012). "Understanding the role of objects in cross-disciplinary 
collaboration." 
Organization Science
 23 (3), 612-629. 
Opie, C. and P. J. Sikes (2004). 
Doing educational research
. London, UK: SAGE Publications. 
Orlikowski, W. J. (2002). "Knowing in practice: En
acting a collective capability in distributed organiz-
ing." Organization Science
 13 (3), 249-273. 
Rowen, R. B. (1990). "Software project manageme
nt under incomplete and ambiguous specifications." 
IEEE Transactions on Engineering Management 37 (1), 10-21. 
Sarker, S. and S. Sahay (2004). "Implications of 
space and time for distributed work: an interpretive 
study of USŒNorwegian systems development teams." 
European Journal of Information Systems
 13 
(1), 3-20. Sarker, S., S. Sarker, A. Sahaym and N. Bjørn-A
ndersen (2012). "Exploring value cocreation in rela-
tionships between an ERP vendor and it
s partners: A revelatory Case study." 
MIS Quarterly
 36 (1).  Winkler et al. /IS Strategy and Governance 
  Twenty-Third European Conference on Information Systems (ECIS), Münster, Germany, 2015 
16   Schmickl, C. and A. Kieser (2008). "How much do speci
alists have to learn from each other when they 
jointly develop radical product innovations?" 
Research Policy 37 (6), 1148-1163. 
Schwaber, K. and M. Beedle (2002). 
Agile software development with Scrum. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 
Seidel, V. P. and S. O'Mahony (2014). "Managing th
e Repertoire: Stories, Metaphors, Prototypes, and 
Concept Coherence in Product Innovation." 
Organization Science
 25 (3), 691-712. 
Shen, Z., K. Lyytinen and Y. Yoo (2014). "Time and information technology in teams: a review of 
empirical research and future research." 
European Journal of Information Systems
, 1-27. 
Sørensen, E. (2009). 
The materiality of learning: Technology 
and knowledge in e
ducational practice. 
New York City, NY: Cambridge University Press. 
Star, S. L. (2010). "This is not a boundary object: Reflections on the origin of a concept." 
Science, Technology & Human Values
 35 (5), 601-617. 
Star, S. L. and J. R. Griesemer (1989). "Institutiona
l ecology, translations' and boundary objects: Ama-
teurs and professionals in Berkeley's Mu
seum of Vertebrate Zoology, 1907-39." 
Social Studies of 
Science 19 (3), 387-420. 
Tiwana, A. (2004). "Beyond the black box: k
nowledge overlaps in software outsourcing." 
IEEE Soft-
ware 21 (5), 51-58. 
Trompette, P. and D. Vinck (2009). "Revisiting the notion of Boundary Object." 
Revue d'anthropologie 
des connaissances 3 (1), 3-25. 
Vlaar, P. W., P. C. van Fenema and V. Tiwari (
2008). "Cocreating understanding 
and value in distributed 
work: How members of onsite and offshore vendo
r teams give, make, demand, and break sense." 
MIS Quarterly
 32 (2), 227-255. 
von Krogh, G., C. Rossi-Lamastra and S. Haeflig
er (2012). "Phenomenon-based research in manage-
ment and organisation science: When is it rigorous and does it matter?" 
Long Range Planning
 45 (4), 
277-298. 
Winkler, M., T. Huber and J. Dibbern (2014). "The 
Software Prototype as Digital Boundary Object Œ A 
Revelatory Longitudinal Innovation Case." 
Thirty Fifth International Conference on Information 
Systems (ICIS)
. Auckland: NZ. 
Yakura, E. K. (2002). "Charting time: Timelines as temporal boundary objects." 
Academy of Manage-
ment Journal 45 (5), 956-970. 
Yin, R. K. (2009). 
Case study research: Design and methods. Thousand Oaks
. CA: Sage Publications. 
 