 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)Information Systems Integration Mechanismswithin Supply Chain Agility in the ChineseAutomotive IndustryYi WuUniversity of WarwickMargi LevyUniversity of WarwickECIS 2008 Proceedings. INFORMATION SYSTEMS INTEGRATION MECHANISMS WITHIN SUPPLY CHAIN AGILITY IN THE CHINESE AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY 
Yi Wu, Warwick Business School, University
 of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK, yi.wu05@wbs.ac.uk Margi Levy, Warwick Business School, Univer
sity of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, UK 
Margi.Levy@wbs.ac.uk  Abstract  Information systems are a critical factor in achi
eving supply chain agility in fluctuating markets. 
However, there has been limited research on identi
fying specific mechanisms on how information 
systems may affect supply chain agility. This gap is
 addressed by illustrating th
e complementary role of supply chain agility across operational dime
nsions, such as flexibility, responsiveness and 
dependability and organizational 
learning leading to improved operational performance. A 
conceptual model is developed to explicate the 
significance of IS on these operational dimensions 

drawing examples from the context of Chinese automotive supply chains.   The research finds that cost 
issues affect IS integration for suppliers 
while production capacity and changing business requirements and transparency of info
rmation inhibit supply chain agility. 
.    Keywords: Information system integration, 
supply chain agility, flexibility, responsiveness, 
dependability, organizational learning 
 1 INTRODUCTION  Information systems are recognised as a competitive tool in achieving supply chain agility (Power, 
Sohal and Rahman, 2001; Yusuf, Gunasekaran, Ad
eleye and Sivayoganathan, 2004), but there is little 
research or understanding of the mechanisms by whic
h IS integration may affect supply chain agility. 
The question of how IS integration contributes to supply chain agility is important as organizations 

heavily invest on IS.
 This paper considers possible mechanisms
 within the context of the emerging 
Chinese automotive industry to answer the following qu
estions: 1) what are the critical factors of IS 
integration? 2) What are the impacts of integr
ated IS in the context of supply chain agility? A 
conceptual model is developed fro
m the literature to explore IS integration and its impact in the 

context of supply chain agility.   The model indicates that supply chain agility is supported by IS 

integration across four areas: customer sensitivity, 
process integration, networ
k integration and virtual 
integration.  This leads to improved operational 
performance in four areas: responsiveness, flexibility, 
dependability and organizational learning. 
As this is an exploratory study, a case study based
 methodology has been deployed to test the model.  
Interviews are carried out with th
ree automotive manufacturers and their first and second tier suppliers 
to investigate the relationship between IS integr
ation and supply chain agility. Analysis of the 
interviews demonstrates IS integration suppor
ts supply chain agility better between automotive 
manufacturers and first tier suppliers than with seco
nd tier suppliers.  While the literature is largely 
supported in finding that IS integration aids supply 
chain agility, the study identifies a number of other 
factors.  These include cost of IS integrati
on and the need to account for changing business requirements and production capacity. The study recogni
zes the constraints of integrating IS in the 
context of achieving agile capabilities, and enhances the existing evidence on the impact of IS 
integration.  2  LITERATURE REVIEW 
The concept of supply chain management is introduced and the importance of agility is discussed.  
Supply chain agility determinants are identified including the role of information systems integration 

in supporting operational performance.  This leads 
to the development of four propositions for IS integration and the development of a research fra
mework showing the relationships between IS 
integration, supply chain agility and operational performance. 
2.1 Supply Chain Agility 
In today™s markets, firms face stiff competition due to time-based competition and fast technology 
development.  Sustainable competitiveness focuses on supply chain management (SCM) (Swafford, 
Ghosh and Murthy, 2006). SCM usually
 consists of indivi
dual functional entities with commitments to 
provide related resources and information to achieve the objectives of efficient management of 
suppliers as well as the flow of parts (Lau & Lee 2000).  SCM has evolved from traditional command and control,
 vertical hierarchy based organization to one 
structured around process units (Van Hoek, Harris
on and Christopher, 2001). Horizontal integration, 
involving outsourcing and inter-firm integration repl
aces traditional vertical integration. Organizations 
look to improve standardization and customizati
on, as well as minimizing waste through streamlining 
business processes within the supply chain. Therefore, agility is becoming important as it is all about 
‚customer responsiveness and mastering market
 turbulences™ (Van Hoek et al. 2001).  
Supply chain agility can be seen as a measure of success 
of the relationships within a supply chain in 
the process of manufacturing, design, delivery and customer service (Yusuf et al 2004). This leads to 
the adoption of Christopher™s (2000)
 definition of supply chain agility
 ‚as a business-wide capability 
  that embraces organizational structures, information systems, logistics processes and in particular, 
mindset™. Responsiveness is seen as a particularly important outcome of agility (Christopher & Towill 
2000).   
The literature suggests that there are four determin
ants of success for supply chain agility.   These are 
customer sensitivity, process integration, networ
k integration and virtual integration Customer 
sensitivity is defined as developing co-operative re
lationships with customers.  Process integration 
focuses on the core competences required to change business processes.  Network integration is 
defined as co-ordination with partners Virtual inte
gration is about leveraging information across the 
supply chain (Christopher, 2000; Goldman, Nage
l and Preiss, 1995; Van Hoek et al, 2001).  
These determinants are supported th
rough organizational and supply chain design, information sharing 
among functional units (Crocitto & Youseeff 2003), in
ternet-based collaboration and networking with 
partners rather than marketing alliances (Yusuf et al, 2004). Among these factors, IS integration has 
been identified as a key enabler to supply chain 
agility (Breu, Hemingway, Strathern and Bridger, 
2001; White, Daniel and Mohdzain, 2005).  
2.2 IS Integration 
A key characteristic of supply chain agility is the in
stant availability of information to manage an ™on 
demand™ business operation.  IS integration provide
s the basis for information sharing and exchange 
among organizations (Yusuf et al., 2004; Auramo, 
Kauremaa & Tanskanen, 2005).  There is some 

evidence that the lack of information shari
ng and sparse information prohibit supply chain 
coordination and lead to greater operational in
efficiencies (Patnayakuni, Rai and Seth, 2006).  
An integrated information system requires the in
tegration of communication, data and application 
(Muller & Seuring, 2007; Ross, 2003) to enable c
onsistent and real-time connectivity among function 
units across supply chains (Rai, Patnayakuni and Seth, 2006).  IS cannot, per se, create any sustained 

performance or values (Powell & Dent-Micallef, 1997). Therefore, it is important for companies to 

integrate resources and embed them in their social
 and cultural context (Barua, Konana, Whinston and 
Yin, 2004) to develop operations and workflow coordination (Rai et al., 2006).  
Rai et al™s (2006) definition of IS integration 
is adopted. This definition has two aspects: data 
consistency and cross-functional SCM 
application system integration. Da
ta consistency is ‚the degree 
to which common data definition an
d consistency in stored data have been established across a focal 
firm™s supply chain™ (Rai et al., 2006). Cross-func
tional SCM application systems integration is ‚the 
degree of real time communication of a focal firm™s function-specific SCM applications with each 
other™ (Rai et al., 2006), such as the connectivity 
between enterprise resource planning applications 
and transaction applications. Enterprise resource 
planning systems support procurement, production 
and logistics. Transaction applications reali
ze the execution of order management, production 
management and distribution (Kalakota & Robinson, 1999).  
 2.3  IS Impacts on Supply Chain Agility 
This research aims to determine the critical factors of
 IS integration and also 
to identify the impacts of 
integrated IS in the context of supply chain agility. 
The literature review indicates that IS integration 
can significantly enhance supply chain agility 
thus improving operational performance. Four 
propositions to investigate the research aims are developed: 
   P1:  
IS has a positive impact on responsive
ness to changes in production and services, 
and to market demands on new products.   
Customer sensitivity emphasizes customers and mark
ets, including customer-focused logistics and 
rapid response. Supply chains are becoming demand-driven rather than forecast-driven in order to 
effectively respond to real-time demand. Due to lack
 of direct feedback from the market firms rely 
heavily on forecasting techniques to predict manufactu
ring and inventory based 
on historical data. IS 
integration within and between organizations enab
les data capture on demand, leading to customer-
focused supply chains (Christopher 2000).  
Firms are more likely to gain competitive advantag
e through fast delivery and product variety rather 
than price. Therefore, the effectiveness of a supply chain can be measured by its responsiveness (Lee 
& Billington 1992). IS encourages a fast respons
e to market requirements through sharing and 
transferring real time informati
on among suppliers and customers.  
 P2: IS increases the degree of dependability among partners in the supply chain. 
There is a growing recognition that companies need strategic partne
rships with shared targets to 
compete in competitive markets. Therefore, in order 
to sustain competitive advantage, it is critical to 
leverage the strengths and competencies of part
ners to realize fast responsiveness to market 

requirements (Christopher 2000). For example, in 
the automotive industry, first tier suppliers are 
involved in the design of car components and at th
e same time, automotive co
mpanies help suppliers 
achieve manufacturing process and technology 
improvement (Martinez & Perez 2005).  Thus 
dependability among partners, such as
 the performance of suppliers in terms of speed and reliability of 
delivery is assured (Narasimhan & Jayaram 1998).  
 P3: IS improves product and volume flexibility along the supply chain. 
Process integration relates to uncertainty across the supply chain, placing emphasis on self-
management teams instead of standardization so that
 core modules of products 
can be delegated within 
networks of agile competitors. Therefore, a
lliances among various suppliers, manufacturers and 
customers will be inevitable and enable collaborativ
e working methods such as joint product design 
(Christopher & Towill 2000). For example, Taiw
an Semiconductor Manufacturing Company gives 
suppliers proprietary tools and prod
uct data requirements so that th
ey can execute changes accurately. 
Therefore, while focusing on their own competenci
es, companies are much more likely to increase 
product variety and improve the ability to handle orders with special customer requirements. 
Meanwhile, the availability of real time demand data improves company volume flexibility - that is, 
increasing or reducing production based on demand. 
Flexibility is another important operational 
dimension which can improve the company™s co
mpetitiveness (Martinez & Perez, 2005), and in the 
context of supply chain management, it is a si
gnificant measure for supply chain performance 
(Vickery, Droge and Markland, 1999).  
 P4:  
IS positively impacts information acquisition and information dissemination of 
organizational learning. 
Virtual integration emphasizes leveraging people a
nd information along the supply chain. Supply 
chains can be structured around the flow of inform
ation to ensure that members within organizations 
along the supply chain have access to relevant information (Tippins & Sohi
, 2003).  IS integration 
contributes to organizational learning by enab
ling more effective information gathering and 
dissemination between customers and suppliers 
making consensus focussed development more 
  efficient (Tippins & Sohi, 2003). Organizational learning is a key dimension of competitive supply 
chains, given the complex and often dynamic natu
re of supply chain management (Hult, Hurley, 
Giunipero and Nichols, 2000).  
From these propositions a framework demonstrating the 
operations impact of IS integration on agile 
capabilities of the supply chain is proposed (see Figure 1). 
  Figure 1 Research framework
  3 BACKGROUND TO THE RESEARCH: THE CHINESE 
AUTOMOTIVE INDUSTRY 
The Chinese automotive industry is suitable for this study for a number of reasons. It is one of the 
leading automotive sales and production markets in
 the world (Gao, 2005). Many western automotive 
manufacturers are working in collaborative partnershi
ps with Chinese firms to develop the market.  
Significant parts of the automotive industry in China are subject to government intervention.  The 

Chinese government promotes regional policy through 
the location of certain equipment and parts 
manufacturers.   Supply chain management is becoming of importance as there is increasing emphasis 

on sourcing all production within Ch
ina (Thru, 2006).  Agile capability is becoming vital to supply 
chain operations in the Chinese au
tomotive industry as it faces inten
se competition for market share 
(Chen, 2004).  As supply chain maturity and comple
xity increases automotive firms seek to improve 
business processes and technology by pushing other 
members of their supply chain to adopt IT 
(Fulcher, 2004). IS applications have reshaped 
the automotive manufacturing sector towards the goal 
of building vehicles to customer orders (Howard, 2005).  
4  RESEARCH METHODS 
The research has been carried out through multiple
 case studies. Case studies are useful when 
exploring new areas of research (Eisenhardt, 1989), particularly in information systems because they 

cope with technical situation with many va
riables (Yin, 2003). Three supply chain cases in the 
automotive sector in China are investigated.  Th
e supply chains are shown in Table 1 below.    Automotive 
Manufacturer 1st Tier 
supplier 
2nd Tier Supplier 
Description 
A   A joint venture of automotive manufacturer with one European company.  
  
A1a 
 A joint venture with one Amer
ican company, producing harness for 
company A and B, with 1,500 employees. 
  
A1b 
 A state-owned small and medium sized enterprise (SME), manufacturing 
sampling parts for automotives. 
  
 A2a A joint venture of manufacturing connectors for A1a, with 1,000 
employees. 
B   A joint venture of automotive ma
nufacturer with one American company 
C 
  A joint venture of automotive manufacturer with one Korean company  
  C1 
 A joint venture of producing automotive seating systems for C 
  
C2 
 A company with 100% foreign investment, producing injection mouldings 
for C. 
Table1: Supply chain case firms  
Open-ended questions were developed from the literature to test the propositions and to explore the 
issues related to IS integration and supply chain 
agility. Forty semi-struct
ured interviews were conducted to collect data from se
nior managers in departments related to IS, procurement, 
manufacturing, and logistics within all the organiza
tions. Interviewees included eight senior managers 
at IS departments, twenty nine senior managers 
at departments related to the supply chains, two 
general managers and one CEO. Each of the interv
iews lasted between thirty minutes to one hour. The 
interviews were taped with interviewees™ permissi
on. Confidentiality of the participant firms was 
assured.  In order to minimize the bias of interpretation, 
a summary of the interview was written up and passed 
back to interviewees in order to justify and improve the accuracy
 of our understanding of each interviews. 45% feedback has been received confir
ming the interview transcripts. Each interview was 
coded using NVivo to identify the communication appro
ach within the supply chain, the level of IS 
integration and the operational performance arisin
g from the integration pr
ocess as proposed within 
the research framework.   
5  RESULTS AND DISCUSSION 
IS integration issues between automotive manufact
urers and their suppliers are analysed.  These 
indicate some support for the four propositions, between automotive manufacturers and 1
st tier suppliers, but less for 2nd tier suppliers. The propositions are discussed and the research framework 
revised. 5.1  Information system integration across supply chains  
Automotive manufacturers in this research develope
d their IS through different periods. They use 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) to help integrat
e processes, but IS managers have some concern 
about systems compatibility. Automotive manufacturers systems are usually more complex in 
comparison to their suppliers. 
To improve responsiveness first tier suppliers usually set up plants close to automotive manufacturers. 
Therefore, each plant only has one customerŠthe auto
motive manufacturer that is close to the plant.  
Material requirements planning (MRP) systems are commonly used by first tier suppliers. IS systems 
in use by 1
st tier suppliers are developed by their headqua
rters where the IS department is located. 
There is no local IS support and maintenance provided 
at the plants.   Second tier suppliers also have 
MRP systems.  
  The use of IT for communication along the supply chain is limited (see Figure 2).   Automotive 
manufacturers supply IS technologies to first tier suppliers. Portals are adopted to publish and 
exchange general information, such as long term
 planning of automotive manufacturers and order 
confirmation from suppliers. WebEDI is 
used to deliver daily schedules to 1
st tier suppliers. First tier 
suppliers apply just-in-time (JIT) delivery for auto
-parts. E-mail is the main means of communication 
between 1st tier suppliers and 2
nd tier suppliers.  Figure 2 Communications from 2
nd tier suppliers through to Automotive Manufacturers Automotive manufacturers are switching 
from importing components to local 1
st tier suppliers as their 
component prices are low and their quality has improved (Thru, 2006). This encourages the use of 

integrated IS between automotive manufacturers and 1
st tier suppliers and facilitates IS adoption in domestic SMEs. Where both 1
st and 2
nd tier suppliers are SMEs, IS inte
gration is problematic.  They 
prefer communicating through instant messenger, 
or telephone, as one senior manager from C1says ‚
it 
is much easier and cost-effective to communica
te in this way than using information systems.™  First 
tier suppliers may have portals provided by their headquarters or by application service providers to 

communicate with 2
nd tier suppliers. No direct communication has been set up between 2
nd tier 
suppliers and automotive manufacturers.  
Specifically, common data definitions and consis
tency has been set up 1) between automotive 
manufacturers and 1
st tier suppliers, for example about
 car models, and 2) between 1
st tier suppliers and 2nd tier suppliers, for example about auto parts. Th
ese common data definitions are regarded as the 
basis of integrating IS.  The study shows that cross-functional application systems integration does not take place across a 
focal firm™s (automotive manufacturer) supply chain,
 instead portals or webEDI are more commonly 
used to link partners across supply chains. As a 
senior manager from automotive manufacturer A says, 
‚it works well in this way so far and at present, th
e business does not require the whole integration of 
systems
™.   5.2 Achieving agile capabilities of supply chains 
Proposition 1 contends that IS has a positive impact
 on responsiveness to changes in production and 
services, and to market demands on new products.  
The proposition was developed from the impact of 
IS integration in the context of achieving customer sensitivity. Many organizations intend to 
implement build-to-order (BTO) respond quickly to cust
omers. Interviews with suppliers indicate that 
suppliers still have to respond to automotive manuf
acturers™ volatile schedules changed at the last minutes and with relatively little adherence 
to the original plans. However, ‚
compared to the time 
without integrated IS, the extremely 
volatile changes are becoming less and less
™ (senior manager 
from A1b).  This leads to problems for BTO. 
‚If operations are executed only based on BTO, without   order confirmation, the production line will cease. The worst scenario is to stop the production line, 
partially because of the cost issue™ (senior manager from C).  
The study indicates that firms have a better understa
nding of the market and customer requirements as 
a consequence of IS integration. Integrated IS help
s firms to gather and analyze available information 
on existing and potential customers to plan more ef
fectively through synchronizing data across supply 
chains. The automotive manufacturers™ role is cri
tical in supply chains because their forecast or 
manufacturing long/short time planning influences suppliers.  
The second proposition suggests that IS increases the degree of dependability among partners in the 
supply chains. All interviewees agree that IS integra
tion helps to achieve a closer relationship between 
automotive manufacturers and
 first tier suppliers by providing real-time manufacturing data or sharing 
production planning, to ach
ieve greater supplier responsiveness. IS integration simplifies the process 
of product design and development and stresses firms™ core competencies.  
The study shows that real time communication help
s to increase the efficiency of sequenced in-line 
supply operations by providing up-to-date information.
 This helps suppliers anticipate changes in the 
production schedule, preventing material short-fa
lls and improving responsiveness. However, 1
st tier suppliers expressed concern with IS integr
ation in terms of data visibility.  
The study finds no direct link between automotive manufacturers and 2
nd tier suppliers. The level of IS 
integration between 1
st and 2nd tier suppliers is limited, with cost and responsiveness cited as the main 
reason. Second tier suppliers implement MRP or MRP
II within the organization, but some resist IS 
integration, because it introduces an extra layer of co
mplexity to existing systems and requires training 
and investment.  The proposition is supported by automotive manufacturers and 1
st tier suppliers but it is not clear for 2nd tier suppliers.    The third proposition advocates that IS
 improves product and volume flexibility along the supply 
chain. Interviews demonstrate that where IS is in
tegrated in business processes, there is improvement 
in traceability or ownership of a product from the in
clusion of serial numbers, time of manufacturing, 

and employee numbers leading to quality improvement..  
However, IS does not improve product and volume fl
exibility when changes in production are made at 
short notice. Limited flexibility is due to organizations™ inability to make changes quickly to 
computerized business processes.  However, if chan
ges are made before IS processing begins, some 
flexibility is achieved particularly through data synchronization. The majority of managers 
interviewed question this proposition, hence it is not proven. 
The fourth proposition suggests that IS positively im
pacts on information acquisition and information 
dissemination of organizational learning.  The study shows that IS integration will only be 
implemented when required by the business strategy
. Firms should seek the best IS competencies to 
further develop their business strategy focusing
 on cost, quality and de
pendability of IS.  ‚
Now it is much easier for us to find the data I want across functional units without running around company to 
gather the data. It saves lots of time so that we can actually have more time to analyze data and make 
decision™ (senior manager from automotive manufacturer B).  
Currently firms are operating in connected links but 
not viewing them as a holistic chain. Therefore, 
supply chain agility is limited.  Relationships in the 
participating companies tend to be based on cost-
reduction, even though they intend to bu
ild the relationship on value-adding. 
However, operational performance is beginning to 
improve through implementing IS for better supply 
chain management. Overall operations are more effi
cient, responsive, traceable, and dependable. Thus, 
there is some evidence that organizational learning is improved through IS. 
The findings from the study lead to the developmen
t of a revised research framework (see Figure 3) 
that indicates IS integration is influenced by cost, wh
ich acts as an inhibitor.  Application integration is 
refined to include the use of portals and real time information transformation. Additional factors 
influence supply chain ag
ility and operational performance.  Customer sensitivity is more focussed on 
  production capacity rather than overall sensitivity to th
e market. Hence, forecast accuracy rather than 
responsiveness is the operational performance outcome
. Virtual integration is determined by business 
requirements, primarily within the automotive manufac
turers.  There is a clear recognition of the need 
to have better information that can be used to 
support production efficiencies, thus supporting the 
proposition that virtual integration leads to organizat
ional learning.  Process integration is influenced 
by organisational maturity. This leads to the intr
oduction of a new aspect of operational performance, 
product quality control or ownership which lead
s to business process optimization.  However, 
flexibility is still contentious. Network co-ordination 
is dependent on the devel
opment of relationships 
between suppliers and automotive manufacturers.  
Responsiveness to changes in orders and products 
is important here.  By recognizing core co
mpetences, dependability is appreciated. . 
 IS Integration
Data Consistency
Application
Integration
Portal
Real-timeinformation
transformation
Cost Issue
Customer Sensitivity
Production
Capacity
Process Integration
Forecast Accuracy
Product Quality
Product Variety
Organization
Maturity
Business Process
Optimization
Efficiency
Product Quality
Control/Ownership
Network Integration
Role of
suppliers
Dependability
Focus on core
competences
Responsiveness
Orders/Products
Changes
Virtual Integration
Business
Requirements for
IS integration
Information Acquisition
Information Dissemination
Supply Chain Agility
Operational Performance
Based on
Products
provided from
suppleirs
  Figure 3: Revised Research Framework 
6  CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, indirect links of IS integration a
nd corporate value creation are investigated by focusing 
on supply chain agility. The research is motivated 
by the importance of IS on supply chain agility in 
complex manufacturing environments such as Chinese automotive industry. A conceptual model is 
developed to address the theoretical gap of IS and supply chain agility. The empirical research 
demonstrates that IS integration 
impacts on operational performance to
 improve supply chain agility in 
a number of areas.  While there is a great improveme
nt of information visibility across supply chains, 
  some data are treated as business secrets: for ex
ample suppliers can not access to real time front-end 
data for example, demands from car dealers. Hence,
 transparency of information is still lacking, 
compounding further inherent upstream problems (C
hilderhouse, Hermiz, Mason-Jones, Popp and 
Towill, 2003). Suppliers indicate that IS integration 
currently helps data visibility, but real time front-
end data, including demands and sales, will help 
them in production pla
nning and cooperation with 
automotive manufacturers to improve product 
delivery, and inventory management.  
The empirical research enhances existing evidence on 
the impact of IS integration on supply chain 
agility. The study recognizes the constraints of im
proving operational performance through integrating 
IS, due to the consideration of production capacity
, business requirements and cost issues. The paper 
provides an in-depth understanding of IS integr
ation in Chinese automotive supply chains and 
suggests how to maximize the benefits from IS integration in Chinese business.   
Further investigation needs to validate the revised model, along with the emerging concepts pertaining 
to customer sensitivity, process integration, network 
integration and virtual integration in achieving 
agile capabilities of supply chains. As IS plays 
an increasingly important role in enabling the 
operations of business, developing such
 understanding at a theoretical level is critical. In addition, the 
research only focuses on automotive industry. Therefore, the model and propositions should also be 
tested on other industrial sectors.  
7              REFERENCES Auramo, J., Kauremaa, J. and Tanskanen, K. (2005). Benefits of IT
 in Supply Chain Management: an 
Explorative Study of Progressive Companies. Inte
rnational Journal of Physical Distribution & 
Logistics Management, 35 (2), 82-100. 
Barua, A., Konana, P., Whinston, A.B. and Yin, F. (2004). Assessing Net-enabled Business Value: An 
Exploratory Analysis. MIS Quarterly, 28 (4), 585-620.  
Breu, K., Hemingway, C., Strathern, M. and Bridger, D. (2001). Workforce Agility: The New 
Employee Strategy for the Knowledge Economy. Jour
nal of Information Technology, 17 (1), 21Œ31. 
Chen, Z.(2004). Investigation of
 Supplier/Buyer Coordination Pe
rformance in Chinese Companies. 
Gestão & Produção , 11 (3), 289-298. 

Childerhouse, P., Hermiz, R., Mason-Jones, R., Popp, 
Q. and Towill, D.R. (2003). Information Flow in 
Automotive Supply Chains-Present Industrial Practice. Industrial Management &Data Systems, 103 

(3), 137-149. 
Christopher, M. (2000). The Agile Supply Chain-Co
mpeting in Volatile Markets, Industrial Marketing 
Management, 29 (1), pp.37-44. 
Christopher, M. (2005). Logistics and Supply Ch
ain Management: Creating Value-adding Network., 
Prentice Hall, London. 
Christopher, M. and Towill, D.R. (2000). Supply Chain Migration from Lean and Functional to Agile 
and Customized. Supply Chain Management: An
 International Journal, 5 (4), 206-213. 
Crocitto, M. and Youseff, M. (2003). The Huma
n Side of Organizational Agility. Industrial 
Management & Data Systems, 103 (6), 388-397 

Eisenhardt, K. (1989). Building Theories from Case Study Research. Academy of Management 
Review, 14 (4), 532-550. 
Fulcher, J. (2004). Suppliers Rush to Meet Demands
, yet Anticipate Overcapacity. MSI, 22 (8), 14. 
Gao, P. (2005). Supplying Auto Parts to the World.
 the McKinsey: Quarterly, Special Edition: China 
Today, 53-61. 

Goldman, S.L., Nagel, R.N. and Preiss, K. (1995). Agile Competitors and Virtual Organisations. Van 
Nostrand Reinhold, New York. 
Howard, M. (2005). Collaboration and the 3Day Car:
 A Study of Automotive ICT Adoption. Journal 
of Information Technology, 20, 245-258. 
Hult, G.T.M., Hurley, R.F., Giunipero, L.C. and Nichols Jr., E.L. (2000). Organizational Learning in 
Global Supply Management: a Model and Tests of 
Internal Users and Corporate Buyers. Decision 

Sciences, 31 (2), 293-325.    Kalakota, R. and Robinson, M. (1999). E-Business:
 Road Map for Success, Addison-Wesley, Reading. 
Lau, H.C.W. and Lee, W.B. (2000). On a Responsiv
e Supply Chain Information System. International 
Journal of Physical Distribution &Logistics Management, 30 (7), 598-610. 
Lee, H. and Billington, C. (1992). Managing Supply Ch
ain Inventory: Pitfalls 
and Opportunities. Sloan 
Management Review, 33 (3), 65-67. 
Martinez, A. and Perez, M. (2005). Supply Chai
n Flexibility and Firm Performance: A Conceptual 
Model and Empirical Study in the Automotive Indus
try. International Journal of Operations & 
Production Management, 25 (7), 681-700. 
Muller, M. and Seuring, S. (
2007). Reducing Information Technol
ogy-based Transaction Costs in Supply Chains. Industrial Management &Data Systems, 107 (4), 484-500. 
Narasimhan, R. and Jayaram, J. (1998). Causal Linkages in Supply Chain Management: An 
Exploratory Study of North American Manufacturing Firms. Decision Sciences, 29 (3), 579-605 
Patnayakuni, R., Rai, A. and Seth, N. (2006). Rela
tional Antecedents of Information Flow Integration 
for Supply Chain Coordination. Journal of Ma
nagement Information Systems, 23(1), 13-49 
Powell, T.C. and Dent-Micallef, A. (1997). Info
rmation Technology as Competitive Advantage: the 
Role of Human, Business and Technology Resour
ces. Strategic Management Journal,18 (5), 375-
405. Power, D. J., Sohal, A.S. and Rahman, S. (200
1). Critical Success Factors 
in Agile Supply Chain 
Management. International Journal of Physical
 Distribution & Logistics Management, 31(4), 247-
265. Rai, A., Patnayakuni, R. and Seth, N. (2006). Firm
 Performance Impacts of Digitally Enabled Supply 
Chain Integration Capabilities. MIS Quarterly, 30 (2), 225-246. 
Ross, J.W.(2003). Creating a Strategic IT Architecture Competency: Learning in Stages. MIS 
Quarterly Executives, 2 (1), 31-43. 
Swafford, P.M., Ghosh, S. and Murthy, N.N. (
2006). A Framework for Assessing Value Chain Agility. 
International Journal of Operations 
&Production Management, 26 (2), 118-140. 
Tippins, M.J. and Sohi, R.S. (2003). IT Compet
ency and Firm Performance: Is Organizational 
Learning a Missing Link?™, Strategic Management Journal, 24, 745-761. 
Thru, E. (2006). Changing Lanes in ChinaŠForei
gn Direct Investment, Local Governments and Auto 
Sector Development. Cambridge University Press, New York, Cambridge 
Van Hoek, R.I., Harrison, A. and Christopher, M. (2001). Measuring Agile Capabilities in the Supply 
Chain. International Journal of Operations
 & Production Management, 21 (1/2), 126-147. 
Vickery, S., Droge, C. and Markland, R. (1999). Dimensions of Manufacturing Strength in the 
Furniture Industry. Journal of Op
erations Management, 15, 317-330. 
White, A.; Daniel, E.M. and Mohdzain, M. (2005). The Role of Information Technologies and Systems 
in Enabling Supply Chain Agility. International Journal of Information Management, 25, 396-410. 
Yin, R. (2003). Case Study Research-Design and Methods
. Sage, London. 
Yusuf, Y.Y., Gunasekaran, A., Adeleye, E.O. an
d Sivayoganathan, K. (2004). Agile Supply Chain 
Capabilities: Determinants of Competitive Objec
tives. European Journal of Operational Research, 159, 379-392 
  
  