 Association for Information SystemsAIS Electronic Library (AISeL)London School of EconomicsLondon School of EconomicsLondon School of EconomicsECIS 2009 Proceedings. SOCIAL CAPITAL IN DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT: 
A CASE OF GRID DEVELOPMENT IN PARTICLE PHYSICS 
Yingqin Zheng, Information Systems and Innovation Group, Department of Management, 
London School of Economics, Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK, 

y.zheng2@lse.ac.uk 
Will Venters, Information Systems and Innovation Group, Department of Manage
ment, 
London School of Economics, Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK, 

w.venters@lse.ac.uk 
Tony Cornford, Information Systems and Innovation Group, Department of Management, 
London School of Economics, Houghton Street, London WC2A 2AE, UK, 

t.cornford@lse.ac.uk 
 Abstract 

This paper examines dimensions of social capital in the distribut
ed collaborative development of the 
UK particle physics Grid. It is shown that the GridPP project eff
ectively draws upon social capital 
rooted in the tradition and culture of particle physics experiment
s, characterized with trust, equality, 
shared vision, collaboration, and pragmatism. These factors contribute to ov
ercoming the challenges 
in the creation and sharing of knowledge in the development of the Gri
d, a cutting-edge technology 
that has to be delivered as a working system with limited time an
d resources. This case sheds lights 
on, and provides a good example of, the importance of social capital in dis
tributed systems 
development.  

Key words: Distributed System Development, Social Capital, Knowledge Proces
ses, Grid 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  1 INTRODUCTION 
As systems development activity becomes increasingly globalis
ed and distributed, projects face great 
challenges in developing and maintaining knowledge and expertise. Th
e need to mobilize knowledge 
capabilities is particularly acute when the task itself
 if highly complex, uncertain, and involve 
innovative technologies. In this paper we use the concept of soci
al capital to examine the knowledge 
processes in the development of the UK particle physics Grid. Pe
rceiving the construction of the Grid 
as a grand systems development challenge in technical, organizat
ional, political and human terms, we 
would like to go beyond the usual software-centric view of system 
development, and focus on how a 
collaborative project, GridPP, dynamically mobilizes social c
apital to sustain the distributed system 
development process.  

The UK particle physics Grid is part of an initiative which ai
ms to produce not just a working system 
but a new generation of computing technology that will potentially ha
ve significant impact on 
scientific research, and may foreshadow the ﬁnext generation I
nternetﬂ (Abbas 2004; Carr 2005). It is 
being developed as a large scale distributed collaboration, by 
particle physicists who come from a 
community with very distinctive work practices and culture (Knorr-Ce
tina 1999; Traweek 1988). They 
have a record of success in developing innovative computing solutions
 of which the World Wide Web 
is the most notable example (Berners-Lee 1989).  

The rest of the paper starts with a literature review w
hich connects distributed system development 
and social capital. The case is then introduced, followed by a brief
 outline of the methodology. Section 
five provides an analysis of the case using the three dimensions
 of social capital (Nahapiet and 
Ghoshal 1998). Section six further discusses the implications of m
obilizing social capital for 
knowledge processes in distributed systems development, and concludes the pa
per. 
2 DISTRIBUTED SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT AND SOCIAL CAPITAL 
With the current trend of globalization where the IT industry is
 becoming more and more globally 
interconnected (Herbsleb & Moitra 2001), information systems devel
opment has increasingly become 
a multi-site, multi-cultural, globally distributed undertaking (Herbsl
eb, Paulish and Bass, 2005). Today 
there are more software projects running in geographically dist
ributed environments and the so called 
ﬁglobal software development is becoming a norm in the software
 industryﬂ (Damian & Moitra 2006). 
One of the advantages of distributed system development is th
e fact that it provides opportunities for 
developers in dispersed locations to build and share their knowledge
 collectively. An example of 
distributed systems development is open source projects, charact
erized with a highly distributed 
environment, collaborative and rapid development among virtual tea
ms and rapid evolution as the 
environment changes (Lee, Banerjee, Lim, Kumar, Hillegersberg and 
Wei, 2006). Similarly, the 
globalization™s effects on outsourcing of software production and sys
tems development have made 
outsourcing take up global dimensions, and thereby become an internationa
l complex undertaking 
which requires a tremendous amount of support and interaction (Yalaho 2006).  

As distributed system development emerges as the new paradigm i
n developing large-scale systems 
(Damian & Moitra 2006), there are still challenges and complexi
ties involved in managing the 
development, such as cultural issues, communication issues and techn
ical issues that need to be 
addressed (Herbsleb & Moitra 2001). Various studies have looked at 
aspects of managing virtual 
teams across time and space. Sarker and Sahay (2004) for exampl
e, identify problems experienced in 
distributed systems development, including those arising from geogr
aphical separation, different 
cultural contexts and different information systems development 
practices. Powell and associates 
(2006) similarly look at the relationship between team commitment
, member effort, and trust in virtual 
teams as compared to collocated teams. DeLuca and Valacich (2006) 
examine the effectiveness of 
using asynchronous and synchronous media in virtual teams. In this paper
, we draw upon the concept 
 of social capital to investigate how GridPP mobilizes its coll
ective knowledge to overcome difficulties 
and challenges in its large scale distributed systems development proj
ect. 
The concept of social capital has been traced back to Durkheim
 (Portes 1998). Bourdieu (1986) 
identified the value of social capital in the context of unequal
 power relations reproduced in societies. 
He defines it as ﬁthe aggregate of the actual or potential 
resources which are linked to possession of a 
durable network of more or less institutionalized relationshi
ps of mutual acquaintance or recognitionﬂ 
(ibid. p. 248). Coleman (1988) distinguished social capital from physical
 capital, embodied in material 
form, and human capital, embodied in the skills and knowledge acquired by 
an individual, and sees 
social capital as existing in the relations among persons. Later
, Putman (1993; 2000) exported the 
concept out of academia and into a wider media. If Bourdieu and Colem
an represent a sociological 
perspective on social capital, Putman took a political science 
perspective, whereas Fukuyama (1995) 
integrated the concept with trust in an economic framework, and def
ines it as ﬁfeatures of social 
organization such as networks, norms, and social trust that facili
tate coordination and cooperation for 
mutual benefitﬂ (p. 57). Fukuyama™s work is considered representat
ive of the ﬁeconomic imperialist 
version of social capitalﬂ (Fevre 2000, p.103), which is based on a 
rationalistic model of individuals. 
In organization studies, the concept has also gained considerable cu
rrency and has been applied in a 
wide range of topics ranging from workers™ career advancement
 to firm strategies in a network (Adler 
& Kwon 2002). Adler and Kwon (2002) define social capital as ﬁthe goodwi
ll available to individuals 
or groups. Its source lies in the structure and content of the 
actor™s social relations. Its effects flow 
from the information, influence, and solidarity it makes available to the
 actor.ﬂ  
From the perspective of organizational advantage, Nahapiet et al. 
(1998) establish the linkage between 
social capital and collective knowledge in the organization. 
They argue that social capital facilitates 
the creation of new intellectual capital by affecting the c
onditions necessary for exchange and 
combination of existing intellectual resources, in the form of expl
icit and tacit knowledge and 
knowing capability. The linkage between knowledge processes and socia
l capital has also been 
explored by information systems researchers. For example, Urquh
art, Liyanage, and Kah (2008) 
suggest that the weaker the social capital, the harder it is fo
r the knowledge and human capital to grow 
in a community. In this paper, we take the view that knowledge is
 socially constructed (Berger & 
Luckmann 1966), and that social capital draws our attention to the impor
tance of social relationships, 
identities and values such as trust which facilitate the know
ledge processes. Knowledge is co-
constructed in a dialectic between individuals within the con
text of social structures (Berger et al., 
1966). Individuals express themselves through language (broadly defined) 
which others must interpret 
to create new knowing (which may or may-not align with the previousl
y known). It is for this reason 
that we adopt the perspective of social capital to explore prac
tices of knowledge-construction and 
sharing of individuals and collectives, yet appreciating that 
knowledge cannot be objectified, it is 
always ﬁknownﬂ. Documents and information can only be potential for
 knowing, rather than 
knowledge itself. 

Nahapiet et al.  (1998) conceptualize three dimensions of socia
l capital: 
structural, cognitive, 
and 
relational 
dimensions. 
Structural 
dimension refers to the overall pattern of connections between actors
 
Œ that is, who you reach and how you reach them. Drawing upon the term
 ﬁrelational embeddednessﬂ 
by Granovetter (1992) which describes the kind of personal relationsh
ips people have developed with 
each other through a history of interactions, e.g. respect and fri
endship, the 
relational 
dimension of 
social capital refers to those assets created and leverage
d though relationships. Key facets in this 
dimension include trust and trustworthiness, norms and sanctions, obl
igations and expectations, and 
identity. Finally, the 
cognitive
 dimension refers to those resources providing shared represe
ntations, 
interpretations, and systems of meaning among parties (Nahapiet 
et al. 1998, p. 244), for example, 
shared language and codes, and shared narratives. The distinction betwe
en the three dimensions of 
social capital is for analytical purposes and they are inev
itably overlapping and interrelated. Within 
this paper we employ these social capital dimensions as anal
ytical devices to explore the case of 
GridPP, and through this explore the social construction of knowledge within this
 community.  
 3 CASE DESCRIPTION 
The LHC Computing Grid is building a large-scale computing infrast
ructure for the high energy 
physics community. The Large Hadron Collider (LHC) particle acc
elerator at CERN, the European 
Laboratory for Particle Physics, is designed to collide Hadron parti
cles at energies close to those of the 
Big Bang in its search for the elusive ‚Higgs-Boson™ particle
 (believed to be responsible for matter 
having mass). These collisions will produce data within the LHCs f
our experiments (ATLAS, LHCb, 
ALICE and CMS). The number of collisions, and the subsequent data produc
ed by the experiments, is 
vast, thus finding the Higgs-Boson has been likened to searching for ﬁ
a person in a thousand world 
populationsﬂ, or for a ﬁneedle in twenty million haystacks. The L
HC envisages producing 15 million 
gigabytes of data a year - equivalent to a DVD every 15 sec
onds or 1% of global information 
production (Lee et al. 2006). To store and analyze this data the LH
C requires the equivalent of 
100,000 PCs spread across the globe and working as a Grid (Economist 2005).  

A technical perspective sees a grid as a computing platform
 for coordinated resource sharing and 
problem solving suitable for data-intensive and compute-intensive a
pplications (Foster et al. 2001). In 
this way a grid connects and coordinates diverse and heteroge
neous computing resources across space 
and different domains, presenting itself to users as though it was
 a single resource. A central concept 
for grids is that of the virtual organization (VO), and resource managem
ent is based on permissions for 
access to shared resources that members of a VO can make use
 of, disregarding actual hardware 
locations
1. Thus the four LHC experiments are examples of VO, and allow physic
ists from around the 
globe to access data and run analysis ﬁjobsﬂ.  

The LCG has been broken down into various elements, and distributed am
ong various countries. The 
UK contribution to the LCG is GridPP, a collaboration of 19 UK 
universities, the Rutherford Appleton 
Laboratory, and CERN. The GridPP project started in 2001 and has 
been involved in developing 
applications, middleware and providing technical infrastructure and 
storage and processing units. The 
LCG has a hierarchically tiered structure, with Tier 0 at C
ERN, Tier 1s consisting of the national IT 
centres in each of the major countries involved in the project
, and Tier 2s being the regional centres in 
each country.  

4 METHODOLOGY 
GridPP™s unique nature provides a revelatory case of distribu
ted systems development practice 
(Venters & Cornford 2006). Drawing from the interpretive resear
ch tradition in information systems 
the focus of this study is on sensemaking and the symbolic world 
of those studied (Walsham 1995). 
The research team includes a senior experimental particle phy
sicist to ensure that the research is not 
undermined by a lack of understanding of physics.  

Data collection began in August 2006, following earlier pilot work, and ha
s included participant 
observations of weekly project management board meetings and deploy
ment team meetings, quarterly 
GridPP collaboration meetings in the UK, international meetings
 of the LCG, site reviews carried out 
by GridPP, observation of various forums and conferences in which G
ridPP participates. The research 
team has had full access to the GridPP main documentation, and we 
subscribe to its main mailing list 
and the deployment team mailing list. At the core of this re
search are over fifty semi-structured 
qualitative interviews of between one and one-and-a-half hours, underta
ken at various universities 
across the UK and during two week-long periods at CERN in Geneva. 
Table 1 provides details of the 
                                             
 1  Grids are distinguished from existing distributed
 computing in that scientists/users do not have to 
negotiate their use of 
different sites or resources separately and deal wi
th security restrictions of individual sites, nor h
ave to find out the precise 
location of their data. They need only one user-acc
ount to access a wide range of resources Œ processi
ng and data Œ as 
permitted by being a member of a VO. 
 research activities undertaken. Interviews were audio-recorde
d, transcribed and then organized for 
analysis using the Atlas.Ti software.
 We found the software useful in handling the amount of data we 
had, but we didn™t want our thinking to be restricted by
 software.
 Rather than developing a theory 
from the data, our data analysis was closely integrated with t
heoretical development in an iterative and 
incremental process, one feeding into the other. Data analysis wa
s closely integrated with theoretical 
development in an iterative process, one feeding into the other.  

We can identify three stages of data analysis. The first 
round was open coding of the data, labelling 
aspects of the project, their practices, and emerging ideas fr
om the phenomena. In the second round of 
data analysis, we used the conceptual constructs related to socia
l capital and knowledge processes as 
categories to set up code families. This is similar to axia
l coding in grounded theory (Glaser & Strauss 
1967). But these relationships were not understood as indicating ca
usality. In this process, some codes 
were merged, some became more general or more specific. Not 
all code families were included in our 
analysis, as some were considered interesting phenomena but not dire
ctly related to the key concepts. 
This was an iterative process until the key conceptual construct
s were sufficiently refined. It should be 
noted that we also verify the findings from the interviews 
with a survey, which largely confirm all the 
themes that we derive from coding the interviews. In the end the a
nalysis reported here is the result of 
the iterative reflections and ongoing discussions within the r
esearch team and with GridPP members, 
rather than a narrow machine-derived account. All the quotes given he
re are taken from interview 
transcripts, and our ideas have also been reinforced by informal c
onversations and participant 
observations.  

5 SOCIAL CAPITAL & SYSTEM DEVELOPMENT IN GRIDPP 
In this section we examine how collective knowledge is cultiv
ated and mobilized in GridPP. The 
dimensions of social capital (Inkpen & Tsang 2005; Nahapiet et al. 
1998) are drawn upon to explore 
various practices employed by members of GridPP in the distributed and col
laborative project.  
5.1
 Structural dimension 
5.1.1
 A network structure and decentralized management 
Figure 1 shows GridPP™s management structure which may be bette
r described as a network than a 
hierarchy. The Project Management Board (PMB) is the heart of 
the network centrally coordinating 
the project. It provides quarterly reports to the Collaborat
ion Board, consisting of representatives from 
the 19 institutes. The participating institutes enter the collabo
ration not under any legal obligation, but 
bound by a Memorandum of Understanding, which specifies the amount of resourc
es and the level of 
Table 1. Details of research activities.
 Research Methods Examples 
Data Collection 
Semi-structured interviews 
Members of GridPP, middleware developers, 

members of LCG at CERN, physicist users–
 Audio-recorded, 

transcribed, coded 
Virtual 

meetings 
weekly PMB meetings  

weekly deployment team meetings 
Audio-recorded, notes 

taken, not transcribed 
Face-to-face 

meetings 
GridPP collaboration meetings, PMB face-to-face 

meetings, deployment team face-to-face meetings,  
Many audio-recorded, 

notes taken, not 

transcribed 
Participant 

observations  
Site visits GridPP site readiness review Notes take
n 
Secondary data 
GridPP publications, GridPP documents, GridPP 

website, wiki, blogs, mailing lists 
Frequent consultation 
 service that each site is committed to provide, and the funding 
and support they will receive from 
GridPP in return. This document serves more as a ﬁgentlemen™s 
agreementﬂ and thus there is no 
authoritative hierarchy between GridPP and the institutes, thus 
there are not top-down command lines 
between them. Decisions have to be made on a democratic basis and 
implemented by influence and 
persuasion.  

The PMB, apart from the project leader, deputy project leader, 
and the project manager, consists of 
representatives from a number of internal and external committe
es, boards and functions. In a sense, 
the figure also indicates the external and internal environment 
in which GridPP operates. Due to role 
differences, some members of the PMB are more closely connecte
d to the main GridPP activities than 
others. An important thing to note is that each of them serves a
s a node on this network, while 
connecting the GridPP to a variety of nodes on other networks that they repre
sent here.  
Associated with this networked structure of the project, member
s of GridPP are generally given huge 
reign of freedom to carry out their work, usually without clear 
instructions or strict supervision. When 
we asked them how they know what they need to do in their day-to-day job, 
most of them replied that 
they would look around and find out what needs to be done, as well as res
ponding to arising problems 
and crises. ﬁ
This environment is based on, if you want, charismatic leadership and people doing things 
relatively independent but also having the freedom to do them, and not having 
to report every two 
minutes on what they are doing.
ﬂ  
Due to the complexity and prototypical nature of the Grid, knowledge
 has often to be acquired in 
processes of exploration and experimentation. Moreover, as the technol
ogy is being developed and 
changing rapidly and constantly, it is difficult to keep documentati
on up to date. We did not observe a 
lot of effort in codifying and documenting of the Grid project in a
 structured way. As a result, most 
knowledge is embodied within the individual experts (Blackler 1995). S
ince most people in technical 
roles are on a contract of two to three years, there is a ris
k of losing expertise due to turnover. 
Nevertheless, the extensive communication channels within the 
community foster the social 
construction and reconstruction of knowledge through socialisation (Ber
ger & Luckmann 1966). This 
focus on communication will be explored in the next subsection. 

5.1.2
 Extensive communication channels 
Members of GridPP maintain a general understanding of the projec
t, especially aspects related to their 
specific roles, through continuous and extensive communication flows in
 the community. Particle 
Project 
 Management 
 Board
 Oversight 
 Committee 
 Collaboration 
 Board 
(Institutes)
 Deployment 
 Board
 User Board 
(Experiments)
 Provision
 Utilisation
 Review
 Action
 Deployment 
Team
 Tier-1 Centre 
Tier-2 Board 
Figure 1 Organizational chart of GridPP (Adapted gr
aph from the GridPP website) 
Arrows: formal 

communication channels.  

Dotted line arrows: occasional 
formal communications
  physics collaborations are managed by what Knorr-Cetina (1999) ref
ers to as ﬁa fine grid of 
discourseﬂ, channelling individual knowledge into the collaboration and pr
oviding it with a sort of 
ﬁdistributed cognitionﬂ. This web of communication includes a comple
x network of boards, 
committees, and working groups which are regularly holding meetings. 
One of the most important 
methods is the online virtual meeting. During these meetings wi
kis, webpages and blogs are used as 
stores of previous communication. There are also various maili
ng lists where there is constant 
exchange of questions and answers and where solutions emerge. Membe
rs of GridPP subscribe to 
mailing lists relevant to their own job functionalities to keep up wit
h what™s going in the project.  
More importantly, understanding and know-how of various aspects of the p
roject are embodied in the 
key members of the project and carried to different cluster
s or groups of agents by these people sitting 
in various boards and a large number of meetings. Besides this fo
rmal management structure, most 
members of the GridPP agree that very often the more importa
nt things happen informally under face-
to-face circumstances, e.g. over coffee breaks and meals, or (being a Br
itish community) ﬁin the pubﬂ.  
Such extensive communications embody mutual monitoring and proactive sense
-making. This 
resonates with communities of practice in which knowledge is shar
ed through their collective 
communication and shared sense of identity (Brown & Duguid 1991; We
nger 1998; 2000). The 
structure of the project, reflective of the experimental 
nature of the field, provides a context in which 
knowledge is socially constructed (and so shared) through socialisati
on (Berger et al. 1966). The focus 
of work is thus upon exploration and sensemaking, rather than upon the f
ollowing (or construction) of 
formalized, codified ﬁdesignsﬂ or ﬁplansﬂ.  

5.2
 Cognitive dimension 
5.2.1
 Shared goal 
While GridPP does include some people from other fields, the majorit
y (and all senior members) are 
from this ﬁelite scienceﬂ (Traweek, 1988) which is highly compe
titive to enter. One consequence is 
that members of the collaboration are strongly characterized 
by a shared common goal which is not to 
build a grid; but to enable the discovery of new physics and to probe 
the origins of the universe. This 
concept of a ﬁshared goalﬂ is frequently mentioned, and can be s
een to bind efforts, solicit devotion, 
and bridge differences. A PMB member attributes GridPP™s or
ganisation to ﬁ
their history and the 
desire to sort of jointly achieve thingsﬂ. 
For example, despite severe competition between 
experiments, they will willingly work together on grid development 
because it is required to do new 
physics:  ﬁ
I said I was proud of being a particle physicist, this is ‚cause pa
rticle physicists always get 
the job done; by and large because they are driven by one fundamental thi
ng. They want their 
experiment to work when the beam gets into the accelerator, okay? A
nd that transcends everything 
else they do.ﬂ 

The common goal of serving Physics is an important source of motiv
ation and commitment. As a 
recent physics PhD graduate pointed out; ﬁ
They don't work for money of course because particle 
physics doesn't have a lot of money. They work because of their pass
ion to do science. So they, we, 
strive to deliver the best result, to collaborate in the best way bec
ause we serve the same ideas and the 
same, the same passion.ﬂ 
Moreover, the shared vision provides a strong sense of direction, urge
ncy 
and progress. 
 5.2.2
 Shared culture 
A shared culture in GridPP emerges from the physics background o
f most participants. The Grid 
project arose from the need for a tool to analyze data from the
 LHC; from the organizational memories 
of previous successful and innovative experiments; and from a his
tory of cutting-edge computing. 
Moreover, it also emerges from a tradition and culture of str
ong commitment with a long term vision, 
pragmatic problem-solving and developing tools through improvisation and 
bricolage
, as well as 
 respect for individual creativity and technical expertise. As
 one interviewee pointed out, 
ﬁThe particle 
physics community and the goals and the culture has had an enormous influence
 on GridPP– So it™s 
not that particle physics is telling us what to do, it™s just that we know it.  It
™s the culture.ﬂ 
With decades of experience running experiments, it is not surprising
 that GridPP is set up in the 
structure of a particle physics experiment and largely manag
ed in the same way. The established 
traditions and accumulated experience means working in large sca
le globally distributed 
collaborations is almost ﬁsecond natureﬂ. A member of the PMB 
commented ﬁ
I think historically 
particle physics has this background in teamwork and this way of worki
ng you know, a very strong 
background in that.[–] When I started off in experiments, there were
 about 20 people in an 
experiment, and now there™s 500 in the current experiment, ATLAS probab
ly 2,000.  So that [–] 
we™ve all worked through this, of adapting to that sort of way of w
orking, which is the sort of thing of 
course the Grid introduces, international projects, um, large scale 
resources, worldwide. So it™s sort 
of second nature I think–ﬂ 

5.2.3
 Norms 
In face of the high level of complexity and uncertainty that GridP
P faces, compound with limited time 
and resources, the way they do computing has to be very pragmatic and of
ten on the basis of trial-and-
error. In a project with such as a multitude of hardware and sof
tware elements, no one person can have 
a clear idea of the whole system; requirements cannot be pre-speci
fied in detail; architectures are often 
conditional conjectures, and technical decision-making is emerg
ent and empirical. As a result, GridPP 
has to be constantly adapting to changes, and practices in GridP
P have been described as ﬁad hocﬂ. 
The PMB focused on accommodating change as their minimal planning
 process. ﬁ
So we set up this 
project map and –the formality of change forms. So this was to formalise
 our freedom to change the 
project – yes, we had a set of milestones but you know, we had a mechani
sm to change them because 
we have to be responsive.ﬂ
  
Pragmatism is one the norms dominant in the particle physics comm
unity. Which is not only reflected 
in computing, but has roots in physics experiments as well: ﬁ
not just in GridPP but in building 
hardware and building detectors - all sorts of setbacks occur and y
ou have to find solutions. Certain 
technology doesn™t work, the company cannot provide what you want. So I
 think there™s this 
background in problem solving and project management and the sort of pragmatic approach
ﬂ.
  This caused friction with the computer scientists working in t
he project, most of whom aspire to a 
more methodological approach. A technical expert commented, ﬁ–
the people who come from a 
physics background are ultimately more pragmatic in computing. [–]if 
it requires you to wrap 
sellotape around it to get it to work, then they will wrap sellotape 
around it. The people who come 
from a computing background tend to [–] have slightly purer model of how the
 computing should 
work...whereas the physicists are happier with an ad hoc solution just to 
get the job done and push 
them through.
ﬂ  
5.3
 Relational dimension  
5.3.1
 Sense of belonging 
With members of the collaboration based in disparate institute
s, it is important to develop an 
emotional bond among individuals for the project to function collecti
vely. ﬁ
We have to work very well 
together as a team, in order for GridPP to be successful. And because 
as you will appreciate it's quite 
a complicated structure, there are multiple channels of communic
ation, some of which are duplicated, 
some of which are contradictory, and there are all sorts of ways in w
hich information flows. And 
anything that you can do to oil the cogs of the machine is going to help. 
And one of the things that are 
going on very well in GridPP is the cohesiveness of the deployme
nt team. And I think for us to 
socialize together is a very important thing
ﬂ. ﬁGoing to the pubﬂ together when they meet, for 
 example, is one aspect of it. ﬁ
It fosters a bond between people and helps.... it helps a lot I think 
because many aspects of working in this project are frustrating because it's so large
. And so if you can 
go out together and you can identify the problems and let out steam about them, 
I think that's actually 
a very important social function of these meetings.
ﬂ 
These emotional communications help to alleviate the anxiety they have to face
, including the pressure 
of the LHC switch-on and that of showing the UK in a good light among 
the worldwide particle 
physics communities. The collaboration is committed, engaged, and is 
always ﬁjust aboutﬂ on top of 
things. They seem to be constantly fire-fighting, discovering probl
ems, managing crises, and 
negotiating solutions. Yet there is a high level of confidence des
pite the sense of urgency and disorder 
on the surface. Almost everybody in the collaboration that we int
erviewed holds a firm belief that the 
Grid will work; it may not work perfectly, but it will work.   

5.3.2
 Trust 
Deriving from the shared tradition and shared goal is a high lev
el of trust among people and 
institutions. One senior member of GridPP calls it 
ﬁa culture of trust and equalityﬂ
. The notion of 
trust also came out very clearly in our interviews: 
ﬁit's very important for the physicists because 
there's so many things that they have to do in order to be able to inte
rpret something that's been true 
in the data, that they have to trust what other people have done. And this
 is even more so when you 
have such big detectors as the LHC ones.ﬂ 

In GridPP, trust not only lies with people™s intelligence and
 ability to deliver work, but more 
importantly, with people™s commitment to their job and with rea
diness to make extra effort to ensure 
things get done. ﬁ
There will be problems coming out in all areas and you™ll have to tr
ust that people 
will step up to the plate and you know, do the dirty work as well as do
ing al the glamorous work you 
know, and things like that.ﬂ
 Trust seems to be what characterizes high energy physics as a
 community. 
ﬁSo actually the trust between the different high energy physics com
puting centres is much larger than 
what, in most of our member countries, are the legal constraints.ﬂ 

6 DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION 
How does the mobilization of social capital contribute to the soci
al construction of knowledge 
(Blackler & Mcdonald 2000; Berger et al 1966) within GridPP? T
able 2 illustrates the implications of 
social capital in facilitating innovation and knowledge socialis
ation. A flat structure of organizing 
combined with minimal direct management provides a positive envir
onment for creativity, 
exploration, and experimentation such that individuals can socia
lise knowledge. This structure 
similarly allows peripheral participation by non-experts so they
 may learn and enter the community 
(Wenger 1998; Lave & Wenger 1991). However, to be productive, there 
needs to be guidance of a 
clearly articulated common goal; in this case to advance th
e science of physics. Such a shared vision 
can be viewed as a bonding mechanism that helps different parts
 of a network integrate knowledge 
(Tsai & Ghoshal 1998), and provides an important sense of identity for the group 
(Lave et al. 1991).
 Although there are extensive communication channels in GridPP, limit
ed effort has been put on 
structured codification of knowing as information (Nonaka & Take
uchi 1995; Nonaka 1994). While 
mailing lists, wikis and blogs provide potential for knowing, they 
are used in a highly unstructured 
manner and are not seen as an important collective resource of knowl
edge. What compensates the lack 
of a codification approach to knowledge (Hansen, Nohria & Tierney, 
1999) is the emphasis on 
socialization and personalisation within GridPP (Hansen et al. 1999
). Most of the members travel 
frequently to attend meetings, conferences and workshops, and make del
iberate efforts to talk to 
people face-to-face. The construction of social connections within the
 project provides personal 
directory (Wegner 1987) to knowing - i.e. ﬁwho knows whatﬂ. This proce
ss of socialization must 
however be sustained through the relational dimension of social 
capital, as illustrated by the ongoing 
 maintenance of trust and a sense of belonging. As the development st
age of the grid draws to and end, 
and emphasis is shifted to maintenance and improving reliability
 of the Grid, such mobilization of 
social capital through formal and informal forms of interpers
onal communication is gradually being 
balanced, but never replaced, with a systematic and impersonal a
rrangement of communication and 
technical support.  

To conclude, the paper has drawn upon the concept of social cap
ital to examine challenges faced in 
distributed systems development. The analysis on the empirical s
tudy of a complex project of system 
development allows us to reflect and explore dimensions of motivat
ing, organizing, and coordinating 
distributed members of a systems development project and their 
implications for processes of 
collective knowing. Our findings are aligned with existing perc
eption of social capital in the literature. 
Social capital has been found to enhance division of labour by reducing c
osts of coordination, induce 
and speed up sharing of tacit knowledge, and encourage co-operations, w
hich in turn fosters firms™ 
innovative capability, competitiveness and ultimately economic 
performance (Maskell, 2000). In an 
era where distributed projects have become increasingly preval
ent, our case generates implications for 
the importance of mobilizing social capital in distributed syst
ems development processes, especially in 
terms of providing shared goals and culture, supporting individual creat
ivity and building trusts in the 
community.  
Table 2 Social capital and knowledge processes
 Social Capital  Processes of knowing  
Structural 

dimension 

 Network structure 

 
 
 
 
 
Decentralized management  

 
 
 
 
 
Extensive communication 

channels 

 Enables free flow of knowledge  

Avoids too many layers of decision making and 

bureaucracies 

Allows knowing to emerge in a bottom-up manner, and
 
circulate in the ﬁecosystemﬂ 

 
High level of individual freedom provides incentive
s 
for sharing expertise and acquiring knowledge.  

Encourages creativity and improvisation 

Lack of centralized knowledge depository may lead t
o 
loss of knowledge  

 
Encourages knowledge creation, especially across 

organizational and geographical boundaries  
Cognitive 

dimension 

 Shared goals 

 
 
 
 
 
Shared culture 

 
 
 
 
Norms (of pragmatism) 
Motivates knowledge acquisition of individuals 

Provides incentives for social construction of 

knowledge 

Fosters individual commitment and devotion 

Encourages co-operation 

 
Provides shared understanding  

Facilitates communication  

Lower barriers from the tacit dimension of knowing 

(Polanyi 1967). 

 
Provides a ﬁsafety-netﬂ which tolerates mistakes wh
ile 
encouraging creativity and problem solving 

 Relational 

dimension 

 Sense of belonging 

 
 
Trust 
Socialization facilitates sharing of tacit knowledg
e 
Supports collaboration and knowledge integration 

 
Promotes willingness to share knowledge 
 7 REFERENCES 
Abbas, A. (2004) Grid computing: A practical guide to technology and appli
cations. Charles River 
Media, MA. 
Adler, P. S. and Kwon, S.-W. (2002) Social capital: Prospects for a ne
w concept. The Academy of 
Management Review 27 (1), 17-40. 
Berger, P. and Luckmann, T. (1966) The social construction of reality. Penguin  B
ooks, London. 
Berners-Lee, T. (1989) Information management: A proposal. CERN, W
3 Organization Archive, 
http://www.w3.org/History/1989/proposal.html. 
Blackler, F. (1995) Knowledge, knowledge work and organizations:  An ov
erview and interpretation. 
Organization Studies 16 (6), 1021-1046. 
Blackler, F. and Mcdonald, S. (2000) Power, mastery and organisational
 learning. Journal of 
Management Studies 37 (6), 833-851. 
Bourdieu, P. (1986) The forms of capital. In Handbook of theory and resea
rch for the sociology of 
education (Richardson, J., Ed), 241-248, Greenwood, New York. 
Brown, J. S. and Duguid, P. (1991) Organizational learning and communitie
s-of-practice: Toward a 
unified view of working, learning, and innovation. Organization Science 2 (1), 40-57.
 Carr, N. G. (2005) The end of corporate computing. MIT Sloan Management Review
 46 (3), 67-73. 
Coleman, J. (1988) Social capital in the creation of human capital. A
merican Journal of Sociology 94 
(Supplement S95-S120),  
Damian, D. and Moitra, D. (2006) Global software development: How far 
have we come? IEEE 
Software 
Deluca, D. and Valacich, J. S. (2006) Virtual teams in and out of sync
hronicity. Information 
Technology and People 19 (4), 323-344. 
Economist, T. (2005) One grid to rule them all. Economist (74). 

Fevre, R. (2000) Socialising social capital: Identity, the tra
nsition to work, and economic 
development. In Social capital: Critical perspectives (Baron, 
S. and Field, J. and Schuller, T., Eds), 
pp 94-110, Oxford University Press, Oxford. 
Foster, I., Kesselman, C. and Tuecke, S. (2001) The anatomy of the gri
d: Enabling scalable virtual 
organizations. The International Journal of High Performance Computing
 Applications 15 (3), 200-
222. Fukuyama, F. (1995) Social capital and the global economy. Foreign Affairs 74 (5)
, 89-103. 
Glaser, B. G. and Strauss, A. L. (1967) The discovery of grounded theory
: Strategies for qualitative 
research. Aldine Publishing Company, Chicago. 
Granovetter, M. S. (1992) Problems of explanation in economic sociolog
y. In Networks and 
organizations: Structure, form and action (Nohria, N. and Eccles, R., 
Eds), 25-56, Harvard 
Business School Press, Boston. 
Hansen, M. T., Nohria, N. and Tierney, T. (1999) What's your strat
egy for managing knowledge? 
Harvard Business Review, 106-116. 
Herbsleb, D. J. and Moitra, D. (2001) Global software development. IEEE Softw
are,  
Herbsleb, D. J., Paulish, J. D. and Bass, M. (2005) Global software de
velopment at siemens: 
Experience from nine projects. International Conference on Softwa
re Engineering (ICSE'05), 
ACM, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. 
Inkpen, A. C. and Tsang, E. W. K. (2005) Social capital, networks and know
ledge transfer. Academy 
of Management Review 30 (1), 146-165. 
Knorr-Cetina, K. (1999) Epistemic cultures: How the sciences ma
ke knowledge. Harvard University 
Press, Cambridge, MA. 
Lave, J. and Wenger, E. (1991) Situated learning: Legitimate p
eripheral participation. Cambridge 
University Press, New York. 
Lee, O.-K., Banerjee, P., Lim, K. H., Kumar, K., Hillegersberg, J. V. 
and Wei, K. K. (2006) Aligning 
it components to achieve agility in globally distributed syste
m development. Communications of 
the ACM 49 (10), 49-54. 
 Maskell, Peter. Social Capital, Innovation and Competitiveness, S. Baron, J. F
ield and T. Schuller, 
Social Capital: Critical Perspectives Oxford: Oxford University P
ress, 2000,  
Nahapiet, J. and Ghoshal, S. (1998) Social capital, intellectual ca
pital, and the organizational 
advantage. Academy of Management Review 23 (2), 242-66. 
Nonaka, I. (1994) A dynamic theory of organizational knowledge creat
ion. Organization Science 5 
(1), 14-37. 
Nonaka, I. and Takeuchi, H. (1995) The knowledge-creating company: How 
Japanese companies 
create the dynamics of innovation. Oxford University Press, New York. 
Polanyi, M. (1967) The tacit dimension. Doubleday, New York. 

Portes, A. (1998) Social capital: Its origins and applications i
n modern sociology. Annual Review of 
Sociology 24, 1-24. 
Powell, A., Galvin, J. and Piccoli, G. (2006) Antecedents to team me
mber commitment from near and 
far: A comparison between collocated and virtual teams. Informati
on Technology and People 19 
(4), 299-322. 
Putnam, R. (1993) The prosperous community: Social capital and publi
c life. The American Prospect 
No 13.  
Putnam, R. (2000) Bowling alone - the collapse and revival of Ameri
can community Simon & 
Schuster, New York. 
Sarker, S. and Sahay, S. (2004) Implications of space and time for 
distributed work: An interpretive 
study of US-Norwegian systems development teams. European Journal of
 Information Systems 13, 
3-20. 
Traweek, S. (1988) Beamtimes and lifetimes: The world of high en
ergy physicists. Harvard University 
Press, London. 
Tsai, W. and Ghoshal, S. (1998) Social capital and value creation:
 The role of intrafirm networks. 
Academy of Management Journal 41, 464-476. 
Urquhart, C., Liyanage, S. and Kah, M. M. (2008) ICTs and poverty reduction: 
A social capital and 
knowledge perspective. Journal of information Technology 23, 203-213. 
Venters, W. and Cornford, T. (2006) Introducing Pegasus: An ethnographic 
research project studying 
the use of grid technologies by the UK particle physics community. 
National e-Science Center 
Conference, Nottingham? 
Walsham, G. (1995) The emergence of interpretivism in is resear
ch. Information Systems Research, 
pp 376-394. 
Wegner, D. M. (1987) Transactive memory: A contemporary analysis 
of the group mind. In Theories 
of group behaviour (Mullen, G. and Goethals, G., Eds), pp 185-205, Springer Ver
lag, New York, 
NY, USA. 
Wenger, E. (1998) Communities of practice : Learning, meaning and 
identity. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge. 
Wenger, E. (2000) Communities of practice and social learning systems. O
rganization 7 (2), 225-246. 
Willcocks, L. and Lacity, M. (2006) Global sourcing of business and 
it services. Palgrave Macmillan, 
Basingstoke. 
Yalaho, A. (2006) A conceptual model of ICT-supported unified process of i
nternational outsourcing 
of software production. In 10th IEEE International Enterprise D
istributed Object Computing 
Conference Workshops (EDOCW'06), IEEE. 
 
 
 