 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.Extreme Programming and Agile Software Development MethodologiesLindstrom, Lowell;Jeffries, RonInformation Systems Management; Summer 2004; 21, 3; ABI/INFORM Collectionpg. 41 Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission. Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner.  Further reproduction prohibited without permission.